By DAVID GELLESMAY 3, 2016
They are Wall Street’s gatekeepers — the crisis communications firms that work to polish reputations, persuade the press and help announce mergers and acquisitions.Now one of the most influential New York-based public relations firms is trying to manage a turbulent deal of its own.Sard Verbinnen & Company is in talks to sell a 40 percent stake for $60 million to Golden Gate Capital, a private equity firm based in San Francisco, according to people briefed on the matter who requested anonymity.But the deal has been at least temporarily delayed because of a wave of employee resignations from Sard Verbinnen in the last week, the people briefed on the situation said. The employees resigned as a result of negotiations related to the investment, the sources said.AdvertisementUnder the proposed agreement, Golden Gate would value Sard Verbinnen at roughly $150 million. In addition to its ownership stake, Golden Gate has agreed to invest up to $50 million more in Sard Verbinnen for expansion projects. There is also a path for Golden Gate to take complete control of the firm in the years to come.AdvertisementSard Verbinnen was founded by George Sard and Paul Verbinnen in 1992. The firm has offices in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, San Francisco and London, and has represented companies like Time Warner Cable, Activision Publishing and Valeant Pharmaceuticals International. Sard Verbinnen has roughly $75 million in annual revenue, according to people with knowledge of the firm.If completed, the investment would allow Sard Verbinnen to fuel ambitious expansion plans, including potentially opening new offices in Washington, Hong Kong and Houston, and offering more robust political communications, research and video production.A deal would also allow Mr. Sard and Mr. Verbinnen to cash in on their substantial ownership of the company. According to people with knowledge of the firm’s finances, the co-founders control about 60 percent of the firm’s equity, meaning their shares would be valued at a combined $90 million.Mr. Sard and Mr. Verbinnen recently presented the 25 other partners at their firm with an offer related to the Golden Gate deal: In addition to terms that would have allowed the partners to sell 40 percent of their shares to Golden Gate, the new contracts included noncompete and nonsolicit agreements. Such provisions are commonly put in place to retain senior employees after a change in control.Of the 27 partners at Sard Verbinnen, including the co-founders, 24 agreed to the new terms. But three partners balked at those restrictions and quit last Wednesday.Jonathan Gasthalter, who has a significant book of business working with about a dozen hedge funds, was the most prominent departure. Among his clients at Sard Verbinnen were Point72 Asset Management, the firm run by Steven A. Cohen’s family office; Greenlight Capital, run by David Einhorn; and Renaissance Technologies, another large hedge fund, founded by James A. Simons. Mr. Gasthalter also represented Mr. Cohen’s previous firm, SAC Capital Advisors.Mr. Gasthalter had talked about starting his own firm for years, but has now made good on the thought. He is expected to take many of his clients with him to his new firm, Gasthalter & Company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Also last Wednesday, Dan Gagnier and Renée Soto quit Sard Verbinnen. Mr. Gagnier, who works with clients including hedge funds and industrial companies, has also started his own firm, Gagnier Communications. Ms. Soto is expected to continue consulting for Valeant, the embattled pharmaceuticals company.AdvertisementThe departure of the three partners has delayed the announcement of Golden Gate’s investment in Sard Verbinnen. Some of the companies that worked closely with Mr. Gasthalter and Mr. Gagnier have informed Sard Verbinnen that they are taking their business to the new firms. But several people with knowledge of the negotiations said they still expected the deal to be completed.Sard Verbinnen and Golden Gate know each other well. Sard Verbinnen has represented the private equity firm for nearly 10 years, working with it on deals like its investments in California Pizza Kitchen and Red Lobster. The New York firm began talking with Golden Gate this year after another large public relations firm approached Sard Verbinnen about an outright acquisition; instead of agreeing to that deal, Mr. Sard and Mr. Verbinnen pursued private equity backing.In addition to the three partners who quit last week, Monday brought additional departures: Three less senior employees — Nathaniel Garnick, Amanda Klein and Kevin FitzGerald — all quit Sard Verbinnen to join Mr. Gasthalter’s new company, according to people with knowledge of the staff moves.Mr. Sard has told people that the departure of Mr. Gasthalter and Mr. Gagnier may actually be a good thing for Sard Verbinnen because it might allow the firm to work with big companies that did not want to be associated with a firm that represented so many hedge funds. However, Mr. Sard himself represents Trian Partners, the activist hedge fund run by Nelson Peltz.Also on Monday, Sard Verbinnen announced a major new hire. Peter Rose, who recently retired as global head of public affairs for the Blackstone Group, joined Sard Verbinnen as vice chairman. Mr. Rose is well connected in business and politics, and is expected to help with the anticipated expansion that would be funded by the Golden Gate investment.In a news release on Monday, Mr. Sard and Mr. Verbinnen said of Mr. Rose: “As we invest to further strengthen the firm and expand our geographic footprint and service offerings, we look forward to benefiting from his counsel and to his active involvement in our work with selected existing and new clients.”Mr. Sard and the firm declined to comment. Mr. Gagnier and Ms. Soto declined to comment, and Mr. Gasthalter did not return calls seeking comment. Golden Gate Capital declined to comment through its public relations firm: Sard Verbinnen.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Public Relations Firm’s Prospective Deal Sets Off Wave of Departures.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.