AdvertisementSupported byBy Elizabeth OlsonFor law firms, a lack of capital, largely because of the cash flow of a typical partnership structure, is a major competitive obstacle, according to a survey of firms and in-house lawyers released Tuesday.As a result, more firms and companies are expected to turn to outside financing to fuel growth, according to the 2016 Litigation Finance Survey by Burford Capital, a litigation lender. In the survey, 81 percent of lawyers said lack of capital inhibited growth.More than nine out of 10 clients, or 94 percent, reported increased pressure on legal budgets, staffing and spending, up from 80 percent in 2014 and 73 percent in 2013. Litigation finance makes money available for upgrades like improving technology or data security, or taking on big cost-intensive cases.According to the survey, which had responses from 60 large law firms, 28 percent of lawyers in private practice have used litigation financing since 2013.Nearly three times as many, or 75 percent, of outside counsel predicted that litigation financing would grow in the next five years, the survey said. In January, Burford announced it was committing $100 million in financing for a group of cases at a large, unnamed law firm. In December, the firm announced an agreement to provide $45 million in litigation financing to a major telecommunications company with a portfolio of pending litigation. At the company, which declined to be named, legal fees and expenses had eaten into operating revenue.Last year, Burford, which is listed on the London Stock Exchange, committed $30 million to the Hausfeld law firm to expand its presence in Germany, including opening an office in Berlin.Burford is not the only firm in the sector. Gerchen Keller Capital LLC, a Chicago-based litigation lender, has $1.4 billion in assets. Burford recently added capital, bringing its investment total to $1 billion. Others include Bentham IMF, which has funded more than a half-dozen litigation portfolios. The field is likely to grow as pressure from costs incurred by litigation continues.“Finance is increasingly used by firms and clients as an innovative and flexible means of accessing capital that can be invested back into the business,” said Christopher P. Bogart, Burford’s chief executive and a former general counsel at Time Warner.Burford, which was co-founded by Mr. Bogart in 2009, reported revenues last year of $103 million, up from $82 million in 2014. Its pretax profit rose to $67 million last year, from $57 million in 2014.Mr. Bogart, who is also a former associateat the law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore, said Burford’s clients often do not want to be identified.“No one likes to talk about litigation,” he said, even though litigation “has moved from aggravating and immaterial to being a very significant matter” for many companies. Burford has more than $600 million invested in litigation, though only 13 percent of its financing arrangements support single lawsuits, he said.Financing helps firms be more flexible in responding to client demands for alternatives to the traditional hourly billing model as well as to curb litigation costs. Typically law firm partners are reluctant to invest long-term because their pay is tied to current profitability, not to future payouts. Financing litigation allows firms to absorb costs in the short term and compete by offering clients alternative fee arrangements.Advertisement