AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressST. PETERSBURG, Fla. — Florida’s largest newspaper, The Tampa Bay Times, said on Tuesday it had purchased its main competitor, The Tampa Tribune, ending a long newspaper rivalry.The acquisition means that The Tribune has ended a 123-year run as a stand-alone paper. The Times will become the fifth-largest Sunday circulation newspaper in the nation.The chairman and chief of The Times, Paul C. Tash, said he intended to create one financially secure, locally owned daily newspaper in the Tampa Bay region. He did not disclose the purchase price.“The continued competition between the newspapers was threatening to both,” Mr. Tash said in a statement.The Times bought the paper from the Revolution Capital Group, which purchased The Tribune in 2012 for $9.5 million.For decades, the two papers have competed in the cities of Tampa and St. Petersburg and the suburbs of Pasco, Hernando and Citrus counties. The competition was also a reflection of the regional differences between St. Petersburg and Tampa, which are about 30 miles apart and separated by Tampa Bay.The rivalry had waned in recent years as both papers adjusted to the challenging realities of the newspaper business.“It’s fair to say we’ve seen this day coming for a very long time,” Mr. Tash said.Rick Edmonds, a media business analyst at the Poynter Institute for Media Studies in St. Petersburg — the nonprofit that owns The Tampa Bay Times — said he thought the acquisition “was in the cards for some time.”“The Tribune’s fate was kind of sealed when the company that bought them sold their property and main building,” he said.Poynter reported that at least 100 layoffs were expected.“If you’re a newspaper reader, this is sad news,” said Gary R. Mormino, a Florida historian and professor emeritus at the University of South Florida-St. Petersburg. “The competition has been overall good for the community.”The Tribune won a Pulitzer Prize in 1966 for local investigative specialized reporting. In 1999, the paper became one of the first in the nation to converge with a TV station when it shared a newsroom with WFLA.The Times began its history 131 years ago as The West Hillsborough Times. It was known for most of its existence as The St. Petersburg Times, but changed its name to The Tampa Bay Times in 2012 to reflect the territory it serves.In April, The Times won its 11th and 12th Pulitzer Prizes, for local and investigative reporting.Advertisement