
In Debt By                     
STEPHEN J. LUBBEN

MAY 3, 2016
There is something quintessentially New York about a grocery store chain with just 15 locations that thinks it needs to be a publicly traded company. But so it was with Fairway Group Holdings, the Manhattan institution that had its initial public offering in 2013 and has now filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.On one level, Fairway’s story is like that of the myriad oil and gas companies filing bankruptcy petitions these days: An eager business sets its sight on a major expansion, beyond what the market can support.Fairway is a bit different, because it has filed a “prepack.” In such prepackaged Chapter 11 cases, creditors vote before the bankruptcy case is filed, which allows the company to get in and out of bankruptcy fast. In Fairway’s case, company executives hope to leave bankruptcy around June 1.Prepacks are useful tools for revamping a company’s balance sheet. And that is exactly what Fairway is doing. It is eliminating old shareholders, mostly a single hedge fund, and giving ownership of the company to the secured lenders. The old secured lenders will also continue as lenders under a debtor-in-possession loan in bankruptcy and under an “exit facility” as the company leaves bankruptcy.AdvertisementSo Fairway will cut down its secured debt, become a private company, while leaving everyone else untouched in the process. This will fix Fairway’s problems, if the problems are mostly the result of too much debt.
                The New York grocery store chain that had its initial public offering in 2013 has now filed for bankruptcy protection.            The disclosure statement does note that same-store sales have declined 6 percent in the last year. Fairway points to its Upper East Side location, where a Whole Foods store opened just around the corner, as a particular source of these declines.Prepacks are often, but not always, associated with second bankruptcy filings, or “Chapter 22” cases. After solving their balance sheet problems, many companies find they have operational problems, too.AdvertisementOnly time will tell if Fairway will avoid this fate, and if its debt reduction will be sufficient to allow it to retool and compete in what it acknowledges is an extremely competitive operating market.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.