By CHAD BRAYMAY 3, 2016
IMS Health Holdings, the health care information and technology provider, and Quintiles Transnational Holdings, which assists pharmaceutical companies with clinical trial research, said on Tuesday that they had agreed to an all-stock “merger of equals.”The merger would create a combined company worth $17.6 billion based on market capitalization and with $7.2 billion in pro forma revenue in 2015.It is the latest in a series of health care deals as companies in that industry sector seek greater scale — as evident in $40 billion in potential transactions announced on a single day last week.Last Thursday, Abbott agreed to purchase St. Jude Medical for $25 billion. Sanofi that same day made an offer to buy Medivation for about $9.3 billion, while AbbeVie signed a $5.8 billion deal for Stemcentrx.Advertisement“This combination addresses life-science companies’ most pressing needs: to transform the clinical development of innovative medicines, demonstrate the value of these medicines in the real world, and drive commercial success,” Tom Pike, the Quintiles chief executive, said in a news release. “I’m confident that together we will make our clients even more successful.”AdvertisementUnder the terms of the latest deal, IMS Health investors would receive 0.384 shares of Quintiles stock for each share of IMS Health that they own.Following the merger, IMS Health shareholders would own about 51.4 percent of the combined company, while Quintiles shareholders would own the remaining 48.6 percent.The transaction would be subject to approval by regulators and the shareholders of both companies. It is expected to close in the second half of the year.Investors owning about 54 percent of IMS Health and 25 percent of Quintiles have entered into agreements to vote in favor of the deal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The companies expect to achieve about $100 million in annual cost savings by the end of the third year following the transaction.The combined company would be called Quintiles IMS Holdings and maintain dual headquarters in Connecticut and North Carolina. Ari Bousbib, the chairman and chief executive of IMS Health, would serve in the same role at the combine company.Mr. Pike, the Quintiles chief executive, would serve as vice chairman of the combined company.IMS Health is being advised by Goldman Sachs and the law firm Weil, Gotshal & Manges, and the independent committee of the IMS Health board was advised by the law firm Morris, Nichols, Arsht & Tunnell.Quintiles was advised by Barclays and the law firms Bryan Cave and Smith, Anderson, Blount, Dorsett, Mitchell & Jernigan and the independent directors of Quintiles were advised by the law firm Simpson Thacher & Bartlett.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Healthy Market.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.