AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiAs recalls of defective airbags made by Takata mushroomed from a few thousand in 2008 to tens of millions, a central mystery remained: What was causing the airbags to rupture violently, sending metal fragments flying into the cabin.On Wednesday, federal safety regulators said they had the answer. Long-term exposure to environmental moisture and wide temperature fluctuations over time can degrade the propellant used to deploy the airbag, making it unstable and prone to unexpectedly explode.Based on the findings, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said on Wednesday that it would require Takata, of Japan, to work with automakers to recall an additional 35 million to 40 million airbags, bringing the number recalled in the United States to nearly 64 million.“This is the largest recall in American history,” Mark R. Rosekind, the agency’s administrator, told reporters.Regulators reviewed three investigations, and conducted an inquiry, into the cause of the defect. At least 11 deaths worldwide and 10 in the United States have been linked to the defect. In every case, the car was an older model. The deadly ruptures have happened with increasing frequency in recent years.All of the investigations found flaws in the airbag’s propellant, which includes a compound called ammonium nitrate and is enclosed in a steel casing called an inflater.“The science now clearly shows that these inflaters can become unsafe over time, and faster when exposed to high humidity and high temperature fluctuations,” Mr. Rosekind said.Takata did not immediately respond to a request for comment.For years, Takata’s engineers struggled to stabilize the ammonium nitrate, a cheap but volatile explosive that is more often used in large-scale applications like mining. Eventually, Takata’s engineers added a drying agent to help stabilize the compound.In addition to ammonium nitrate’s volatility, Mr. Rosekind said that the age of the airbag had emerged as an important factor. Takata’s inflaters, even without the drying agent, do not pose a risk to safety when they are installed in a new vehicle, and for a few years afterward, he said.“But after time, they pose a risk and should be replaced,” he said.The expanded recall means that all inflaters that use ammonium nitrate and do not contain a drying agent will be replaced.Takata has until the end of 2018 to recall cars that have airbags with such inflaters, and until the end of 2019 to recall faulty bags installed as part of earlier recalls.Automakers face an enormous logistical challenge in replacing the faulty inflaters. Not only are there shortages of parts in many areas of the country, but automakers also must deal with confused and frustrated consumers who face the prospect of driving potentially deadly cars while they await the repair. In some cases, automakers have made loaner cars available.Mr. Rosekind was blunt in his criticism of Takata and blamed its efforts to manipulate testing data and mislead regulators for the snowballing recalls.Takata and Honda were aware of an airbag rupture in a Honda vehicle as early as 2004, but did not alert safety regulators or issue a recall. Former Takata engineers have said that Takata conducted secret tests on inflaters it retrieved from scrapyards that year, but ordered the data destroyed after the two inflaters cracked under testing.In addition, documents unsealed as part of lawsuits against Takata have shown that it manipulated data as early as 2000 to conform with automakers’ safety requirements.All the while, Takata engineers struggled to tame ammonium nitrate. Even as deaths, and recalls, mounted, Takata maintained that limited manufacturing errors were at fault, not a fundamental problem with the propellant. The first recall, in 2008, affected only about 4,000 cars.“It’s because of how long it took for everyone to realize what’s going on — that’s why it went from a small recall to the largest recall in American history,” Mr. Rosekind said. “We’re talking about propellant degradation. That’s different from a manufacturing defect.”He said valuable time was lost because of Takata’s obfuscation.“There were some years of confusion, withholding information about that,” he said.Advertisement