AdvertisementSupported byBy Janet MorrisseyIn the unregulated world of estate sales, it can often be a challenge finding a reliable company to handle the unforgiving task of assessing and selling a person’s lifetime of possessions in just a few days.That was the issue Melanie Stepanovich faced. As executor of her cousin’s estate, she had the daunting task of clearing out his home in Downey, Calif.Hundreds of boxes, stacked to the ceiling, were crammed into a 2,200-square-foot house. Some contained antique bronze statues, 1920s Lalique perfume bottles, vintage Disney memorabilia and Tiffany-style lamps. Rolled-up Persian rugs and antique furniture were scattered around the house. Ms. Stepanovich, 67, a retired high school teacher, had no idea where to start.“Do you know the ‘Hoarders’ TV show? That’s what the house looked like, except it wasn’t garbage or trash,” Ms. Stepanovich said. “I was overwhelmed, depressed and stressed to the max. I knew I had to get help.”After doing a little research online, Ms. Stepanovich hired Grasons Company Estate Sale Services. And within three weeks, Grasons had priced and sold the home’s contents, netting more than $20,000 for the estate.The art of pricing antiques and selling hidden gems may seem easy in an era of eBay auctions and dazzling finds on “Antiques Roadshow” on PBS. In reality, turning estate sales into a profitable business can be difficult.Still, would-be entrepreneurs have entered the estate sale business in droves. More than 12,000 estate sale companies operate across the country, with more than 98 percent of them mom-and-pop businesses, estimates Micky McQuade, chief executive of EstateSales.net, a listing site for estate sales.Unlike appraisers and auctioneers, estate sale companies are not licensed or regulated, making it difficult for consumers to assess or compare businesses.Simone Kelly, who founded Grasons, is betting that building a business in this fragmented industry and franchising its name in cities across the country will give the company a leg up.“Having a brand name that is trusted and reputable is humongous for us,” Ms. Kelly said. She conducts background checks on all employees and potential franchisees, she said, and has rejected 14 people for franchises because they did not meet her standards.Grasons held 245 estate sales through 11 franchises in three states in 2015, up from 27 estate sales in its first full year in 2012. Ms. Kelly said she expected to have 40 franchises nationwide by the end of 2016 and 300 by 2020.Grasons, the parent company, makes money by charging a $30,000 franchisee fee and a 4.5 percent royalty on the franchisee’s gross estate sales. It plans to raise the franchise fee to $40,000 and charge a flat $500 a sale, Ms. Kelly said. Its revenue, $103,000 in 2012, rose to more than $375,000 in 2015, she said. She predicted that revenue would reach $920,000 in 2016 and exceed $9.8 million in 2020.Ms. Kelly said she was lobbying Matthew Harper, a California state assemblyman, to write legislation to regulate the industry. Madeleine Cooper, Mr. Harper’s legislative director, confirmed that the state was considering ways to impose penalties or regulations on it.The estate sale business requires a deftness for both appraising and handling people.Ms. Kelly recalled a large estate in September 2013, in which the deceased man’s only surviving relative was his 94-year-old mother. Possessions at the home, in Huntington Beach, Calif., included three Rolls-Royces, a 1992 Jaguar XJS, a 2006 Cadillac Escalade, Arizona Leather Interiors furniture, four flat-screen TVs, a gun collection and a grand piano.Tagging and pricing the items was challenging enough. Adding to the stress were the strangers dropping in, professing to be long-lost relatives or friends who were entitled to some of the property, she said. Some were testy, insisting that pen scrawls on napkins and random pieces of paper were proof of their claims.Some even “went searching through the koi pond” looking for treasures, she said. “It was crazy. It was the most disgusting display of humanity I’d ever seen.”Ms. Kelly calmly referred all of them to the estate’s lawyer, who sorted out what was owed to whom.Grasons franchisees hope some of the experience and credibility that Ms. Kelly acquired will help their operations. The franchisees make their money by charging a commission, usually 30 percent, on the proceeds of each estate sale.In some instances, they pocket as much as 50 percent for “hoarding” clean-out jobs and as little as 10 percent for big-ticket items, such as cars and rare coins.Franchisees say the estate sale business is often tough work. “We have two or three days to empty a house that took 60 years to fill, and that takes skill,” said Kathleen Shattles, who goes by Kendra. She owned a small estate sale company called America’s Attic in Huntington Beach, Calif., before she bought Grasons’s first franchise in 2014. She recently bought a second franchise.Combing through a labyrinth of possessions is also daunting. Elderly clients, in particular, are notorious for hiding valuables, sometimes sewing them into the hems of draperies or taping them under floorboards.“We literally pull up carpets. We stomp on the floors. We hit the walls. We hit the ceiling. We climb up into attics. Every drawer is removed, and we look underneath it and behind it,” Ms. Shattles said.Building a business was one of Ms. Kelly’s longtime goals. She flexed her entrepreneurial muscle early, digging up worms in the backyard to sell to fishermen while living in Muskegon, Mich., at 9 years old, and setting up a lemonade stand at 11.Even though she had no college education, she started a loan company, W.E. Financial in Fountain Valley, Calif., in 2002, and in 2003, she bought a Re/Max franchise in Huntington Harbour, Calif., for $25,000. When she sold the franchise and ancillary businesses after a divorce in 2006, it had 55 agents and was valued at more than $400,000.While running the real estate business, she discovered estate sales. She saw potential for huge demand, given the need for property sales after a divorce, death of a parent or downsizing. She scoured books, antiques websites and auctions to learn about appraising and pricing items. In late 2011, she started Grasons, which is named after her sons, Grant and Jason.One customer, Cindy Rossi, said she had contacted three estate sale companies before choosing Grasons to handle the sale of her former husband’s estate in Huntington Harbour in 2014.The sprawling 5,500-square-foot home was chock-full of antiques and collectibles, including paintings, a 1970 Rolls-Royce and 1975 Stutz Blackhawk.Ms. Rossi said the Grasons brand made a difference.“Anytime you’ve got more than one office, you’re looking at somebody whose business is doing well, or they wouldn’t be expanding,” Ms. Rossi said.Grasons’s biggest rivals are Caring Transitions of Cincinnati and Blue Moon Estate Sales near Raleigh, N.C., which both operate franchised estate sale companies.Blue Moon, which started in 2010, is similar to Grasons’s model, but it focuses on the Northeast and Southeast, while Grasons is largely in the West. However, Grasons recently added a Pennsylvania franchise, which probably will compete with Blue Moon.Caring, which started in 2006 and has 169 locations, focuses on a different niche. Most of its customers are older people who are moving to a smaller home or an assisted living center. It offers estate liquidation and relocation services, which include packing and moving a client to a new home.Ms. Kelly said her company did not compete directly with Caring and sometimes even referred clients to it. For his part, Chris Seman, president of Caring Transitions, said the expansion of franchise operations would help the industry.“The rising tide lifts all boats,” he said. “I think it’s good for the industry and will bring in a level of professionalism and quality that, frankly, is not there today.”Advertisement