AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiMartha Stewart has ditched eBay, taking her American Made store to Amazon’s Handmade marketplace, as the e-commerce giant flexes its muscle in the burgeoning online market for handcrafted goods.American Made, a venture introduced in 2013, was intended to be eBay’s answer to Etsy, the pioneer in the online handmade goods market. It offered locally made food, crafts and health and beauty products handpicked by Martha Stewart and her team at Martha Stewart Living, the media company she founded.But both eBay and Ms. Stewart confirmed on Tuesday that they had decided to part ways.Instead, American Made will go live on Wednesday on Amazon’s Handmade store, the arts-and-crafts marketplace the company set up last month. The new site has positioned Amazon as a formidable competitor to Etsy, which logged almost $2 billion in gross merchandise sales in 2014, and went public this year.Since Amazon introduced Handmade, the number of artisans who list on the site has doubled to more than 10,000, according to Erik Fairleigh, an Amazon spokesman. The number of products for sale on Handmade has also jumped to 200,000 items, from an initial lineup of 80,000, he said.He declined to give figures, but said Amazon was “very pleased and encouraged by the early sales results.”Handmade at Amazon remains dwarfed by Etsy, which lists about 36 million craft items for sale from 1.5 million active sellers.And in a statement, eBay’s vice president for merchandising for soft goods, Jill Ramsey, said hundreds of sellers who had sold on American Made continued to operate their storefronts on eBay. EBay continues to sell more than a half-billion dollars of handmade items and related craft supplies annually, she said.Still, Ms. Stewart said in an interview that Amazon’s mammoth scale over all made it an attractive partner for American Made, which features handmade goods like knit socks, intricately designed coffee tables and grass-based dairy. Sales at Amazon are set to exceed $100 billion for the first time, making it one of the country’s largest retailers.“It’s a much bigger audience,” Ms. Stewart said. “It’s the powerhouse retailer online in the United States.” She added: “It’s a step in the right direction, I think, to showcase the vast number of entrepreneurial small companies emerging in the United States. And some of these companies might become the giants of tomorrow.”It is a particularly inopportune time for eBay, which, after a drawn-out proxy fight with its shareholders, spun off PayPal, the global payments processing company, into an independent company four months ago.Investors have long been bullish on the future of PayPal, but are less certain of the fate of an independent eBay, which faces formidable e-commerce competitors like Amazon and, to a lesser extent, Google.Ms. Stewart, 74, has seen her fortunes rise and fall. At its peak, Martha Stewart Living, a media empire built around Ms. Stewart’s carefully curated lifestyle brand, was worth over $1 billion. But in June, the company agreed to sell itself to the Sequential Brands Group for just $353 million.Martha Stewart Living’s troubles stemmed partly from Ms. Stewart’s conviction, in 2004, of obstructing justice and lying about a stock sale. Ms. Stewart spent several months in prison in Alderson, W.Va., but has since reclaimed a spot on the board of her namesake company.But Martha Stewart Living, which runs publishing, broadcasting and merchandising businesses, has suffered. In 2014, the company logged sales of $141.9 million, compared with $160.7 million in 2013.Mike Isaac contributed reporting.Advertisement