By LANDON THOMAS Jr.MAY 4, 2016
William H. Gross, as prominent a stamp collector as he is a bond investor, has just sold a sizable chunk of his stamp collection — netting $4.5 million.Mr. Gross, who says he has spent more than $100 million on his collection since the early 1990s, will donate $2 million each to the Pimco Foundation, the philanthropic arm of his former employer, and The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. The rest will go to smaller charities.Mr. Gross is in the middle of a bitter legal dispute with his former firm over the circumstances of his abrupt departure in late 2014. But he has vowed to keep supporting the Pimco Foundation, which he was instrumental in setting up and supporting.“The Pimco Foundation appreciates the donation from Sue and Bill Gross,” Sarah Middleton, executive director of the Pimco Foundation, said in a statement. “These donations serve to improve local and global communities and help empower others to better their lives.”AdvertisementUnder Mohamed El-Erian, Pimco’s former chief executive, the company’s employees were asked to volunteer their time as well as their money to support various causes.AdvertisementThe foundation has a size of $77 million, and Mr. Gross has said that he will donate the proceeds of his $200 million lawsuit, if he wins it, to charities — including the one at his former company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Gross, who has a net worth of nearly $2 billion, according to Forbes magazine, was inspired to start a serious stamp collection when he discovered that his mother’s lifelong stash could not be sold at a profit. As he accumulated wealth in the 1990s at Pimco, he began to look at stamps as a type of asset class, deserving of the same rigorous study that characterized his analysis of fixed-income securities.Along the way, he has relied on the same kind of principles that made him one of the world’s largest bond investors, insisting on discounts to face value and rarity in the stamps that he bought.Since 2007, Mr. Gross has been more a stamp seller than buyer, raising more than $20 million in this period.This latest sale includes eight volumes and more than 1,000 stamps from Switzerland, a collection he bought in 1999 and has added to.A version of this article appears in print on May 5, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Co-Founder of Pimco Sells Rare Swiss Stamps.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.