By JONATHAN SOBLEMAY 4, 2016
The recall of defective airbags made by Tatkata has become the largest in the United States' history, according to a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration report released on Wednesday.TOKYO — Takata, the Japanese auto-parts supplier, faces big losses, dwindling cash and mounting costs from an auto safety scandal already linked to 11 deaths.Now, as the scandal widens to include tens of millions of more cars in the United States, one problem has gained new urgency: whether the company can survive in its current form.Regulators in the United States announced Wednesday that 35 million to 40 million additional Takata airbags need to be fixed. That would more than double what is already the largest automotive recall in American history.“It’s very clear that the company cannot pay all the expenses at this point,” said Koji Endo, a car industry analyst at Advanced Research Japan. “The question is: Is there a player that wants to save Takata?”AdvertisementPotential saviors include Japanese automakers, which have become increasingly dependent on Takata’s airbags, seatbelts and other parts over the years. They could also include foreign auto-parts companies that might be tempted by Takata’s still-strong sales and its market share.AdvertisementBut any company that intervenes would face daunting challenges, particularly the potential for the scandal to widen further.Exactly how much the recalls will ultimately cost Takata remains unclear. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, the American regulator, has said 100 million airbags may eventually need to be fixed in the United States alone.The company’s cash reserves have shrunk by 40 percent in over the past two years as the problem has expanded, according to its financial disclosures. Even before the news of the widened recall, Takata has said it planned to to book special one-time charges totaling 20.1 billion yen, or $189 million, to cover recall costs and settlements with consumers injured by its inflaters — an amount four times the size of the annual profit it had projected before that.This slow-motion footage, courtesy of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, shows a test of a Takata airbag. During the test, the airbag inflater ruptures, sending metal fragments flying.Automakers, not Takata, are responsible for carrying out the recalls, and they bear much of the initial cost, which they can then try to recoup from the supplier. But how much they can recover is negotiable. That raises difficult problems, like how hard carmakers can afford to squeeze a supplier whose products they still depend on.Takata’s sales have not declined significantly. It still controls about 30 percent of the airbag market, and some automakers in Japan, like Honda, have become especially reliant on it. Takata is also a major supplier of seatbelts. If it collapsed suddenly, some carmakers’ assembly lines would halt.Those pressures could set up Japanese carmakers as possible saviors for Takata. One scenario, floated by the Japanese news media, is that a “Rising Sun Alliance” of Honda, Toyota and other Japanese producers could bail the company out with an injection of emergency capital, taking ownership stakes in return. Takata’s banks would be expected to keep credit flowing to the company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Publicly, at least, the carmakers have pushed back against the idea. Honda’s president, Takahiro Hachigo, said in his most recent comments on the matter in February that his company was “not considering financial aid” for Takata.One obstacle, said Mr. Endo of Advanced Research Japan, is that as partial owners, carmakers would be on the hook for unpredictable future costs, such as potentially large penalties stemming from lawsuits against Takata in North America. Carmakers would have to weigh such risks against Takata’s collapsing or being bought out by a foreign competitor.AdvertisementSuch competitors, like TRW Automotive of the United States, might be tempted by Takata’s large market share. But because the airbag sector is already tightly consolidated, any attempt at a takeover could raise antitrust issues.A competitor would still have to contend with the possibility of unresolved future costs. One option would be to restructure the company so that it becomes two entities: a “good” company that owns the continuing business and a “bad” company responsible for its legacy liabilities. In that arrangement, which would be similar to what resulted from the bankruptcy and restructuring of General Motors in 2009, the good company would continue to run businesses like seatbelts and the overhauled airbag operations, while the bad company would pay out and settle the claims against Takata.Takata has hired an advisory team of lawyers and other specialists with expertise in corporate restructuring. According to Japanese news reports, the team believes Takata needs a cash infusion to avoid bankruptcy and is hoping to secure some kind of rescue by the end of the summer.For now, carmakers are absorbing much of the financial impact. Mazda set aside a little over ¥40 billion last week to cover the cost of replacing Takata airbag components. Largely as a result, its net profit for the past fiscal year declined by 15.4 percent. Other, bigger Japanese carmakers are scheduled to report their earnings in the coming weeks.“It’s an enormous financial burden,” Mr. Endo said. “There’s no way Takata can pay it back.”Follow Jonathan Soble on Twitter @jonathan_soble.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.