By MICHAEL CIEPLYMAY 5, 2016
LOS ANGELES — The trial to determine the mental competency of the ailing 92-year-old media mogul Sumner M. Redstone will open with a blockbuster lineup of witnesses on Friday, beginning with Mr. Redstone himself.At a final case management conference here on Thursday, Judge David J. Cowan of the Los Angeles County Superior Court established a first-day trial schedule that promises to lead with 30 minutes of video testimony from Mr. Redstone.If all goes according to plan, that will be followed by testimony from a psychiatrist who has examined Mr. Redstone, Dr. Stephen L. Read; Mr. Redstone’s granddaughter, Keryn Redstone; and Philippe Dauman, the chief executive of Viacom, of which Mr. Redstone is a controlling shareholder.Mr. Dauman, like Mr. Redstone, will testify via an already recorded video, according to Pierce O’Donnell, a lawyer for Manuela Herzer.AdvertisementMs. Herzer, a former companion and romantic partner of Mr. Redstone, initiated the court case in November by filing a petition that claimed Mr. Redstone was not competent when he removed her from a directive last year that would have given her supervision over his health care. Lawyers for Mr. Redstone are disputing the claim.AdvertisementMr. Redstone’s own testimony presents a considerable challenge for the court. Ordered by Judge Cowan only three days ago, the 30-minute video testimony was completed earlier on Thursday, lawyers both for Ms. Herzer and for Mr. Redstone said in court.In opening Thursday’s hearing, at 1:30 p.m., Judge Cowan asked if the testimony went smoothly.“It did,” answered Mr. O’Donnell, whose opinion, at least on that matter, was affirmed by Robert N. Klieger, who represents Mr. Redstone.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Judge Cowan turned down requests to bifurcate the trial, with one part dedicated to Mr. Redstone’s competency, and the other related to whether he was under undue influence of his daughter, Shari Redstone, his caretakers or others when he removed Ms. Herzer from his health care directive last October.Judge Cowan said he found the issues to be interrelated, and to be dependent on facts, lots of which he intends to explore during testimony that is likely to become painfully personal, though the court has allowed lawyers to withhold some details from their public filings.When Mr. Redstone’s video testimony is presented on Friday, the courtroom will be cleared of all but a few lawyers, expert witnesses, court personnel and Shari Redstone. But Mr. O’Donnell was ordered to make a transcript of Mr. Redstone’s remarks available to reporters.Judge Cowan noted that 18 news organizations had asked for space in his small courtroom. “We’re going to get some more chairs in here,” Judge Cowan promised.The nonjury trial is scheduled to run through next Thursday, but could go longer, and will be decided by Judge Cowan.A version of this article appears in print on May 6, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Trial Will Hear From Redstone Himself First.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.