AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la Merced and Alexandra StevensonAlthough the biggest leveraged buyout of the year is still set to be completed on time, some of the banks involved in the financing have postponed plans to sell several billion dollars’ worth of debt meant to support the transaction, people briefed on the matter said on Tuesday.The move by the lenders, led by Bank of America Merrill Lynch and Morgan Stanley, highlighted the sense of caution that has descended on the market for junk bonds and riskier high-yield loans. It also underscored the growing reluctance of investors to place money in volatile markets in recent months, in both the bond and equity markets.The decision — involving the Carlyle Group’s planned takeover of Symantec’s data storage business — also means that the banks will hold as much as several billion dollars’ worth of debt on their books for at least a month, potentially leaving them with millions of dollars in losses.Carlyle and a consortium of investors, including Singapore’s sovereign wealth fund, agreed to acquire Veritas Technologies from Symantec for $8 billion. Symantec, which specializes in security software, announced plans last year to split its operations into two businesses, one of which is the Veritas unit.Backing up the deal is more than $5 billion worth of debt. The lenders had already extended what is known on Wall Street as bridge financing, meant to temporarily support the transaction until they could subsequently sell loans and bonds to investors and remove the risk from their books.The banks had already sold off a portion of the debt — known in the trade as syndicating it out — to reduce their risk. But as they ventured into the debt markets to try to sell the remaining loans and bonds over the last several weeks, they encountered resistance from investors who demanded better terms for the offerings, according to the people briefed on the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.The lenders tried to entice potential buyers by offering a higher interest rate for the bonds, to more than 11 percent, and a lower price for the loans, some of these people said. But investors continued to balk.Ultimately, the banks chose to call off their marketing effort, believing market conditions were forcing the deal to a price that was too low. They will try again in January, one of the people added.The news that the debt offering was delayed did not come as a surprise to some bankers and investors who believed that the deal was too highly indebted. Others who are working on the transaction argued, however, that the transaction was likely to fetch respectable credit ratings from the major credit ratings agencies and represented a solid investment.Symantec asserted that the deal would still close by Jan. 1 of next year, according to a spokesman for the company. “The transaction is subject to customary closing conditions, although there is no financing contingency associated with the closing of the deal,” the spokesman said in a statement.A spokesman for Carlyle declined to comment.Not all junk-rated debt transactions have suffered difficulties. Last week, Avago Technologies, a chip maker, increased the amount of debt it was seeking to raise from the markets by $2 billion, to $9.75 billion, on favorable terms.The Veritas acquisition comes during a trying 2015 for the Carlyle Group. In October, the private equity giant reported a loss for the third quarter, driven in large part by lower mark-to-market valuations after months of volatility in the markets. Its credit-focused hedge fund, Claren Road Asset Management, has faced a steady flow of investor requests to redeem their money.Peter Eavis and Leslie Picker contributed reporting.Advertisement