By LESLIE PICKERMAY 5, 2016
Kelcy Warren has been trying for months to free his pipeline empire from a deal with the Williams Companies despite their ironclad merger agreement.So far, his tactics have merely gotten him and his company, Energy Transfer Equity, sued.Now, Mr. Warren thinks he has found a breakthrough.His company’s outside legal adviser, Latham & Watkins, said it was unable to provide a certain tax opinion, a condition required to close the deal. Without it, Energy Transfer said its deal with Williams would be effectively dead.“We can’t close. We don’t have a transaction that can close,” Mr. Warren said on Thursday in the Energy Transfer’s conference call to discuss quarterly earnings. “Absent substantial restructuring of this transaction, which Energy Transfer has been very willing and actually desiring to do, absent that, we don’t have a deal.”AdvertisementRestructuring is certainly another option for Energy Transfer. Mr. Warren said in the call that he would like to pay for Williams with stock, rather than the agreed-upon mixture of stock and $6 billion in cash, which Energy Transfer would have to finance by taking on debt. An all-stock deal would also presumably enable Latham to grant the tax opinion, since the main reason it couldn’t offer one was the cash involved in the transaction, according to tax experts.AdvertisementBut the talk at this point may be just theater. Williams has not received a new proposal from Energy Transfer to restructure the deal, according to people briefed on those discussions. Williams has not gotten a termination notice either, said those people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.Some experts say they are skeptical of the validity of Latham’s decision not to grant the tax opinion. The questions arose after Energy Transfer amended a regulatory filing on April 18 to show that Latham would no longer be able to deliver a so-called 721 opinion if the transaction were closed that day. No reason was given. Williams, after consulting with its legal team, led by Cravath, Swaine & Moore, disagreed.Then, on Wednesday, the dueling law firms were able to make their cases in public by way of an amended regulatory filing on the deal. Because of the market declines in the energy sector since the deal was signed, Williams’s assets are now valued at far less than the $6 billion in cash its shareholders would be receiving from Energy Transfer, according to Latham’s argument. That could prompt the Internal Revenue Service to require them to recast the transaction, making the assets suddenly taxable.Cravath said in the filing on Wednesday, however, that it did not think recasting would be necessary.Robert Willens, an independent tax consultant said the I.R.S. would focus on the values that existed at the time the deal was signed, back in September, as opposed to now. While Latham was able to obtain an I.R.S. ruling for other parts of its opinion, the firm did not seek one related to this issue.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Now that we’re seeing such a dichotomy of opinion between the two law firms, people can’t help but think Latham is bending over backward to help their client,” said Mr. Willens in an interview, in regards to Energy Transfer’s desire to get out of the deal. “Certainly the issues Latham is raising are not just totally hogwash. There’s some merit to them. Personally, I think Cravath has a better side of the argument.”However, Energy Transfer’s chief financial officer, Thomas E. Long, said in the earnings call Thursday that Latham “really scrubbed this issue before reaching its conclusion” and Energy Transfer also consulted with other legal advisers that reached the same conclusion as Latham.Representatives from Energy Transfer, Williams, and Cravath declined to comment. A representative from Latham & Watkins did not respond to requests for comment.AdvertisementThe disagreement between the two law firms underscores the contentiousness that has permeated this deal almost from the beginning.Seven months ago, Energy Transfer announced its $38 billion acquisition of Williams, a capstone deal for Mr. Warren, giving him 71,000 miles of pipelines across the United States. Soon thereafter, the market for energy companies radically changed for the worse. For Williams, where the board was initially split on a transaction, the deal suddenly became a necessity. Energy Transfer, on the other hand, has scrambled frantically for a way out.By February, Energy Transfer fired the architect of the deal, Jamie Welch, who had been serving as its chief financial officer. The next month, Energy Transfer sharply cut its estimates for how much the merger would lift earnings, to $170 million from the original $2 billion projection. Energy Transfer, based in Dallas, also threatened thousands of job cuts for Williams employees in Tulsa and Oklahoma City, even though the initial agreement said a presence in Oklahoma would be maintained.Tension rose when Energy Transfer disclosed an arrangement that gave Mr. Warren and several other unit holders of the company priority over other investors in both Energy Transfer and Williams if the deal were to close. This transaction gave the select group protection if Energy Transfer’s distributions — similar to dividends — were cut in a cash squeeze.That led Williams to sue Mr. Warren for breaching their merger agreement. Mr. Welch is also suing Energy Transfer for wrongful termination.A version of this article appears in print on May 6, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Energy Transfer Sees Way Out of Williams Pipeline Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.