AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelThe media mogul Sumner M. Redstone was in the middle of a bitter divorce from his wife of 52 years in December 2000 when he was spotted with a decades-younger woman at the New York premiere of the Paramount movie “What Women Want.”His companion was Manuela Herzer, then a 36-year-old single mother of three. The pair met the previous year, and they dated for about two years. When he asked her to marry him in 2000, she declined.Yet Ms. Herzer remained in the orbit of Mr. Redstone’s life as a friend, even as he cycled through another marriage and a series of girlfriends. He lavished gifts, real estate and money on her — more than $70 million in cash and other assets since 2009. He named her a beneficiary of his personal trust, listing her as “family.” Upon his death, he planned to leave her an additional $50 million and his $20 million Los Angeles mansion, according to various court filings.Now Ms. Herzer is challenging Mr. Redstone’s mental competence in a salacious lawsuit she filed last November, not long after she was suddenly ejected from Mr. Redstone’s life and his home, where she had maintained a residence for about two years. She also was removed from his will and from a directive that would have given her supervision of his health care.The legal battle, filled with embarrassing claims about Mr. Redstone’s sexual desires, incontinence and demands to eat steak while on a feeding tube, is scheduled for trial starting Friday in Los Angeles County Superior Court, exactly three weeks before his 93rd birthday.This real-life soap opera has captivated both Hollywood and Wall Street. While the dispute concerns Mr. Redstone’s personal affairs, the outcome could have major implications for his $42 billion media empire, which includes two of the world’s largest entertainment companies, Viacom and CBS, both still controlled by Mr. Redstone.A ruling by Judge David J. Cowan that Mr. Redstone is not competent would set off a contentious battle for power across Mr. Redstone’s businesses.At the center of it all is Ms. Herzer, now 51, who claims in the suit that Mr. Redstone lacked mental capacity and was under the undue influence of a nurse and his daughter, Shari Redstone, when he changed his health care plan. Is Ms. Herzer a loving friend, concerned about his well-being, whom he trusted to look out for his best interests even more than his own family? Or are her claims an invasion of privacy, riddled with lies and motivated by greed?Those questions will set the backdrop for the trial, as the court is expected to hear video testimony from Mr. Redstone, as well as from his daughter, doctors and nurses, Ms. Herzer and Philippe Dauman, the chief executive of Viacom.“The trial will expose the tragic inconvenient truth that Sumner Redstone needs the court’s protection from those who have lied to and exploited him in his debilitated condition,” Pierce O’Donnell, a lawyer for Ms. Herzer, said in a statement. “We look forward to trial.”Robert N. Klieger, a lawyer for Mr. Redstone, said in a statement that the case was all about money for Ms. Herzer.“For Mr. Redstone, it is about his ability to decide who will make the most important health care decisions in his life,” Mr. Klieger added. “Some things are more important than money.”The two sides came close to reaching a settlement last month but talks hit a snag. Since then, hurried trial preparations have been underway, with both sides boldly proclaiming that they are looking forward to arguing the dispute in court.The trial, which is scheduled to last five days, promises to provide vivid details and plot turns worthy of a Shakespearean drama.The first witness Friday is expected to be Mr. Redstone, in video testimony recorded Thursday. Mr. Redstone has not been seen publicly since his 92nd birthday last May and has suffered minor strokes that have left him with a severe speech impediment. In her suit, Ms. Herzer called him a “living ghost.’’One person who has interacted regularly with Mr. Redstone, and who asked not to be identified because the conversations with Mr. Redstone were private, said that while it was difficult to understand him initially, people who become familiar with his speech patterns could make out what he was saying, particularly when he responded to yes or no questions, spoke in shorter phrases or became angry. His speech therapists and nurses are said to assist in interpreting Mr. Redstone’s more complex statements.Next on the witness list is Dr. Stephen L. Read, a psychiatrist who conducted a medical exam of Mr. Redstone in late January and filed a 37-page report; most details were withheld. Dr. Read is expected to testify that Mr. Redstone “did not fully understand and appreciate the consequences” of removing Ms. Herzer from the health care directive, according to court documents filed by her lawyers on Thursday.Lawyers for Mr. Redstone asserted in a separate court filing on Thursday that Dr. Read’s report was manipulated by Mr. O’Donnell.Then comes Keryn Redstone, Mr. Redstone’s granddaughter, who has formed an alliance with Ms. Herzer that essentially pits her against Shari Redstone, her aunt. In a recent declaration Keryn Redstone described her grandfather as a “prisoner in his own home.” She also claimed that she and her grandfather had been threatened by her aunt. Shari Redstone has called the claims false.New court documents filed Thursday by lawyers for Mr. Redstone assert that Ms. Herzer exploited her relationship with him for financial gain, saying that between last August and mid-October she charged more than $265,000 to his American Express card, and at one point called in a request for $40,000 in cash to be delivered to Mr. Redstone’s house and had him sign for it.In response, lawyers for Ms. Herzer said that Mr. Redstone had been generous to many people in his life, and Ms. Herzer was one of them.Ms. Herzer has said the suit is solely about Mr. Redstone’s well-being. She was introduced to him by one of his old friends in 1999, about five years after her bitter divorce from Eric Chamchoum, a Nigerian-born telecommunications executive who is part of a dynastic Lebanese family.Ms. Herzer was born in Buenos Aires, the only daughter in a family with four sons. The family moved to Miami when she was a child. She later studied in Paris, where she met Mr. Chamchoum. The couple moved to Los Angeles.Their divorce filings, in the Los Angeles court system, are lurid. The case includes well over 1,500 pages, with accusations of physical abuse and tax evasion, and assertions by Ms. Herzer that her husband had threatened to abduct their two children and take them to Nigeria. Lawyers came and went.Mr. Chamchoum lived in Nigeria at the time. Ms. Herzer was unable to provide any evidence of abuse.Over the years, Ms. Herzer has listed her occupation in public records as homemaker, producer and self-employed. She owns property in California, New York and Paris and is also listed as the principal officer of the Herzer Foundation, dedicated to the prevention of childhood diseases and child abuse.Former employees of Paramount, the movie and television studio owned by Viacom, described her as a frequent presence on the lot and on the red carpet for movie premieres, charity parties and other social events over the years. Last year, she participated in an interview and photo shoot for a lengthy profile about Mr. Redstone in Vanity Fair.Though they stopped dating early in the 2000s, Mr. Redstone and Ms. Herzer remained close, and in early 2013 she moved into his mansion at his request, she said in court filings. From 2013 until August 2015, Ms. Herzer said, she helped Mr. Redstone make health care decisions along with his girlfriend at the time, Sydney Holland.In August, Ms. Holland was ejected from the home after a confession of infidelity. At that point, Ms. Herzer said, she took over the management of Mr. Redstone’s health care. She characterized his health as deteriorating rapidly.On the morning of Oct. 12, Ms. Herzer was removed from Mr. Redstone’s home in a scene she described as a tearful frenzy. She has said that she did not know why she had been ejected and was told by Mr. Redstone’s lawyers only that she had “lied” to Mr. Redstone. The papers filed by the Redstone side on Thursday said the lies involved Ms. Herzer obstructing Mr. Redstone’s relationship with another woman as well as her fabrication of a letter she said was from Ms. Holland.Lawyers for Ms. Herzer said that they will show during the trial that the allegations have no merit.Noah Smith contributed reporting from Los Angeles. Doris Burke contributed research.Advertisement