By DIANE CARDWELLMAY 5, 2016
NRG Energy, moving to complete its reorganization after the ouster of its chief executive last year, is paring back involvement in two of its alternative energy ventures as it seeks to cut costs and streamline operations, the company announced on Thursday.The company, whose large fleet of conventional power plants has made it a leading independent power producer, will sell a majority stake in its electric vehicle charging business, EVgo. And its home solar division will sell the future customer agreements it originates to two partners, Sunrun and Spruce, once the systems are up and running.That approach will allow the residential solar business to break even by next year, Mauricio Gutierrez, NRG’s chief executive, said in a conference call with analysts.“We don’t have any grand aspirations in terms of the total sales and installations that we want to have for the year,” Mr. Gutierrez said, declining to disclose financial goals. Under the new business model, he added, “we sell, install and flip to a third party.”AdvertisementThough it continues the company’s pushes into alternative energy, Mr. Gutierrez’s strategy is more restrained than that of his predecessor, David Crane, who sought to transform the company into the Google of electricity.AdvertisementMr. Gutierrez’s approach to fast-growing new-energy businesses that have generally offered more promise than profit is intended to help the company thrive despite the financial pressures of low wholesale energy prices.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company has held onto its large-scale renewables development business and plans to sell a 51 percent stake in the California Valley Solar Ranch, a large farm in San Luis Obispo, to NRG Yield, a subsidiary, during the second quarter this year.The home solar unit will for now focus on three markets where it is already active — New York, New Jersey and Massachusetts — but will look to offer rooftop arrays to the residential customers it serves in Texas when the economics are more viable, Mr. Gutierrez said.“It makes a whole lot of sense that if we already have a relationship with the residential customer, and this is one of the products that they are asking for, that we provide it,” he said.The company announced a net profit for the first quarter of $47 million in contrast to a net loss of $136 million for the first quarter of 2015. It also announced that Christopher Sotos would be the new chief executive for NRG Yield, the publicly traded subsidiary set up to buy the power plants the parent company develops and then pay dividends to investors from the income the plants generate.Mr. Sotos has been on the board of directors of NRG Yield since its initial public offering in July 2013, and has been head of strategy and mergers and acquisitions at NRG Energy since 2012.A version of this article appears in print on May 6, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: NRG, in Bid to Pare Costs, Trims Green Power Goals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.