AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — The start-up Via, a ride-sharing service that pools commuters, faced some headwinds as it sought new financing recently.Its primary competitors include two of Silicon Valley’s best-financed companies, Uber and Lyft. And it went looking for new financing at a time when venture capitalists have begun to tighten their purse strings amid concern that many of the start-ups that they have backed may not survive.Yet Via appears to have done well: The company was to announce Thursday that it had closed on $70 million in a new round of financing, with an additional $30 million expected to close in the next several weeks.The latest round was led by Pitango Growth, an investment firm based in Israel, and included C4 Ventures, Hearst Ventures and the investment firm of the billionaire Roman Abramovich, who may be better known as the owner of the London soccer team Chelsea.About 70 percent of the new round came from new investors, according to Isaac Hillel, a managing general partner of Pitango Growth.The new money will help the four-year-old company expand on what it says is a quest to change mass transportation, including expansion within existing markets, like New York City and Chicago, and entering new cities, like Boston and Washington.Via’s main focus isn’t on getting one or two passengers from one point to another so much as on smart car-pooling — figuring out the most efficient way to get up to six passengers headed in the same direction to their destinations.“We’re trying to build a mass-transit system,” Daniel Ramot, the start-up’s co-founder, said in an interview. “Via is the only system designed from the ground up to allow for a fully dynamic public transportation system.”The result is that customers sharing S.U.V.s, are picked up close to their current locations and ideally dropped off close to their preferred destinations. That means passengers may pay less than what they would for an Uber or Lyft ride: Riders pay $5 plus tax in Manhattan south of 110th Street from 6 a.m. to 9 p.m. on weekdays, or about $6 plus tax from 9 p.m. to midnight on weekdays. In the neighborhoods of Chicago where Via operates, the service costs about $4 plus tax for about the same hours, except during rush hour.In regions that are less dense, Via is seeking partners that will help subsidize the service or use the technology to provide a similar offering. So far, the start-up has joined a partnership with Mercedes-Benz for rides in parts of Orange County, Calif.“There are so many empty cars going around,” Mr. Hillel said in an interview. “I really think it’s the future of solving congestion.”(The concept has also gained attention for helping riders make new friends and even find potential dates.)Via isn’t the only start-up offering this kind of car-pooling service. Both Uber and Lyft provide similar offerings, which both companies have been promoting heavily in recent months. Uber has said that its UberPool provides 100,000 rides a week in New York. Lyft has estimated that about 30 percent of its overall rides come from its similar Line service, with that percentage rising to more than half in New York and San Francisco.Lyft also introduced Lyft Carpool, a service aimed specifically at commuters, in March.But Via says it has held its own. The company claims to have provided more than four million rides to date and has performed 125,000 rides a week in Manhattan. It says that its membership has quadrupled over the past 12 months, to 250,000 customers.The company plans to push out from Manhattan into other boroughs, as well as expand its service to weekend travel.That sort of growth prompted Via to begin looking for new financing over the past several months, after having collected $27 million from investors a year ago. Since that time, fund-raising has become more challenging, with start-ups asked more pointedly about how they will eventually make money.Mr. Ramot said that his company had faced little difficulty, raising money from existing and new investors at what he called a “substantial” rise in valuation and without onerous special terms. He declined to be more specific.“We did see more of a focus and questions around, ‘Is this a sustainable business model?’ ” he said.While Via doesn’t yet make money, Mr. Ramot argued that the two sides of its business — operating the service directly in dense cities and licensing its technology in other cases — represented a sustainable model and a good way to expand.“We’ll continue to grow the platform very rapidly and move a step closer towards our goal of changing how mass transit and public transit work,” he said.Advertisement