By LESLIE PICKERMAY 6, 2016
Shareholder activism has expanded well beyond the stereotypical irate hedge fund manager, pounding his fists on the table for corporate changes. Mutual funds have started agitating publicly, as have pension funds. And on Friday, even a prominent family stepped into the ring.Wildcat Capital — which manages $1.79 billion for David Bonderman, the founding partner of the private equity firm TPG Capital, and his family – is seeking a corporate-governance overhaul at Sorrento Therapeutics, a developer of cancer treatments based in San Diego. The stock of Sorrrento, a biotech company, has plummeted more than 75 percent since July, to a $220 million market valuation.The move is an uncommon one for a family office, which is a professional investment manager for a wealthy family. Given that such offices do not manage outside capital as a hedge fund or mutual fund would, and that they deal with the finances of billionaires, their activities are often private.Wildcat Capital, which owns 2.5 million shares, or 6.5 percent, of Sorrento, took that rare step on Friday, calling out “egregious” actions undertaken by Sorrento’s management and board in a letter it publicized. The family office, led by Leonard A. Potter, demanded that the board fire Sorrento’s chief executive, put a halt to the remainder of a private placement, appoint three new directors and hire an investment banker to help sell the company.AdvertisementAs activism has spread to almost every corner of investing over the last few years, a few family offices have felt so emboldened. This year in London, for example, Western Gate Private Investments, the family office for the Portuguese physicist Luis Amaral, began demanding management changes at Stock Spirits, a vodka maker.AdvertisementIn his long letter to Sorrento’s board on Thursday, Mr. Potter, the president and chief investment officer of Wildcat, explained the actions that led him to take his first activist stance.Sorrento was transferring assets into various subsidiaries, and those subsidiaries then issued “significant amounts” of stock options and warrants, some with higher-priority voting privileges, to a select group of executives and board members, according to the letter. “This series of transactions appears to be little more than a looting of the company assets,” Mr. Potter said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Potter also criticized Sorrento’s licensing and investment strategies, which have prevented the company from gaining control or influence in those situations. Sorrento also engaged in a private placement of as much as $150 million worth of shares with two groups of Asian investors, which could represent 45 percent of the company’s outstanding shares. Mr. Potter said that investors did not receive sufficient disclosure related to this transaction and that it diluted the holdings of existing shareholders.As a result, Mr. Potter called for the immediate termination of Henry Ji, the chief executive of Sorrento, and asked that the company halt the portion of the private placement that has not yet been issued. The letter also requested that the board appoint three directors nominated by Wildcat, create a committee to find an interim chief executive and hire a banker to sell the company.“We are not activists – in fact, we tried to be constructive and offered our assistance to Dr. Ji,” said Mr. Potter in an emailed statement. “However, after being rebuffed and seeing the continuing actions of Dr. Ji and the board, we felt it was necessary to take this step immediately in order to protect and maximize shareholder value.”Kevin M. Herde, chief financial officer at Sorrento, declined to comment on the Wildcat Capital letter.Sorrento shares plummeted more than 15 percent to about $5.50 on Friday, almost half the price at which Wildcat Capital acquired them last May. Wildcat is the second-largest investor in Sorrento after the Chan Soon-Shiong Family Foundation.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.