AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael Cieply and Emily SteelLOS ANGELES — The lawsuit over Sumner M. Redstone’s competency took a startling turn on Friday when the judge interrupted afternoon testimony to say that he was strongly entertaining a motion by Mr. Redstone’s lawyers to dismiss the whole case.The development came after the ailing media mogul, in halting but fiery videotaped testimony, appeared to forcefully reject the proposal that his former lover, Manuela Herzer, who brought the lawsuit, make his health care decisions.Judge David J. Cowan delivered what amounted to a judicial bombshell as Dr. Stephen L. Read, an expert witness for Ms. Herzer, finished his testimony relating to Mr. Redstone’s competence. Gabrielle Vidal, a lawyer for Mr. Redstone, asked that the judge reconsider their request for a dismissal. Judge Cowan said that he was leaning toward dismissal, but that he would review the matter over the weekend, and asked both sides to submit briefs.A decision to dismiss would put an end to a bitter, monthslong legal battle that has included thousands of pages of documents and exposed lurid details that industry observers say have tarnished both sides. It would also leave in place, for now, the controlling structure of his two big media companies, Viacom and CBS. Mr. Redstone is a director, chairman emeritus and controlling shareholder of both, and remains in control until he is either declared incompetent or dies.In bringing the suit, Ms. Herzer had claimed that the 92-year-old billionaire wasn’t competent when he removed her from a directive that would have put her in charge of his care. But in reopening the question of dismissal, Judge Cowan said he was relying heavily on Mr. Redstone’s own statements in a profanity-laced video that was played behind closed courtroom doors.“I think he said what he wanted to say,” Judge Cowan said of the 18-minute video, in which Mr. Redstone repeatedly used obscene epithets in referring to Ms. Herzer, and said he did not want her involved with his health care.“How can I sit here and say, after seeing that video, ‘No, you’ve got to have Manuela?’” Judge Cowan asked.In a brief verbal response to the judge’s remarks, Pierce O’Donnell, Ms. Herzer’s lawyer, said that he still had a great deal of evidence to present. He further noted that the judge appeared to be reducing a complicated decision about Mr. Redstone’s well-being into a far simpler one — whether Ms. Herzer or Mr. Redstone’s until recently estranged daughter, Shari Redstone, should be left in charge of his care.In addition to Mr. Redstone’s testimony, the judge said he was also strongly influenced by Dr. Read’s acknowledgment under cross-examination that Ms. Herzer at this point would not be a viable choice for management of Mr. Redstone’s current or future care.In his testimony, videotaped on Thursday, Mr. Redstone said that he hated Ms. Herzer. In response to a question about whether he wanted Ms. Herzer to make health care decisions for him, Mr. Redstone replied, “No.”“I want Manuela out of my life,” Mr. Redstone said at the end of the session when his lawyer asked what he wanted at the end of the trial. The videotaped testimony was shown after reporters and spectators were cleared from the courtroom and a transcript was provided to news organizations afterward.In response to a question from his lawyer about who he wants to make his health care decisions if he is unable to do so himself, he responded with the name of his daughter: “Shar — Shari.” He also confirmed that he had been seeing his family lately and was happy with the nursing care that he was receiving.While Ms. Herzer claims that she is concerned about Mr. Redstone’s well-being, his lawyers say that she is after his money. On the same day Ms. Herzer was removed from the health care directive, she was also removed from Mr. Redstone’s estate plan, in which he had planned to give her $50 million and his $20 million Los Angeles mansion.In his testimony, Mr. Redstone was able to answer some questions — especially those with yes or no answers — but did not respond to others. When asked what his birth name had been, for instance, he remained silent. (It is Sumner Murray Rothstein.) The transcript shows that the flow of the testimony was sporadic, and at one point his interpreter asked that Mr. Redstone’s dentures be adjusted in order to better understand him.But at other times Mr. Redstone’s comments were decisive and showed a glimmer of his well-known ferocity and penchant for profanity.In the first question, he was asked who Ms. Herzer was. His response denigrated her with two obscene words. He repeated that description of her several times over the course of his testimony.During the testimony, Mr. Redstone said “yes” in response to a question about whether Ms. Herzer stole money from him, but was not able to say how much money she stole. He also confirmed that he once said that she was the love of his life, but that he did not still love her.When he later was asked by his lawyer why Ms. Herzer was ejected, he said, “She lied to me.”When asked what Ms. Herzer had done to assist in his health care, he struggled to find words, repeated his obscenities about her, and failed to help an interpreter spell out an answer.“What’s the first letter?” the interpreter finally asked.“L. The next letter? H. H. Next letter? I. E. H. E.,” the interpreter continued. “She helped? Helped?”In opening statements, Ms. Herzer’s lawyers sought to show that Mr. Redstone was mentally incompetent and under the undue influence of others when he removed Ms. Herzer last October from an advance directive that would have given her authority over his health care.Mr. O’Donnell cast Ms. Redstone as the central villain in a supposed conspiracy to deceive and manipulate him.“She established a broad intelligence-gathering” network inside Mr. Redstone’s home, “featuring a ring of spies,” Mr. O’Donnell said, in describing what he said was a yearlong effort by Ms. Redstone, then estranged from her father, to get control of his money and media properties.Robert N. Klieger, who represents Mr. Redstone, sharply dismissed the notion of a conspiracy. Instead, he said Ms. Herzer had worked to remain in Mr. Redstone’s good graces, and to share his wealth, by weaving lies about other women with whom the media executive had become romantically involved.The first witness to follow Mr. Redstone’s testimony Friday was Dr. Read, a psychiatrist who examined the media mogul in late January and in a report said the executive lacked decision-making capacity.Dr. Read called Mr. Redstone “a thin shadow” of what he was. He said he rated Mr. Redstone’s dementia, based on an earlier examination, as being “toward the severe end of moderate.”Dr. Read noted Mr. Redstone’s extreme difficulty in swallowing, and with what he called “language production.”Dr. Read’s testimony also revealed that Mr. Redstone engaged in sports betting with friends and family. Mr. Redstone often doesn’t know who is playing, but the bets are arranged so that Mr. Redstone always wins, Dr. Read said, adding that the mogul thinks he has a perfect record.In the afternoon, as testimony resumed after Judge Cowan’s statements about dismissal, Ms. Herzer’s legal team shifted gears by calling a Redstone caretaker. They sought to portray him as having been at the center of a conspiracy orchestrated by Shari Redstone, with an eye toward ousting Ms. Herzer and an another Redstone companion, Sydney Holland.That caretaker, a vocational nurse named Joseph Octaviano, acknowledged having regularly provided Ms. Redstone with reports of her father’s behavior, including his relationships with Ms. Herzer and Ms. Holland.Asked whether he would have been fired had Mr. Redstone known that he was reporting intimate details of his life, Mr. Octaviano said, “Yes.” Asked whether it would be fair to say that he hated Ms. Herzer, he again answered, “Yes.”Neither Keryn Redstone, a granddaughter of Mr. Redstone, nor Philippe Dauman, the chief executive of Viacom, testified as scheduled.Michael Cieply reported from Los Angeles and Emily Steel from New York.Advertisement