AdvertisementSupported byQ & ABy Niki KitsantonisATHENS — Greek workers walked off the job on Friday, heeding a call by the country’s labor unions to join a three-day general strike to protest a new round of austerity measures including new pension cuts and tax increases.The strike came as Greek lawmakers debated the new measures, worth 5.4 billion euros, or $6.2 billion, in budget savings, before a vote Sunday night and a meeting of eurozone finance ministers in Brussels the next day. Athens is hoping that the talks on Monday could be a step toward unlocking new bailout loans it needs to make a crucial debt repayment in July.The walkout, the second general strike this year, halted public transportation services, shut down government offices and closed schools. Here is a look at why Greeks are striking again, and where the country’s tortuous debt negotiations stand:Greece’s two biggest labor unions, which together represent about 2.5 million workers, object to a new round of austerity measures that Greece must adopt to receive fresh bailout funding.The measures include an overhaul of the Greek social security system, involving cuts to the pensions of new retirees and higher social security contributions. They also require increased rates of income tax, a rise in the top level of the country’s sales tax, and higher levies on alcohol and cigarettes.The unions have denounced the measures as a “guillotine” for Greek society, which has suffered six years of austerity measures that have cut household incomes by a third and left a quarter of Greeks unemployed.Social upheaval has been mounting in recent weeks with workers holding sit-ins at city halls and landfills across the country, leaving trash piling up. Greek farmers, who blocked national highways in February to protest pension cuts, are planning to drive their tractors into Athens at the weekend in a symbolic protest.Greece says it has agreed with its creditors on a €5.4 billion package of austerity measures, and Pierre Moscovici, the European commissioner for economic and financial affairs, has said the two sides are “99 percent of the way there.”Greek lawmakers will vote on the package Sunday night, hours before eurozone finance ministers meet in Brussels to discuss relief for Greece from its large debt burden, which stands at 177 percent of gross domestic product. The ministers, known collectively as the Eurogroup, will discuss whether Athens has sufficiently enforced the tough terms linked to its 2015 bailout, worth €86 billion — its third in five years.The legislators are expected to approve the package on Sunday, but the meeting on Monday may be more problematic.Greece’s creditors want the country to legislate an additional €3.6 billion in contingency measures that would come into effect if Athens misses its 2018 budget targets, but Greece has refused to do so, saying the measures would violate domestic law and go beyond the terms of last summer’s bailout deal.Athens has instead proposed a mechanism to cut spending if it misses budget targets. Its creditors, however, particularly the International Monetary Fund, are skeptical.Greece has been led by Alexis Tsipras, who heads the leftist Syriza party, since January 2015. Mr. Tsipras, who once denounced austerity in street protests but nevertheless signed last year’s bailout, came through early elections in September, but the latest standoff has fueled speculation about another set of early elections.Mr. Tsipras’s three-seat majority in Parliament is expected to hold for Sunday’s vote, but officials have warned that obliging the authorities to legislate additional contingency measures could prompt a revolt that would shake the fragile government’s stability.New Democracy, the main conservative opposition party, leads Syriza by three percentage points to six percentage points in opinion polls and has been calling for early elections. Ministers have so far ruled out that possibility, but the governing party is rived by dissent, with a radical grouping arguing that the government should “fall heroically” rather than enforce the austerity measures.After six years of crisis management, the eurozone is better prepared to deal with a possible Greek exit from the 19-member currency bloc. Most international banks and foreign investors have sold their bonds and other financial holdings, protecting them from potential upheaval in Greece. Other eurozone countries suffering from debt problems have also largely recovered.But eurozone member states are still heavily invested in Greece, having participated in bailouts worth more than €300 billion. And they are desperate not to lose their money.Greece does have some leverage, as European officials will be reluctant to face down a new Greek crisis before a June referendum when voters in Britain will decide whether their country should remain a member of the European Union. The bloc is also likely to need Greece’s help in tackling the region’s migration crisis.More than a million migrants entered the European Union via Greece since last year, putting further pressure on the country as it struggles to put its battered economy in order. About 50,000 remain on Greek territory, many of whom are awaiting the outcome of asylum applications. Most are eager to continue their journeys toward more affluent countries such as Germany and Sweden. But those countries have tightened their borders, and more stringent controls may be in place for another six months.The situation has left thousands of migrants in camps across Greece. Tensions often mount there, resulting in violence and, occasionally, riots. Greek society has remained largely tolerant, though there have been protests in some communities against the creation of reception centers for migrants.The flood of refugees through the Aegean has slowed in recent weeks after a deal between the European Union and Turkey, however. If that trend holds up, Greece’s role in the crisis could lessen.Advertisement