By PATRICIA COHENMAY 7, 2016
PARK CITY, Utah — “I want to be first on Success,” said Carl Barney, standing up from the breakfast table after a final sip of tea at Deer Valley, a luxury resort with a view of Utah’s mountainous rooftop.Mr. Barney, who had arrived in the dining room wearing his custom-made orange ski boots, was referring to the trail named Success, with its early-morning blanket of freshly groomed, untouched snow.He could just as easily have been referring to himself.Mr. Barney, who turns 75 on Monday, arrived in the United States in the 1960s as a jobless British immigrant and went on to amass a fortune running for-profit colleges. All the while, he was guided by the heroic entrepreneurial creed of Ayn Rand, a champion of unalloyed selfishness and remorseless capitalism.“She taught me how to live,” Mr. Barney said.He credits Rand’s brand of antigovernment libertarianism, hard-nosed rationality and unapologetic self-interest with helping him realize his own American dream — an achievement he sells to the students at his schools. But his inspiring story is not without contradictions.AdvertisementMr. Barney, who opposes government-backed loans and grants on principle, has made his fortune in a business that is almost wholly dependent on them. His students borrow heavily to pay for their studies in hope of replicating Mr. Barney’s up-by-the-bootstraps success, but often find themselves dropping out and burdened with loans. And while he invokes a rigorous Rand-inspired ethical code of fair dealing, he is in an industry with a history pockmarked by fraud and abuse.AdvertisementCongress, state prosecutors and federal regulators have opened investigations into numerous schools — including some of Mr. Barney’s — saying that they have misled students, leaving them deeply in debt without providing the training and job placements that would enable them to pay it off.The troubles in for-profit higher education have fed a mountain of student-loan debt, totaling $1.3 trillion. The sector enrolled 10.4 percent of students but received 19.3 percent of federal aid, according to the latest figures from the Education Department. The prospect of a taxpayer bailout for defrauded students could run into the billions of dollars depending on eligibility rules.Mr. Barney sees it differently. He is proud of the role of for-profit education in catering to students often ignored or left behind by traditional colleges and universities. A few rogue employees and school operators, he says, have been used as a cudgel by critics ideologically opposed to the education business.“I’m sure there’s some bad guys out there,” he said, after returning from a morning of skiing. “But a lot of them? No.”In his view, there has been a “deliberately designed campaign to cripple, crush and close these schools,” spearheaded by people who “really think profit-making is wrong.”Federal efforts to prevent abuses through increased monitoring and regulation, Mr. Barney argues, are only burdening schools with onerous requirements that further increase student costs.Mr. Barney’s business and beliefs place him at the center of a pressing national debate. More than ever, a college degree has become a ticket to the middle class. But there is a divide over how to best help students with the fewest skills and resources.AdvertisementThe clash is not just over policy options, but ideas. Ayn Rand, who died in 1982, has long been a flash point for conflicting concepts of America and its promise.On one side, Republican leaders like Senator Ted Cruz of Texas and Paul Ryan, the conservative House speaker, consider her a lodestar. President Obama  has described her vision as “pretty narrow” and “not one that, I think, describes what’s best in America.”Versions of this debate are playing out on the presidential campaign trail — in clashes over income inequality, government regulation and college affordability.In Mr. Barney’s view, both parties are leading the country in the wrong direction. “Politics is not going to solve the problem,” he said, settling into the third-floor lounge of his Alpine-styled boutique hotel.That is why he directs his multimillion-dollar contributions not to political candidates or super PACs — but to spreading Ayn Rand’s thinking around the globe. Over the years, he said he had contributed more than $20 million to the Ayn Rand Institute, to create free online courses about her work and other projects. Millions more have gone to other similarly minded groups. “I’m not an altruist, I’m not a do-gooder,” Mr. Barney said. “But I would like to have others experience the understanding and the benefits that I’ve had from philosophy.”If rationality, hard work and self-interest are fundamental Randian values, so is the pursuit of happiness. And that is what led Mr. Barney to rise early that day — only to have to wait at the front of the ski lift line. Standing there, he mentions to the lift operator his intent to be first down the run.“You look like you’re first in a lot of things,” the lift operator replies.Soon enough, Mr. Barney is gliding down the mountain, listening on his earbuds to a favorite Broadway tune, “One Day More,” from “Les Misérables,” with its call to the masses to man the barricades.“The greatest tragedy in all schools today is the ‘D.D.D.’” — a dropout who is in debt and doesn’t get a degree, Mr. Barney said over an artistically arranged dessert plate. The term is one of the many expressions that his staff refers to as “Carl Barneyisms,” the abbreviations, aphorisms, quotations and guidelines that pepper the boss’s daily conversation and fill employee binders.AdvertisementFor years, Mr. Barney worked six-and-a-half-day weeks sending notes to colleagues and friends at all hours about newly discovered enthusiasms — videos, books, middle-of-the-night brainstorms or even gadgets, like the MagicJack, the as-seen-on-TV device to connect a phone to a computer for inexpensive calls.“If he finds something that he really likes, he’ll send it to 10 of his friends,” said John Allison, the former chief of the bank BB&T and a longtime friend who once received a Keurig coffee maker from him.Many of his work ideas are cataloged in “P.D.s” (procedure directives), “D.L.s” (data letters), “I.L.s,” (information letters) and “M.M.s” (management memos). “M.M. 302,” for example, is titled “Student Satisfaction and Success — S.S.S.” and offers the antidote to what he calls the “dreaded D.D.D.”“If something worked, we then systematized it,” Mr. Barney said.“P.D. 154 R” lays out a two-year training program for employees who want to advance to associate directors. Among other things, they will be expected to read Rand’s manifesto, the 1,200-page novel “Atlas Shrugged,” which depicts a rotted-out America where creative geniuses stage a nationwide strike against corrupt “moochers and looters.”Rand made her way to the United States after escaping the Soviet Union’s terrors in the 1920s, an experience that left her with a deep-rooted distrust of government. She extolled laissez-faire capitalism, ruthless ambition and individualism in her novels, including “The Fountainhead,” and a philosophy known as objectivism.Mr. Barney discovered Rand in midlife. He grew up with five siblings in postwar London.His father was a serial entrepreneur, opening a nightclub, a motel and a gas station. “He was good at creating things. He wasn’t good at carrying through,” Mr. Barney said.Rationing of food, gas and clothing made deprivation a fact of daily life. The abundance portrayed in American movies offered an alluring contrast.As a teenager, he traveled to Australia, where he sold encyclopedias door to door and picked grapes (“I was good at it”). He toured India, and later ended up in California — dabbling briefly, he admits with some embarrassment, in Scientology — seeking meaning here and there while engaging in the great American tradition of self-improvement.AdvertisementBy the 1970s, he participated in another American tradition: making money in real estate. Then a minor business transaction came along that became a seminal moment. After legally terminating a lease, he offered some extra compensation for the inconvenience.The leaseholder was offended and said, “I don’t want anything that isn’t earned or deserved,” Mr. Barney recalls. She was describing Rand’s “trader principle,” which holds that two people engaging in a trade shouldn’t take any more, or less, from each other than is deserved.Mr. Barney was bewildered.Her explanation? “You need to read ‘Atlas Shrugged.’”He began teaching himself about Rand and objectivism. Attending her final public appearance in 1981 in New Orleans, he heard speaker after speaker declare, “She changed my life.”It was testimony Mr. Barney would ultimately echo. “This is what Rand taught me — identify that values that are important to you and practice the virtues to achieve that,” he said. It infused him with “a central purpose.”That led him to pursue a business in education. So when a friend told him about the existence of for-profit colleges, he was struck. “Wow,” he said he thought, “you could actually buy a college? That’s what I want to do.”In time, he ended up buying and establishing several colleges including CollegeAmerica, Stevens-Henager and California College. He developed an online division, Independence University.It was thinking about the future of that business and his legacy that Mr. Barney said led him to merge his colleges in 2012 with the Center for Excellence in Higher Education, a nonprofit that supports free-market ideas in higher education. The center bought all the schools for about $630 million.The money came from Mr. Barney himself in the form of loans and tax-deductible donations. Today, the colleges are no longer considered for-profit entities, and the center supports programs at brand-name universities like Tufts, Clemson and Duke.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Barney has stepped back from day-to-day oversight, but nothing changed in the way the colleges are operated. “We woke up the next day with the exact same management team,” said Eric Juhlin, who continued as chief executive.AdvertisementThe sale, which is awaiting Education Department approval, has its critics. Industry watchdogs point, for example, to a whistle-blower lawsuit brought by two former recruiters in 2014 that charges the merger was done “at least in part, to evade certain regulatory requirements that apply to for-profit schools.”Todd Zywicki, executive director of George Mason Law and Economics Center and a longtime trustee at the Center for Excellence in Higher Education, called the notion “insulting,” saying “it totally misrepresents what we were doing.”Mr. Barney similarly dismisses the accusations: “I could be a billionaire today if I hadn’t converted to nonprofit.”The Salt Lake City branch of Stevens-Henager College occupies a modern, four-story building off Highway 15, about a 45-minute drive from Deer Valley. At night it bustles with students arriving for class after clocking out of their day jobs.All are looking to better their lives, saying they’re spending from about $30,000 for an associate degree to about $70,000 for an M.B.A., and are taking on thousands of dollars in debt to make it happen.Almost everyone who applies is accepted. As Mr. Barney acknowledged, getting some of these students — those with the poorest preparation or juggling work, family and school — to graduate is difficult. “We don’t select the best. We take who comes there and do the best we can,” he said.Of the approximately two dozen students interviewed at random during a recent visit, nearly all praised the school’s instruction. They particularly liked that the path to a degree was clearly mapped — no electives, no course catalog to decipher — and that class work was structured around short, four-week modules.Thomas Hillier, 46, said he and his daughter ended up enrolling at the same time. She graduated with an associate degree in medical specialties and has a good job, while he is finishing his bachelor’s in network security. Cynthia Turgeon, 42, who is majoring in accounting forensics, said, “It has the best reputation in the Valley.”AdvertisementShe and other middle-aged classmates said they had seen several dropouts, particularly younger students, whom they described as often lacking focus and commitment — just as they themselves used to. “This is my third time back in school,” Ms. Turgeon said. “It’s just clicking now.”There were dissenters. “I didn’t understand what I got myself into,” Felicia Robbins, 21, said during a break in her medical specialties class. She had heard about the school on radio ads. “They’re very enticing,” she said.Ms. Robbins said she didn’t realize that the course was largely self-taught, with an instructor providing guidance. “I thought it was going to be like college.”Only after dropping out, she said, did she discover other colleges would not accept her credits. Rather than throw out her investment, she returned. “I feel like you’re stuck,” she said.Unhappy students can be found at any school, but a darker picture is portrayed in lawsuits directed at Mr. Barney’s other colleges. The Colorado attorney general’s office, for example, has accused CollegeAmerica in Denver of deceptive advertising and lying about job placements and graduation rates. Former students have said in court papers that they were misled about the transferability of credits, courses and instruction, and employment prospects. Former employees have filed affidavits saying they placed misleading advertisements and were pushed to graduate failing students and lie to independent auditors. The Justice Department has joined one whistle-blower suit that says Stevens-Henager recruiters were illegally awarded bonuses for signing up students.Linda Carter, the former dean of the Cheyenne campus in Wyoming, for example, resigned in 2012, saying she was pressured to misrepresent information to school accreditation panels and was disturbed about what she called misleading advertising.When a dispute arose over whether she qualified for unemployment benefits, the Division of Appeals of the Wyoming Department of Workforce Services held a hearing. It concluded that Ms. Carter had “proved, by a preponderance of the evidence, the employer’s customary working conditions involved deceit on the part of the employer.”The colleges are fighting the suits, characterizing them as without merit.Mr. Barney recalled his reaction to some of the accusations. “They are all horrific. If anybody was reading those you’d say, ‘Those were really bad guys.’” He said that when he investigated, however, he concluded that all the complaints were unjustified. “We’re not perfect,” he said, “but when we find something that’s wrong, we fix it.”AdvertisementWhat Mr. Barney said he refused to accept was guilt that was not deserved. In the Rand worldview, that would be “unearned guilt” and akin to a sin. A rich man should not feel guilt for hard-earned wealth, he said; a pregnant woman should not feel guilt for having an abortion.So when it comes to the “D.D.D.s” — the dropouts and debtors — Mr. Barney said, “I’m really sad about that, but I’m not guilty. We do everything to help them graduate.” He compared his Denver school’s on-time graduation rate of 34 percent with the local community college’s of 10 percent.As for the complaint brought by the Colorado’s attorney general’s office, Mr. Barney said it was “invented for political purposes” and designed “to force us into a settlement of millions of dollars.”The school’s request to get the case dismissed failed. But Mr. Barney points out that, during one proceeding, a judge in Denver judge wrote that the school’s admissions process ensured “prospective students get the accurate information they need to make an informed decision about whether to enroll.”At the same time, Mr. Barney said, students sometimes did not pay attention to the requirements and costs even when they were explained.In Mr. Barney’s view, the campaign against for-profit colleges is motivated by resentment against their outsize profits. He traces this animosity to the 2008 financial crisis and recession.The bad economy turned out to be good for his business. Stranded without jobs, people flocked to enroll in college. Yet the budgets of many state-run schools were slashed as the economy contracted.People turned to for-profit schools. “The phones were ringing off the hook,” Mr. Barney said. “Along with the students came a lot of money. There is no question it was massive.”AdvertisementMany of the winners were on Wall Street. Private equity and other investors bought several of the largest for-profit systems after realizing the federal government was providing a virtually endless source of cash, chiefly in the form of student loans. Students at for-profit institutions went from receiving 13 percent of the outstanding federal student loan balances in 2003-4 to 21 percent 10 years later. This turned teachers’ unions and some public officials against the industry, Mr. Barney said.Not only does Mr. Barney understand the indignation about profiting off public funds, in one sense, he shares it. “I don’t think taxpayers should pay for our students,” he said. He says he believes that government should get out of student loans and grants altogether and leave the financing to the schools, potential employers and banks.It is a view that is echoed in “Atlas Shrugged.” In the novel, the legendary railroad titan Nathaniel Taggart is said to have tossed a government official down three flights of stairs merely for asking if Mr. Taggart would like a government loan.To some critics, the for-profit college business represents the exploitative side of Randian philosophy, in which vulnerable students’ ambitions are manipulated for personal gain.The problem is not just a few bad apples, said A. J. Angulo, a history professor and the author of “Diploma Mills: How For-Profit Colleges Stiffed Students, Taxpayers and the American Dream.” Mr. Angulo says, “We’re really talking about a few good apples.”That was the conclusion of a 2012 Senate investigation, the latest in a series of congressional and independent inquiries into for-profit schools’ advertising, job placement and graduation rates, and recruitment strategies that date to the 1980s.To Mr. Angulo, the problem is systemic. “There is a fundamental conflict of interest, and it’s created by the profit motive,” he said. It leads to cost-cutting, and “the thing that gets shortchanged systematically is instruction.”Such hostility to the profit motive is precisely what sets off Mr. Barney’s alarm bells. He argues that for-profit schools offer an alternative to failing, overcrowded community colleges and an educational lifeline to working adults.Free enterprise is what has propelled the United States to prosperity, Mr. Barney said, sitting in a club chair in the lounge at Deer Valley, after a day on ski trails with names like Tycoon, Lucky Star and of course, Success. “Yes, there are things to criticize,” he said.AdvertisementBut there were “two great philosophical experiments of our age,” he said — the Soviet Union, and America. “Since the founding of this country, when the king was told to buzz off,” he said, laughing, “it’s been a wonderful ride in America, hasn’t it?”A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2016, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Selling the Self-Made Dream.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.