
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
MAY 6, 2016
This interview with Jimmy Dunne III, senior managing principal of the investment banking firm Sandler O’Neill & Partners, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Tell me about your early years.A. I grew up on the South Shore of Long Island. My father would always say to me that you’ve got to be a leader, not a follower. You can’t let the room sway you. Just because other guys are going to jump off the Brooklyn Bridge, you should not be a follower.So I was always willing to take a stand. There was a belief in our household that there’s a special place in hell for somebody who sits on a fence during a crisis.What about your mother?She was tough, and she was strong. She had very definite views, and was seldom right but never in doubt. There would sometimes be tense situations. My father was working and traveling, and there were arguments. One I remember was about evolution, which got very heated. She thought I was being anti-Catholic or some crazy thing.AdvertisementI remember my father came upstairs and said to me, “Look, this is how it’s going to go. If she says something is white, it’s white. I’m no longer interested in your point of view. This is not high school, where you come and tell everybody what you think. Everything you say has a consequence. You’ve got to think about this.”And he would talk to me about it like it was being in a boardroom, and how you have to pick your shots. His whole thing was about anticipating the consequences of what you say.Sounds like he was grooming you for your current job.Yes and no. He was grooming me for how to anticipate things, how to control the situation at home and make sure there was as little volatility as possible. But he would have much preferred that I go into medicine.What were some early management lessons for you?There was one overriding thing that happened at Bear Stearns. Sometimes you have a point of view and you get turned around 180 degrees.There was a small group of us divvying up the bonuses, and somebody wanted to give one guy an additional $5,000 on top of the $20,000 he was getting. Then someone said, no, he didn’t earn it, we’re not doing it, and we should give it to the guy who made a $3 million bonus, because he earned it. And either the first guy has got to do a lot better, or he has to quit, or we have to fire him.AdvertisementThat was not my view, but he was right, and it changed my mind. It’s about meritocracy. You’ve got to be brutally honest with people about where they stand. And you do them a disservice by sugarcoating it or by not giving them the absolute facts. That evolved into what I call my infinite-finite strategy.Which means?Finite is about whether this guy or that guy gets the $5,000. Infinite discussions are whether you were a good father, a good husband, a good brother. Finite is stuff that should be handled with the back of the hand, and there’s a finite beginning and end to it. They’re important; they’re just not critical.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So let’s keep things focused on the nonpersonal, financial nature that they are, so that if I tell you you’re not good at something, I’m not saying you’re not a good person. But a lot of people can’t handle the truth. What we do is deliver the news without Novocain.It is absolutely critical for me to be brutally honest with people because they’re entitled to it. If they can’t handle it, it isn’t written that these people must work here. We live in the greatest country in the world, there are other opportunities, and water will find its own level. That early conversation changed me to being 100 percent about merit with no fluff.What else about your culture?The other thing we do here is really emphasize that there is no problem with making a mistake. We prefer them to be little mistakes, but if you defend a mistake, then that is a real insult because you have put your ego ahead of what’s right, and that we can’t tolerate.It’s a very natural thing to do because you get all these really smart guys in a room and they’re in there battling. They get into a fight and have to prove that they were really right and then they start defending the mistake. Then I go after them.In the moment?In the moment, in public.And what does that look like?It’s not good. It depends on what they did, but I’ll let them know that’s not what we do here. The point is you have to be willing to take the blame, let the tension come out of the room so you can discuss what really happened, and not worry about it. That’s a definite style of ours.Hearing that, somebody might wonder if that tough, hard-driving style makes for a good boss.I don’t understand in any way, shape or form why there’s a separation between the two.We also have a little saying here: “Don’t wave your W-2 in Jimmy’s face.” Which means I don’t care how much money you made. I don’t care how productive you think you are. We’re interested in being right and doing it the right way. You’ve got to understand I may be tough in the moment, but generally I have a reservoir of good will with people. I’m just speaking about the issue. I’m not making a judgment about everything else. And it’s not personal.I tend to do much better with people who are secure. The more insecure you are, the more difficulty I probably will have with you. If you have a skill set or are pretty productive, I will try to figure out a way to work with that. So I’ll adapt my style a little bit, but I’m going to tell them the truth. I may just make a little effort to be nicer about it.AdvertisementBut if I get any sense that they’re not at least 70 percent as committed as I am, then I’ll be a lot less cordial about the whole thing.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2016, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Delivering the Truth Without Novocain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »