AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.19 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.39 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.20 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Board of Education, $180 million of debt securities. Competitive.Florida, $241.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.California Department of Water Resources, $107.7 million revenue bonds. Competitive.Denver Board of Water Commissioners, $152.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.New Jersey, $121 million revenue bonds. Competitive.San Francisco Public Utilities, $308.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.California, $88.7 million of East Side Union High School District general obligation bonds. Competitive.Oklahoma, $60 million of technical center general obligation bonds. Competitive.Orange County, Fla., $83.6 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.California, $73.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAustin, Tex., $252 million of water and wastewater system revenue bonds. Ramirez.California, $662 million of Alameda Corridor Transportation Authority tax-exempt revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Central Texas Regional Mobility Authority, $368.7 million of revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Charleston, S.C., $61.4 million of waterworks and sewer system refinancing revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Chicago, $546.4 million of water system revenue bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Clay County, Mo., $52.6 million of public school general obligation refinancing bonds. George K. Baum.Florida Housing Finance Corporation, $75 million of homeowner mortgage revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Fort Bend County, Tex., $172.3 million of unlimited road tax and refinancing bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Georgia, $55 million of facilities refinancing revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Horry County, S.C., School District, $62.7 million of special obligation bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Indiana, $65 million of Purdue University football performance complex debt securities. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Kent, Wash., $64.5 million of refinancing debt securities. KeyBanc.Los Angeles International Airport, $293 million of revenue bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Maine Municipal Bond Bank, $59.9 million of revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $116.9 million of debt securities. Cain Brothers.New Jersey Higher Education Student Assistant Authority, $190 million of student loan revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.New York State Dormitory Authority, $152.6 million of hospital center revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.North Carolina Medical Care Commission, $169.7 million of health care facilities revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.North Carolina, $151.8 million of water and sewer system refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Oregon Housing and Community Services Department, $56 million of single family mortgage program revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Oregon, $298 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Pasadena, Calif., Unified School District, $192 million of debt securities. RBC Capital Markets.Rockford, Mich., Public Schools, $71.6 million of school building refinancing debt securities. Stifel Nicolaus.St. Croix County, Wis., $80.4 million of bond anticipation notes. Robert W. Baird.Texas Public Finance Authority, $188.7 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Texas, $120 million of Southern Methodist University higher education debt securities. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.University of Cincinnati, $73.5 million of general receipt bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Virginia Resources Authority, $89 million of infrastructure revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Wake, N.C., $194 million of limited obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Advertisement