AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWilliam C. Dudley, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York president, who helped pilot the Fed’s post-crisis stimulus campaign, sounded pretty calm about the nation’s current economic situation.In an interview on Friday, Mr. Dudley said he foresaw continued growth despite bumps in the early months of the year — enough growth for the Fed to get back to slowly raising its benchmark interest rate. And if growth should falter, he said, there is plenty of medicine in the Fed’s chest.It remains a “reasonable expectation” that the Fed will raise its benchmark interest rate twice this year, Mr. Dudley said.“I think the general story of the economy over the last few years is very much intact,” he said during the conversation at the New York Fed’s ornate fortress in Lower Manhattan. “I think we’re still on track.”The Fed in recent months has faced some criticism that it moved prematurely by raising rates in December for the first time since the 2008 financial crisis. In the months after the move, both domestic and global growth weakened unexpectedly, and volatility increased across a wide range of financial markets.The Fed had held rates near zero to encourage borrowing and risk-taking, which stimulated economic growth. As it increases rates, those incentives are dwindling.In Mr. Dudley’s view, the Fed is keeping its balance by moving slowly.He said he still expected roughly 2 percent growth over the next year. He described the global situation as “dramatically better,” and said financial conditions have eased “considerably.”Even government spending is rising modestly now.“If that’s how the economy plays out, then I think we’re going to see further moves by the Fed to gradually normalize interest rates,” Mr. Dudley said, though he emphasized that the pace would be determined by actual economic data.Mr. Dudley, 63, may well be the nation’s most powerful policy maker who was neither elected nor confirmed by Congress. The New York Fed, a quasi-public institution, watches Wall Street and carries out the Fed’s monetary policies. Mr. Dudley, its president since 2009, serves as vice chairman of the Fed’s policy-making committee and is the only regional reserve president with a permanent vote.A former Goldman Sachs economist, he is sometimes portrayed as emblematic of an institution that is more interested in the health of Wall Street than Main Street. Questions about the New York Fed’s efficacy as a regulator, and its relationship with Goldman, in particular, have dotted Mr. Dudley’s tenure. But Mr. Dudley, a top adviser to the Fed chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, has also been one of the strongest advocates for the Fed’s stimulus campaign, which is aimed at driving down unemployment and improving the performance of the broader economy.“I can’t wipe out my employment history,” Mr. Dudley said in the interview. “I hope people judge me on my actions, and I hope my actions are very much consistent with the view that I care completely about Main Street, not about Wall Street.”Mr. Dudley also pushed back against critics who say the Fed should be restructured. Since the crisis, both Democrats and Republicans have advanced proposals to raise the Fed’s accountability and circumscribe its powers.Mr. Dudley said the rescue of large banks during the crisis was deeply unfair yet necessary, and he cautioned that any changes should be focused on improving the Fed’s ability to achieve its goals, not on punishing it.“If you look at how the Fed has actually behaved over the last few years, I would not want to trade places with a lot of other countries around the world,” he said.The Fed is insulated by design from political pressure so that it can do unpopular things that are in the nation’s long-term economic interest. Congress curtailed the Fed’s emergency lending powers in the aftermath of the crisis, and some members of both parties continue to push for even stronger restrictions.But in a speech last week in Fernandina Beach, Fla., Mr. Dudley argued that Congress should consider expanding the Fed’s emergency lending authority, to make it easier to lend money to security firms. “I think that’s a potential shortcoming of our system that we should re-evaluate,” he said, noting such firms are now subject to increased oversight.Mr. Dudley does not, however, see any crises looming in the near horizon. Low interest rates can encourage excessive speculation and economic distortions, as in the years before the financial crisis, but the Fed’s stimulus campaign so far has produced only a modest recovery, and there remain few signs of overheating.“I would say at this point I don’t see a lot of things that disturb me,” he said.Mr. Dudley said the risk of a recession seemed “quite low.” The Fed is unlikely to raise rates aggressively, so the only danger is an unexpected shock to the economy.He also offered an upbeat take on the Fed’s ability to revive economic growth whenever the next downturn inevitably arrives. “In some ways, we have more ammunition than we had 10 years ago because we’ve developed new tools that we actually know are effective,” he said. He was referring to the measures the Fed employed in the aftermath of the financial crisis, like promising to keep rates low for an extended period, or buying large sums of Treasuries and mortgage bonds.One thing he’s not really considering, though, is the idea of imposing negative interest rates, as Europe and Japan have done. “This is not something I’m spending any time thinking about and it’s not something I contemplate doing now or in the future,” he said, although he added he was not ruling out anything.Mr. Dudley listed standard reasons for the continued sluggishness of domestic growth: Borrowers are reluctant to borrow and lenders are reluctant to lend; the population is aging; the global economy is weak.James Bullard, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, said in an interview last month that he worried conditions would remain weak and that the Fed would find itself unable to raise interest rates. Other economists share the same concern.Mr. Dudley offered a more optimistic view. He said the trajectory of growth remained quite shallow, so small changes in the outlook could lead the Fed to delay rate increases for months at a time. That has created a communication challenge for the Fed, which is trying to set aside its post-crisis practice of predicting when it will raise rates and instead encouraging investors to focus on economic data.“I think the only forward guidance we’re giving right now is very, very soft,” he said. “It’s just the notion that we expect the rate path is likely to be quite gradual.”But all the arrows — growth, inflation, interest rates — are still pointing up.Advertisement