By THE NEW YORK TIMESMAY 8, 2016
This is what to expect in the week ahead:TECHNOLOGYOracle and Google will go back to court on Monday to determine whether Google unfairly used Oracle’s property in the software it used to make the Android operating system for smartphones. Oracle wants $8.8 billion for the use of about 7,000 lines of code, out of a total of 15 million lines in Android. If those lines are found to be critical and unfairly used, Google is likely to appeal. Failing all else, the company will have to dip into its cash — totaling over $75 billion at the end of the first quarter. Quentin HardyECONOMYEurozone finance ministers will meet on Monday afternoon to seek agreement on fresh aid for Greece. The ministers have struggled for weeks to bridge a gulf between European officials and the International Monetary Fund, which has demanded far-reaching guarantees to make the prospect of Greece paying back its loans more realistic. Greece needs the funds to avoid defaulting on its debts in July. James KanterENTERTAINMENTBeyond brief comments in a news release, Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive and chairman, has not publicly discussed the recent, abrupt resignation of his most likely successor, Thomas O. Staggs. Analysts will have a chance to press Mr. Iger about that on Tuesday, when Disney reports quarterly earnings. They will also be listening for any commentary by Mr. Iger about the health of ESPN — namely, did the number of subscribers go up or down — and any plans by Disney to move deeper into the streaming business, perhaps with an acquisition. As for Disney’s quarterly results, revenue is expected to increase by at least 6 percent, to $13.2 billion, while per-share profit may increase 14 percent, to $1.40, thanks to an ongoing theme park boom and strong ticket sales from “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” and “Zootopia.” Brooks BarnesBANKINGEarnings season continues as several of Europe’s largest banks report their first-quarter results this week. The Swiss bank Credit Suisse and the Italian lender UniCredit will report on Tuesday and the French bank Crédit Agricole on Thursday. The first quarter was a challenging one for banks as turmoil in the markets caused clients to be more cautious and came as several of Europe’s biggest lenders were in the midst of reshaping of their businesses. Chad BrayAdvertisementRETAILMacy’s is expected on Wednesday to report a drop in revenue in the first quarter and the biggest declines in adjusted earnings per share since the end of 2009, during the depths of the financial crisis, according to analysts polled by Bloomberg. The results follow a decline in Macy’s sales during the all-important fourth quarter, when retailers rely on holiday shopping to offset slower periods at other times of year.On Friday, retail sales data for the United States is expected to show a slight increase in consumer spending for April, after a decline in March. Rachel AbramsTECHNOLOGYRussia’s antitrust authorities are expected on Wednesday to announce a fine against Google on the allegation that it misused its dominance over the Android mobile operating system to favor some of the company’s services over those of rivals. Google denies any wrongdoing, but the possible fine — potentially up to 7 percent of the company’s annual revenue in Russia — comes a month after European Union officials made similar allegations. Mark ScottPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ECONOMYOn Friday morning, the University of Michigan will release its preliminary estimate of consumer sentiment in May. Economists expect a slight increase to 89.5 from April’s reading of 89, which is considered healthy. While the stock market volatility of the first quarter and the rebound in energy prices may have slightly raised anxiety levels among consumers, continued strength in hiring and the housing market has generally kept consumer confidence solid in recent months. Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisementChina’s growth continues to slow, but economists will be watching closely this week for signs of stabilization in the world’s second biggest economy. China has been mired in industrial deflation for more than three years, hurt by weak commodity prices and lackluster overseas demand, but analysts expect this to continue to ebb. On Saturday, China will report monthly data for industrial output, retail sales and investment, which are expected to show a slight improvement from March. Neil GoughA version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Google Pushes Back  Over Code and Antitrust.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.