
Advertising By                     
JANE L. LEVERE

MAY 8, 2016
A French bakery that morphs into a Riviera beach club. A movie that will make a stop at the Cannes Film Festival but will not be shown until 2115. A tour of a chateau.These may sound like itinerary ideas for a particularly upscale European jaunt, but each is actually an advertisement for a high-end liquor company. In an attempt to attract customers, especially much-desired millennials, premium spirit brands are often eschewing traditional marketing in favor of more imaginative promotions.Millennials are “not about acquiring products, but about acquiring experiences,” said Mauricio Vergara, the chief marketing officer in North America for Bacardi.The concept of a French bakery that transforms into a Riviera beach club is a main feature of a new campaign that begins on Monday from Grey Goose, a superpremium brand from Bacardi.AdvertisementTitled “Grey Goose Boulangerie Bleue,” the bakery-beach clubs are popping up in over 20 locations around the world through September, including the Cannes Film Festival; the United States Open in New York; and summer hot spots like the Hamptons, Ibiza and Marbella. Chefs identified by Slow Food International will prepare brunch, lunch and dinner dishes served with Le Grand Fizz, Grey Goose’s first signature summer cocktail, made with elderflower liqueur, lime juice and soda. Admission to the clubs will be by invitation only.AdvertisementA more democratic aspect of the campaign is its advertising, created by the agency BBDO. The centerpiece is a 60-second TV spot of a group of friends who discover a dirigible and take it on a journey for a movie night in the sky, screening an old black-and-white film against the clouds as they drink Le Grand Fizz.“How you connect with people these days is different than five years ago,” said Dan Leahy, global content director for Johnnie Walker. “There’s a rightful expectation that you can play with brands, interact with brands, and the brands should take a point of view, they should contribute tangibly to the world. It’s a natural evolution from television being the primary medium, one-way. The Internet allows more access to information, more ways to participate.”According to Dan Sanborn, senior vice president of culture and partnerships for Diageo North America, which counts Johnnie Walker as one of its brands, one advantage of the spirits category is that the drinks are often “experienced at a bar, a football game, at home with friends,” and therefore “part of celebratory moments.”Because the brands connect with consumers in varied places, “it’s forced us to think about new and different ways to engage” with them, he said.The Cannes Film Festival will also be a stop on a tour by a new film, on life in the year 2115, that will be displayed but not screened there: Commissioned by Louis XIII cognac (a Remy Martin brand that takes 100 years to make and retails for close to $3,000 per bottle), the film, “100 Years: The Movie You Will Never See,” was directed by Robert Rodriguez and stars John Malkovich, who also wrote it. The film has been seen only by its cast and crew, and has been placed in a safe that is supposed to open automatically on Nov. 18, 2115. Various people have received invitations for their descendants to attend the film’s premiere at the brand’s estate in Cognac, France, in 2115.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since the movie was announced in November, the safe housing it has been touring the world; it will be displayed at the Majestic Hotel in Cannes later this month and then travel to Johannesburg, Chicago and Dallas before returning to Cognac.According to Ludovic du Plessis, global executive director for Louis XIII, the film was inspired by the fact that the cognac’s creators never experience the fruits of their labor. Although he said its promotion is aimed at drinkers of all ages, it is a “way to talk to millennials by not giving them instant gratification. It provokes their imagination. With Google, you can find everything. We are forcing them to stop everything and think.”Louis XIII also is giving its aficionados the opportunity — for 1,000 euros, or about $1,140, per person — to visit its estate and tour its blending and aging cellars.AdvertisementSimilarly, Courvoisier cognac, a less-expensive brand from Beam Suntory, is offering new tours of Paris and expanded tour options at its chateau in Jarnac, France, the latter priced from €12 to €250.Last year, “Keep walking,” the longstanding advertising tag line of Johnnie Walker, inspired Daniel Titz and Dorian Lebherz, two German film school students, to make a 90-second commercial as part of their coursework. The film, about two Scotch-drinking brothers on the Isle of Skye in Scotland, has been viewed more than four million times on YouTube.Mr. Leahy, who said Johnnie Walker was not aware the students were making the spot, called it a “really beautiful piece of work.” Johnnie Walker did not pay the students for the commercial, but Mr. Leahy said the brand and the students “were committed to each other” to collaborate in the future.MaryLeigh Bliss, chief content officer of Ypulse, a youth-oriented market research company, said it was “very smart” for Johnnie Walker “to look at the kind of marketing young creatives are making themselves, to use that and make it part of their brand’s process.”Several years ago, the company released a report saying that millennials generally pass over “material luxury goods” in favor of “social experiences.” The report concluded that “what has stood the test of time as both a symbol of status and luxury for this generation is experiences, and fundamentally, broadcasting them,” through social media.And while millennials are having these experiences, liquor companies are hoping they will have a drink, too.A version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Luring Millennials With Signature Experiences (and Liquor).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »