

      By MARY WILLIAMS WALSH and 
    
LIZ MOYER

UPDATED July 1, 2016

For years, Puerto Rico borrowed money by issuing municipal bonds, using the funds to compensate for declining government revenue and prevent deep cuts in services and layoffs of public workers. It easily found investors. But Puerto Rico can no longer afford what it owes. The island is reeling under more than $70 billion of debt, and officials there have warned about its inability to pay back investors while maintaining essential services for residents such as health care and schools. This is what’s happening and how the island got here: The White House said it had chosen seven experts in finance and the law who will supervise Puerto Rico’s fiscal affairs in the coming months under a law enacted this summer designed to help the island restructure its $72 billion of debt.The rescue plan drew plenty of criticism from both sides of the political aisle, and the passage of the law elicited protests among the island’s residents. In June, the Supreme Court rejected Puerto Rico’s attempt to allow its utility companies to restructure their debt, leaving it to Congress to finalize a rescue plan for the island’s fiscal woes.The day after the law was signed, the island’s governor, Alejandro Garcia Padilla, suspended nearly $2 billion of debt payments that Puerto Rico was supposed to make. It was not the first large payment Puerto Rico has missed in recent months — the island skipped a $399 million debt payment due May 2. The defaults since have continued to escalate.For months, the Obama administration has pressed Congress to put together a solution for Puerto Rico. Gov. García Padilla enacted a law in early April that allows him to block debt payments and preserve the island’s dwindling cash. He has already invoked that power.Gov. Alejandro García Padilla But Washington’s rescue bill takes precedent.Puerto Rico’s Government Development Bank, one of the island’s biggest debtors, has been negotiating with some of its bondholders to pay them at less than 100 cents on the dollar. Fights brewing among various types of bond investors could greatly complicate things if Congress does not act in time. Some of Puerto Rico’s bonds have guarantees or constitutional priority, and those investors are pushing for full payment. Other investors are pushing for early settlements, hoping they can recover more in private negotiations than a court-ordered one. The rescue plan’s restructuring provisions would also apply to Guam, American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands and the U.S. Virgin Islands, if necessary in the future.
Puerto Rico’s public debt has ballooned because of a failing economy and an inefficient government that has spent more than it has taken in.
Parts of Puerto Rico’s debtThe government created  a health insurance system for the poor in the 1990s, but did not identify a way to pay for it.Bonds backed bylegislative appropriations