AdvertisementSupported byBy Jackie CalmesSAN JUAN, P.R. — As Washington remains deadlocked over a solution to Puerto Rico’s rapidly worsening debt crisis, the Treasury secretary, Jacob J. Lew, traveled here on Monday to put human faces on the dry numbers underlying the island’s woes, seeking to pressure Republicans in Congress to move quickly on a rescue package.Mr. Lew, with a small pack of reporters in tow, visited a struggling hospital complex and an elementary school, and conferred with local officials and business leaders — all to dramatize the stakes as the island faces both a financial collapse and the spread of the Zika virus.“The financial crisis is not just a question of bondholders, but it’s a question of the lives being led by three and a half million Americans who live on Puerto Rico,” Mr. Lew said, standing outside the cafeteria at Eleanor Roosevelt Elementary School, where employees told him of battling termites, equipment breakdowns and electrical failures.“What Puerto Rico needs is the ability to restructure its debt,” the Treasury secretary added. “That means that there needs to be an oversight authority, and the government of Puerto Rico has to work with that new structure to put the island on a path toward a sustainable economic future.”Puerto Rico’s governor, Alejandro García Padilla, interjected: “The secretary and the administration have been there with us. We need Congress to act.”“We have not been offered and we are not asking for a bailout,” Mr. García Padilla said, cognizant that conservative groups in Washington have assailed emerging legislation as just that, though no federal money is involved.But, he added, “if Congress does not act, then we will need a bailout. And it will be very expensive for U.S. taxpayers.”The debt crisis culminates years of financial mismanagement by a succession of island governments, exacerbated by the recession of recent years, as well as actions in Washington. In 1984, Congress barred Puerto Rico from restructuring debt in bankruptcy, as municipalities in the 50 states and businesses can do, and lawmakers are trying to undo that stricture.The visit by Mr. Lew was his second to the island this year. It came a week after he wrote a letter to the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, warning that without a change in the law that would allow the island to restructure debt exceeding $70 billion and better manage its repayments, Puerto Rico this summer could face “a series of cascading defaults” that force a federal bailout.Also last week, Puerto Rico defaulted on most of a $422 million debt payment — its largest missed payment to date — and about $2 billion comes due July 1.Representative Rob Bishop, Republican of Utah and chairman of a House committee responsible for the issue, said on Monday that he would unveil a revised bill by Wednesday and press for a committee vote next week. In an interview with Reuters, he said the Treasury had been “marvelous” to work with, but “in some of the small areas, I think they have been dragging their feet.”A bigger problem, Republican leaders acknowledge, is the opposition of conservative groups, which have sponsored television advertisements inaccurately depicting pending proposals as bailouts.The opposition, backed by some like-minded lawmakers, has hindered legislative efforts by Mr. Ryan and Mr. Bishop. Also opposed are lobbyists for hedge funds and other debt holders that do not want any reduction in the payments they receive.Late last year, Mr. Ryan directed House committees with jurisdiction to devise a solution. But tentative deadlines have passed without Republicans’ being able to agree among themselves, let alone with Democrats, whose votes are needed to pass legislation, given likely Republican defections.The island’s economic, health and education travails are driving more Puerto Ricans to move to the mainland United States. They include doctors, teachers and other professionals much needed here.At least 629 cases of Zika infection have been confirmed, and it is projected that up to 20 percent of the population could become infected this year, according to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Zika infections have been linked to serious birth defects.Eleanor Roosevelt Elementary School was chosen for Mr. Lew’s tour as representative of Puerto Rico’s nearly 1,400 public schools, which are said to lack money even for screens to keep out Zika-carrying mosquitoes.Scores of schools have been closed, leaving more children distant from the nearest classrooms, even as some bus companies have stopped driving students for lack of payment. The government expects to shutter hundreds more schools.At the sprawling medical complex on Mr. Lew’s itinerary — Centro Medico, the primary medical center for the Caribbean region, and one of the largest trauma facilities in the United States — doctors and executives told him of their life-or-death decisions dealing with shortages of money and supplies.Mr. Lew toured the trauma unit and the neonatal intensive care unit. “We are hanging by a thread,” Dr. Juan Nazario, executive director of the hospital, told him, adding that officials decide day to day which bills — payroll, medication, suppliers — they can pay. The secretary later called his tour “heartbreaking.”Afterward, en route to a meeting with representatives of business and social groups, Mr. Lew strode through Paseo de Diego, a pedestrian mall once described as the commercial hub of the capital. It is now, his host told him, “almost 80 percent shuttered.”Advertisement