AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryRenaud Laplanche and his crew steered a 105-foot racing boat through New York Harbor one day last spring, its towering sails ripping across the water at 30 knots.An accomplished sailor and founder of Lending Club, Mr. Laplanche was hosting executives from hedge funds, Goldman Sachs and other banks — part of his effort to win over Wall Street on his plans to upend traditional banking with a faster, more democratic form of lending.He already had endorsements from Lawrence H. Summers, the former Treasury secretary, and John Mack, the former chief of Morgan Stanley, who joined his board. At Lending Club’s initial public offering in December 2014, the company was valued at over $8 billion.But on Monday, Lending Club announced that Mr. Laplanche had resigned after an internal investigation found improprieties in its lending process, including the altering of millions of dollars’ worth of loans. The company’s stock price, already reeling in recent months, fell 34 percent.The company’s woes are part of a broader reckoning in the online money-lending industry. Last week, Prosper, another online lender that focuses on consumers, laid off more than a quarter of its work force, and the chief executive said he was forgoing his salary for the year.The problems at Lending Club, in particular, threaten to confirm some of Wall Street’s worst fears: that as favorable economic conditions begin to turn, they will reveal many upstart companies with weak internal controls that have been feeding inaccurate information to starry-eyed investors.“It is clear this is bad news not just for Lending Club, but for our entire industry,” Peter Renton, who founded Lendit, a leading industry conference, wrote in a blog post on Monday. “Really bad.”Marketplace lenders like Lending Club have created easy-to-use websites that match consumers and small businesses, hoping to borrow a few thousand dollars, with individuals or Wall Street investors looking to lend money.Freed from the costs of brick-and-mortar branches and federal regulations requiring that they reserve money against their loans, marketplace lenders have been able to grow quickly and with fewer expenses.The process is almost entirely online, with loans approved in days rather than the weeks a traditional bank might take.While marketplace loans account for less than 1 percent of the consumer loans in the United States, a recent report by the investment bank Jefferies said that in some segments — like installment loans — the new lending companies account for more than 10 percent of the market.Just months ago, it seemed marketplace lenders couldn’t churn out loans fast enough. Investors like hedge funds, insurance companies and pension funds were clamoring to buy large pools of these loans, which offered an attractive return at a time of record low interest rates.But in the first quarter, lenders like Lending Club, Prosper and OnDeck Capital had difficulty convincing investors that their business models are sound.Even though the majority of the companies’ borrowers continue to pay their loans on time, Wall Street investors have started to worry about the prospect of increasing defaults.Last week, the small business lender OnDeck said demand for securitized packages of its loans had all but vanished in the first quarter.“Investors are shooting first and asking questions later,” said Christopher C. Brendler, a financial analyst at Stifel, the investment bank.Wall Street’s waning demand for loans exposed the Achilles’ heel of marketplace lending. Unlike traditional banks that use their deposits to fund loans, the marketplace companies discovered how fleeting their funding sources can be.Since the start of the year, Lending Club has raised interest rates on its loans three times to sweeten their appeal to investors.As the pressure to sell loans mounted across the industry, the problems began to surface at Lending Club, according to two people briefed on the company’s internal investigation, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.They said that in early April, a Lending Club employee discovered that the dates on about $3 million of loan applications appeared to have been altered in some way. The employee raised the issue with Mr. Laplanche, who alerted the company’s internal auditor.That inquiry led to the discovery of more irregularities, these two people said. This time, it appeared that about $22 million in loans that had been sold to Jefferies did not meet the investment bank’s criteria.While the discrepancy was fairly minor, they said the Lending Club board considered it a serious issue. The company bought back all of the loans.“A key principle of the company is maintaining the highest levels of trust with borrowers, investors, regulators, stockholders and employees,” Hans Morris, who on Monday was named Lending Club’s executive chairman, a newly created role, said in a statement.The two people briefed on the internal investigation said it had turned up another issue. Mr. Laplanche had a stake in an investment fund that the company was also considering whether to invest in. But Mr. Laplanche had failed to disclose his personal investment to the board.Mr. Laplanche did not respond to a request for comment.Mr. Laplanche, in many ways, was considered the face of his industry. He is a French-born lawyer who spent the early part of his career at Cleary Gottlieb, a large corporate law firm.He came up with the idea to start Lending Club in 2006 after seeing how little banks paid people to deposit their money and how much those same banks charged to lend. “We wanted to lower the spread,” he said in an interview last year.Mr. Laplanche is also a world-class sailor who holds two speed records. He would frequently take his staff in San Francisco sailing.Last Friday, the board informed Mr. Laplanche of its conclusions, making it clear that he had lost its confidence. Three senior managers involved in the loan sales have either resigned or were fired. The company’s president, Scott Sanborn, was named acting chief.Before the recent turmoil, more traditional banks were putting faith in the industry’s underwriting models and low-cost lending system. The banks had been buying loans from the marketplace lenders and also forming partnerships.JPMorgan Chase, for example, started a partnership with OnDeck to offer small-business loans. JPMorgan, the nation’s largest bank, figured that OnDeck could offer the loans more cheaply and quickly than if the bank processed them internally.Some analysts predict that if the funding pressure continues, large banks could end up acquiring the marketplace lenders, or pieces of them.“They have good technology and it could ultimately be adopted by the banks themselves,” said Todd H. Baker, founder of Broadmoor Consulting, which advises financial services companies.Advertisement