By ELIZABETH OLSONMAY 9, 2016
An Arizona law school that came under fire for admitting applicants who took the more general Graduate Record Exam rather than the traditional Law School Admissions Test has received a reprieve.The membership body, the Law School Admission Council, has decided not to oust the University of Arizona James E. Rogers College of Law.“I appreciate the decision not to expel Arizona for our decision to open up J.D. admissions to people who take either test,” Marc L. Miller, the law school’s dean, said on Monday. J.D. refers to the juris doctorate degree conferred by law schools.In February, Arizona became the first law school to accept the GRE as well as the LSAT to admit students. That policy drew criticism from those who said the LSAT was the most reliable metric for predicting law school success.AdvertisementThe council, which oversees the LSAT as well as the common application process used by thousands of law students, refrained from penalizing Arizona after a majority of the nation’s law school deans rallied last week to support the school. Nearly 150 deans signed a letter backing Arizona’s effort to broaden its applicant pool by accepting those who had taken only the GRE, and to spare it from being banned from the network that law schools use to process applicants.AdvertisementIn a letter released over the weekend, the council’s president, Daniel O. Bernstine, said its inquiry into Arizona’s new policy, where it accepted three students on the basis of their GRE scores, had been misunderstood and mischaracterized as “an obstacle to innovation an experimentation in legal education.”“That was not our intent,” he noted.Arizona’s deviation from the law school norm, however, may have a limited life.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In his letter, Mr. Bernstine noted that the American Bar Association’s Section on Legal Education and Admissions will review a study that Arizona had conducted to assure the GRE’s reliability as a predictor of law school success. Arizona had teamed up with the Educational Testing Service last December to corroborate the test for law school applicants to satisfy the A.B.A.’s requirement that the GRE is a valid and reliable predictor student’s first-term law school grades.“The resolution of these issues may well impact L.S.A.C.’s membership requirements,” Mr. Bernstine said in his letter confirming that the council is allowing Arizona to remain a member, at least for now.Arizona’s testing will be examined again by the A.B.A., most likely this year, confirmed Barry Currier, the A.B.A. section’s managing director for accreditation and legal education. In addition, he noted, the A.B.A. wants “to establish a process so schools, one by one, do not have to show that a test is valid and reliable predictor for their student body.”Supporters of the LSAT say that it closely predicts first-year law school grades while other more general tests do not have its precision. But Mr. Miller noted that Arizona’s testing measures found that the GRE scores were slightly better in predicting entry-year outcomes.“The council certainly and explicitly retains the possibility that there could be a different decision down the road,” Mr. Miller said. “But law schools who signed their letter have expressed their support for innovation and experimentation.”A version of this article appears in print on May 10, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Law School That Accepts GRE Scores Can Continue On, as Deans Rally Around It.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.