AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningBenjamin Franklin once pointed out that “in this world nothing can be said to be certain, except death and taxes.” Evading taxes and shielding ill-gotten gains are an effort to avoid some of that certainty, but as much as the government tries to battle corruption in the financial system, it will almost never be enough.In the wake of the disclosure of confidential documents known as the Panama Papers showing how lawyers set up shell companies to hide assets, the White House announced initiatives last week to combat “shady practices” used by “corrupt officials, tax cheats, and other criminals.”Like other well-intentioned steps to fight corruption, they will make it a little bit harder to shift money around anonymously, but ultimately will be only a modest impediment to stanching the flood of illicit funds that course through the economy.The challenge to changing the misuse of corporate forms is that the ability to start a shell company is deeply embedded in the legal system. A video posted recently shows a cat’s owner going to a firm to set up a limited liability company in Delaware for the feline in less than five minutes just by paying the $249 fee and entering minimal identifying information.If it involves a cat, it shows how remarkably easy it is to create an anonymous entity that can be used for almost any purpose, whether nefarious or benign.The Treasury Department adopted a final rule requiring financial institutions, like banks and brokers, to verify the identity of beneficial owners of 25 percent or more of a company when it opens an account. In addition, there must be monitoring of the account, which includes reporting any suspicious activity. The regulation will be phased in over two years, so do not be surprised to see a rush to open accounts before the reporting requirement kicks in.It also announced proposed regulations that would require a foreign-owned single-member limited liability company to obtain an employer identification number from the Internal Revenue Service to report any taxable income. This type of L.L.C. is used frequently in high-end real estate transactions, which The New York Times described extensively in the “Towers of Secrecy” series about how numerous foreigners use corporate facades to buy Manhattan condominiums. If adopted, the new rules will pull back slightly the veil of secrecy surrounding these entities because it will allow the government to track transactions and provide information to other countries trying to crack down on tax cheating.How much of a barrier the new Treasury Department rules will erect to the misuse of shell companies to hide assets remains to be seen. Ownership of a L.L.C. or other corporate entity could be divided among five holders, none crossing the 25 percent threshold, to stay below the customer information requirement. The use of nominees holding purported interests in a shell can still take place to shield the true owner’s identity, although perhaps if the same names appear on regulatory filings with some regularity then investigators will at least have a lead on who to scrutinize.The Justice Department announced that it would submit proposals to Congress to make it easier to pursue transnational corruption. One change would expand the list of crimes that can be a predicate for a money laundering charge against a foreign official who engages in corruption and transfers funds through the United States. A second would allow prosecutors to issue administrative subpoenas in a money laundering investigation rather than just using criminal grand jury subpoenas to obtain banking records, allowing information in some cases to be gathered more quickly.A third proposal would make it easier for the Justice Department to introduce the records obtained from foreign banks in court, relaxing the requirements under the rules of evidence for submission of these documents.A more radical step is legislation the Treasury Department is preparing to require that newly formed companies disclose their beneficial owners to the federal government. There are already bills in the House and Senate that would require similar information be reported, but so far they have not gone anywhere. The United States Chamber of Commerce and American Bar Association fought efforts in prior years to pass legislation on this issue, although perhaps the disclosure of the Panama Papers will mute some of that opposition.The legislative proposals will require approval by Congress, which may not be likely during the run up to the November elections when few bills are likely to be considered unless they are urgent.There is also the question of whether requiring greater disclosure of who controls a corporate entity goes too far in denigrating the privacy rights of the owners. There are legitimate reasons to hide one’s wealth from public disclosure, especially in those parts of the world where that information could make one a target for extortion or kidnapping. Just because a criminal can use a corporate shell to hide ill-gotten gains does not necessarily mean that most, or even many, of these entities are used for illegitimate reasons.Balancing the needs of law enforcement with the privacy interests of individuals is always difficult, as the recent fight over iPhone encryption between Apple and the Justice Department amply demonstrates. How far the need to gather information on the identity of owners should go is an issue Congress will have to settle.Even if President Obama gets everything on the wish list of changes being suggested, there remains the problem of how effective they would be in fighting corruption. Money is like water, following the path of least resistance. Impediments to anonymously transferring and holding assets may slow the flow in the short term, but are unlikely to put much of a dent in how illicit funds move through the financial system because there always seem to be new avenues to hide their ownership.That does not mean that pushing for greater transparency in the ownership of assets and making it easier to prosecute money laundering are not worth the effort. But the proposed changes should be seen for what they are — small steps in a continuing battle.Advertisement