AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz Moyer and Michael J. de la MercedCanadian Pacific said on Tuesday that it had sent an offer letter to the Norfolk Southern Corporation, proposing a merger that would reshape the North American rail industry.Yet, in an unusual twist, it was the takeover target that actually described the nature of the bid.In a short statement, Canadian Pacific declined to disclose details of its proposal except to say it was a “sizable premium in cash and stock” and would create a company that has the potential for faster earnings growth than either railroad could achieve alone.Norfolk Southern, in its response, outlined what “sizable” meant. It described the takeover offer as $46.72 in cash and 0.348 of a Canadian Pacific share for each of its own shares.As of Tuesday’s closing prices, that valued Norfolk Southern at about $94.95 a share, representing a premium of about 9 percent, for a total of $28.4 billion.In its statement, Norfolk Southern said that it would consider what it called an “unsolicited, low-premium, nonbinding, highly conditional indication of interest.”The exchange marks a strange turn in what represents the latest effort to bring about consolidation within the North American rail industry. A year ago, Canadian Pacific, based in Calgary, attempted a combination with the larger United States railroad operator CSX, which would have created a transcontinental railroad. But CSX spurned the offer.Reports that Canadian Pacific was back in the hunt for a merger have swirled for weeks. On Nov. 9, Canadian Pacific said there was no material news pending, despite those reports. Earlier on Tuesday, its chief operating officer said at a conference in Canada that consolidation in the industry was inevitable.Thus far, the two rail operators have met just once, this past Friday, according to a person briefed on the matter but not authorized to speak about it publicly. During that encounter, Norfolk Southern’s chief executive, Jim Squires, told his counterpart, E. Hunter Harrison, that he did not believe a merger made sense.Mr. Squires emphasized that the deal, which would be reviewed by the Surface Transportation Board in the United States, would probably not pass regulatory muster, the person added.The investor William Ackman’s hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management, reported a $2 billion stake in the Canadian rail operator for the end of the third quarter. Yet during the last year, until reports of Canadian Pacific’s renewed interest in a merger emerged, the company’s stock price had fallen from a high of nearly $210 to just under $132.A merger with Norfolk Southern would create a transcontinental network. In its announcement on Tuesday, Canadian Pacific said one of the benefits of a combination would be the alleviation of rail traffic congestion in Chicago.In after-hours trading, shares of Norfolk Southern surged nearly 6 percent, to $92.10. At that share price, its market value is $27.5 billion.OpinionAndrew N. Liveris and Matthew K. RoseAdvertisement