AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryLending Club, one of the largest online lending services, said on Monday that its chairman and chief executive, Renaud Laplanche, had resigned after an internal review showed a violation of the company’s business practices.The company said that the case involved sales of $22 million in near-prime loans to a single investor. The company said the sale was made in a way that was against the investor’s express instructions. The company did not say how the deal defied the investor’s wishes, but added that the issue did not have to do with credit quality or pricing.Scott Sanborn, the company’s president, will be acting chief executive. One of its directors, Hans Morris, will become executive chairman.“While the financial impact of this $22 million in loan sales was minor, a violation of the company’s business practices along with a lack of full disclosure during the review was unacceptable to the board,” Mr. Morris said in a statement. “Accordingly, the board took swift and decisive action, and authorized additional remedial steps to rectify these issues.”Mr. Laplanche was, in many ways, the face of the marketplace lending company. Lending Club, which he founded, was the first marketplace consumer lender to go public when it made its debut in 2014, and Mr. Laplanche frequently gave interviews to extol the virtues of this type of lending.Since its I.P.O., however, the company’s shares have been on a steady decline, as Lending Club failed to live up to investors’ expectations for growth.On a conference call with analysts on Monday morning, the company’s new executive team tried to assure investors that they had done a thorough job fixing weaknesses in internal controls. Lending Club’s chief financial officer said the issue with the $22 million loan sale was “isolated.”Still, news of Mr. Laplanche’s departure drove the company’s stock down 25 percent on Monday morning.The move comes as lenders such as Lending Club — which make loans to businesses and individuals and then sell them to hedge funds, pension funds or individual investors — are struggling on Wall Street.The company also reported a profit of $4.1 million, or 1 cent a share, for the first quarter that ended March 31, compared with a loss of $6.4 million, or 2 cents a share, in the same period a year earlier.“This has been a difficult weekend for the Lending Club family,” Mr. Sanborn said on the conference call on Monday morning. Despite Lending Club’s profit in the quarter, the company faced trouble funding its loans in the capital markets, as investors grew wary about potential credit problems.Advertisement