AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelLOS ANGELES — The trial over the mental competency of the ailing media mogul Sumner M. Redstone was over almost before it began.Yet in the course of nearly six months, from the time it first burst onto the public stage in November until its abrupt dismissal on Monday after just one day of testimony, the legal battle provided a series of stunning revelations about Mr. Redstone’s personal life as well as his reign over his $42 billion media empire.There were the embarrassing, prurient claims about the sexual desires and deteriorating health of Mr. Redstone, who had not been seen publicly since a party for his 92nd birthday last May.There was the investor turmoil over corporate governance at his two big entertainment companies, CBS, whose shares have plunged nearly 8 percent in the last year, and Viacom, down 39 percent. Mr. Redstone was forced to step down as chairman of both companies, a development he had long declared would never occur.And there was the return of his long-ostracized daughter, Shari Redstone, who gradually worked her way back into his life.The decision on Monday by Judge David J. Cowan of Los Angeles County Superior Court to dismiss the suit closed one chapter of this drawn-out saga of money, love, power and the future of Mr. Redstone’s personal and business empires. The dismissal was a blow to Manuela Herzer, Mr. Redstone’s former lover, who brought the suit challenging Mr. Redstone’s mental capacity, and a clear legal victory for Mr. Redstone and, by extension, his daughter.“I am grateful to the court for putting an end to this long ordeal,” Ms. Redstone said in a statement. “I am so happy for my father that he can now live his life in peace, surrounded by his friends and family.”For now, too, the ruling maintains the status quo across Mr. Redstone’s business holdings. While the lawsuit concerned Mr. Redstone’s personal life, a decision that he lacked mental capacity could have set off a contentious battle for control at CBS and Viacom. He is a director, chairman emeritus and controlling shareholder of both companies and remains in control until he is declared incompetent or dies.At that point, Mr. Redstone’s interests in CBS and Viacom are to be held by an irrevocable trust that was created for the benefit of his five grandchildren. Among the trust’s seven voting members are his daughter and Philippe P. Dauman, the chief executive of Viacom, who have disagreed on how the company should be managed.News emerged late Monday that members of Viacom’s board of directors were evaluating Mr. Redstone’s position at the company after considering the information about his condition that was made public during the trial, according to a person with knowledge of the deliberations.That information includes the transcript of the videotaped testimony from Mr. Redstone, along with the evaluation by a geriatric psychologist. The judge, in his evaluation of the testimony, said “it is also not in dispute that Redstone suffers from either mild or moderate dementia.”The board is scrutinizing not only Mr. Redstone’s pay — his total compensation was $2 million in the 2015 fiscal year, down from $13 million the previous year — but also his continued role at the company, this person said.It is not clear whether the board of directors at CBS is making the same considerations.Spokesmen for Viacom and CBS declined to comment. The development was first reported by The Wall Street Journal.The legal tussling and the potential for more salacious disclosures also appear likely to continue.Within minutes after the court dismissed the case with prejudice, Ms. Herzer filed a $100 million suit against Ms. Redstone, her adult sons, Tyler and Brandon Korff, and a team of nurses and other employees of Mr. Redstone. The new suit portrayed Ms. Redstone as being at the center of a network of spies that manipulated, abused, lied to and unduly influenced Mr. Redstone. Lawyers for Ms. Herzer also said they planned to file an immediate appeal of Judge Cowan’s decision.Robert N. Klieger, a lawyer for Mr. Redstone, called the move to appeal unsurprising and “the reflexive action of everybody that loses a case.” He said that the new suit “smacks of desperation and also shows the true character of the other side.”A transcript of videotaped testimony of Mr. Redstone, taken Thursday at his Los Angeles mansion. The document includes some vulgar language.Hours after the ruling, Ms. Herzer said in an interview that she was “a little bit emotional” on hearing the judge’s decision.“I was thinking back at the video that I saw of Sumner and how vulnerable and confused and alone he was, his blank stare, his mumbling,” she said. “It is sad and makes me want to protect him even more.”Ms. Herzer was referring to the 18 minutes of videotaped testimony from Mr. Redstone that was shown on Friday, during the first and only day of trial. In the video, Mr. Redstone said that he did not want Ms. Herzer in charge of his care, or in his life at all, and that he was happy with the care he was receiving.Mr. Redstone had not been seen publicly for nearly a year and had made no public declarations related to the suit since Ms. Herzer filed it in November.In his ruling, Judge Cowan said that Mr. Redstone’s videotaped testimony had completely altered the case. “Redstone’s testimony ultimately defeated her case,” the judge wrote.He stressed that he was not making a finding related to Mr. Redstone’s mental capacity or the credibility of Ms. Herzer or Ms. Redstone, but was focusing on the issue of Mr. Redstone’s health care.“The court is finding only that the ‘proceeding is not reasonably necessary to protect the interests of the patient,’” Judge Cowan wrote. “Specifically, Herzer cannot be restored as his agent and Redstone is satisfied with the care he is receiving and to be with his family.”While the video remained confidential, a transcript was made public. During the questioning, Mr. Redstone denigrated Ms. Herzer with obscenities multiple times and said that he hated her and wanted her out of his life.“He mustered everything he could to tell the judge what he wanted, and the judge respected that. Everything else was noise,” Mr. Klieger said.The transcript also showed that Mr. Redstone’s testimony was halting, and that he was not able to answer some basic questions, such as his birth name (Sumner Murray Rothstein) — a point seized on by Ms. Herzer’s side.“How this judge thought that all of this was normal and that Sumner was well taken care of to me is unbelievable and sad,” Ms. Herzer said. “It is a sad day for Sumner.”Lawyers for Ms. Herzer argued that the court should not have accepted Mr. Redstone’s testimony at face value and needed to hear all the evidence before dismissing the case after just one day of trial.“My client came here to protect Sumner Redstone,” Pierce O’Donnell, a lawyer for Ms. Herzer, said outside the courthouse on Monday, surrounded by reporters. “We think that we established overwhelmingly that he has serious mental defects and perhaps, more so that he has been the victim of undue influence, a campaign initiated by Shari Redstone.”Mr. O’Donnell added that he had learned that Mr. Redstone was considering filing a suit against Ms. Herzer and his former girlfriend Sydney Holland, seeking to recover close to $150 million in gifts in recent years. “His two attorneys and a leading psychiatrist blessed these gifts as the result of Sumner’s sound mind and free will,’’ Mr. O’Donnell said. “This is obviously a desperate act.”In the new suit filed on Monday, Ms. Herzer asserted that Ms. Redstone developed an “insidious two-part plan” to turn her father against her and Sydney Holland, by first gathering intelligence then using her father’s staff to influence him.“Shari’s blind ambition was so furious, her animosity toward Sumner’s two devoted caregivers so extreme, that she would stop at nothing to get her way,” the suit says.In a statement, Ms. Redstone called the accusations “total fiction’’ and said the suit “continues to speak volumes about Herzer’s motivation and character.”Advertisement