By JOHN KOBLINMAY 10, 2016
In the last 18 months, Comedy Central has seen the departure of its most familiar on-air faces, Jon Stewart and Stephen Colbert.Now comes a high-level change behind the scenes.Michele Ganeless, Comedy Central’s longtime president, is leaving the network at the end of the month and will be replaced by Kent Alterman, president of original programming.Ms. Ganeless has been in charge of Comedy Central since 2004, and has been at Viacom for more than two decades. She said in an interview that the decision was hers.“It’s been the better part of 25 years,” she said. “And I’m ready for a new challenge.”It is an anxious time in the cable industry, and Comedy Central is confronting a problem shared by a number of its peers: Ratings are declining as network executives point toward less lucrative digital successes.AdvertisementDoug Herzog, the president of Viacom’s music and entertainment group, acknowledged the drop in ratings even as he defended the network’s continued cultural relevance.Advertisement“We’ve certainly got some challenges with how our audience is interacting with our content in a less traditional way than ever before,” he said. “What gives us a great deal of confidence, and quite frankly gets me to sleep at night, is it’s all about content and you’re nothing without it, and we have an unbelievable brand.”The network continues to broadcast shows that carve out a place in the culture and are popular with younger viewers, like “Inside Amy Schumer” and “Broad City.”And though the business is still largely defined by the traditional Nielsen ratings, Mr. Herzog noted inroads that Comedy Central has made on digital channels like Hulu and Snapchat.Mr. Alterman has been the head of original programming at Comedy Central since 2010, and he also worked at the network from 1996 to 2000. As part of the succession plan, David Bernath, who is a 12-year veteran of Comedy Central, has been promoted to general manager.After losing two longtime hosts, Comedy Central’s late-night lineup is struggling to gain its footing. Ratings for both Trevor Noah, Mr. Stewart’s successor, and Larry Wilmore, who replaced Mr. Colbert, have declined compared with their predecessors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Alterman strongly defended Mr. Noah’s performance, saying that he’s “only going to get better.”“A lot of people like to compare Trevor to Jon, but they’re two different people and it’s a little silly to compare one’s first day to the other’s last day after 16 years,” he said. “We’re amazed how Trevor started. He has already has such command of his own voice and he’s so self-possessed.”Mr. Alterman, who will be based in Santa Monica, Calif., (Ms. Ganeless was in New York) also emphasized continuity, saying, “it’s not like we’re going to make some radical shift.” But both he and Mr. Herzog acknowledged an uncertain future for all of cable television.“The world continues to change and change rapidly, and Kent and Dave are going to face challenges going forward that Michele never did,” Mr. Herzog said. “That’s how fast the world is moving, so Comedy Central needs to evolve and needs to change and it needs to adapt.Advertisement“There are some headwinds there that we’re all facing in the traditional cable-related business, but I go back to our brand and our tremendous content,” he added. “If we do that right, I think we’ll have a head start and figure the rest out.”A version of this article appears in print on May 11, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Comedy Central’s President, in Charge Since ’04, Is Leaving.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.