AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robert CyranThe pharmaceuticals merger mind-set may be changing. Allergan, the $87 billion maker of Botox, will devote capital to stock buybacks and paying down debt.Separately, Bill Ackman’s hedge fund is selling a big part of his stake in Zoetis, the animal health company that he considered a takeover target. With luck, the two moves together signal a more subdued approach to deals.Allergan spent the last few years on an acquisition spree powered by borrowing. The decision to sell its generics business to Teva Pharmaceutical for $40.5 billion when drug stocks were peaking in July 2015, and a subsequent attempt to sell the rest of the business to Pfizer in November, indicated that Brent Saunders, the chief of Allergan, had a keen sense of how the merger and acquisition winds were blowing.With the Pfizer deal thwarted by Treasury officials last month, Allergan is reimagining itself without acquisitions as a primary strategy. There will be small deals, and Mr. Saunders isn’t categorically ruling out larger ones. Even so, he says there is “no greater investment than Allergan stock,” suggesting a less merger-and-acquisitions-focused approach. Allergan plans to buy back up to $10 billion in shares, shrink its debt load and fund research and development.Mr. Ackman’s reported $800 million sale of Zoetis shares also suggests a cooler deal market. After a bad run, led by his soured bet on another once-acquisitive pharmaceuticals company, Valeant, his Pershing Square could be in need of extra liquidity, or there may simply be better opportunities. The investment in 2014, however, was largely based on the idea that Zoetis would be bought.After Zoetis was spun off from Pfizer, Mr. Ackman’s fund installed a board director and called the company a “scarce asset,” essentially hanging out a for-sale sign. Shrinking his fund’s position implies that a sale may be less likely as buyers like Valeant head for the sidelines.Health care mergers and acquisitions have accelerated out of control. A record volume of deals were announced last year even after stripping out the $160 billion union of Pfizer and Allergan. Tax benefits overshadowed strategic sense. Valuations and premiums soared. Regulators then got worried. If the pace is indeed slowing, as Tuesday’s news implies, it could be an encouraging sign of a renewed commitment to developing drugs instead of just overpaying for them.Advertisement