AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonBill Gates’s Foundation Trust and his personal investment fund are locked in a brutal shareholder dispute in Switzerland over the sale of a controlling interest in the Swiss specialty chemicals maker Sika. This is more than just another activist battle, however, showing how things in Europe these days look more and more American.The fight began in 2014, when the fifth generation of Sika’s founding family, the Burkards, decided to sell its controlling stake. Though the family members owned only 16 percent of the 100-year-old company, their shares had special voting rights giving them a controlling voting interest in the company.Burkard family members explained they were selling their stake because the younger generations of the family had not been involved in its day-to-day operations for some time. They thought they had found a stable, long-term owner in a Sika competitor, France’s Cie de Saint-Gobain. And it is not hard to see their rationale for selling. The price they received — $2.8 billion — carried an 80 percent premium.Other shareholders were left in the cold, however. Saint-Gobain announced it would not bid for the shares of Sika that were not being sold by the Burkard family. Instead, it would seek to enter into “arm’s-length” arrangements that would allow Saint-Gobain to control the company and consolidate its earnings and revenue on its books without having to pay for all the shares.In Europe, there is a rule that an acquisition for control of more than 30 percent of a company requires a mandatory offer for the rest of the shares. In Switzerland, however, there is an opt-out provision, and the Burkards used it. That meant they could unload their shares and controlling interest in the company without offering the same sweet deal to other shareholders.So began a tale of intrigue, lawsuits, shareholder expectations and infighting. It’s a tale that easily could be told in the United States.Here, shareholders are legally allowed to sell controlling stakes at a premium without permission of the company. To limit this right and prevent other shareholders from losing out, companies often have restrictions in their organizational documents. The 2009 Merck-Schering Plough merger was structured to get around change of control restrictions in the drug Remicade that would have forced Merck to sell it to Johnson & Johnson. That saga, too, ended in litigation.Not surprisingly, the Burkards’ move did not sit well. Shareholders and independent directors immediately struck back, relying on a provision in Sika’s organization documents dating to the 1970s that permitted the board to refuse an acquirer of more than 5 percent of registered shares the permission to register them in the company’s books. The board refused to approve the sale and restricted the voting rights of the Burkards to only 5 percent of the company.The Burkards sued in Zug, a city in Switzerland, claiming that the restrictions on shareholder transfers did not apply to their sale of shares to Saint-Gobain. They claimed that because they were selling their shares through a company, not as individuals, the provision on which the board had relied did not apply.This is where Bill Gates came in. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation Trust and Cascade Investment, which manages Mr. Gates’s personal wealth, owned 5 percent of Sika and had been invested for seven years without selling a single share.The Gates funds, run by Michael Larson, are known for their secretiveness. But they have been willing to make public, activist positions from time to time. Cascade Investment pushed Waste Management to drop its takeover of Republic Services in 2008, calling it a wasteful expenditure of shareholder funds, for example.The Gates funds have been on the warpath over the Sika sale, joined by two European investor allies, Columbia Threadneedle and Fidelity International.At a the recent shareholder meeting, the Gates funds made a statement that “if this were only about money we could have sold our shares and moved on,” saying that their fight was instead about ”the rule of law trumping individual greed and ensuring respect for the shareholder protections put in place by previous generations of the Burkard family.”The Gates funds challenged the deal in a claim to the Swiss Takeover Board in Zurich, saying that Saint-Gobain was required under the Swiss takeover law to make an offer for the remaining shares at the same price it offered the Burkards.The funds have also sued Urs Burkard, the patriarch of the Burkard family and a director of Sika, claiming that he breached his fiduciary duty. This case is pending. There is another Gates foundation suit against two other Sika directors, claiming that they assisted in this illegal takeover. And the Gates funds joined the main lawsuit against the Burkards seeking to invalidate the voting restrictions imposed by Sika’s board.That is four lawsuits that involve the Gates funds in the fight over the sale of these shares.The main action is in the suit over whether the Zug court will allow the board to restrict the family’s ability to vote more than a 5 percent interest. And things are moving slowly, with a decision expected in 2017 at the earliest.The Zug court has issued a favorable order requiring that the status quo be maintained while this transaction is pending. In limiting the Burkard family’s voting rights to 5 percent, the board acted to defend itself and prevent the Burkards from unseating the directors to push through the deal.But the board has not limited the Burkards from acting in all situations, and for the last two years, the Burkards have been able to block board members from being paid for their services. The Sika board has still refused to back down, taking the same position as the Gates funds.And that’s where this big rugby scrum stands today as everyone awaits for a decision by the court of Zug or for Saint-Gobain to walk away. Saint-Gobain has said it is willing to wait out the fight. After last year’s meeting, it said that it had a “determination to complete the transaction and has full confidence that the Swiss courts shall allow them to regain their rights according to the law.”The Sika saga may be an important one for Switzerland – it is one of the first truly modern shareholder disputes in that country. The outcome is tabloid fodder involving one of the biggest Swiss companies and will set the tone for shareholder rights and management relations in the future.But the real lesson here may be broader. Global investors are going to be looking for standards to guide their investments, and those standards are for the most part set by practices in the United States and Britain. When things go awry, these global investors are willing to push forward their agendas. That the Gates funds were willing to participate in four suits in Switzerland shows not only that these investors are going to enforce standards globally, but that convergence is likely to increase.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.Advertisement