By BROOKS BARNESMAY 10, 2016
LOS ANGELES — The Walt Disney Company reported sharply mixed quarterly results on Tuesday, as surging movie and theme park units were undercut by weakness at some television businesses and a surprise retrenchment in video games.As a result, overall profit and revenue, while each increasing, missed Wall Street’s expectations, a rarity for Disney. Shares of Disney fell about 6 percent in after-hours trading, to about $100.85.Even so, the first question posed to Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, in a postearnings conference call with analysts involved succession. Thomas O. Staggs, who had been the favored internal candidate to succeed Mr. Iger, stepped down as chief operating officer in April after Disney’s board opted to expand its search to outside candidates.“We’re sorry about what came to pass, but we don’t really have anything more to say,” Mr. Iger said when asked about Mr. Staggs. Mr. Iger added that he had no “current plans” to extend his reign beyond a previously stated retirement date of June 2018.AdvertisementFor its fiscal second quarter, Disney reported net income of $2.14 billion, or $1.30 a share, an increase from $2.11 billion, or $1.23 a share, in the same period a year earlier. Excluding items affecting comparability, per-share profit for the most recent quarter was $1.36. Analysts had expected $1.40 a share.AdvertisementRevenue totaled $12.97 billion, a 4 percent increase. Analysts had expected $13.2 billion.Disney simultaneously said that it would pull the plug on Infinity, a costly video game and toy line that was introduced in 2013. Infinity has performed well, but sales have plateaued amid intensifying competition. Ending production of the game, which effectively removes Disney from the self-published console game business, resulted in a $147 million charge in the quarter. More than 300 employees will lose their jobs.The division that housed Infinity, Disney Consumer Products and Interactive Media, posted operating income of $357 million, an 8 percent decline from the year-earlier period, because of softer game sales and unfavorable foreign exchange rates. The Disney Store chain, lifted a year ago by “Frozen” merchandise, also declined.By contrast, operating income at Walt Disney Studios soared 27 percent, to $542 million, because of the success of “Zootopia,” which is closing in on $1 billion in worldwide ticket sales, and “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” which collected $2.1 billion at the global box office.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Unlike many of its peers, Disney does not provide earnings guidance, leaving analysts to make rough guesses. Still, it is extremely rare for Disney to fall short, and the company’s detractors will most likely use the disappointing results to further a negative premise: Disney’s traditional engine — television — is no longer reliable.In the quarter that ended April 2, Disney’s biggest division, Media Networks, which includes ESPN, ABC and a suite of other channels, reported a 9 percent increase in operating income, to $2.3 billion. But cable revenue fell 2 percent, to $3.96 billion, as A&E Networks, which is co-owned by Disney and Hearst, experienced lower ad revenue and higher costs. Operating income at Disney’s broadcast television business declined 8 percent, to $278 million.ESPN benefited from lower programming costs and a 5 percent increase in affiliate revenue, offset by a decrease in advertising sales, partly because there were fewer college football bowl games.Despite upheaval in the television business — viewership via satellite and cable services is declining as streaming options proliferate — Mr. Iger has aggressively defended ESPN in particular as indispensable to consumers, both now and in the future. He continued his support of ESPN on the analyst call, saying that he was “very, very encouraged” by negotiations with fledgling streaming providers to offer ESPN.Earlier on Tuesday, Disney and Verizon settled a dispute over a Fios television option that allowed consumers to exclude ESPN.Mr. Iger also emphasized efforts to make Disney less reliant on television, which last year accounted for about 50 percent of Disney’s profit. He noted, for instance, that Shanghai Disney Resort would open on June 16.AdvertisementFor the most recent quarter, operating income at Walt Disney Parks and Resorts rose 10 percent, to $624 million, reflecting improved results in Florida and California, offset by Shanghai start-up costs and attendance declines at Hong Kong Disneyland. Higher prices increased profit at Disney Cruise Line.A version of this article appears in print on May 11, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Disney Folds Video Game Division.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.