AdvertisementSupported byBy Quentin HardySAN FRANCISCO — Eric E. Schmidt, the executive chairman of Google’s parent company, Alphabet, may have unique insight into the multibillion-dollar lawsuit filed against his company by another Silicon Valley heavyweight, Oracle Corporation.Mr. Schmidt, in an earlier job, was in charge of the programming language that Oracle claims Google misused years later when it created software called Android, which is now the most popular operating system in the world.On Tuesday, Mr. Schmidt was the first witness in the latest round of a lawsuit Oracle first filed against Google nearly six years ago.The outcome of the trial, expected in early June after testimony by some of the most famous people in technology, could have industrywide implications for software development.Oracle initially sought $8.8 billion, but is expected to raise that to $9.4 billion, based on recent estimates of how much profit Google has made from Android, which a lawyer for Oracle put at $21 billion since a working version of Android made its debut in 2008.About three billion Android smartphones have been activated in that time.At issue in the Federal District Court for Northern California is how freely someone might use Java, a popular software language that Oracle acquired when it bought Sun Microsystems for $7.4 billion in 2009. Much of Java is open source, meaning anyone may use it, but some aspects require obtaining a license.Some 11,000 lines of Java code inside Android were taken without paying a copyright fee, Oracle argues.“This involves fundamental principles of fairness and business conduct,” Peter Bicks, a lawyer with Orrick, Herrington, & Sutcliffe, said in his opening statement for Oracle. “They knew they needed a license.”Google counters that the software, just 0.08 percent of all the software in Android but critical for its operation, was legitimately obtained and used in ways that free it from paying fees.“Our view was that Android was a completely different approach” to building a smartphone, Mr. Schmidt said.Google originally tried to work with Sun on Android, he said, but those talks broke down because Google would not be able to control the final product. Mr. Schmidt, who formerly was in charge of Java at Sun, said his expertise informed how Google could use Java.The trial, including a possible penalty phase, is expected to end by June 10. The payoff could be Oracle’s biggest victory from buying Sun. Some parts of Sun, like its computer hardware, have lost Oracle money.Mr. Bicks noted that a version of Android is used in Amazon’s Kindle reader, raising the prospect that Oracle will pursue payments from more companies that use Android. Deborah Hellinger, a spokeswoman for Oracle, declined to comment on what Oracle might do.Even if it wins, Oracle is unlikely to see any money for a long time. The expected appeals from whichever side loses would also slow any changes in corporate policies on open source, copyrights and licensing.Oracle first sued Google in 2010. That case, over patents and copyrights, featured contentious testimony by Lawrence J. Ellison, Oracle’s founder and then chief executive, and Larry Page, the founder and chief executive of Google.It was decided largely in favor of Google in 2012, but then in 2014 an appeals court found that certain parts of Java were protected by copyright. Last year the Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal of that decision, which sent the case back for this new trial.While the clock in Judge William Alsup’s court is stuck at 6:08, the latest phase of the long trial process showed signs of how much the world has changed since the first trial began. This one is expected to end by June 10.Mr. Ellison, now Oracle’s executive chairman, may appear in this trial on video. Safra Catz, Oracle’s co-chief executive, is expected to appear. Mr. Page may also testify, along with Andy Rubin, who developed Android for Google and now works in robotics and artificial intelligence.The parts of Java that Oracle wants to be paid for are the Application Programmer Interfaces, or A.P.I.s, which are the instruction sets that enable one computer to share the data and behavior of another. They have become critically important as computing moves to smartphones, apps and the cloud, because these uses frequently involve using elements from several computers.Google argued that A.P.I.s are tools used by programmers, and that its use of them constitutes “fair use,” a legal standard that permits use of copyrighted material. It also said its use of Java transformed it from something used in computers to something used in smartphones, which could also justify fair use.Advertisement