AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedOver the last five years, Paddle8 has sought to shake up the world of online art auctions. In Europe, and for almost the same amount of time, Auctionata has tried to do the same in its own way.Now the two online auction houses are planning to join forces.Auctionata and Paddle8 are expected to announce on Thursday that they will merge, seeking to create a bigger specialist in selling art online with a broader international reach.Even combined, the two do not dream of displacing the giants of the art world, the auction houses Sotheby’s and Christie’s. Both Paddle8 and Auctionata focus on what they call the “middle market” for art sales: objects more valuable than can be sold on eBay, but generally topping out at $500,000.Of course, sometimes the companies run auctions for more expensive items. Paddle8 gained notoriety when it auctioned the sole copy of the final album by the Wu-Tang Clan last year, raising $2 million. (The buyer was eventually revealed to be Martin Shkreli, the former pharmaceutical executive who is facing federal securities fraud charges.)And Auctionata, whose unusual features include livestreamed auctions, sold an 18th-century Chinese clock for $3.83 million last summer.The start-ups’ aim is to disrupt scores of smaller auction houses, largely brick-and-mortar and without an online presence. By contrast, the two start-ups were born with the express intent of reaching broad audiences by tapping the Internet for both objects to be sold and potential buyers.“We will be able to pick up an object and sell it quicker than anyone else in the world,” Alexander Zacke, the chief executive of Auctionata, said in a telephone interview.Buying art online has become a small but quickly growing part of the global business in fine art. Beyond Sotheby’s and Christie’s — both of which have focused on digital sales in recent years — other players include Artsy, Artnet and 1stdibs.Since their founding, both Auctionata and Paddle8 have gained prominence as online art marketplaces. A ranking of online art platforms compiled by the research firm Hiscox, based on a survey of 672 art buyers, ranked Paddle8 fifth and Auctionata at ninth. By comparison, Christie’s LIVE placed first, while Sotheby’s BIDnow ranked fourth.Together, Auctionata and Paddle8 reported sales in 2015 of around $140 million and have a combined user base of nearly 800,000.Both companies have drawn backing from big names in the world of art and luxury: Auctionata’s investors include Bernard Arnault, the chairman of LVMH, while Paddle8’s include the artist Damien Hirst and the gallery owner David Zwirner. All existing investors are expected to remain on board with the newly combined auction house.The two companies have known each other for years. Mr. Zacke regularly meets with Paddle8’s founders, according to Aditya Julka, a Paddle8 founder. But nearly two years ago, Mr. Zacke conceded that his company would have a difficult time breaking into the United States, and Mr. Julka said his start-up would struggle to move into Europe.Combining would allow each company to more easily move into new geographies and markets, as well as share new technologies.Founders of both companies declined to disclose specific terms of the deal, though Mr. Zacke said that because Auctionata was bigger in terms of sales, its shareholders would receive more equity in the combined company.Mr. Zacke will also lead the combined company, though all the founders will remain in top roles.Both Mr. Zacke and Mr. Julka repeatedly called the deal a merger, meant to fuse both companies’ cultures together. The combined entity — whose new name has yet to be determined — will retain both the Paddle8 and the Auctionata names and their own headquarters, in New York and Berlin, respectively.“We’re quite focused on doing this together,” Mr. Julka said. “For every practical purpose, it’s a merger.”Advertisement