AdvertisementSupported byBy Reed AbelsonIn the latest attempt to restore confidence in its business, the embattled Silicon Valley blood-testing company Theranos is replacing its chief operating officer and expanding its board, including the addition of a former senior Amgen executive.Theranos attracted the media spotlight with its claim of revolutionizing the laboratory business, offering simplified blood tests at a fraction of the cost of conventional methods. But the company, once valued at $9 billion, now faces growing skepticism over its technology and is under criminal investigation and intense regulatory scrutiny.The company’s chief operating officer, Sunny Balwani, is departing as its flagship laboratory operations in California are threatened with potentially crippling sanctions. Federal inspections revealed serious deficiencies, including one that posed “immediate jeopardy to patient health and safety,” according to government officials.The proposed sanctions include revoking the California lab’s certification and barring Mr. Balwani and Elizabeth Holmes, Theranos’s chief executive, from the industry for two years. Theranos insists it has fixed the problems at the lab; federal officials have not yet announced any final action.Mr. Balwani’s precise role in the company’s current problems was unclear. A computer scientist and successful entrepreneur, he has been Theranos’s president and chief operating officer since 2009. In a statement, he said he would “continue to be the company’s biggest advocate.”Through a Theranos spokeswoman, Mr. Balwani declined to comment further. Officials from the Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services, which conducted the inspections, also declined to comment.Ms. Holmes, a Stanford University dropout who founded and controls Theranos, will remain as chief executive. But Mr. Balwani’s departure is the biggest shake-up yet at the company. Theranos said that it would hire several new executives as soon as possible and that it was dividing its operations into separate divisions, focusing on its core technology and its clinical laboratory business.Theranos has been sharply criticized for a lack of experienced laboratory professionals among its management and on its board, and Ms. Holmes emphasized that it was now looking to bring in top experts in the field. The company has already made some hires, including a new lab director for its California operations.The company insisted that the most recent changes were not a result of the regulatory pressure but were because of the need to expand its operations. “This is about building our company,” Ms. Holmes said in an interview. “This is about realizing the next stage of our growth.”Ms. Holmes said that her own role in determining the company’s overall strategy would not change but that the addition of new executives would allow the company to better develop its business as it evolved from a start-up.Fabrizio J. Bonanni, a retired Amgen executive vice president who is joining the board, said he would help Theranos develop the infrastructure necessary to satisfy regulators and to become a major business. “They need to have systems and standard processes so they can excel in this growth,” he said.Dr. Bonanni has extensive operations experience at Amgen and Baxter International, both large health care organizations. He said he believed the company would be responsive to any suggestions he made about how to structure the business and hire the right executives.“I saw a group of people who are eager to listen and eager to learn,” he said.Theranos also announced that two of its advisers, Dr. William H. Foege, a former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Richard M. Kovacevich, a former chief executive of Wells Fargo, were joining its formal board.The company, which has been the subject of numerous critical articles in The Wall Street Journal questioning its proprietary technology, is struggling to resolve the troubles it faces, including investigations by the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission.Ms. Holmes said Theranos, which has been secretive about its technology because of what it said were fears that its intellectual property would be stolen, planned on becoming much more open about how it conducts its tests.She said the company would be publishing articles in peer-reviewed journals and making presentations before lab experts in the coming months.“What matters,” Ms. Holmes said, “is the fundamentals, the science and the technology and the data.”OpinionRandall StrossAdvertisement