AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Reynolds HoldingThe real victims of Volkswagen’s diesel-emissions scandal may end up being eclipsed in court.That’s the risk, at least, when firms that specialize in underwriting lawsuits for profit get involved. One of them, Bentham Europe, is already funding a case that claims that the German carmaker duped shareholders. The financial muscle may improve the odds for large awards – but also hefty gains for Bentham and others.Volkswagen admitted that 11 million of its vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat on emissions tests. This is how the technology works and what it now means for vehicle owners.The basic facts are not much in dispute. VW admitted rigging millions of Jettas and other vehicles with software that sharply reduced emissions when the cars were being tested. It is likely that VW will lose cases, but the big question is how much it will have to pay out.That may depend on litigation financiers like Bentham Europe, which is partly backed by Elliott Management, the hedge fund run by Paul Singer. The litigation-financing industry started in Britain decades ago, largely because rules that limited class-action lawsuits, barred lawyers from sharing awards and required losers to pay winners’ fees often made suing prohibitively expensive. Outside funders stepped in to finance the bill in return for up to a third of the proceeds.It’s a decent business. The Australia-based IMF Bentham, Elliott’s partner in Bentham Europe, says it has made a 158 percent return on investment since 2001. Its rival, Burford Capital, reports a 71 percent net return over six years, and last month it announced a joint venture with the law firm Hausfeld to bring antitrust cases in Germany.The benefits for victims are less clear. They receive help suing in costly places like Britain and Germany, perhaps when they otherwise would not. Even in the relatively litigation-friendly United States, funding may give plaintiffs bargaining power to extract bigger settlements.But conflicts of interest are a concern. Litigation financiers emphasize that they do not interfere with legal strategy. But critics fear they still have indirect influence on the timing and amounts of settlements. Their cut also reduces what goes to victims.That may seem unfair when, as in the VW cases, public outrage and government investigations already provide victims’ lawyers with enormous leverage. It is perhaps fitting that what looks like a profit-driven decision to cheat is being met with litigation motivated by money. When a court fight is all about business, though, the interests of the actual victims can take a back seat.Reynolds Holding is law editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement