By JONATHAN SOBLEMAY 11, 2016
TOKYO — A fuel-economy cheating scandal that began with a single line of microcars now encompasses the entire domestic lineup of Mitsubishi Motors after the carmaker admitted on Wednesday that it had published exaggerated mileage ratings for every model it sells in Japan.Mitsubishi disclosed last month that it had been using improper methods to test fuel economy for 25 years. It disclosed the mistake after engineers at another carmaker, Nissan, discovered discrepancies in the ratings of a family of ultralight cars developed by Mitsubishi and sold by both companies. Mitsubishi did not initially say how extensively it had used the unapproved methods, whether it was on all models or just a few.On Wednesday, Mitsubishi added nine more models — the remainder of its current lineup — to the list of affected vehicles. The company said it was still retesting older vehicles, but it said it had confirmed discrepancies in the ratings of an unspecified number of discontinued models, too.The company said it had even misstated the energy efficiency of a vehicle that does not use gasoline, the all-electric i-MiEV. It acknowledged that there could be problems with the ratings of every car and truck it had produced since 1991.AdvertisementThe widening scandal at Mitsubishi adds to the scrutiny over carmakers’ reports of fuel economy and pollution ratings. The industry’s reputation took a serious blow when Volkswagen admitted last year to cheating on emissions tests.AdvertisementMitsubishi is already a diminished brand, especially at home. Its market share in Japan has shriveled since a scandal in the 2000s in which officials admitted hiding reports of dangerous vehicle defects for decades.Today, Mitsubishi’s favored markets are in areas like Southeast Asia and Russia. It sells only about 10 percent of its cars in Japan.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Analysts have speculated that Mitsubishi, a small manufacturer with far fewer resources than Nissan, promised its partner a car with impressive mileage specifications but was unable to deliver. Cheap, small-engine microcars are a fiercely competitive segment of the auto market in Japan, where they account for 40 percent of new cars sold.“I think the fact that work was being done in an insular company was one big factor,” Chairman Osamu Masuko said at a news conference. He said successive Mitsubishi development teams had used the same flawed testing methods without questioning them.“There was perhaps a sense that, if someone authorized something in the past, it couldn’t be wrong,” he said.Mr. Masuko said he and other top executives had been unaware of the cheating. He said Mitsubishi was still investigating how a fuel-economy testing method not approved for use in Japan came to be used on domestic models.The issue centers on the way engineers calculate so-called running resistance, the effect of the friction between tires and the road, under various driving conditions. The method used by Mitsubishi tends to result in a more flattering assessment of fuel economy and is approved in the United States but not in Japan.Mitsubishi said discrepancies in the ratings of the nine additional models named on Wednesday were relatively small, amounting only to “several percent.” The company said it had exaggerated the mileage of the ultralight car line — sold by Mitsubishi as the eK and Nissan as the DAYZ — by a much greater extent, from 5 to 15 percent.An article on Thursday about the widening of a fuel-economy cheating scandal involving Mitsubishi vehicles misstated the surname of the company’s chairman in some editions. He is Osamu Masuko, not Mashiko. The error was repeated in some editions in an article on Friday about Nissan Motor’s decision to buy a substantial stake in Mitsubishi.Hisako Ueno contributed reportingA version of this article appears in print on May 12, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: As Fuel Scandal Broadens, Mitsubishi Turns to Nissan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.