AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan SobleTOKYO — Takata, the embattled Japanese auto parts manufacturer, said on Wednesday that it was looking for ways to restructure its business, including by overhauling the division responsible for millions of potentially dangerous airbag inflaters, as it battles to survive the largest auto-safety recall in history.The company offered few details about its plans but appeared to accept the view, hardening among analysts, that getting through the crisis would require a major transformation.Yoichiro Nomura, Takata’s chief financial officer, said the company hoped to have a concrete turnaround plan in place by the fall. It has appointed a committee of five lawyers and other corporate-restructuring experts to advise it, he said.Many analysts say they believe Takata needs a major infusion of capital — from banks, a new investor or even a buyer — to avoid falling into bankruptcy. The committee is expected to devote much of its energies to securing new funds.Takata avoided any talk of an external rescue on Wednesday. Instead, it listed cost-cutting and the sale of unspecified noncore businesses as potential ways to raise cash. It singled out the inflater business as a target for change, but it did not elaborate.Takata-made inflaters can explode with too much force when airbags deploy in a crash, sending shrapnel shooting into a vehicle’s cabin. The fault has been blamed for at least 11 deaths worldwide and more than 100 injuries.Last week, American regulators more than doubled the scope of the airbag recall in the United States, identifying another 35 million to 40 million vehicles they said needed fixing. The expansion will add to the already onerous financial burden on Takata.On Wednesday, the company confirmed that it sustained a net loss of 13.07 billion yen, or roughly $120 million, in the financial year that ended in March. It had warned of the loss in a preliminary filing with the Tokyo Stock Exchange on Monday, revising what had until then been a forecast for a profit.Takata said its cash reserves fell by 12 percent last quarter, to ¥53.7 billion. The financial cushion, though dwindling, was enough to keep it in business, it said.Takata’s annual loss was its second in two years. Officially, it expects to return to the black this year: It issued a full-year forecast for a net profit of ¥13 billion on Wednesday. But that estimate appeared to be little more than a placeholder, as the company said it had not factored in what are likely to be major additional costs.Mr. Nomura said the forecast included ¥14 billion of expenses for legal fees and engineering investigations into the cause of the inflater defect. But it did not include costs for repairing vehicles or compensating victims, the scope of which Mr. Nomura said remained impossible to assess.Many of Takata’s bills for the crisis are a long way from being finalized. Automakers are paying much of the cost of the recalls, for instance, and how much they will be able to recoup from Takata is negotiable. Lawsuits from accident victims could take years to resolve.Takaki Nakanishi, an automotive analyst at Jefferies Group, estimates that nearly 120 million vehicles worldwide may ultimately have to be recalled to replace Takata-made airbag components. That could cost ¥665 billion on top what has already been spent by carmakers, Mr. Nakanishi said in a report after the latest recall expansion in the United States.The amount would wipe out Takata’s cash reserves more than 10 times over, if the supplier were saddled with the entire expense.Takata acknowledged a year ago that it bore responsibility for the inflater defects, after denying for years that its products were dangerous. Several investigations have traced the problem to the propellent used in the inflaters, ammonium nitrate, which experts say can destabilize because of prolonged exposure to airborne moisture or temperature fluctuations.Mr. Nomura said the company was nonetheless waiting for the results of another investigation, commissioned by Takata and conducted by the Fraunhofer Institute in Germany, before moving forward with discussions with around a dozen automakers over how much of their recall expenses it should cover. He said the institute might release its findings sometime this summer.Advertisement