AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel AbramsPens matter. Ink does not.In the age of Amazon, evaluating antitrust concerns is sometimes twisting government officials into knots. That was made clear this week, when the Federal Trade Commission blocked the merger of Office Depot and Staples, in part by drawing elaborate distinctions between who buys pens and printer ink cartridges, and how.The products are widely available online, of course, including from Amazon, which by some estimates accounts for half of all online shopping and has reshaped the retail industry. But big companies, the F.T.C. argued, like to shop in bulk, and often don’t buy their ink from the same places as people shopping for themselves. For bulk purchases of Post-it Notes and pens, Office Depot and Staples are the primary options.The trade commission’s argument underscores just how complicated it has become to judge Amazon’s place in the retail industry. To put it simply: The agency does not think that the company benefits all customers equally.The decision also shows how difficult it is for regulators to keep up with industries being reshaped almost daily by technology.“The impact of online is not uniform,” said Paul T. Denis, a lawyer at Dechert in Washington, who represented Office Max during its approved merger with Office Depot in 2013. “Just because it’s an effective competitive alternative for individual consumers doesn’t mean it’s necessarily an effective competitive alternative for other types of customers.”Companies that stock up on pens, Post-it Notes and other items by the thousands have different needs than a college freshman buying a new printer. In the Office Max case, the F.T.C. agreed with Mr. Denis and another partner, James A. Fishkin, that individual customers would still have plenty of low-cost options.But for the decision this week, the agency was not convinced that Amazon was about to offer services that would suit large office supply buyers. Staples and Office Depot are the country’s two largest office supply companies, with fleets of trucks, thousands of stores and large geographic footprints. Cutting the two down to one, the agency decided, would hurt those large buyers.“An online retailer isn’t necessarily in that kind of market,” said Diana L. Moss, president of the American Antitrust Institute.As Amazon’s history has shown, though, its capabilities can undergo swift and sweeping expansion: A company that started as a bookseller just over 20 years ago now has a business with a stock market valuation of almost $350 billion, dozens of times larger than the combined valuation of Office Depot and Staples.For the two office supply giants, which declined to comment for this article, the future was clear. Amazon has eaten into the profits of traditional retailers for years, and has given every indication that it only intends to grow, including deeper into their business.“The question becomes, how quickly will they offer that?” said Daniel S. Bitton, a partner at Axinn, Veltrop & Harkrider.Last week, Amazon said its business-to-business website, Amazon Business, generated $1 billion in sales in its first year. Amazon offers same-day delivery in a growing number of stores, and has deep pockets to expand the ventures that it deems successful.Staples and Office Depot argued that Amazon’s flurry of new initiatives would make it remain a strong rival, including in the business market. But to win antitrust cases, companies must prove that competitive threats are imminent if not present.The Federal Trade Commission is willing to look into the future, but not too far.“We look at a very short time horizon because consumers can be injured in the meantime,” Deborah L. Feinstein, director of the F.T.C.’s Bureau of Competition, said in an interview.Office Depot and Staples, once fierce rivals, saw teaming up as the best way to survive a highly competitive and challenging atmosphere. Consumer spending has lagged in the years since the 2008 financial collapse, and online merchants have increasingly lured away customers from traditional brick-and-mortar stores.Staples closed a combined 242 stores in 2014 and 2015, and expects to shutter another 50 this year, according to the company’s most recent annual report. For the year ending Jan. 30, sales fell more than 6 percent, to $21 billion.Office Depot said it had closed 349 stores in 2014 and 2015, and had marked “at least” 400 retail stores for closing through 2016. Sales fell 10 percent last year, to $14.5 billion.But evaluating the competitive landscape is about more than store counts and market share, said Ben Gomes-Casseres, a professor at Brandeis International Business School who studies corporate alliances.“It is basically evaluating the potential, maybe, for that player to expand more rapidly,” he said.The F.T.C. argued in court documents that Amazon did not have a “demonstrated track record” of serving business customers, a segment of the population that many people may not associate with typical antitrust cases. But the commission has blocked mergers that threaten business contracts before, notably with the proposed Sysco and US Foods deal last year.“We will challenge transactions that have an adverse effect on business customers, not just ordinary consumers,” Ms. Feinstein said.Including, it might be added, when those shoppers are buying Post-it Notes.Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting.Advertisement