By REUTERSMAY 13, 2016
BERLIN — Germany more than doubled its economic growth rate in the first quarter as higher state and household spending more than offset a fall in exports, the country’s Federal Statistics Office said on Friday.The economy grew by 0.7 percent, the highest quarterly rate since an identical reading in the first quarter of 2014. That figure beat the rate of 0.6 percent registered across the eurozone, cementing Germany’s position as the bloc’s economic engine.Milder winter weather in Germany prompted a rise in investment on construction and capital goods, the statistics office said. Private consumption has also overtaken trade as the most important driver of growth for the German economy, with record-low unemployment, low interest rates and higher wages encouraging consumers to spend more.Also on Friday, Germany’s biggest trade union, IG Metall, said it had agreed with employers on a two-stage wage increase of 4.8 percent over 21 months.AdvertisementEconomists link the rise in consumption, as well as a booming real estate sector mainly in urban centers, to the European Central Bank’s extremely loose monetary policy, which has been criticized in Germany.AdvertisementThe quarterly growth rate easily beat the 0.3 percent posted in the final three months of 2015.The Economy Ministry said it expected German growth to slow, however. That view was shared by economists, who said the impact of weaker exports would eventually be felt as demand from emerging markets slows.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Trade remains the problem child because of weakness in emerging markets,” said Ulrike Kastens, an economist at Sal. Oppenheim.The German economy minister, Sigmar Gabriel, said the government should increase investment on education, infrastructure and innovation, echoing calls by the International Monetary Fund.“The German economy started 2016 on a good footing: Industry posted an increase in production, employment is noticeably rising and higher income of private households is leading to higher private spending,” Mr. Gabriel said. “Our task is to use this momentum to invest in education, modern infrastructure and innovation.”The I.M.F. and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development have urged Germany to increase investment and to overhaul its labor market and pension system.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.