AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanIn May 2008, two months after Bear Stearns collapsed into the arms of JPMorgan Chase, sending paroxysms of fear from one end of Wall Street to the other, I had lunch with Erin Callan, who was then in her fifth month as the chief financial officer of Lehman Brothers. We met in one of the corporate dining rooms atop 745 Seventh Avenue, where the bank had moved in 2001 after its downtown Manhattan headquarters was rendered dysfunctional by the Sept. 11 attacks.My lunch with Ms. Callan comes to mind after the recent self-publication of “Full Circle,” her engaging, well-written and revealing memoir about “leaning in too far and the journey back,” an obvious play on the words of Sheryl Sandberg in her best seller “Lean In.”Ms. Callan traces her life through one seemingly effortless success to another: from a no-nonsense Catholic upbringing in Douglaston, Queens, to Harvard University, to New York University’s law school and the white-shoe law firm Simpson Thacher & Bartlett before she joined Lehman Brothers, where her career was particularly meteoric.In 13 years, she rose from being a tax specialist on corporate mergers to being the head of a group that designed financial solutions for hedge funds. She was plucked from seeming obscurity by Lehman’s top management for the C.F.O. job. Then, of course, her fabulous career and, three months later, Lehman Brothers itself came crashing down.It has never been clear whether Ms. Callan was set up for her eventual fall by Dick Fuld, the longtime Lehman Brothers’ chairman and chief executive whose nickname was the Gorilla, and Joe Gregory, the firm’s president. Ms. Callan does not explore that question in “Full Circle.” Nor does the book provide much insight into Mr. Fuld and how he ran the firm. He emerges as little more than a shadow. (My bet is she did not know him very well.)Instead, in the book, Ms. Callan describes her ruthless ambition, which left behind trusting colleagues, boyfriends and a former husband for whom she steadfastly refused to make time as she focused on her successful career. In “Full Circle,” Ms. Callan tries to make amends for her years of boorish behavior. She is candid about her mistakes and seems to have genuinely learned about needing to strike a better balance in her personal and professional lives. The catalyst for her coming full circle was a series of events, including a failed suicide attempt after a new post-Lehman job at Credit Suisse First Boston; her marriage to Anthony Montella, a former New York City firefighter; and the birth of their daughter, Margaret Mary Montella, via in vitro fertilization. Her message is saccharin but powerful.Our lunch came at a pivotal moment for Ms. Callan, although neither of us knew it at the time. She recounted for me how she had survived her first major test as Lehman’s C.F.O. when on March 18, 2008, she faced off against some 11,000 listeners on a striking quarterly earnings call.It was two days after Bear announced the last-minute sale to JPMorgan that saved Bear from bankruptcy, and everyone was predicting Lehman was next to fall. Ms. Callan presided over the call in a conference room at Lehman with just the firm’s treasurer at her side. Mr. Fuld, who had returned to New York City a few days before from India during the Bear Stearns crisis, was not on the call. As precarious a moment as it was, his presence on this call would simply have sent the wrong message at the wrong time.Ms. Callan had been working all weekend on her message, but what started as a straightforward discussion of Lehman’s decent quarterly earnings turned into a question of whether the firm had the near-term liquidity to survive. Wasn’t Lehman just a bigger version of Bear, after all? The day before the call, Lehman’s stock had fallen 39 percent. Understandably, Ms. Callan had not slept well the night before the earnings conference call. Would her words that day exacerbate the slide or reverse it?That morning at 8, Ms. Callan recalled, Mr. Fuld shared the earnings report with the firm’s 50 top managers in a meeting that lasted a half-hour. Ms. Callan’s conference call was at 10 a.m. “He kind of pats me on the back and says, ‘Good luck,’” Ms. Callan told me at our lunch. “I was like ‘Oh, my God’. Like it just hit me at that point, like, there is a lot of pressure here. There’s a lot at stake, a lot at stake.” She handled the call well. Lehman’s stock rose some 15 points while she was talking. “It’s funny,” she told me, “I remember I came back upstairs, and Dick said, ‘The only one complaint I have is that you shouldn’t have hung up the call because as long as you were on there the stock kept coming up.’ It was definitely a very surreal experience.”During our lunch, she shared what clearly was the firm’s mantra that Lehman would not go the way of Bear Stearns. It was better managed, it was better funded, it had taken fewer risks, and its clients were more supportive of it. It also had faced near-death experiences at least twice before, after the 1998 Long-Term Capital Management collapse and after the Sept. 11 attacks left the firm temporarily homeless. Unlike Bear, she said, Lehman knew to expect the unexpected. “There’s a lot of hubris in our business,” she told me. “And I’ve found this just talking to my peers — no one ever thinks it’ll happen to them, right? We’re the only ones, I think, around who think it’ll happen to us because it happened to us, but most of the others, they never quite really believe it could happen to them. And thus don’t fully think about their game plan accordingly.”But she was wrong about Lehman. The day after our lunch, David Einhorn, an activist hedge fund manager, announced at the annual Sohn Conference in New York that he was shorting Lehman’s stock because of “accounting irregularities.” Lehman “has been one of the deniers,” Mr. Einhorn told The New York Times. In June, Lehman announced the first quarterly loss in its 150-year history.Ms. Callan became the point person at Lehman for dealing with Mr. Einhorn. That tactic failed miserably, and swiftly. Three weeks after our lunch, she was gone from Lehman (along with Mr. Gregory). She says she resigned. But word leaked into the media that Mr. Fuld had fired her. “As with most everything that went on at Lehman,” she writes in “Full Circle” about her firing, “I thought the idea was to make Dick look good.” She added, “Accepting a resignation just didn’t have the same ring to it. We needed to be fired!” Three months later, Lehman was gone, too.For many years after, Ms. Callan refused to talk to the press about what happened at Lehman. She spent hours being deposed in the litigation over the Lehman bankruptcy but never spoke publicly. Then, in March 2013, she resurfaced with an opinion article in The Times, with a dateline of Sanibel Island, Fla., where she had moved with her husband. (They also have a house in Shelter Island, N.Y.) She has resurfaced again in “Full Circle,” written as Erin Callan Montella, as a blessed mother and wife. She seems to have found a measure of peace. Good for her. But there are still a lot of questions to be answered about what happened at 745 Seventh Avenue.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”Advertisement