AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicholas FandosWASHINGTON — When Neetzan Zimmerman arrived at The Hill as its first director of audience development in January 2015, he found a publication largely unchanged since its heyday as a scrappy weekly for Washington’s deal makers.“I don’t know if struggling is the right word because that would imply they had been trying, and they really had not,” he said recently, referring to the paper’s efforts to compete in a digital ecosystem. “They did not have any reasons to think they needed to exist in any meaningful way in this world.”It has been the job of Mr. Zimmerman, a former editor at Gawker and Whisper, the anonymous messaging app, to help change that. And the challenge is daunting.Capitol Hill publications like The Hill, Roll Call and National Journal were for decades a Beltway staple, strewn across desks on K Street and in Congress. With a captive audience and a strong advertising base, they were protected from broader economic forces and less concerned about competition from more nationally focused newspapers.Now these publications are scrambling to find their footing in a political landscape that is more competitive and almost unrecognizable from the one they chronicled for decades. Advertisers have fled, in part, these publications say, because of congressional inaction, which has sapped the special interest advertising that once padded their balance sheets.“A generation ago, ad sales people would sit back and wait for phone calls and probably have opportunities to tell people the book was full,” David Ellis, the chief content officer for CQ Roll Call, said recently. “Those days are long gone.”In addition, Politico, founded in 2007, has been changing the media game in the Beltway, offering readers fast, savvy political reporting in a more digitally native form. The old lions of Capitol Hill were left straining to catch up.The realignment has already led to a profound adjustment by National Journal, a weekly magazine known for its substance-heavy writing on politics and policy. In January, it suspended its print magazine, leaving the free news business, and laying off or transferring a large portion of its staff as it reorganized. It now relies on about 1,000 corporate members paying four to five figures a year for services like Hotline, a well-known election news aggregator; live events; and access to databases of PowerPoint presentation slides and data sets.The move constituted a return to the publication’s roots, said David G. Bradley, whose Atlantic Media Company owns National Journal, and to a business model that serves as a counterweight to advertising-driven publications.The Hill and Roll Call have tacked in the opposite direction, in pursuit of a national readership they can sell to potential advertisers.At The Hill, Mr. Zimmerman, the senior director for audience and strategy, said his goal is to emulate the attitude and approach of sites like Gawker and BuzzFeed without distorting what he calls The Hill’s distinct voice. He has filled a handful of new positions, including a director of emerging platforms, who is exploring ways to use Snapchat and Facebook Live to share its content.Mr. Zimmerman’s digital efforts come as The Hill’s owner, the New York media investor Jimmy Finkelstein, is proceeding with ambitious expansion plans.“We want to be one of the big sites of America within a year,” Mr. Finkelstein said in an interview.The Hill’s website had almost 14 million unique visitors in March, up 126 percent compared with the previous year, according to comScore, the traffic measurement firm. Those kinds of raw numbers have put the site in competition with sites like Politico, which it managed to surpass for the month of December, according to comScore. The Hill’s print circulation of about 26,000 has remained roughly steady.Much of the site’s growth can be attributed to social media, aggressive aggregation and a premium on breaking news. The Hill’s aggregation strategy has prompted critics to brand it as less serious than other competitors.Mr. Zimmerman countered that criticism, saying it “changes the notion of aggregation’’ if you are furthering a conversation about an issue and giving proper credit to the work of others.To Mr. Finkelstein and Bob Cusack, the editor in chief, the strategies are being used to finance a transformation of the once-parochial publication into a national player.“We don’t want just the people who watch C-Span all the time to read us,” said Mr. Cusack, who assumed the top editorial post in July 2014. “Our name suggests really only Capitol Hill. What we have become now is more about original content and interviews. You should know what’s going on in the entire world of politics.”That has meant cosmetic tweaks, like getting the names of obscure lawmakers out of headlines and framing stories for a larger audience.Mr. Finkelstein declined to discuss the publication’s finances in detail; he said he expects profit to grow this year as The Hill undergoes a rapid election-year expansion that includes increasing the editorial staff about 25 percent and expanding opinion content. Just this week The Hill announced a rash of new hires, including a new publisher, Johanna Derlega, formerly of the National Journal; three new associate editors; and reporters to cover political fund-raising in Hollywood, Latino issues and transportation.Those moves are being watched closely at Roll Call, once known as the “campus newspaper’’ of Capitol Hill. Mr. Ellis and the paper’s new editor, Melinda Henneberger, are trying to use techniques like narrative storytelling and human interest to attract a wider audience.“I don’t want to win the two-minute cycle; I want to go deeper,” said Ms. Henneberger, a former reporter at several publications, including The New York Times.So far, that work has included documentary video features and on-the-ground reporting, like a news package from Flint, Mich., on the water crisis there.The paper has also added significantly to its stable of opinion writers and has invested in a native advertising unit.The evolution has been slower to make an impact on web traffic, though, which dipped sharply in January, February and March compared to the previous year, bottoming out well below 500,000 unique visitors, according to comScore. The paper’s print circulation of about 21,000 has been largely unchanged.Mr. Ellis and Ms. Henneberger said they expected a new, multimedia-heavy website and a print design that made its debut in mid-March to help.Roll Call’s strategy has partly been shaped by the financial security it receives through its relationship to CQ, the subscription-supported congressional tracking publication. The two publications, owned by The Economist Group, merged in 2009.Some in the Beltway worry that the drive for wider readership has necessitated a kind of betrayal of Capitol Hill DNA. “Put me down as questioning whether they can pull it off,” said Jim Manley, a Democratic strategist and former congressional staff member who described himself as an avid reader of Washington’s political press. “It seems to me that they are moving away from their bread and butter and tying to find new ways to bring in clicks.”Still, as the rules of doing business evolve, the Capitol Hill publications insist that their only choice is whether to learn them.“I’m not nostalgic at all,” said Mr. Finkelstein, whose father helped found The Hill in 1994. “Every media organization is different, and you have to figure out how you’re going to grow each one. I loved The Hill when it was just in paper. I love it much more now.”Advertisement