AdvertisementSupported byFair GameBy Gretchen MorgensonThe recent tribulations of Lending Club, a former highflying “peer to peer” lender, provide an object lesson for both companies and their investors: When it comes to financial disclosures, less is definitely not more.Celebrated as a Silicon Valley disrupter set to transform the financial industry, Lending Club first issued public shares at $15 in December 2014. Like other wildly popular disrupters (Theranos, the blood-testing company that is now under siege, comes to mind), Lending Club had a star-studded board and a concept that made investors swoon.By directly connecting borrowers with willing financiers, Lending Club said it was turning “the banking system into a frictionless, transparent and highly efficient online marketplace, helping people achieve their financial goals every day.” Borrowers would get faster and cheaper access to consumer installment-type loans, and lenders would receive higher returns than they would if they had parked their money in a bank.Its shares peaked at almost $28 in late 2014, giving Lending Club a $10 billion market value. Not bad for a company that generated a $33 million loss on $211 million in net revenue that year.Lending Club was the quintessential story stock. Disrupting finance, though, turned out to be harder than promised.Six months after its public offering the company’s shares had fallen below the deal price. And in recent months, as doubts about the peer-to-peer lending industry emerged, Lending Club’s shares continued to decline.On Monday came an abrupt announcement. Renaud Laplanche, Lending Club’s founding chief executive and very public face, was resigning. The company’s shares plummeted 35 percent. In subsequent days, the stock fell even further.The company cited two reasons for Mr. Laplanche’s exit. First, Lending Club had improperly sold $22 million of loans to an institutional investor that did not meet the investor’s standards. In addition, Mr. Laplanche had not disclosed to company directors his stake in a fund in which Lending Club was weighing an investment.Compared with some of the corporate shenanigans we’ve seen lately, these disclosure failings look relatively minor. So why have Lending Club’s shares taken such a beating?Here’s a hypothesis: Investors don’t have enough information about the company’s operations to keep them confident about its prospects. When shareholders have to rely more on a company’s promise than on the reality of its operations, they often flee at the first sign of trouble.In contrast with traditional financial companies, Lending Club’s disclosures are thin. And the company’s practices in the area were the subject of a whistle-blower submission to the Securities and Exchange Commission last July. The submission, which I reviewed, contended that the company does not disclose crucial operational measures that investors need to evaluate its business.Lacking, for example, is detailed data on Lending Club’s credit decisions and scoring models, its investors’ returns and loan performance. Nor does the company provide specifics showing investor satisfaction with its platform.I asked Lending Club about these areas of its financial disclosures. Taylor Hamilton, a spokesman, pointed me to additional information on the company’s website. But this data was only modestly enlightening.How does Lending Club assess risks among its borrowers? In its most recent annual filing, the company said that in addition to common tools like borrowers’ credit scores, it uses “proprietary algorithms that leverage behavioral data, transactional data and employment information.” The company contends that its “strong record of loan performance” is evident in its loan origination growth.Nevertheless, Lending Club provides scant details on borrower performance by type, product or vintage (the year in which a loan was made). Other financial institutions provide this kind of data routinely.In its filings, the company does show two tables of charge-off rates on its loans, reflecting borrower defaults. One table spans three years, the other, five. Good luck figuring them out.The Lending Club spokesman suggested I also consult a chart on the company’s website showing the “adjusted net annualized return” that its investor-lenders receive. But this chart, which the company noted was “for informational purposes only,” was limited to larger investors, those buying at least 100 of the company’s notes or bundled loans.Since the company is a peer-to-peer lender, the performance on smaller loan purchases would be a more helpful measure.Lending Club filings also state that “high reinvestment rates” prove that its investor-lenders have confidence in its marketplace. But the company has not disclosed actual reinvestment rates in its regulatory filings.Scott Sanborn, the company’s president, recently told investors in a conference call that its reinvestment rate hit 85 percent “over the past two quarters.”If the company published these figures regularly, shareholders could watch for investor churn, a risk to its business that Lending Club has acknowledged. It must “maintain relationships with existing borrowers and investors,” it says in filings.Another question raised by Lending Club’s regulatory disclosures is how different from traditional lenders it truly is. The company says it has a “wide range of investors,” including retail and high-net-worth individuals, banks and finance companies, hedge funds, foundations, pension plans, and university endowments. In its first-quarter presentation, the company said that 56 percent of its loan originations were financed by institutions, with the remainder funded by individuals.But in its most recent annual report, issued in February, Lending Club noted that “a relatively small number of investors account for a large dollar amount of investment in loans funded through our marketplace.”If most of Lending Club’s loans come from a handful of investors, such as brokerage firms, hedge funds or pension plans, that’s not so revolutionary a business model. That looks a lot like a bank. More troubling, if one or two of these investors pulled back from Lending Club, the company’s funding capacity could drop significantly.On Tuesday, the company told regulators that its quarterly financial filing, due that day, would be delayed until Monday. That filing, Lending Club said, “will reflect significant changes in the company’s results of operations for the first quarter of 2016 as compared to those of the first quarter of 2015.”Full and detailed data about a public company’s operations is crucial if investors are to remain confident about its prospects. While it’s not unusual for companies to want to limit their disclosures, Lending Club no longer has that luxury. If it wants to regain its shareholders’ trust, being more forthcoming is a good way to start.The investor lesson here is also clear: Don’t let enthusiasm for a purportedly innovative business model replace hard-nosed analysis of a company’s operations. And if the data to do that analysis isn’t there, move on.Twitter:@gmorgensonAdvertisement