
Revalued By                     
 DAVID GELLES
 
MAY 14, 2016
On a recent Wednesday at lunchtime, Secretary of Labor Thomas E. Perez strolled through the clattering kitchen of the Modern, the haute eatery at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.As sous-chefs finished plates of poached salmon and foie gras for the dining room, Mr. Perez quizzed employees on their working conditions and benefits. Were they adequately compensated? Did they make enough to save for retirement? Were they proud to work there?The Modern is run by Danny Meyer, whose company, Union Square Hospitality Group,  is eliminating tipping and raising wages for employees at its restaurants. By and large, the employees said they were satisfied. “It’s nice having health insurance and a 401(k),” said Sean Kelly, who oversees the Modern’s cocktail program. “As a bartender, that’s unusual.”Mr. Perez nodded appreciatively, but he wasn’t necessarily surprised. The visit was part of an unusual effort by the labor secretary to find common ground between his office and the business community.AdvertisementIt’s not an obvious pairing. The Labor Department is charged with improving working conditions and benefits for employees, job seekers and retirees. That means pressuring companies to raise wages and spend more on perks, efforts that can drag on profits. When it does single out companies, it is usually in the form of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration bringing an enforcement action against what it deems an irresponsible employer.AdvertisementBut in the waning days of the Obama administration, Mr. Perez is turning the spotlight on companies he believes exemplify social and environmental responsibility.He is talking about “conscious capitalism” and “inclusive capitalism.” He is singling out “high road” employers. He is promoting B Corps, companies that adhere to lofty social and environmental standards. In doing so, he hopes he can persuade less enlightened corporations to change.“The employers who do best are employers who reject these false choices,” Mr. Perez said. “It’s not a zero-sum world where you either take care of your workers or you take care of your shareholders. You can do good and do well, too.”Darrell M. West, vice president for governance studies at the Brookings Institution, said Mr. Perez was breaking the mold of the office. “It is unusual for a labor secretary to be building bridges with the business community,” he said. “But it is an atypical era.”Mr. Perez is also an atypical cabinet secretary. The son of first-generation immigrants from the Dominican Republic, he paid his way through Brown University by collecting trash and working in the cafeteria. He went on to study at Harvard Law School, then worked as a federal prosecutor in the Justice Department’s civil rights division. While there, he led an interagency task force designed to improve conditions for low-wage workers.Mr. Perez has won elected office only once — in 2002, when he took a seat on the Montgomery County Council in Maryland. In that role, he continued to campaign for vulnerable employees, opposing mergers likely to result in job cuts and fighting for better benefits for county workers.In 2007, he was appointed to run the Maryland Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation, where his efforts to help workers continued. And in 2009, President Obama appointed Mr. Perez assistant attorney general for civil rights, where he took on discrimination by police, discrimination in schools and onerous voter ID laws.AdvertisementSince becoming labor secretary in 2013, Mr. Perez has continued to be an advocate for underdogs, most recently issuing new rules to protect investors. At the same time, he has found a surprisingly receptive audience among companies that are taking preliminary steps to improve workers’ compensation, reduce pollution and promote well-being. After a career trying to move big business with a stick, Mr. Perez is now trying carrots.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He’s the first labor secretary I’m aware of that has gone beyond this ‘us versus them’ mentality,” Mr. Meyer, of Union Square Hospitality, said. “He’s trying to set an example, and he’s looking for businesses that are already embracing the very policies he wants to see others embrace.”Mr. Perez’s courting of chief executives also stems from a recognition that his department alone can’t fix the problems bedeviling American workers. Thorny issues like wage stagnation, stingy vacation time, shoddy manufacturing and environmental degradation are so complex, so entrenched, that no one government agency can tackle them (not to mention the diminished influence of organized labor).“Secretary Perez recognizes that to address these issues, he can’t do it with the Labor Department alone,” Mr. West, of Brookings, said. “He has to encourage business people to step up to the plate.”Indeed, the scope of what Mr. Perez is advocating goes well beyond the limited purview of the Labor Department, and will take much longer than the 250 or so days he has left in office. Understanding as much, Mr. Perez is trying to convince businesses that it is in their self-interest to increase wages, offer better health care and take better care of the environment.“Government alone can’t fix this,” he said. “This is about a generational shift, and it is not going to happen in six months.”Mr. Perez offers few specifics when describing his vision of an economy that works for all. Beyond calling for a higher minimum wage, he has not identified specific benchmarks companies should meet in order to win his approval. Instead, he speaks generally of reforming corporate culture, and allowing managers the freedom to put workers first.“There’s a myth out there that you have to genuflect at the altar of quarterly earnings,” he said. “But it’s a false choice that you can either be a good fiduciary or promote values such as environmental sustainability.”It all sounds good, but in truth, there’s only so much Mr. Perez can do as labor secretary. And while he has showered praise on the Modern, and on start-ups like Managed by Q, a cleaning company, and UncommonGoods, which makes jewelry and other items, only a few big companies — Costco, Nestlé and Whole Foods Market among them — have won his limited endorsement.AdvertisementMr. Perez has been suggested as a possible vice-presidential running mate for Hillary Clinton. He is progressive enough to excite supporters of Senator Bernie Sanders. He has Latino heritage. (At the Modern, he broke into Spanish when he met a Dominican server.) And he has a strong record pushing for core Democratic values like civil rights.He demurred when asked about joining the ticket. “I haven’t had any conversations about it,” he said. “I’m just doing my day job.”It’s a day job intended to help other people with day jobs. He wants companies to take better care of their employees, even if it costs them in the short term. It’s not a message many C.E.O.s want to hear, but Mr. Perez believes it is his duty to spread the word.“We’re building a movement,” he said. “It’s undeniably a work in progress, but there’s a fundamental desire to see capitalism to do something different.”A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2016, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Labor Watchdog Who’s Not All Bite.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »