AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Carter Murray, worldwide C.E.O. of the advertising agency FCB (Foote, Cone & Belding), was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Tell me about your early years.A. My background is a little complicated, which probably suits me for a global role. My parents divorced when I was about 11, and remarried. I always say I have four parents, and between them they’re from France, Germany, England and Scotland. They’re Catholic, Jewish, Protestant and atheist. I grew up in Belgium, Britain and the Bahamas, I went to college in the United States, and my wife is from Nicaragua. So it’s a bit of everything.I also had a very privileged background. I had everything I wanted. And then I went through a teenage identity crisis of asking whether I am who I am because it’s all been given to me, or is it because I actually am different and my force of personality is allowing me to have this amazingly happy, privileged life.I had this desire to get out of England and go to the States for college. And after I graduated from Duke, I moved back to London. Our family business is high-end real estate. I just had a lot of fun. And my mother and stepfather, in particular, were being very nice. I lived in one of the properties they developed. I had an allowance. It’s quite ridiculous when I think about it now.If you come from a privileged background and you’re taking the financial support, you start to think it’s your right to have it. I just became entitled. I had a credit card for emergencies, and it’s amazing, over time, what gets considered an emergency. Like, how often am I going to be in South Africa with this view? I need to order a bottle of wine.My parents sat me down one day, and said, “You know, this isn’t free.” And after that sank in, I decided I was going to do it on my own. I cut up the credit card. I actually got even closer to my parents as a result because there wasn’t that financial bond. I think entitlement is the kiss of death for the soul of a human being.What were some influences for your leadership style?I’ve worked for some unbelievable people. I’ve had eight bosses, and seven of them are people I respect. Once, a long time ago when I was very young, I had one boss I didn’t like, and I ended up pouring a full pint of beer on his head in front of the entire team. I was so scarred and angered by the way he treated people, I decided I would never put myself in that situation again. When I work for someone, I have to either like or respect them, or both.A lot of people feel as if they’re stuck with a bad boss.Thirty years ago, when people stayed in one company, maybe they felt they didn’t have a choice. But today, with the fluidity of the marketplace, you do have that choice. You have a lot more power to understand your options than you did before. You want to work for people you can relate to and be inspired by, and believe in.I think leadership is fundamentally changing. There are two schools of leadership.There is one style, which is you’re going to come work for me, and I’m going to pay you this, and I’m going to judge you. I’ll decide your bonus, and I’ll decide when you’re ready to be promoted.There is another one where you say to someone, “Look, I think you’re amazing, incredibly talented and you can do even more than you think in your wildest dreams. And I’m not going to manage you to do that. You will determine that yourself. What I can promise you is I’ll create a culture where that happens.”The challenge I’ve learned with that type of leadership is you’ve got to hire triple-A talent, and you need to have even stronger checks and balances in the cultural infrastructure.You were brought in to do a turnaround. How did you figure out who was going to stay on your team?I had to wait six months before I started because of a noncompete agreement. So not surprisingly, people were pretty wound up about my arrival. When I got this job, I was 38, and I could tell people were wondering, “Who is this guy? He’s probably going to come in and think he has all the answers.”What I tried to do was to create an open environment to assess people. So I did four sessions, each with 25 of our top 100 executives, and we started with blank pieces of paper. What are our 10 biggest challenges? What’s our focus? What are our beliefs?I started every session by going around the room and asking people how many years of experience they had in marketing. I had a huge whiteboard. So they went around the room, and I wrote down, 30, 25, 40, 10. I added them up, and I said, “Well, in the room today, we have 400 years of marketing experience.”And then I said, “My name is Carter, and I’m the global C.E.O., but I have 14 years of experience. Yes, I have a point of view. I’m here to try to make sure we’re all on the same page. But you need to own this with me. And not because I’m telling you, but because if you can’t solve it with 400 years of experience, we have a serious problem with the talent in this room. And I know we have the talent to do this.”Watching everyone go through that, and seeing who was receptive and who was contributing, was an amazing early canvas to get a general idea.I wanted to get rid of no one, but if I look at the leaders I’ve had to change out, 50 percent of the time it was because of their inability to make decisions. I think making a decision is half the battle. People need to know whether we’re going left or right.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement