MAY 15, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.28 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.37 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.24 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida, $241.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida Board of Education, $180 million of public education capital outlay bonds. Competitive.Loudoun County, Va., $144.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Maryland, $145 million of Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementNew Mexico, $282.9 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Superior, Wis., School District, $52.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementVirginia College Building Authority, $361.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Alamo Regional Mobility Authority, Texas, $116 million of vehicle registration fee revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Atlanta Development Authority, $72 million of university research foundation revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Bethel Park, Pa., School District, $74.6 million of general obligation bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Charlotte, N.C., $57 million of convention facility project refinancing certificates of participation. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.El Paso, $125 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Fort Bend, Tex., Independent School District, $70.4 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Georgia Municipal Electric Authority, $372 million of general power revenue and general resolution projects subordinated bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Georgia Housing and Finance Authority, $107 million of single-family mortgage bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Gulfport, Miss., $50 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Henrico County, Va., $124.2 million of water and sewer system revenue and refinancing bonds. Raymond James.AdvertisementIllinois Finance Authority and Iowa Finance Authority, $214.8 million of health facilities revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Illinois Toll Highway Authority, $300 million of toll revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.Indiana, $50 million of school district refinancing debt securities. Stifel Nicolaus.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Indianapolis Local Public Improvement Bond Bank, $167.4 million of refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Los Angeles Municipal Improvement Corporation, $800.2 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Nashville, $299 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Nevada, $148.5 million of gas facilities revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York City, $800 million of general obligation bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority, $500 million of tax fund green bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.New York State Dormitory Authority, $209 million of school district revenue bonds. Roosevelt & Cross.New York Transportation Development Corporation, $2.5 billion of La Guardia Airport terminal redevelopment special facilities bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Akron, Ohio, $74 million of higher education revenue bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Oregon, $57 million of health district general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.San Antonio Independent School District, $120.4 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.AdvertisementSan Jose, Calif., $58 million of election general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Santa Clarita, Calif., $95 million of community college general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.South Dakota Housing Development Authority, $99 million of homeownership mortgage bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Spring, Tex., Independent School District, $80.3 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Springdale, Ark., Public Facilities Board, $76 million of hospital revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Texas, $67 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Tukwila, Wash. School District, $50 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Washington State, $91.2 million of school district unlimited tax general obligation bonds. D. A. Davidson.A version of this schedule appears in print on May 16, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Auctions of Treasury Securities Set for the Week of May 16.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.