By JOHN KOBLINMAY 15, 2016
The annual television upfront presentations for advertisers begin Monday, in which the broadcast networks will introduce new shows along with two newish entertainment presidents (Glenn Geller at CBS, who got his job last year; and ABC’s Channing Dungey, who took over in February). Here’s a rundown of each network’s previous season, and what will be promoted this week.WHAT’S WORKING Business as usual here: CBS was the most-watched network for the 13th time in the last 14 years — by as wide a margin as nearly three million viewers — and finished on top for the 18-to-49-year-old demographic as well, which is important to advertisers. “The Big Bang Theory,” in its ninth season, was once again the No. 1 comedy on TV, and “NCIS” was the most-viewed drama for the seventh consecutive year. Other perennials like “Blue Bloods,” “Criminal Minds” and “Survivor” still perform well.WHAT’S NOT  Though the network continues to ride its thoroughbreds, it has been a few years since it has introduced a meaningful hit. “CSI: Cyber,” the last spinoff from that franchise, was canceled after two sluggish seasons. The comedy “Angel From Hell” was canceled and other comedic efforts fizzled, beyond a solid first season from “Life in Pieces.” And though “Supergirl” started off strong, its viewership has declined and now the show will be shuffled over to CBS’s cousin network, the CW.WHAT TO LOOK FOR THIS WEEK CBS will introduce new comedies with two stars (Kevin James in “Kevin Can Wait” and Matt LeBlanc in “Man With a Plan”) and a few reboots: “MacGyver,” based on the 1980s show, and “Training Day,” based on the 2001 movie. The network will also promote its “Star Trek” revival, which is being devised for its stand-alone app, CBS All Access.WHAT’S WORKING “Empire” continues to deliver. Though it slowed a bit in its second season, it will finish as the No. 1 show among adults under 50. The six-episode run of “The X-Files” turned out to be surprisingly muscular. It brought in meaningful ratings, and Fox executives are hopeful that there will be plenty more episodes going forward. Fox also managed to climb out of the basement among the big four networks and will finish in third place in the 18-to-49 demographic.AdvertisementWHAT’S NOT Two big comedy debuts — “The Grinder” and “Grandfathered” — received nice reviews but were canceled after poor ratings. “Minority Report” was likewise let go after one year. And even if “Scream Queens” is popular among a younger audience and will get a second season, it did not make any lasting impression on the ratings, particularly considering the lengthy and expensive marketing blitz it received.AdvertisementWHAT TO LOOK FOR THIS WEEK With “American Idol” shutting down, Fox is going to have a lot of hours to fill, and it plans on doing it with reboot mania. Projects include reboots for “24,” “Prison Break,” “Lethal Weapon” and “The Exorcist.” Fox will also have another show, “Star,” from Lee Daniels, the creator of “Empire.” And there will be one surefire ratings boon that will be talked up at its presentation: Fox will broadcast the Super Bowl in February.WHAT’S WORKING ABC’s lineup of comedies with diverse casts like “black-ish” and “Fresh Off the Boat” continues to give the network an identity. Thursday night remains strong, thanks to Shonda Rhimes, even if “How to Get Away With Murder” and “Scandal” showed signs of wear and tear this year. “Quantico” had a solid debut and qualifies as the network’s standout first-year show.WHAT’S NOT ABC said goodbye to Paul Lee, its entertainment president, in February. The network experienced the biggest losses in viewers and in the 18-to-49 demographic among the networks (percentage drops of 14 percent and 18 percent). It canceled several new shows like “Wicked City” (the first network show to be axed this season), “The Muppets” (one of the season’s biggest flops) and the veteran series “Castle” and “Nashville.”WHAT TO LOOK FOR THIS WEEK ABC will introduce Ms. Dungey, the first black network president. Ms. Dungey’s new lineup will include the Kiefer Sutherland drama “Designated Survivor,” about a low-level United States cabinet member who takes over the presidency after a large-scale attack. ABC will also pick up a period drama from Ms. Rhimes, “Still Star-Crossed,” about the Montagues and the Capulets after the deaths of Romeo and Juliet.WHAT’S WORKING For the first time in a few years, quite a bit. In what was an otherwise anemic year for rookie network shows, “Blindspot” was the clear winner among the first-year class. Dick Wolf’s Chicago-based franchise continues to prosper, and “Little Big Shots” was the breakout reality hit of the year. “The Voice” remains a very strong performer and “The Wiz Live!” was a win for the network’s annual live musical series. Over all, if CBS had not had the Super Bowl, NBC would have finished the year in first place in the 18-to-49 demographic.WHAT’S NOT The Neil Patrick Harris variety show, “Best Time Ever,” was an expensive flop. Though the network has shown progress with the critically praised “Superstore” and “The Carmichael Show,” the comedy cupboard is otherwise empty. The Eva Longoria show “Telenovela” did not work, nor did a reboot, “Heroes: Reborn.”WHAT TO LOOK FOR THIS WEEK This year’s upfront presentation will include all of NBCUniversal’s properties, not just the broadcast network’s. But NBC is trying to bring its comedy rolls back to life with “The Good Place,” a show from the “Parks and Recreation” co-creator Michael Schur starring Ted Danson, and “Great News,” produced by Tina Fey. The network has high hopes for “Timeless,” a time-travel thriller, and the costly drama “Emerald City.” “The Celebrity Apprentice” will return without Donald J. Trump: Arnold Schwarzenegger is the new host. Mr. Wolf’s “Chicago Justice” will represent his fifth show in NBC’s lineup.A version of this article appears in print on May 16, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Expect From the Broadcast Networks This Coming Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.