AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesThis is what to expect in the week ahead:FINANCIALArgentina will issue its first major corporate bonds in international markets since it resolved a lengthy debt feud with hedge funds and came out of default. Banco Hipotecario, a commercial bank and mortgage lender, will issue up to $200 million worth, Manuel Herrera, the assistant chief executive, said in an interview. The order book for the bonds, maturing in 2020, will open on Monday or Tuesday.Under its new president, Mauricio Macri, Argentina returned to global credit markets last month after a 15-year hiatus. Its sale of $16.5 billion in bonds — the biggest ever in so-called emerging markets — was priced at an average of 7.14 percent, demonstrating investors’ appetite for high yields despite risk.Banco Hipotecario did sell bonds last year while Argentina was still in default. They were issued at 9.75 percent, but this time pricing could tighten to less than 8 percent, market analysts said. “The demand is very high for Argentina,” Mr. Herrera said. “Everyone is trying to tap this opportunity.” Jonathan GilbertECONOMYOn Tuesday, economists will get a host of new data on how the economy performed last month. The Commerce Department will report on housing starts in April, with experts looking for a slight pickup in activity that would lift the annual rate of new construction to 1.1 million units. Housing starts fell 8.8 percent in March to the lowest level since October 2015. The data for April should help indicate whether that was a blip or a sign of softness ahead in residential construction.The Labor Department will release data on inflation in April. The Consumer Price Index is thought to have increased by 0.2 percentage point in April while the core C.P.I., which does not include more volatile food and energy prices, is estimated to have risen 0.1 percent. The increase in the broader index was driven by higher gasoline costs in particular, but inflation remains tame, according to economists.Also on Tuesday, the Federal Reserve will release data on industrial production and capacity utilization in April. The Fed expects a modest improvement in both measures, with industrial production rising by 0.1 percentage point and capacity utilization increasing slightly to 74.9 percent. Both have been anemic lately, hurt by the slide in energy-related activity and weak demand from overseas because of the stronger dollar. But factory activity may have rebounded slightly in April. Nelson D. Schwartz Japan’s economy probably grew by the thinnest of margins in the first quarter of the year. The country will report gross domestic product numbers on Wednesday, and economists’ latest estimates point to annualized growth of 0.2 percent. Anemic consumer spending, a tumbling stock market and the fallout from China’s slowdown all stood in the way of faster expansion, experts say. The economy contracted by 1.1 percent in the final quarter of 2015, and might have shrunk by a similar amount in the first quarter of 2016 if not for the extra day provided by the leap year. Jonathan Soble The Federal Reserve’s April meeting passed quietly, with no increase in the Fed’s benchmark rate and no clear signal that another rate increase was imminent. The minutes of that meeting, which the Fed will publish on Wednesday, may help to explain the Fed’s caution. Job growth remains fairly strong, while reported economic growth has been weaker than expected. Some Fed officials have said since the meeting that they have not ruled out raising rates at the Federal Reserve’s next meeting in June. Investors, however, are increasingly convinced that the Fed will wait for more data to clarify the divergence, and that the central bank is not likely to raise rates before September. Binyamin AppelbaumFinance ministers and central bank governors from the Group of 7 leading industrialized nations are scheduled to meet in Sendai, Japan, on Friday and Saturday. They are expected to discuss a broad range of global risks, from swings in oil prices and currencies to the slowdown in China. A core issue will be whether countries can continue to rely on their central banks to stimulate growth, or whether governments need to play a bigger role by increasing spending or cutting taxes. The talks are a precursor to the Group of 7 leaders summit meeting in Japan on May 26 and 27. Jonathan SobleRETAILINGWalmart, the country’s largest retailer, will report first-quarter earnings on Thursday. Analysts will pay particular attention to the shopping giant’s e-commerce business, in which it has invested heavily to better compete with Amazon. Amazon has also posed a challenge for another low-cost rival, Target, which will release its first-quarter results on Wednesday. Rachel AbramsAdvertisement