By HIROKO TABUCHINOV. 17, 2015
Robust sales numbers from Walmart, Home Depot and TJX on Tuesday are helping to ease concerns over the American consumer’s health in the countdown to the Black Friday sales.And some retailers also seemed to shrug off concerns that the Paris attacks would chill consumer sentiment heading into the Thanksgiving sales weekend.Sluggish traffic and a buildup of inventory at Macy’s and Nordstrom last week prompted a broad market sell-off in retail stocks. And investors fretted that consumers were not feeling flush despite a brightening economic outlook and a strong recovery in the job market. But Walmart, the nation’s largest retailer by sales, on Tuesday posted positive sales numbers for the fifth consecutive quarter, though it said income declined as it continued to invest in its e-commerce operations and higher wages for its workers.Home Depot and the discount retailer TJX also posted strong sales growth on Tuesday.The upbeat numbers “indicate that the consumer is, on average, still in decent shape,” Christopher Horvers, a retail analyst at J.P. Morgan, said in a note. The department store woes, he said, were “more of an apparel issue” because of an unseasonably warm October that blunted early demand for winter boots and coats.AdvertisementWalmart, which is also the world’s largest retailer by sales, said that third-quarter earnings per share came to $1.03, beating a consensus estimate of 98 cents. Revenue fell 1.3 percent from the previous year, to $117 billion, with currency exchange shaving $5 billion from the top line.AdvertisementSales at stores in the United States open at least a year rose 1.5 percent, led by an 8 percent jump in sales at Walmart’s smaller-format Neighborhood Markets. Walmart’s same-store sales logged the fifth consecutive quarter of growth, buoyed by a 1.7 percent increase in traffic over all.Operating income fell 8.8 percent, and international sales fell 11.4 percent during the quarter, hurt partly by a strong United States dollar, which erodes the dollar value of overseas earnings. E-commerce sales growth slowed to 10 percent.The retail giant, whose stock is down more than 30 percent this year, has warned investors to expect lower profits next year because of its investments in its work force, part of its effort to reduce turnover, and its efforts in online retailing, to compete better with the surging might of Amazon.com.Walmart said back-to-school and Halloween sales had been strong, with some weakness in early October because of the warm weather. Apparel sales rose, while consumer electronics sales declined because of slower sales of television and wireless products. Inventory in the United States, a concern at many of Walmart’s peers, grew at about half the rate of sales and declined on a comparative store basis.For the holiday season, Walmart has simplified its sales offerings and will carry most of its in-store deals and so-called doorbusters online. Greg Foran, chief executive of Walmart U.S., said last week that the retailer’s focus over the holidays would be on execution and the store experience — an approach he has taken to revamp Walmart stores over all, with better in-stock supply and customer service.“We do expect it to be competitive,” Mr. Foran said. “It always is.” He said he expected Walmart to log same-store sales growth of about 1 percent in the fourth quarter, compared with 1.5 percent last year.Home Depot said same-store sales in the United States jumped 7.3 percent in the third quarter, as consumers spent more on home improvement goods and appliances. The retailer said its earnings came to $1.36 a share, above analysts’ estimates, and it said it expected profit for the full year to reach the top end of its forecasts. Net sales for the quarter rose 6.4 percent to $21.82 billion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.TJX, which operates the off-price chains T.J. Maxx and Marshalls, said same-store sales rose 5 percent in the third quarter, beating analysts’ forecasts and pushing revenue 5.3 percent higher, to $7.75 billion. Earnings per share at the retailer, which sells excess name-brand apparel and home furnishing brands at steep discounts, came to 86 cents, also beating analysts’ expectations.AdvertisementStill, some analysts cautioned that the somber mood after the Paris attacks — and nervousness over the safety of crowds and public spaces — could affect retailers’ Black Friday sales at a time the rush to clinch deals was already losing its appeal.Burt P. Flickinger III, managing director of the consumer consultancy Strategic Resource Group in New York, cautioned that Black Friday had already gotten a bad reputation for security after stampedes and rowdy fights at stores in recent years. Any terrorism fears would add to those concerns, he said.“Instead of going family shopping with the parents, the grandparents, the grandkids, what you could see more of instead is shoppers leaving the kids at home,” he said. ”Or consumers might skip Thursday and Friday, and shop in December instead, because they expect to be able to find deals then too,” he said.Oliver Chen, a retail analyst at Cowen, warned of what he called a “CNN effect” of consumers becoming more frugal with holiday purchases, and devoting more attention to news watching.To address any concerns over security, the Mall of America, the country’s largest shopping center, announced that it had put in place extra security precautions, but that only some of the measures would be noticeable to guests. Dan Jasper, a spokesman for the mall, based in Bloomington, Minn., declined to elaborate.Jesse Tron, a spokesman for the trade group International Council of Shopping Centers, said that shoppers should expect to see additional police, including K9 units, at malls.Mr. Foran of Walmart said he had not seen any change in shopper sentiment or spending after the multiple attacks in the French capital on Friday. Walmart has not bolstered security at stores beyond measures that would normally be taken heading into the Black Friday sales rush, officials said.Mr. Flickinger said that extra security measures might reassure consumers, but “could also remind them of dangers that they may not have been thinking about last year.”“And over all, the mood is less likely to make people want to spend,” he added. “They feel blessed to be alive. They schedule more time with family and friends. They spend less time shopping.”A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: 3 Big Retailers Post Sales That Ease Some Concerns.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.