AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerPandora Media, the largest Internet radio service, has become the target of an activist shareholder who is urging the company to renew plans to sell itself.Corvex Management, a hedge fund managed by Keith Meister, has taken a 9.9 percent stake in Pandora by acquiring 22.7 million shares and share equivalents, making it the largest shareholder, according to a regulatory filing on Monday. Corvex’s stake is worth about $230 million at Monday’s closing stock price.Pandora had enlisted the help of Morgan Stanley to field preliminary takeover conversations, people briefed on the matter said in February. However, those discussions did not get far, and in March, the company replaced Brian P. McAndrews as chief executive with Tim Westergren, the company’s co-founder and former chief strategy officer.Comments from Mr. Westergren since he has been appointed chief executive “suggest an unwillingness to consider a sale regardless of the price offered to shareholders or the cost and uncertainty inherent in a stand-alone business plan,” said Mr. Meister in a letter to Jim Feuille, chairman of Pandora, that was disclosed in the filing.As a result, Mr. Meister urged Pandora to hire a new firm to pursue a sale, or what the fund calls “a value maximization process.”“We are confidently investing to fully capture the massive opportunity ahead of us,” Pandora said in a statement. “Our management team is in constant dialogue with shareholders about our business strategy and committed to delivering results and long-term value.”A representative Morgan Stanley declined to comment.Pandora’s large user base might appeal to buyers like traditional media companies, Internet giants or other companies in the music industry, Macquarie analysts said in a research report.Mr. Meister said that he delivered a notice of intent to nominate three directors at Pandora’s annual meeting this year, but withdrew after conversations with executives and other board members demonstrated a willingness to “enhance shareholder value.” He said he was surprised by the appointment of Mr. Westergren as chief executive.Shares of Pandora jumped 3.5 percent in after-hours trading once Corvex disclosed its filling. The company trades at a market valuation around $2.3 billion, with another $200 million or so in debt.Pandora’s former chief executive, Mr. McAndrews, is a director at The New York Times Company.Advertisement