By GRAHAM BOWLEY and MELISSA EDDYOCT. 5, 2015
WOLFSBURG, Germany — This sturdy, workaday city in northern Germany has long been known as the birthplace of the “people’s car” — the Volkswagen.But even though the Volkswagen Group’s hulking plant and headquarters still dominate the skyline and local economy, city planners in recent years have tried to forge a more modern identity for Wolfsburg and its 125,000 inhabitants.The gritty downtown near the railway station has been given a makeover, crowned by a futuristic science center by the Iraqi-British architect Zaha Hadid. A gleaming soccer stadium was erected, home to VfL Wolfsburg, the 2015 German Cup winners. There is now a water park, an indoor ice arena and an annual international dance and music festival. There are more than a dozen new commercial and industrial parks that have nothing to do with the manufacture of cars or auto parts.But all it took was the diesel emissions scandal to remind Wolfsburg just how dependent this city and region still are on the Volkswagen ecosystem, and the jobs, tax revenue and even tourism business that spin out of the world’s biggest automaker. It is the company’s success that helped make the Wolfsburg makeover possible, in other words, and now that font of prosperity might be imperiled.Advertisement“Everyone is very tense,” said Carsten Baschin, editor in chief of the Wolfsburger Allgemeine Zeitung, one of the main dailies. “There is a lot of fear in the city.”The crisis that has erupted around Volkswagen over the past few weeks has been a reminder of the older reality — that the automaker provides 72,000 jobs at the Wolfsburg plant. And that number does not include the thousands of other jobs in the region at companies that supply Volkswagen.AdvertisementLast week, after Volkswagen said it was setting aside 6.5 billion euros, or about $7.3 billion, in the third quarter to cover expected costs from the scandal, Klaus Mohrs, the mayor of Wolfsburg, issued a public warning of an impending drop in corporate tax revenue. The mayor said it was too soon to cite numbers, but announced a municipal hiring freeze and a halt on any new projects, despite the city’s current balanced budget.“What is clear, we will have to examine many measures for the continued development of our city,” he said in the statement.Worries about the repercussions dominate conversations around the city.Three schoolchildren standing on the corner of Porsche Street one evening seemed to know all about Volkswagen’s deceptions and the likely creeping effect on the local economy.“In politics class we spoke about the situation,” said Sofie, 14, who only gave her first name. “We don’t think it’s very good that it was concealed.”Her friend, Olivia, also 14, said her older brother, who worked in seating technology for Volkswagen cars, had been given a week off because of the uncertainty.Nearby, waiting for a bus outside the main station, Gerhard Tscherner, 64, a retired engineer, said his family’s fortunes depended on a good resolution to the problems: His son, daughter and son-in-law all work for the automaker.AdvertisementWearing a black cap against the cold wind, Mr. Tscherner spoke about guilt and the need for accountability within the company. But he also expressed worry about what that accounting might lead to in the lives of citizens if Volkswagen must pay fines or if its newfound notoriety causes it to lose customers worldwide.“We’re talking about billions,” he said with a frown. “People built their homes believing the money would always be there to pay for them. That could change.”Mayor Mohrs said that as the city has sought to diversify its economy, with considerable expansion in tourism and in the service sector over the past decade, the growth has created problems of its own. Wolfsburg already faces a dire shortage of housing, and its population is expected to expand by 9 percent over the next decade.There are no plans to scale back the expansion of housing stock, Mr. Mohrs said. But he cautioned that “we will have to wait and see how the situation at Volkswagen develops.”The city and company have been inextricably linked from the beginning. There was no Wolfsburg until 1938, when the Nazis chose that patch of land along the Midland Canal, with access to the Baltic Sea, as the site for making Europe’s first mass-produced vehicles.After the war, Wolfsburg was swelled by immigrants who arrived from eastern and southern Europe to work in the iconic brick factory, inspired by the Ford River Rouge plant in Detroit.More recently, the maker of the Beetle and of the hippie van has grown into a global automotive group, expanding its sales in China and North America, acquiring luxury brands like Porsche, Bentley and Bugatti, while broadening its own models to include turbo diesel S.U.V.s and luxury limousines. (Various Golf models, the Touran and Tiguan marques, and drive shafts and other components are made at Wolfsburg.)One day last week, the four great brown chimneys of the carmaker’s own power plant loomed high over the rooftops, as clouds of steam trailed into the sky. Workers passed through the factory gates in the brisk early morning air to the 1,600-acre complex that turns out about 830,000 vehicles annually.Right next to the main complex is Autostadt, Volkswagen’s theme park of manicured gardens, lakes, and glassy atriums that was built 15 years ago as a way to make the company more transparent and inviting, and to play a role in Wolfsburg’s effort to become a magnet for international tourism.AdvertisementVisitors to Autostadt can sit behind the wheel of the latest Porsche model, marvel at the roar of a Lamborghini Murcielago engine or drive an Amarok over a boulder-strewn obstacle course. Customers who have ordered cars can pick them up at the theme park.Some 2.2 million people visited last year. So far, despite the scandal, visitor numbers have held steady, said Tobias Riepe, an Autostadt spokesman.The reaction among Wolfsburg city officials to the revelations of Volkswagen’s cheating has been mainly one of stunned silence. The company has shut down most of its outward communications as it has struggled to adjust to the crisis, which claimed a chief executive and has erased more than $17 billion from the company’s stock market value. And many factory workers and even the city historian declined to comment about the scandal.Mr. Baschin, the newspaper editor, said Volkswagen had survived other crises — like the episode in 2005 when the head of the company’s works council was jailed over a sex and bribery scandal. But nothing until now, he said, has so threatened the company’s long-cultivated image as builder of solid, reliable vehicles. With criminal and civil investigations underway in the United States, Germany and elsewhere in Europe, the company’s corporate future may be hanging in the balance.So despite Wolfsburg’s efforts to become something more than a one-company factory town, people here are engaged in civic soul searching about the international corporation that put them on the global map.“We hope the problem is solved,” said Dennis, 34, who works in logistics and would give only his first name, as he made his way one recent morning to the factory entrance.“We are a big family,” he said. “We are all asking the same question, ‘Why?’”A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Scandal Reverberates in a Company Town.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.