AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerThomas Piquemal made headlines in March when he quit as chief financial officer of the French utility EDF after an argument over an 18 billion pound ($25 billion) investment in a British nuclear plant. Mr. Piquemal thought the project would threaten the utility’s balance sheet, telling the French Parliament that the company would not listen to him.Now, he has resurfaced with a new job: head of global mergers and acquisitions at Deutsche Bank.For Mr. Piquemal, it is a homecoming to the banking world. He worked at Lazard for 14 years until 2009, when he left to become the C.F.O. of Veolia. A year later he assumed his role as finance chief at EDF.At Deutsche Bank, Mr. Piquemal will report to Jeff Urwin, the head of corporate and investment banking at the firm, according to a statement on Monday announcing the new hire.“Thomas brings to Deutsche Bank a unique combination of skills gained from over seven years as leading finance director and nearly a decade and a half as corporate finance adviser to clients and their boards,” said Mr. Urwin in the statement. “His appointment underscores our commitment to investing in our global M&A franchise and to sustaining our position as a leading corporate finance adviser.”Mr. Piquemal succeeds Henrik Aslaksen, who left Deutsche Bank as global head of mergers and acquisitions late last year. In April, Credit Suisse  announced it had hired Mr. Aslaksen to be the head of strategic client coverage, a newly created position.Earlier this month, Jacques Brand, the chief executive of Deutsche Bank’s operations in North America, left the bank as well. He is headed to PJT Partners, people briefed on his plans said when his departure from the German banking giant was announced.Deutsche Bank was ranked 12th in global mergers and acquisitions during 2015, according to data compiled by Thomson Reuters. Its 6.7 percent market share was lower than most of the large American banks, as well as Credit Suisse, Barclays and UBS in Europe.The firm advised large companies on several hallmark deals last year, however, including Anheuser-Busch InBev’s acquisition of SABMiller, as well as Marriott International’s purchase of Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide.Mr. Piquemal will be based in Paris and begins his new job on Tuesday.“I am delighted to join Deutsche Bank and to dedicate myself to supporting its commitment to client-focused service,” said Mr. Piquemal in the statement. “I am greatly looking forward to working together with my new colleagues, whose excellence and talent I have known for many years.”Advertisement