By BROOKS BARNESMAY 16, 2016
LOS ANGELES — Television executives always say the same thing about remakes: We recycle shows only when we have strong, fresh ideas for them.It’s almost never true, of course. Remakes like the recently canceled “Muppets” and the much-maligned “Fuller House” usually materialize because dusting off old hits carries less risk than trying to introduce new ones.But a few rare “reboots,” to use the Hollywood term, do put storytelling concerns ahead of business needs, or at least beside them, and the reimagined “24,” which Fox is to unveil to advertisers on Monday, appears to be one of them. Built by the same team of producers who turned the original series into a cultural touchstone — in many ways, “24” ushered in the era of binge viewing — “24: Legacy” will arrive in early 2017, with a debut after the Super Bowl.“We understand the skepticism, but there was no corporate mandate here,” said Howard Gordon, a returning executive producer. “If anything, it was the opposite. When we started discussing ideas a year and a half ago, the message was to be slow and careful, to only proceed if the creative team felt it had something that fans would love.”AdvertisementEarly “24: Legacy” video, viewed exclusively by The New York Times last week, revealed a lavish action series that is both the same (the ticking clock, the split screens, the against-all-odds heroism) and new: Instead of following the secret agent Jack Bauer, played by Kiefer Sutherland, the new show focuses on a young, tormented Army Ranger who is being hunted by terrorists.AdvertisementThe new protagonist’s name is Eric Carter. Corey Hawkins, a Juilliard-trained actor best known for his portrayal of Dr. Dre in “Straight Outta Compton,” plays the part. “The fact that he is an African-American hero is not irrelevant,” said the producer Brian Grazer, who has helped shepherd the “24” franchise from its start. “As a series, ‘24’ was prescient about what was going on in the culture. We want to do that again.”Mr. Gordon added: “Against the backdrop of Ferguson and Black Lives Matter, here is a character who has fought for a country that has in some ways abandoned him. He’s squaring a question for himself: Is this place even worth defending?”The “24: Legacy” team, led by Manny Coto and Evan Katz, drew inspiration from SEAL Team 6, best known for killing Osama bin Laden. In the new series, six Army Rangers, having successfully led a Bin Laden-style raid overseas, are now living anonymously in witness protection. One by one, however, they are being located, tortured and killed by associates of the dead terrorist. As it turns out, one of the Rangers took something home from the raid as a trophy. He doesn’t know its meaning, but the terrorists do — and they need it back as they plan a new attack on the United States.For a remake to work, said Peter Rice, chairman of the Fox Networks Group, “there has to be a narrative engine that is not purely character-based. ‘24’ was groundbreaking in its character storytelling, but it’s also a propulsive thriller with constant cliffhangers.”“24: Legacy” also stars Miranda Otto, recently known for “Homeland,” as a former Counter Terrorism Unit chief; married to a senator with presidential ambitions (Jimmy Smits), she is dragged back into her old job. Mr. Sutherland, who will serve as an executive producer, may well appear as Jack Bauer as the series continues, at least in a cameo fashion. “Was I not supposed to reveal that?” Mr. Grazer asked a publicist in an interview. “Oh, well. I just did.”The first “24” ran from 2001 to 2010, with a mini-series, “Live Another Day,” unspooling in 2014. Fox knows that bringing back “24” without Mr. Sutherland in the central role is risky. It’s a bit like making a Bourne movie without Jason Bourne, as Universal Pictures did in 2012 with “The Bourne Legacy.” When the network announced in January that it was working on “24: Legacy,” some fans snarled.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“24 without Kiefer Sutherland as Jack Bauer is like vodka without alcohol in it. NO THANK YOU,” the comedian Sarah Colonna wrote on Twitter.Complicating matters, Mr. Sutherland will return to television in a new thriller on a rival network. He will play the lead in ABC’s “Designated Survivor,” about a low-level cabinet member who becomes president after a catastrophic attack on the capitol.AdvertisementDana Walden, a Fox Television Group chairman and chief executive, thinks that the ideas behind “24: Legacy” and their execution will win over reluctant fans. She is also betting that the series will capitalize on the African-American audience that watches “Empire,” Fox’s soapy music industry drama. But she conceded in an interview that the bar was high.“The original ‘24’ didn’t have the burden of facing up to something that was already established and beloved,” she said. “That just meant we had to work harder.”She added, “The new one stands on its own. It is in no way derivative.”In other words, she is keenly aware of the cardinal rule of remakes: A familiar title acts as a viewer magnet, especially in the face of a glut of competing series, but people continue to watch only if they see something they think is worth their time.Take a lesson, Muppets.An earlier version of this article misstated who would lead the “24: Legacy” team. It will be led by Manny Coto and Evan Katz, not Robert Cochran and Joel Surnow, who created the original “24.”A version of this article appears in print on May 17, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Fox Revives ‘24’ With a New Leading Man, but a Familiar Look.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.