AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike IsaacAMC prides itself on the large number of young viewers who regularly watch its television shows. Now, the network is trying to take one of its shows to young viewers who may not already be watching.On Monday, the cable network will introduce an advertising campaign in which the first five minutes of “Preacher,” the network’s much-hyped new series, will be able to be viewed from within Snapchat, the messaging smartphone app popular with millennials.Though many networks buy ads on Snapchat to promote their shows, this is the first time that an extended clip of a network television show will be available, according to both companies. Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed. AMC plans to make the clip exclusive to Snapchat for a period of 24 hours before broadcasting it more widely on other platforms. (The clip will be available on Snapchat for a week.) “Preacher” is set to make its network debut on Sunday.Snapchat users can find the five-minute video clip inside of Snapchat “Discover,” a section of the app where third-party publishers like BuzzFeed, Daily Mail and National Geographic directly post content daily.While AMC regularly promotes shows across social channels, the campaign is another step in the network’s quest to meet millennials in the places and the apps where they spend the most time. (Snapchat says it has 100 million active daily users.)“Obviously it’s a terrific platform for this younger audience,” Linda Schupack, executive vice president of marketing for AMC and SundanceTV, said in an interview. “The audience we think will sync up perfectly with ‘Preacher’ is already on Snapchat.”It is also the network’s effort to turn “Preacher,” a darkly comedic drama based on a cult-hit comic series, into another flagship show like “The Walking Dead” and its spinoff series, “Fear The Walking Dead,” which regularly have sizable audiences in the 18-to-49-year-old demographic most attractive to advertisers.With “The Walking Dead” in particular, AMC has tried to capitalize on the show’s young fan base, much of which regularly takes to social sites like Twitter, Facebook and Reddit to talk about the show in the hours after episodes air on television. “Talking Dead,” the network’s hourlong live discussion in which different members of the cast and creative team chat with celebrities about the week’s most recent episode, was a direct result of the series’ enthusiastic following.But Snapchat is an interesting choice for AMC to focus its marketing muscle on, particularly because of the platform’s regular pitch to brands and publishers that it is the best suited to handling video. For nearly a year, Snapchat has likened itself more to television than its competitors, pitching advertisers that it is focused on hourly time spent watching video and daily use of the app. Other tech companies like Facebook, Twitter and YouTube continue to compete for the same video advertising dollars.AMC has spread its advertising clout across nearly all of these new media platforms thus far, though the network hopes this particular ad buy will pay off in a swath of cheerleading young fans for the new series.“For millennials, the thrill of discovery is really important,” Ms. Schupack said. “Our hope is to turn our fans into evangelists by getting ‘Preacher’ to them ahead of the premiere.”Advertisement