By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINNOV. 17, 2015
As the district attorney of Manhattan, Cyrus R. Vance Jr. enjoys the spotlight of being a top prosecutor in the nation’s financial capital.Yet the spotlight has lately been harsher in the wake of several setbacks in white-collar trials, including the mistrial last month in the criminal case against three former executives at the once-mighty law firm Dewey & LeBoeuf.As a result, lawyers have been second-guessing about whether Mr. Vance’s office has made financial trials overly complex and has been too aggressive in pursuing matters that might best be treated as civil disputes. Apparent missteps by his office in a mortgage fraud case involving a Chinatown bank — the details of which have just emerged in a court filing — raise additional questions about the trial readiness of his prosecutors.Mr. Vance rejects those suggestions, saying it is unfair to draw too many conclusions from any two cases.Advertisement“If you look at two cases, it is like looking at crime statistics for the weekend,” Mr. Vance, 61, said in a recent interview.AdvertisementStill, he said he was willing to concede that the trial of former Dewey executives Steven H. Davis, Stephen DiCarmine and Joel Sanders could have been handled better. He said if there is a new trial for the men, who were accused of orchestrating an accounting fraud that deceived the law firm’s financial backers, it will have to be “simpler and shorter.”The Dewey trial, which began with much fanfare and publicity in late May, went on for more than four months before the jury spent 21 days grappling with the 151 charges that Mr. Vance’s office had filed against the men, the testimony of 41 witness and the 2,347 exhibits prosecutors put into evidence. The deadlock in the proceedings now has Mr. Vance trying to decide whether all three men should be retried and how to streamline any new proceeding.“If we do go forward we will listen to the input from the jury and try the cleanest and simplest case that we can,” Mr. Vance said. “The jurors did express some concern over the number of counts.”He is expected to make a decision on a new trial by Dec. 7, when the parties are scheduled to return to court. The Manhattan district attorney’s office may yet be victorious in the Dewey case. Still, its record this year in prominent white-collar trials is checkered.In June, a jury acquitted two senior officers of Abacus Federal Savings Bank in a mortgage fraud case that Mr. Vance sought to link to the financial crisis. He had charged the bank, which is in Chinatown, and more than a dozen employees with participating in a “systematic” scheme to sell fraudulent mortgages to Fannie Mae, the government-sponsored home finance company and a primary issuer of mortgage-backed securities.But a few months after those acquittals, prosecutors with little fanfare all but acknowledged in a court filing that the Abacus case had been troubled from the start.In the September court filing now under seal but reviewed by The New York Times, prosecutors working for Mr. Vance said the trial had been compromised by “unanticipated witness issues and evidentiary issues, as well as legal rulings that diverged from the legal positions the People adopted at the grand jury stage and urged at trial.”AdvertisementThe admission, however, is a little too late for some of the defendants, many of them Chinese immigrants, who have spent more than five years dealing with the fallout from a two-year investigation by Mr. Vance’s office and the filing of a 184-count indictment in 2012.“If you care more about the press conference than the proof, you end up charging people and institutions that you shouldn’t and overreaching in terms of theories,” said Kevin R. Puvalowski, the main lawyer for Abacus. “My clients spent millions of dollars on this investigation and trial, and it seriously damaged their business for years.”This is not the first time Mr. Vance has been criticized for pushing legal boundaries to prosecute a white-collar defendant.In July, in another closely watched trial, a state judge threw out the conviction of Sergey Aleynikov, a former Goldman Sachs computer programmer accused of stealing sophisticated trading code from the Wall Street firm in 2009. The judge ruled that the state law under which Mr. Vance had prosecuted Mr. Aleynikov, a Russian-born American citizen, was outdated and the evidence did not support his conviction. The judge tossed out the conviction after the jury in the case deliberated for more than a week and clearly struggled with the meaning of the decades-old law.Within days of the judge’s ruling, Mr. Vance’s office said it would appeal. Yet at the same time, the district attorney is pushing the New York State Legislature to revise some of the criminal statutes under which Mr. Aleynikov was prosecuted.Mr. Vance said it was “not mutually inconsistent” for his office to both appeal the judge’s ruling and press legislators to amend the state’s criminal law.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is possible, as Mr. Vance does, to look at the recent setbacks as simply a matter of bad timing or the result of judicial rulings at odds with the law.Mr. Vance notes that his office has a large caseload, some 100,000 cases a year, with matters as varied as violent crimes and white-collar frauds. This year the office’s investigation division has achieved a conviction or plea in 89 percent of its cases.Other local prosecutors also have had notable courtroom setbacks recently.On Thursday, for instance, a jury in the Federal District Court in Brooklyn stunned federal prosecutors when it acquitted Vincent Asaro, who was charged in connection with the notorious 1978 Lufthansa robbery made famous in the movie “Goodfellas.” Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan is still dealing with an appellate court ruling last December that overturned the insider trading convictions of two hedge fund managers. That decision forced his office to vacate the guilty pleas and convictions of seven other people last month.AdvertisementEven Robert M. Morgenthau, whom Mr. Vance succeeded as district attorney and is widely credited with establishing the office’s reputation for prosecuting white-collar crime, had courtroom disappointments in high-profile cases. In the early 1990s, Mr. Morgenthau won praise for securing a number of convictions in a major financial scandal involving the Bank of Credit and Commerce International only to see a jury acquit a powerful Washington lawyer in a related prosecution.But some of the missteps by Mr. Vance’s office in the Abacus case raise questions about the readiness of his prosecutors to go trial in complex frauds.In the September court filing, Mr. Vance’s prosecutors recommended that Justice Roger S. Hayes of the New York State Supreme Court dismiss charges against seven other Abacus employees because of the problems at the initial trial. Prosecutors said they could not proceed with a planned second trial because the major cooperating witness, Qibin Yu, known as Ken, had not told the truth to the jury or to prosecutors in pretrial talks. “His credibility is in question, and the People will not call him as a witness in any future trial,” the prosecutors wrote.Mr. Vance’s office wants to rip up its cooperation agreement with Mr. Yu, who pleaded guilty and agreed to testify in return for a light sentence, people briefed on the matter said.The prosecution also contends it was caught off guard by nuances of Fannie Mae’s mortgage application process with regards to the bank’s obligation to verify financial information provided by borrowers. The prosecution said defense lawyers introduced evidence about Fannie Mae’s guidelines that “differed in significant ways from the People’s understanding of those regulations and guidelines before trial.”Prosecutors said they had a different understanding of those regulations based on repeated meetings with Fannie Mae representatives. The prosecution apparently was surprised at trial to discover that banks need not “actively verify loan application information” if a mortgage application is processed through Fannie Mae’s desktop underwriter system, said other people briefed on the matter who did not want to speak publicly on a sealed case.Mr. Vance’s office had argued Fannie Mae was victimized by Abacus and its employees because they knowingly approved mortgage applications from borrowers who had submitted false financial information. Mr. Vance filed the case even though his investigation found that Fannie Mae had incurred few or no losses on the loans.Daniel C. Richman, a criminal law professor at Columbia University, who reviewed a copy of the dismissal letter, said either prosecutors “didn’t do their homework” in analyzing the Fannie Mae rules, or “were thrown off course by the what they say is the sloppiness of Fannie.”AdvertisementAndrew Wilson, a Fannie Mae spokesman, said the company’s employees “spent considerable time” answering all the prosecution’s questions.Mr. Vance declined to elaborate on the filing but said his office had secured guilty pleas from eight bank employees, which is evidence crimes were committed.“We have not shied away from tough or challenging cases,” Mr. Vance said. “We are going to do tough cases, and some of those cases the jury is not going to agree with us. That is the reality of prosecution.”A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Harsh Spotlight on Vance .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.