AdvertisementSupported byBy Elizabeth OlsonThe financial fortunes of big law firms appear to be on the upswing, according to a survey released Tuesday by Citi Private Bank’s Law Firm Group.The survey said revenue rose 5.8 percent in the first three months of the year from the same period a year ago. It was the strongest gain since the first quarter of 2008 — before the economic meltdown of the financial crisis.The gain came on stronger demand, higher rates and a shorter debt collection cycle. The upbeat findings echoed a separate overview issued last month by The American Lawyer, which found that the country’s 100 largest firms had grown for six consecutive years, including in major measures like revenue per lawyer. Total gross revenue, the legal publication said, rose 2.7 percent in 2015.Despite some turmoil in the legal industry, the Citi law group report found that the rates lawyers charge for their work climbed 3.2 percent in the first quarter from a year ago. A few lawyers, according to some published reports, are now charging $2,000 an hour. Law firm coffers swelled early in the year when clients began paying a backlog of bills. But there were warning signs about industry growth.“There’s no question, there are headwinds for the rest of the year,” said John Wilmouth, a Citi law group adviser and author of the report, which surveyed 176 firms based in the United States.Demand for legal services rose 1.8 percent in the first quarter, compared with a year ago. But the report’s authors cautioned that “the demand for traditional law firm services has remained relatively soft, the supply of legal service providers has increased, creating a hypercompetitive market and forcing law firms to think about how they deliver legal services.”The Citi report’s authors forecast that overall industry revenue and profitability growth rates for 2016 would be in the low single digits, similar to what law firms had in the years 2010 through 2013. This is a far cry from the flush period between 2001 and 2007, when growth was about 10 percent a year. The report warned that the growth rate experienced even as recently as 2014, when deal makers were busy, may well not come roaring back.About half the firms responding to the Citi survey reported more client demand for their services between 2009 and 2014, which “means there is work to be had,” the survey said. Law firm revenues are not rising, however, because of increased expenses, including higher lawyer compensation.The report forecast that 2016 would see an emphasis on improving efficiency and streamlining the delivery of legal services, as well as more investments in technology, including systems to combat the growing threat against computer security.“Single-digit growth in industry revenue and profitability is now typical,” the report said.The better outcomes for the top-grossing 50 firms also signal an increasing split in the legal industry, with elite firms drawing higher revenue and paying higher salaries than many counterparts.Such firms, noted Mr. Wilmouth, the law group adviser, “are separating themselves from others by developing one or two strong practice areas. They are more conscious of brand identity and are doubling down on their core strengths.”Advertisement