By JOHN KOBLINMAY 17, 2016
ABC will officially announce its 2016-17 fall schedule at its annual upfront presentation in Manhattan on Tuesday. Here is a look at some of the highlights:ABC’s so-called T.G.I.T. block of Ms. Rhimes’s shows on Thursday night, which has been the most reliable part of the network’s schedule, is getting a shake-up. “Scandal” is moving to midseason, and a new drama that was not created by Ms. Rhimes, “Notorious,” will take its place. The bookends — “Grey’s Anatomy” and “How to Get Away with Murder” — stay the same.Ms. Rhimes’s shows suffered this season, particularly “Scandal” and “How To Get Away with Murder,” which both had declining ratings. ABC’s new president of entertainment, Channing Dungey, explained in a telephone call with reporters that the switch was made for a “variety of reasons,” including an adjusted production schedule to accommodate the pregnancy of the “Scandal” star Kerry Washington. When asked whether ABC would still brand its Thursday night lineup T.G.I.T., Ms. Dungey said the network had not yet considered marketing plans for the fall.Ms. Rhimes’s Thursday night block will be reassembled for midseason with “Grey’s Anatomy,” “Scandal” and her second-year show, “The Catch.” Ms. Dungey noted that by year’s end Ms. Rhimes will have five shows on the air (just like Dick Wolf at NBC), including a new show, “Still Star-Crossed,” a period drama about the Montagues and Capulets after Romeo and Juliet are dead. It will be on the midseason schedule as well.While Fox and NBC have struggled mightily with comedy, ABC is raising the ante on its comedy. ABC is expanding from two nights of comedy (Wednesday and Friday) to three (welcome, Tuesday). “The Middle” moves to Tuesday, while “Modern Family” will continue to anchor the Wednesday night lineup.Fox executives lavished praise on its “24” reboot at Monday’s upfront presentation, but Mr. Sutherland will not be back in a starring role (he will make a cameo). Instead, he will turn to a new ABC drama, “Designated Survivor,’’ which the network has very high hopes for.No, not Mr. Sutherland; we’re talking about Ms. Dungey. She is the first black network president and will take the upfront stage for the first time. She got her job in February (after Paul Lee was moved out of it), and she arrived in the middle of the pilots process. But she did say: “The schedule very much reflects my sensibility of where the network is and where we want to be going.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.