AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaThe investor Carl C. Icahn’s protégé Keith Meister is striking the right note.Mr. Meister, founder of the activist hedge fund Corvex Management, is pushing Pandora Media, the $2.2 billion online music service, to sell itself after his firm became its largest shareholder. A costly acquisition, an abrupt leadership change and a lack of song rights suggest that Pandora is floundering. Its rivals, Spotify and Sirius XM, could make sense as partners.Pandora has two big attributes: It is easy to operate and it uses algorithms to suggest songs based on listener preferences – Grateful Dead, anyone? Pandroa, which is 16 years old, is in stiff competition with Spotify, which has more global subscribers, and deep-pocketed Apple, Amazon.com and Alphabet.Pandora weathered an increase in music-royalty fees last December, but growth in the number of users has stalled, and its stock price has fallen 21 percent since January. For the quarter ended in March, the company had fewer than 80 million active listeners, contrasted with more than 81 million in the previous quarter. It’s now aiming to expand internationally by cutting deals for music rights directly with record labels and artists.Relying mainly on advertising for revenue may no longer be enough. Pandora has tried to diversify, buying the ticket purveyor Ticketfly for $450 million in November. But that business contributed only 7 percent to Pandora’s first-quarter revenue of almost $300 million.The exit in March of Brian McAndrews, Pandora’s chief executive, has ruffled investors even further. Replacing him with the founder Tim Westergren suggested there was serious dissension in the ranks, and the new boss quickly stopped efforts to find a possible buyer for the company.At this point, a sale might be the best outcome. Spotify, which recently raised $1 billion and faces pressure to go public, could be interested in Pandora’s substantial user base and advertising sales operation. Sirius XM, a $20 billion satellite radio service, could benefit from Pandora’s popularity on mobile devices. Even Apple, which is trying to make iTunes easier to use, could see a solution in Pandora’s simple design.Mr. Meister argued in a letter to Pandora directors that there could be plenty of strategic buyers willing to pay a substantial premium. The board should be all ears.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement