AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — Consumer prices in April had their biggest increase in more than three years in the United States as gasoline and rents rose, pointing to a steady inflation buildup.Other data on Tuesday showed that housing starts and industrial production rebounded strongly last month, suggesting the economy was regaining steam early in the second quarter.“The combination of higher prices, housing gains and industrial production support the narrative of a second-quarter rebound in G.D.P.,” said Jay Morelock, an economist at FTN Financial in New York.The Labor Department said its Consumer Price Index increased 0.4 percent last month, the largest gain since February 2013, after rising 0.1 percent in March. That took the year-on-year increase in the C.P.I. to 1.1 percent from 0.9 percent in March.Americans also paid more for medical care, food, recreation, tobacco, motor vehicle insurance, airline fares and grooming.The so-called core C.P.I., which strips out food and energy costs, rose 0.2 percent after climbing 0.1 percent in March. In the 12 months through April, the core C.P.I. increased 2.1 percent, after increasing 2.2 percent in March.The Federal Reserve has a 2 percent inflation target and tracks an inflation measure, which is currently at 1.6 percent.In a separate report, the Commerce Department said housing starts increased 6.6 percent, to a seasonally adjusted annual pace of 1.17 million units last month as builders ramped up the construction of single- and multifamily homes. Building permits rose 3.6 percent to a 1.12 million-unit rate.A third report, from the Fed, showed that industrial production increased 0.7 percent in April after two straight months of declines. Manufacturing output rose 0.3 percent, reversing March’s 0.3 percent decrease.Utilities production jumped 5.8 percent in April, but mining output fell 2.3 percent. Mining production continues to be undermined by the delayed pass-through of the oil price plunge between June 2014 and December 2015, which has caused a sharp reduction in capital spending by energy firms.The inflation report showed gasoline prices jumped 8.1 percent last month, the largest gain since August 2012, adding to March’s 2.2 percent increase. Food prices rose 0.2 percent after falling 0.2 percent in March.The core C.P.I. was lifted by housing and medical costs, as well as transportation services. Owners’ equivalent rent of primary residence rose 0.3 percent after increasing 0.2 percent in March.Medical care costs picked up, rising 0.3 percent after gaining 0.1 percent in March. Prescription drugs shot up 0.7 percent and the cost of hospital services increased 0.3 percent.Apparel prices fell for a second straight month, as did the cost of used cars and trucks. Prices for new motor vehicles fell 0.3 percent.Advertisement