AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerThe revolving door at Credit Suisse has been turning faster, as a number of senior bankers have left in the last few days.On Tuesday, five technology bankers, most with decades at Credit Suisse, defected to Jefferies, according to six people briefed on the moves, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Another consumer banker quit last week to work at Royal Bank of Canada, three of these people said.Departures have accumulated over the last several weeks. A few more bankers who cover health care resigned this month to join Centerview Partners, while another banker who handles private equity relationships went to Goldman Sachs.A major reason for the exodus, according to people with direct knowledge of the moves, was concern that investment banking had become less of a priority for Credit Suisse, which is based in Zurich, since Tidjane Thiam, who had been the head of British insurer Prudential and a newcomer to investment banking, became chief executive last year.He recently unveiled a plan to realign the investment bank, and its traders and deal makers, to serve the needs of private banking and wealth management. In other words, bankers were concerned there would be less focus on efforts like trading, mergers and acquisitions, and initial public offerings, and more emphasis on low-risk activities that cater to wealthy clients.European banks, in general, have had more difficulty retaining vital employees lately. Other firms, such as Deutsche Bank, also have lost several prominent bankers recently. They are more restricted in how much they can divide bonuses in cash versus stock, making it easier for the American competition to poach bankers. Shares at Credit Suisse and Deutsche Bank have been cut in half over the last year, shrinking the potential stock value of their compensation.Jefferies, based in New York, is a subsidiary of Leucadia National Corporation. It and smaller advisory firms have been able to capitalize on the turmoil because they are not required by regulators to defer compensation and have the firepower to offer big pay packages and build up investment banking groups. Still, Jefferies lost its four technology bankers to UBS last year.The recent moves were significant because many of the people who left had been at Credit Suisse many years.William Brady, who was at Credit Suisse since he was brought over by Frank Quattrone in the late ’90s, was among those who left for Jefferies. Cully Davis, who was a leader of the firm’s equity capital markets group in the Americas and helped manage several prominent initial public offerings including Alibaba and Google, also departed. Cameron Lester, who had just returned to Credit Suisse as head of Internet investment banking a year ago after a stint in venture capital, also resigned.Those three will take two other managing directors with them to Jefferies: Steve West, who focused on software, and John Metz, who led enterprise technology.Credit Suisse has already designated bankers to step up to the roles that were vacated and will hire others in the technology group, one of the people said. David Wah, the global co-head of Credit Suisse’s technology, media and telecom group, remains at the bank, as does the head of technology, media, telecom and health care equity capital markets, John Kolz.Additionally, Credit Suisse has continued to hire investment bankers from other firms. Ray Raimondi plans to join in August from Barclays as head of industrials mergers and acquisitions. Haidee Lee left BMO Capital Markets to lead Credit Suisse’s sell-side mergers and acquisitions group, where she will help smaller companies find buyers.Representatives from Credit Suisse and Jefferies declined to comment on the moves.Advertisement