By MICHAEL M. GRYNBAUMMAY 18, 2016
After a monthslong public feud, Donald J. Trump struck a conciliatory tone in an interview broadcast on Tuesday with the Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly.Relentless ads promised a showdown for the ages, and Donald J. Trump even made a personal appeal, pledging to post his own pithy commentary on Twitter in real time.But in the end, many more Americans chose the popular programs “NCIS” and “The Voice’’ over Megyn Kelly’s soft-toned interview Tuesday night with the likely Republican presidential nominee.Mr. Trump, it turns out, is a ratings bonanza — to a point.The debut of “Megyn Kelly Presents” drew an average of 4.8 million viewers, according to early Nielsen figures, a respectable number for a prime-time special but less than the audience for, say, one of this presidential campaign’s punchy debates. The first quarter-hour, when Mr. Trump was featured, drew an average of 5.2 million viewers, Fox said on Wednesday.News programming rarely outpaces entertainment, and Ms. Kelly’s Fox special, trumpeted as her Barbara Walters moment, did not buck that trend. It faced stiff competition in the 8 p.m. time slot: the finale of “NCIS,” the long-running CBS procedural that is a reliable ratings magnet, drew 17.6 million viewers; “The Voice” on NBC attracted about 8.9 million. “Fresh Off the Boat,” the ABC sitcom, fell short of Ms. Kelly’s special, but not by much, with 4.2 million viewers.AdvertisementAlthough Ms. Kelly and Mr. Trump had feuded for months, with Mr. Trump fiercely deriding her as “crazy” and worse, their interview was relatively subdued. Ms. Kelly asked mostly personal questions and Mr. Trump offered mostly unsurprising answers.Ms. Kelly’s nightly cable show on Fox News Channel, “The Kelly File,” averages around 2.5 million viewers, about half of the audience for her special on Tuesday, which was shown on the Fox broadcast network. Her fellow Fox anchor, Bill O’Reilly, drew about 2.4 million viewers directly against Ms. Kelly’s show.AdvertisementStill, her interview with Mr. Trump ranked as Fox’s second-most-watched program on a Tuesday this year, behind the “American Idol” finale. It was also a 140 percent improvement in the time slot from last Tuesday, when the channel aired “New Girl.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.