By ANDREW POLLACKNOV. 18, 2015
Martin Shkreli, the brash pharmaceutical executive whose abrupt fiftyfold increase in the price of an old infectious disease drug sparked an uproar, has acquired a majority of the shares of a publicly traded biotechnology company that was about to go out of business.The company, KaloBios Pharmaceuticals, had said on Friday that it would wind down its operations after having suffered various setbacks in developing drugs.But in a statement late Wednesday, KaloBios said that a group led by Mr. Shkreli had acquired more than half of its outstanding shares and that the company was in discussions with Mr. Shkreli about possibly continuing to operate.Shares of KaloBios soared more than 800 percent after hours Wednesday, to more than $19, after Mr. Shkreli’s stock purchases were reported in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The shares had closed at $2.07 in regular trading.Mr. Shkreli, a former hedge fund manager, runs Turing Pharmaceuticals, a private company.It is conceivable that he wants to merge the two companies to take Turing public. But it also seems possible that Mr. Shkreli could sell his KaloBios shares and realize a tidy profit. Through a spokesman, he had no immediate comment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The regulatory filing showed Mr. Shkreli and his group had acquired 1.2 million shares on Monday and Tuesday alone, at an average price of about $1.35 per share. He reported previously owning 414,000 shares, bringing his ownership to about 40 percent of KaloBios on Tuesday. He might also have acquired more shares on Wednesday.“We have received communications from Mr. Shkreli informing us of his group’s ownership position, and a proposal to continue the company’s operations,” Ronald Martell, the executive chairman of KaloBios, said in a statement. “Our board of directors is prepared to entertain any constructive proposal, which we will act upon promptly. Addressing short-term cash needs is our first priority.”Mr. Shkreli, 32, achieved notoriety in September after Turing acquired a 62-year-old drug called Daraprim and raised its price overnight to $750 a tablet, from $13.50. The drug is used to treat toxoplasmosis, a parasitic infection that can cause serious brain damage to people with AIDS and to some babies.After infectious disease doctors and politicians protested, Mr. Shkreli promised to lower the price somewhat but has not done so yet. He has indicated the price reduction would be modest, on the order of 10 percent.A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Shkreli Leads Bid for Biotech Firm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.