
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

MAY 18, 2016
It’s hard to sell any company, but Yahoo is finding that it may be even harder when the entire world seems to know about your supposedly secret bidding.Secrecy is supposed to be the sine qua non of deal-making. An early leak can destroy a deal by driving the share price of the target company too high or by alerting other potential bidders.As a result, deal makers are known for their secrecy, using code names and holding clandestine meetings. In the 1980s, it was not uncommon for law firms to sweep for bugs and for arbitrageurs to camp outside law firm offices to try to figure out who would be the next hostile raider target.Secrets are not always kept, to be sure; in fact, leaks in deal-making are an art form practiced for a variety of purposes. It may just be about a lawyer or a banker cozying up to a journalist. In Britain, it is standard practice to do a “leak announcement” at the start of a negotiation, as bankers are known for regularly leaking deals. It is not quite like that in the United States, but there is a steady stream of dialogue among lawyers, bankers and journalists. After all, they are all in this game together and are likely to see each other again in the next big deal.AdvertisementThe leak cycle can work both ways for companies, though the conventional wisdom is that leaks hurt deals more than help.AdvertisementThat’s probably true for Yahoo. Its sale process is unfolding in the public eye in part as a result of its decision to publicly announce that it is exploring “strategic alternatives” — Wall Street code for a sale. Given Yahoo’s prominence, a media feeding frenzy was always a given.But here’s where it gets interesting. Yahoo is running an auction process. So its goal is to bring in as many bidders as possible to generate a hot auction and push up the price.In this case, reporting on the process has the effect of amplifying the bidders and the numbers they are putting forward. Take the recent reports that Warren E. Buffett and Dan Gilbert of Quicken Loans are in the Yahoo bidding.This is the type of news that bankers love. There is such a glow around Mr. Buffett that it will help make Yahoo shine. It shows other bidders that there is a real player with money in the bidding, which will hopefully push up interest and prices.Never mind that Mr. Buffett is known for paying cheaply most of the time or that this is essentially a private equity bid – one that cannot pay top dollar.Private equity firms often lose out to strategic bidders, real companies that can cut costs and find efficiency in the merger of two entities. Many of the bidders for Yahoo are private equity firms, including TPG Capital, Bain Capital and Vista Equity Partners. That is another bad sign for a high price for Yahoo.Some of the attention over the early stages of the sales process seems unwarranted. The news that there were about 40 bidders for Yahoo in its first round missed the point that these were just companies that had signed confidentiality agreements. The number of bidders is settling down – perhaps to 10 or so. But even those bidders are probably still deciding whether to make final offers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And pay no attention to the presumed range of the latest round of bids — $4 billion to $8 billion. These are simply back-of-the-envelope indications that will change substantially.AdvertisementA steady stream of players has emerged in the media coverage. Verizon, the parent of AOL, is in the mix and is seen by many as the most likely winner. There’s not a lot of foundation to this assertion other than the concept of putting AOL and Yahoo together has become one of the more pitched merger ideas of the decade.Alphabet does not appear to be bidding. (Antitrust issues would most likely prevent it from acquiring Yahoo anyway.) And Microsoft is supposedly lurking to try to tie up with another bidder.Some players may be deliberately leaking that they are not involved in the bidding to signal to their competitors to stay out as well, since they do not have to worry about an Internet behemoth acquiring the company and becoming even more gigantic.The round-by-round coverage of the bidding may push the winner to pay more for Yahoo, but it can also have the opposite effect. If Verizon thinks it is up against only private equity firms, it can adjust its bid lower to account for this.Reports of potential bidders walking away from Yahoo can cool down the auction, too. If bidders are seen as dropping away too quickly, Yahoo will be severely damaged as it becomes known which companies kicked Yahoo’s tires and passed.In other words, the more information other bidders have about the bidding, the more finely they can tune their bids to the competition, at that will most likely result in lower bids.And the coverage becomes a channel for bidders to complain that Yahoo is not disclosing enough information about the business for them to bid. This has put pressure on Yahoo to do more to push the sales process.So we await the next round of bidding – second-round bids are supposedly due in June in what is definitely a slow-motion auction. You can be sure there will be more details and players to surface.Whether it helps Yahoo or not is another question.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »