AdvertisementSupported by2016 TV UpfrontsBy Emily Steel, John Koblin and Michael M. GrynbaumThis week the major television networks are unveiling their offerings for the coming season to advertising buyers. Plenty of money and prestige are at stake. Three New York Times reporters who cover media and television — Emily Steel, John Koblin and Michael M. Grynbaum — assess what they saw during Tuesday’s presentations.MICHAEL: Emily, John, to kick off our discussion of ABC’s upfront on Tuesday, I thought I’d share a 1997 clip from “The Simpsons” about a TV network that dreams up a new ratings bonanza: a talking, wisecracking dog.I thought of this during ABC’s big finale, a video greeting from Martin, the talking canine protagonist of the new sitcom “Downward Dog.” Martin talks to the camera about his troubles and his master, a harried single woman trying to “have it all.” It turns out there was a bidding war over this show! So I’ll reserve judgment for now. But given the old-school vibe at ABC’s presentation, which featured the traditional schedule walk-through and PowerPoint bar charts, it did feel a bit like an old-dog network that hasn’t yet learned the new tricks. Poochie, indeed.JOHN: Yeah, the crowd wasn’t exactly … howling (sorry). On the other hand, the new Kiefer Sutherland drama, “Designated Survivor,” got the biggest reaction we’ve heard over the three network presentations. The trailer lasted about five minutes, by far the longest we’ve seen this week. I’m going to assume the length of the trailer means Big Endorsement. Here’s a shorter clip at 2 minutes and 35 seconds, but it’s got all the good stuff:Big star, attention-grabbing premise. And it won the crowd over hard, which is some good news for ABC after a fairly rough year. EMILY: What didn’t win over the crowd was yet another time-travel show, bringing the tally for next season to a grand total of three. (One for NBC. One for Fox. And now one for ABC.) ABC’s “Time After Time” is billed as “a fantastical cat-and-mouse adventure through time when famed science fiction writer H. G. Wells is transported to modern-day Manhattan in pursuit of Jack the Ripper.” Too bad the network executives couldn’t travel into the future to see that their competitors were all presenting something similar.MICHAEL: There was an odd scene in the trailer where Jack the Ripper sees footage of modern-day school shootings and nods approvingly. Yeesh.JOHN: How long before they reboot “Quantum Leap”? It’s all the rage these days.EMILY: Speaking of which: What do you think the future will hold for Channing Dungey, the new president of ABC Entertainment? Did her first upfront presentation impress?JOHN: She was nervous, and that was endearing. She talked a little bit about being a TV junkie growing up, which played well. This was a down year for ABC (they fell into last place among adults under 50, the only stat that TV execs really care about). ABC’s big play — in addition to breaking up TGIT, its powerful Shonda-Thursday prime-time block, with a non-Shonda show, “Notorious,” — will be more comedies. They’ve added a comedy slate on Tuesday, on top of what they had on Wednesdays and Fridays.MICHAEL: Their new slogan is “Not Just Funny. ABC Funny.” But I’ve heard on good authority that the rival network TBS is allegedly “Very Funny.”JOHN: Also worth mentioning: On the same day that HBO said the little-watched gay series “Looking” would have its series finale in July (I am sad about this, but many other gay men I know do not feel this way!), ABC promoted an eight-part mini-series, “When We Rise,” about the gay rights movement. It’s written by Dustin Lance Black, who won an Oscar for “Milk,” and it’s directed by Gus Van Sant. This fits perfectly with ABC’s brand (diversity), and the crowd dug it.EMILY: One of the event’s biggest personalities — besides the talking dog — was Priyanka Chopra, the Indian actress who plays Alex Parrish in the drama “Quantico,” about F.B.I. recruits at a Virginia base. The show has delivered decentish ratings during its first season, but it looks like ABC is trying to make her its next big star — at least based on Tuesday’s presentation. She opened the show singing and dancing her way down the aisle of the theater in a bright-red, sparkling sequin bodysuit.MICHAEL: Next she’ll have her own reality show. (By the way, only five days until “The Bachelorette” returns! Wish it had been Caila, though.) I’m glad to see Katy Mixon — a.k.a. Kenny Powers’s love interest on “Eastbound and Down” — getting her star moment in “American Housewife,” a sendup of life in Westport, Conn. But the sharpest lines came from Jimmy Kimmel, who got some of the biggest applause I’ve heard all week when he ripped into millennials in a highly amusing, highly profane way. Not a lot of love for millennials in this crowd — even though every network and ad agency is desperately trying to get their attention.JOHN: O.K. guys, on Wednesday we’ve got Turner in the morning and the final network, CBS, at Carnegie Hall in the afternoon. CBS has been the butt of everyone’s jokes all week — Homer Simpson in a Fox skit and Mr. Kimmel in his routine on Tuesday both mocked its … elderly audience — so we’ll see just how good Les Moonves’s comedy department is at striking back.Advertisement