AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedPfizer is nearing a deal to buy Allergan, a rival drug maker that has its headquarters in Ireland, for as much as $150 billion, potentially helping the company move its corporate citizenship abroad and reduce its tax bill, a person briefed on the matter said on Wednesday.The two companies are discussing a potential deal valued at $370 to $380 a share, said the person, who was not authorized to speak publicly about the negotiations. That would make a transaction the biggest announced so far in 2015, in what has proved to be a banner year for deal-making across industries.At the high end of the range, such an offer would represent a premium of more than 22 percent over Allergan’s closing stock price on Wednesday.Yet several details remain unresolved. Among them is whether the timing and structure of a takeover would be affected by new guidelines from the Treasury Department governing so-called corporate inversions, mergers in which the acquirer moves its headquarters to lower-tax jurisdictions abroad.Late last month, the two companies confirmed that they were in preliminary talks.Representatives for Pfizer and Allergan declined to comment.Bloomberg News earlier reported the details of the offer negotiations.A merger would create a company with nearly $53 billion in annual sales, with products including Lipitor, Viagra and Botox.Perhaps more important, it could finally give Pfizer what it has long desired: a chance to move its corporate headquarters and reduce the amount it pays in United States taxes. The company’s chief executive, Ian C. Read, has long spoken of a need to improve the drug maker’s ability to compete against foreign rivals, many of which have more advantageous tax structures.A corporate inversion has offered one potential solution to that problem. In such a deal, an American company buys a foreign target, and if certain conditions are met, the buyer can then change the country it calls its legal home.Allergan presents an opportunity for this kind of move. While its operations are largely in New Jersey, its headquarters are technically in Dublin. In contrast to Pfizer’s 26.5 percent tax rate last year, Allergan reported an effective tax rate of just 4.8 percent for the same period. (Its tax rate this year is about 15 percent.)The present-day Allergan was built out of numerous mergers, including a corporate inversion as well.Besides giving Pfizer a lower tax rate, a deal could help enlarge the company as part of its quest to eventually split into two. It has been looking to separate its higher-growth, brand-name products from its older drugs.Pfizer’s talks with Allergan come more than a year after Pfizer abandoned a bid to acquire AstraZeneca and move its tax headquarters to Britain. That effort led the Treasury Department to tighten some of the guidelines that made inversions so attractive to corporations.Pfizer’s latest merger approach appears to have set off another round of alarms in Washington. On Wednesday, the Treasury Department told members of Congress that it would announce new proposals this week to deter corporate inversions.In a letter to the Senate Finance Committee, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew urged legislative action on the issue.“Treasury cannot stop inversions without new statutory authority,” Mr. Lew said in the letter, addressed to Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, the committee’s ranking member, and also sent to the committee’s chairman, Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah.The letter on Wednesday did not specify what new proposals were being considered.Liz Moyer contributed reporting.Advertisement