By RACHEL ABRAMSMAY 19, 2016
One percent growth may not seem like a lot — unless you’re the world’s largest retailer.Walmart reported on Thursday that its quarterly revenue had risen 0.9 percent, exceeding analysts’ forecasts and signaling that its strategies to combat a tough retail environment were working. The results were particularly striking after dismal earnings reports by several retail chains last week, and Walmart’s shares shot up nearly 10 percent.Investments in everything from employee wages to store layouts had led to higher customer satisfaction, the company said. Shoppers filled more prescriptions, purchased more over-the-counter products and showed more of an appetite for apparel and other general merchandise.“We’re improving our stores, adding critical capabilities and deepening relationships with customers,” Doug McMillon, Walmart’s president and chief executive, said in a call with reporters on Thursday.Department stores including Macy’s, Nordstrom and Kohl’s reported that quarterly sales fell at stores open longer than a year. But Walmart appears to have benefited from Americans’ increased reliance on low-cost or discount stores. Off-price retailers like Ross and the TJX Companies — which operates T. J. Maxx and Marshalls — reported sales increases last year.Advertisement“People are definitely hunting for value, and I think that’s what you’re seeing,” said Charlie O’Shea, the lead retail analyst for Moody’s. “Especially in the apparel sector.”AdvertisementBut doubts persist about whether Walmart is growing fast enough in one increasingly important area: online.“For a company of its size, Walmart underperforms in e-commerce,” said Neil Saunders, a retail analyst for Conlumino.Percentage growth can be misleading. Walmart’s sales increase translates to more than a billion dollars in revenue, essentially the same as adding the entire businesses of Burger King and Tim Hortons. Walmart does not break out a quarterly figure for online sales, but said its e-commerce business had grown 7 percent in the last quarter.Walmart has been investing heavily to increase that business, which, like every other retailer’s, continues to get clobbered by Amazon. Some analysts said that given Walmart’s vast resources, its web business should be growing faster, and Mr. McMillon acknowledged on Thursday that its growth rate was “too slow.”“The U.S. number is better than the global number, but neither is as high as we’d like,” he said.Amazon does much more business than Walmart.com, Mr. Saunders said, and yet it still reports double-digit growth. Amazon reported that net product sales rose 13 percent, to $79.3 billion in 2015, while Walmart reported that global annual e-commerce revenue had risen 12 percent to $13.7 billion in its latest fiscal year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Other retailers are tackling the problems and making headway much better,” said Bernie Sosnick, a retail analyst with Madison Global Partners. “Walmart has plowed so much capital in this that it should be doing as well or better than other retailers.”But Mr. O’Shea of Moody’s argues that comparing Walmart.com and Amazon is like comparing “apples to watermelons.”Advertisement“If Amazon were to get into brick-and-mortar, would it be fair to compare Amazon’s brick-and-mortar business to Walmart’s brick-and-mortar business?” he said. “Probably not, and we’re doing the reverse to that here.”Walmart’s online reinvention, Mr. O’Shea pointed out, has just begun. The company has been aggressively tackling its online business in the last few months, and has committed to investing heavily in a number of areas, including technology.The company recently announced plans to offer free two-day shipping to customers who paid an annual $49 fee. On Thursday, Mr. McMillon also disclosed Walmart’s plans to expand its grocery pickup business to 40 markets by the end of the month, up from 22 early this year.At the same time, the company has expanded its online assortment. At the end of last year, about eight million items were available through Walmart.com. That number is now up to 10 million. Four years ago, it was fewer than two million, according to a spokesman, Dan Toporek.“This takes time,” Mr. O’Shea said. “You don’t just flip a switch and become a great online retailer.”In other areas, Walmart significantly outperformed its peers.Over all, Walmart reported that profit fell to $3.08 billion, or 98 cents a share, compared with $3.34 billion, or $1.03 a share, a year earlier. That beat expectations of 88 cents a share, according to analysts polled by Thomson Reuters. Revenue was $115.9 billion; analysts had expected $113.2 billion.“Walmart, especially with apparel, did better than other retailers for a really stressful period,” Mr. Sosnick said.A version of this article appears in print on May 20, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Walmart Bucks Trend in Retailers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.