By REUTERSMAY 19, 2016
The billionaire investor Steven A. Cohen on Thursday won the dismissal of a long-running lawsuit in which his former wife accused him of cheating her out of millions of dollars in their 1990 divorce.Chief Judge Loretta A. Preska of Federal District Court in Manhattan said Patricia Cohen failed to show that her former husband fraudulently hid $5.5 million from a soured 1986 real estate transaction in New York City, enabling him to lowball his net worth.“We respectfully disagree with the decision,” said Gerald B. Lefcourt, a lawyer for Patricia Cohen.In her lawsuit, Patricia Cohen accused Steven Cohen and his brother Donald, who was also the couple’s accountant, of understating the value of the real estate investment during the divorce proceedings.AdvertisementPatricia Cohen claimed she was entitled to at least half of the $5.5 million at stake, plus interest. But the judge found that there was “no evidence that Steven concealed any assets from Patricia during the divorce,” and that no reasonable jury could find that he had committed fraud.AdvertisementJudge Preska also said the record showed that Patricia Cohen “suspected Steven of fraud in 1991 and 2006,” more than two years before she sued in December 2009, and that the statute of limitations had run out.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mark Herr, a spokesman for Steven Cohen, said: “We’re pleased with the court’s thorough and thoughtful decision.”The divorce came two years before Mr. Cohen created his hedge fund, SAC Capital Advisors, based in Stamford, Conn., where he made his name on Wall Street and his fortune. Forbes magazine estimates his net worth at $12.7 billion.SAC Capital later ran into trouble. In 2013, the fund was forced to plead guilty to criminal charges of insider trading and pay $1.8 billion in settlements to United States regulators.Mr. Cohen, who eventually converted SAC into a so-called family office, Point72 Asset Management, was not criminally charged. Under a January settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission, he can resume managing outside money in 2018.Last month, Steven Cohen disclosed his ownership of a new firm, Stamford Harbor Capital, that can accept outside money, but said he would not act as a supervisor.A version of this article appears in print on May 20, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Cohen Wins Dismissal of Lawsuit by Ex-Wife.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.