AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — Growth in the services sector in the United States slowed in September as sales fell and new orders plunged, evidence that stock market volatility may have hit consumer confidence and limited spending.The Institute for Supply Management said Monday that its services index fell to 56.9 last month, from 59 in August, which was the second-highest reading in a decade. Any reading above 50 signals expansion.A measure of sales fell to 60.2, still a healthy reading, from 63.9. A gauge of new orders, however, dropped nearly seven points to 56.7. That suggests sales growth may continue to cool in the coming months.The survey still points to solid sales and growth for services companies, including retailers, hotels, banks and other financial services companies. More than eight million Americans have found jobs in the past three years, lifting their ability to spend on restaurant meals, clothes and vacations. That pushed up the services index in July and August to the highest levels since 2005.And in September, the institute’s measure of hiring rose, indicating that companies actually added jobs at a faster pace. That suggests companies remain optimistic about the economy. It is also a sign that slower hiring in the past two months, according to government data, may be temporary."The companies still feel confident, and they are still hiring," said Anthony Nieves, chairman of the institute’s services survey committee. "That may bode well for down the road."Some companies that responded to the survey, however, said the stock market’s recent declines had damaged consumer confidence and curtailed sales."This is still a very high reading, despite the bigger-than-expected decline, which likely reflects a knee-jerk reaction to the drop in stock prices," said Ian Shepherdson, chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics.The institute is a trade group of purchasing managers. Its services survey covers businesses that employ 90 percent of workers, including companies in construction, health care and education.While the American economy has been healthy, weak economies overseas and the strong dollar have hammered United States exports of manufactured goods. Factory growth has stumbled and the institute’s manufacturing index has been weak all year. It dropped to just 50.2 in September.Other signs indicate the global growth slowdown is taking a toll on the American economy. Hiring slowed sharply in August and September and employers added an average of just 167,000 jobs a month in the July-to-September period. That is down from an average of 231,000 in the previous three months.Much of the weakness in the jobs report was concentrated outside the service sector. Manufacturers shed jobs for the second straight month, and mining, which includes oil and gas drilling, cut 10,000 jobs.Services companies mostly did better. Retailers added nearly 24,000 jobs, and hotels and restaurants hired at a healthy clip. But there were some weak spots. Financial services employment did not change, and education and health care hiring fell to half its recent pace.Advertisement