AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Jürgen Fitschen, who is stepping down as co-chief executive of Deutsche Bank, will continue to work at the lender with a focus on Germany and Asia, the bank said at its annual meeting on Thursday.Deutsche Bank announced last year that Anshu Jain and Mr. Fitschen would step down as co-chief executives as the bank brought in John Cryan to overhaul the lender, which is Germany’s largest. Mr. Jain resigned in June. Mr. Fitschen is leaving his post as co-chief executive on Thursday.“Jürgen Fitschen has put heart and soul into serving our bank,” Mr. Cryan said in a news release. “He always puts clients first, knows what they expect of us and how we can best fulfill their wishes.”“I am delighted that Jürgen will continue to support the bank and our clients with his valuable expertise and outstanding network,” he said.Mr. Cryan, who joined the lender as co-chief executive in July and is set to become the bank’s sole chief executive, is seeking to simplify the company and improve its returns.In October, he announced plans to eliminate as many as 35,000 jobs through internal cuts, close operations in 10 countries and cut the number of its investment banking customers in half.The bank reported a record loss in 2015 and endured a 58 percent plunge in profit in this year’s first quarter, as it faced challenging conditions in the financial markets amid the attempted turnaround.Mr. Fitschen, 67, who has been at Deutsche Bank since 1987, has an extensive network of clients. He worked for more than a decade in Asia before relocating to Germany, and he has been a member of the bank’s management board since 2009. He was named co-chief executive in June 2012.In his new role, Mr. Fitschen will use his network of contacts to support the bank’s business with key corporate clients. The lender said he would continue to work closely with Deutsche Bank’s management board and with leaders in all of its businesses and regions.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.Advertisement