AdvertisementSupported by2016 TV UpfrontsBy John Koblin and Michael M. GrynbaumThis week the major television networks are unveiling their offerings for the coming season to advertising buyers. Plenty of money and prestige are at stake. Two New York Times reporters who cover media and television — John Koblin and Michael M. Grynbaum — assess what they saw during Wednesday’s CBS presentation.MICHAEL: John, it’s been a grueling week of cocktail shrimp and wagyu sliders, but we made it — the 2016 upfronts are a wrap. I’m still a bit groggy from CBS’s bash on Wednesday at the Plaza, so bear with me here, but the self-styled Tiffany Network’s coming comedy slate left me wondering: Is “Trump Voter” the new coveted demographic?All three of CBS’s new sitcoms feature a middle-aged white man alienated by the modern world. There’s Matt LeBlanc as a contractor suddenly raising the kids when his wife goes back to work (“Man With a Plan”). Kevin James plays a police officer who retires, only to find his daughter is dating a cardigan-clad hipster, among other indignities (“Kevin Can Wait”). And “The Great Indoors” pits Joel McHale against a bevy of millennials making his job obsolete.Prime Trump voters, all! Or maybe it’s like the old Phil Hartman skit “Unfrozen Caveman Lawyer”: a put-upon protagonist whose world frightens and confuses himJOHN: Good morning, Mike. Hope you rubbed the sleep out of your eyes, but yes, CBS got dinged for this on Wednesday (the white male lead thing). Fair.For starters, the network is in a really strong position. It has a ridiculous winning streak, attracting the most viewers among the Big Four networks for 13 out of the last 14 years. And it’s got television’s most dominant comedy, and by a wide margin, in “The Big Bang Theory.” The problem? We’re heading into Year 10 of that show. This isn’t going to last forever. And the thing that scares CBS a little — the way it scares a winning but aging baseball team that can’t produce anything out of the farm system — is it needs a hit. A real hit. Not a medium-size “Life in Pieces” that is a decentish performer.So they’re taking a big swing here — three big promotable stars — and probably willing and ready to take the criticism that comes with the fact that they are all white males. These are shows that may not play with “elites,” like ”Mad Men’’ did, but may play elsewhere. And if they win, they win. (CBS does love to rattle off ratings stats the way a certain candidate loves to talk about poll numbers). Maybe Les Moonves, the chief executive, invited it on himself when he said of Trump a couple months back, perhaps with some regret: “It may not be good for America, but it’s damn good for CBS.”MICHAEL: And those sparkling Nielsen numbers helped CBS upgrade its afterparty to a primo spot on Fifth Avenue, so why mess with success? Unlike some of its rivals, CBS’s upfront presentation was all about continuity over change. NBC went with a “We, for one,  welcome our new digital overlords” vibe. Fox got Ne-yo to perform. CBS opened with a parody of … Frank Sinatra.JOHN: Including a video installation with martini glasses and lyrics like “I did it ‘Eye Way.’” Nice job, guys. When you’re on brand, you’re on brand.I guess one of my takeaways: just how unforgiving CBS can be. At a press breakfast, the network’s longtime scheduling czar, Kelly Kahl, said that “losing is a dirty word” at CBS in the era of Moonves. True of any network, but some shows get breaks. CBS seems more reluctant to offer them. The Jane Lynch comedy “Angel From Hell” did O.K.-ish, and it got yanked after five episodes. Then again, that’s how Mr. Moonves’s pal, Robert Kraft, and his coach, Bill Belichick, handle the New England Patriots (am I going too far in saying Mr. Belichick is a friend of Mr. Trump’s, too?). Also worth noting here: CBS has the N.F.L. on Thursday for the first five weeks in the fall season.So, back to Wednesday’s upfront presentation for ad buyers: Their “late late” man James Corden performed first Thursday. As Alexander Hamilton. Stephen Colbert came on later for a quick routine. They really do love Mr. Corden, don’t they?MICHAEL: It was hard not to read into the order of performances, and the disparate levels of exposure they got, although Mr. Colbert did have to get back to his studio in time to tape his show. But between the “Late Show’s” growing pains and Mr. Moonves’s effusive praise for Mr. Corden, it seemed clear which host is the current toast of Tiffany.JOHN: Then again, Mr. Corden is an actor, and he can sing. He’s also hosting the Tonys (on CBS), so the “Hamilton” tie-in for him specifically is a no brainer. But wait. We’ve talked comedies and late night. You wrote about reboots this week. What’d you think of CBS’s big Friday night play, “MacGyver”?MICHAEL: Corden + Hamilton = the Tonys might finally win the demo! “MacGyver,” on the other hand, may test the longevity of that storied TV brand. The trailer didn’t have the sizzle of Fox’s “24: Legacy” or ABC’s “Designated Survivor.” I liked the quirkiness of “Bull,” which is, quite literally, based on the life of Dr. Phil. And “Pure Genius,” with Dermot Mulroney (not Dylan McDermott), was created by Jason Katims, a former head writer of “Friday Night Lights.”JOHN: Oh, and “The Good Wife” is not dead yet. A spinoff is coming to the CBS app and it’s all about Christine Baranski.MICHAEL: There’s no title yet, but I’d watch anything with Christine Baranski. It’s a good way for CBS to retain the prestige audience that took a break from HBO on Sundays to catch Diane Lockhart & co. The spinoff co-stars Cush Jumbo, who joined “The Good Wife” as Alicia Florrick’s pal Lucca Quinn this past season (and who opens in “The Taming of the Shrew” in Central Park next week)JOHN: O.K., Mike, I need a break. Great talking. See you next May.MICHAEL: I guess it’s time for some post-upfronts R.&R. Hey, is there anything good on TV?JOHN: Mike, can’t hear you. Watching the “Kevin Can Wait” trailer again.MICHAEL: OMG, I just realized that title is a pun.Advertisement