AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy Michael W. PeregrineA germinal governance issue for many regulated companies is not whether their boards should be spending more time on compliance issues, but rather that they should be spending less time.It is an emotional reaction to the unceasing public policy, regulatory and media focus on corporate compliance — and the extent to which compliance matters are consuming the boards’ agendas, to the potential detriment of governance effectiveness.The concept of “the compliance board” was introduced in a 2007 op-ed article by the venture capitalist Thomas Perkins in The Wall Street Journal. He bemoaned the metamorphosis of corporate governance from a venture capital model in which the board is heavily involved (the “guidance board”) to one in which the board is more focused on legal issues (“the compliance board”). The guidance board features industry-specific composition, and an emphasis on performance, strategy, tactics, hiring and firing. The compliance board, on the other hand, has less technical familiarity with the company and is guided in significant part by governance and compliance consultants and lawyers.The article was written when memories of Enron and the expectations of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act were running strong. Many corporate boards were struggling with newly enacted regulatory and stock exchange requirements and best practices applicable to public companies. Mr. Perkins may have been responding in part to the perceived consequences of such increased legal requirements on effective governance.The Sarbanes-Oxley principles are old hat to most boards, but those boards are now struggling with a new and more complex wave of regulatory enforcement. The leading edge of this wave is seen in the regulatory focus on individual accountability and corporate cooperation.Its undertow is felt in an increase in the enforcement of laws relating to false claims, foreign corrupt practices, public safety, price-fixing, market allocation and the like. Its froth is noticed in the rise in whistle-blower claims by corporate gatekeepers such as inside counsel and compliance officers.The cumulative effect on the board agenda can seem overwhelming. There is an incipient, but understandable, sense that in an organization‘s zeal to be “compliant” and to pay needed attention to pressing regulatory concerns of the moment, the board may be deflected from attending to those matters most important for long-term sustainability, if not also short-term performance.Enter into the mix a new report, “Principles and Practices of High-Quality Ethics Programs,” released last month by the Ethics and Compliance Initiative. Its authors reflect a cross section of prominent current and former legislators, government enforcement officials and compliance officers.The report identifies specific principles and practices that characterize “high quality ethics and compliance programs,” or in other words, those that transcend minimum effectiveness standards such as those contained in the federal sentencing guidelines. It is, in essence, a call for more comprehensive and sophisticated compliance programs. The report is a thoughtful document that is likely to attract significant attention — if not outright adoption.For some corporate leaders, however, that attention might take the form of extreme frustration. At what point does enough become enough? For organizations that already feel unduly burdened by compliance commitments, the report’s recommendations may represent the tipping point — when compliance becomes the ultimate, unstoppable corporate bureaucracy. And this may be a dangerous opening for those who, by the promotion of less vigorous and less costly compliance measures, would intentionally or unintentionally expose the company to significant risk.At that point, taking a deep breath is warranted for the board. The unflattering and ineffective characteristics of the compliance board notwithstanding, mature corporate leaders know that there can be no turning back. Legal compliance remains unalterably an important fiduciary commitment of the board. The cost of doing business in a highly regulated industry requires the independent oversight of what the board determines to be an effective compliance program. Effective corporate compliance supports the value of corporate assets and the reputation of the corporation.The release of the Ethics and Compliance Initiative’s report offers an excellent opportunity for board dialogue on the proper balance of compliance and the other critical issues on the board agenda. It also allows for the board to consider whether changes are needed to reposition the board more closely on strategy and tactics: to return to its guidance board roots. For it is surely “best practice” to periodically confirm that the fiduciary agenda is properly balanced between the tactical and the strategic, between the day-to-day and the long term.And, in the end, that may be where the guidance board and the compliance board can comfortably coexist.Michael W. Peregrine is a partner at the law firm McDermott Will & Emery. His views do not necessarily reflect the views of the firm or its clients.Advertisement