AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaTribune Publishing’s latest takeover defense makes for a good headline but may just be disappointing clickbait.The company’s chairman, Michael W. Ferro Jr., is drawing up plans to turn the tables on its unwanted suitor, Gannett, according to Politico. The maneuver would probably require Tribune Publishing to lard itself with enormous debt, which is what made the company vulnerable in the first place.As it stands, Gannett, the owner of USA Today and other newspapers, has offered to buy Tribune Publishing for $490 million in cash, a 99 percent premium to the price of its shares before the hostile takeover attempt was first announced in April. The valuation is also superior to where most of its publicly listed peers trade.For Tribune Publishing to enlist the so-called Pac-Man defense and gobble up its larger rival instead would be considerably more expensive. Assume an all-cash bid without any outside backers at a more standard premium of 30 percent to where Gannett’s shares now trade, and the equity would cost $2.4 billion. Subtract $200 million of cash on Gannett’s balance sheet and factor in Tribune Publishing’s existing $390 million of debt, and the combined company would have net borrowing of $2.6 billion.By 2017, analysts expect Gannett to generate about $420 million of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, and Tribune Publishing almost $140 million. Gannett predicts $50 million of cost savings by merging the operations. Add it all up and total Ebitda could reach $610 million. Net debt would be more than four times that figure.In a shrinking business, that would be a worrisome level for credit-rating agencies and shareholders alike. An aversion to debt is a big reason Gannett spun off from the company’s broadcasting arm last year with net cash.Tribune Publishing also has its own tortured history with debt. When the real estate mogul Sam Zell bought the publisher in 2007, the $13 billion of leverage he burdened the business with led to bankruptcy within a year. Oaktree Capital Management, Tribune Publishing’s second-largest owner after Mr. Ferro, endured four years of the process as one of its senior creditors.The fanciful tactic the chairman is reportedly contemplating reflects just how much he relishes his role as a newspaper owner. Gannett disclosed on Friday that when its executives met with him last week, Mr. Ferro said he was unwilling to engage in deal talks unless he got “a piece of the action.” With his Pac-Man plan, it’s not clear anyone else would want any.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement