
Workspace As told to                     
PATRICIA R. OLSEN

MAY 21, 2016
My office, on the sixth floor of a building on Park Avenue South, overlooks Union Square. There’s a greenmarket below us, and I also have a view of the Metronome, a countdown clock on a building. It gives me perspective and reminds me to stop and smell the roses.The hustle and bustle of the city energizes me, but my office is serene, which is fitting for a company in the beauty and wellness industry. My office is in a high-traffic area and has glass walls, so I see everyone coming and going. Nothing gets past me; I’m always in the know. I’m also the resident greeter. I try to nod or wave to everyone.I have some current and vintage Elizabeth Arden ads in my office. They make me proud. This company has such a celebrated heritage. The ads ground me and keep me focused on where the brand has been and where we’re going.I use a laptop when I travel, but I hook it to a monitor when I’m in my office. It’s easier on my eyes. I use both screens simultaneously to multitask. I might read clinical results about a product from our R.&D. department in email on one screen, and everything that isn’t email on the other.AdvertisementAbout 10 years ago, I bought a plaque inscribed with the phrase “It Can Be Done” in the gift shop at the Ronald Reagan library. I saw it on the former president’s desk there. I’m competitive, and I’m always trying to psych my team up. Leadership is about bringing people along.AdvertisementFriday is our team meeting day. After each department leader gives a report to the whole group, I meet one on one with each person. It puts a finishing touch on the week and leaves everyone free for the weekend.Red doors are an iconic symbol of Elizabeth Arden, and they are also auspicious symbols in the Chinese culture. Every time I see this red tin box, it makes me smile. Also, everyone who knows me knows that I have an unbelievable sweet tooth. I keep my emergency stash of candies in it for that afternoon pick-me-up. I try to farm the candy out to others so I don’t eat it all, but I’m not good at making it someone else’s problem. I start the day with the best intentions by having a good breakfast, but I’m allowed to have some flaws. Otherwise, no one will identify with me.I have a clock where the hours and minutes are listed in a random order; it’s meant to signify that creativity knows no time.In 1995, when I was on the PepsiCo board of directors, I helped the company open a silk factory in China related to an intricate import-export agreement. To commemorate the factory’s opening, we commissioned a Chinese artist to paint seven scrolls for the seven board members. My scroll has a poem that incorporates my name, which in Chinese means, “I will get everything my heart desires.”When my daughter was about 4, she made a plaque with her handprints that I keep on my credenza. I tear up every time I look at it. Though she is grown now, I love to be reminded of her when she was small.I always have a candle at home and at work because they can be good for stress relief. I started this job on the day that Superstart, a new product, started shipping, which I took as auspicious. Another good sign is that I haven’t lit this candle.In 2014 I won a Stevie Award for Female Executive of the Year. I was honored, but the fact that my team at StriVectin, which I led at the time, entered me for it was just as touching. I felt like Sally Field when she said, on winning an Oscar, “You like me!” You never really know if people like you or just know they have to deal with you, so this was nice.Interview conducted and condensed by Patricia R. Olsen.JuE WongA version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2016, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Serene Inner Sanctum at the Center of the Action.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »