By LIZ MOYERNOV. 18, 2015
The New York attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, has named two top lieutenants who will split oversight of criminal cases and the civil cases brought by the office.Jason A. Brown, a former criminal division chief for the United States attorney’s office in Brooklyn and most recently a partner at the law firm Ropes & Gray, will join Mr. Schneiderman’s office as chief deputy attorney general responsible for criminal prosecutions. He also will be supervising defensive litigation.His civil litigation counterpart will be Janet Sabel, who is being promoted to chief deputy attorney general in charge of affirmative litigation. She has been Mr. Schneiderman’s first deputy attorney general of affirmative litigation and joined the office in January 2011.“I am delighted to announce the appointment of two first-rate legal minds,” Mr. Schneiderman said in a statement. “As part of my senior leadership team, both will be invaluable in helping to advance the mission of my office.” The appointments were to be announced on Thursday.AdvertisementThe two take on the roles after the departure of Harlan A. Levy, Mr. Schneiderman’s former top deputy, who left state government to rejoin the law firm Boies, Schiller & Flexner. Mr. Levy played a crucial role in overseeing big investigations by the state, including getting $60 billion in fines from banks for selling flawed mortgage securities.Advertisement Mr. Brown will join the office on Jan. 4. At Ropes & Gray he is a partner specializing in white-collar criminal defense and complex civil litigation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters. He joined the U.S. Attorney’s office in 1991 and was appointed criminal division chief in 1999 by Loretta Lynch, now the United States attorney general. Mr. Brown worked on the federal civil rights cases brought against Nassau County prison guards in the beating death of an inmate in 1999, among other prominent cases. After nine years, he joined the law firm Holland & Knight before moving to Ropes & Gray. He has an undergraduate degree from Princeton University and a law degree from Harvard Law School. Ms. Sabel directed the New York attorney general’s efforts to remove an Alzheimer’s drug from the market to protect consumers’ rights to obtain generic drugs, the first enforcement of the state’s mental health parity laws, and the resolution of a market-redlining investigation against a bank in Buffalo. She entered the attorney general’s office as the executive deputy attorney general for social justice. Before that she was general counsel and chief administrative officer of the Legal Aid Society. She was a clerk for Judge Frank M. Coffin of the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit.  She has an undergraduate degree from Harvard/Radcliffe College and a law degree from New York University. A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Attorney General of N.Y. Picks Top Deputies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.