MAY 22, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.32 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.45 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.24 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida, $241.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida Board of Education, $180 million of public education capital outlay bonds. Competitive.Denton, Tex., $83.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Ladue, Mo., School District, $85.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementBrookland Cayce, S.C., School District, $100 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Fort Worth, $164.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementFort Worth, $75.9 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Los Angeles, $91.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.McKinney, Tex., $59.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Metropolitan Council, Minn., $123.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Mount Vernon, Wash., School District, $56.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Santa Clara, Calif., Financing Authority, $160.9 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Niagara Falls, N.Y., $55.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Alamo, Tex., Community College District, $71 million of limited tax refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Chicago, $348.3 million of airport revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Connecticut, $250 million of Wesleyan University taxable bonds. Goldman Sachs.Connecticut, $500 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Crowley, Tex., Independent School District, $100.7 million of refinancing bonds. Bosc.Florida, $339.3 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Frisco, Tex., Independent School District, $228.7 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Raymond James.AdvertisementGreenville, N.C., $63.4 million of combined enterprise system revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Harris County, Tex., Cultural Education Facilities Financing Corporation, $129.4 million of hospital revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Houston Independent School District, $191.3 million of variable rate limited tax schoolhouse bonds. Morgan Stanley.Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, $265.4 million of water system revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Los Angeles, $65.9 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Massachusetts Educational Financing Authority, $340 million of educational loan revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Minnesota Housing Finance Agency, $153.7 million of housing finance bonds. RBC Capital Markets.New Jersey Health Care Facilities Financing Authority, $180.5 million of refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.North East Texas Regional Mobility Authority, $200 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Paducah, Ky., $62 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.West Palm Beach, Fla., $69.3 million of special obligation bonds. Raymond James.Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, $545.1 million of revenue refinancing bonds. PNC Capital Markets.San Diego Public Facilities Financing Authority, $568 million of water revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.South Orange, Calif., Public Finance Authority, $62 million of utility facility lease revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.AdvertisementSouthern San Francisco Unified School District, $129 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Tempe, Ariz., $93 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Virginia Housing Development Authority, $100 million of mortgage bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Wisconsin, $77.1 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Robert W. Baird.A version of this article appears in print on May 23, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for the Week of May 23.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.