AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesThis is what to expect in the week ahead.ECONOMYFinance ministers from eurozone countries are scheduled to meet on Tuesday with the aim of agreeing on the next disbursement to Greece from an 86 billion euro ($96.5 billion) bailout hammered out last year. The talks in the 19-member group have been complicated by warnings from the International Monetary Fund about Greece’s ability to repay its giant debt. A breakthrough would ease concerns about another embarrassing showdown over Greece’s future in the single-currency zone. On Wednesday, the finance ministers from non-euro countries are expected to join the meeting to discuss creating a blacklist of tax havens and limiting the ability of companies to shift their profits to low-tax jurisdictions. James Kanter On Tuesday, the Commerce Department will release the latest data on new-home sales in April. After several months of declines, new-home sales are expected to show a slight increase, to an annual rate of 520,000 compared with 511,000 in March. Borrowing rates remain low, and continuing strength in the labor market should continue to serve as a tailwind for the real estate market. Nelson D. SchwartzTECHNOLOGYEuropean officials will unveil proposals on Wednesday that could force companies like Netflix and Amazon to devote at least 20 percent of their video-streaming catalogs in Europe to local content. The rules, which are still years away, are also likely to ask the online services to help pay for the production of European movies and television programs. Those demands come as the region’s policy makers look to bolster local content makers, who have often fallen behind their American counterparts. Mark ScottECONOMYOn Wednesday, Russia’s presidential economic council will convene for the first time in three years to discuss strategies to put the country on a long-term growth trend of at least 4 percent. One idea that has been floated in the Russian financial media is a policy, sure to be unpopular, to increase competitiveness by depressing wages even lower than they have fallen during the recession. Another strategy would cut taxes on capital investments. Whatever the recommendations, the high-level meeting is a concession that Russia can no longer count on oil windfalls. In a sign the Kremlin is ready for a policy shift, President Vladimir V. Putin has appointed a noted economic liberal, Aleksei L. Kudrin, above, as deputy chairman of the advisory council. Outside economists are skeptical that Russia can turn around quickly; its gross domestic product contracted 3.7 percent last year. Last week, the International Monetary Fund projected a 1.5 percent drop for 2016. Andrew E. KramerOIL INDUSTRYExxon Mobil and Chevron, the country’s two largest oil companies, hold their annual shareholder meetings on Wednesday, and they are expected to be lively. Activist shareholders at both companies have proposed a series of resolutions that would oblige the companies to take more responsibility for controlling climate change and to report what risks their businesses face in a warming world. Many of the proposals have been offered and rejected in the past, but the global climate change accord reached in Paris last December has given them new momentum. Clifford KraussFOOD INDUSTRYWorkers pushing for higher wages will stage a protest at McDonald’s annual shareholder meeting in Oakbrook, Ill., on Thursday, the day after a strike of fast-food workers is planned in Chicago by the union-organized “Fight for $15” campaign. On Wednesday, advocacy groups plan a protest in Los Angeles outside 365, the first of a chain of new, lower-priced stores from Whole Foods Markets. The protesters, which include Jewish groups, object to John Mackey, above, the co-founder of Whole Foods, sitting on the board of an organization led by a former rabbi accused of sexually abusing a teenager. Stephanie StromECONOMYOn Thursday, the Commerce Department will release the latest data on durable goods orders in April. Over all, durable goods orders are expected have risen by 1 percent, driven by strong orders for aircraft. Economists expect less volatile “core” durable goods to be flat, reflecting weak business investment and continuing softness in the manufacturing sector because of weak demand overseas and the stronger dollar.On Friday, the Commerce Department will announce the first revision of its estimate of economic growth in the first quarter of 2016. The preliminary estimate, released in late April, pegged the annual growth rate for gross domestic product at 0.5 percentage point. Economists expect that estimate to rise to 0.8 percent, helped by updated data showing stronger conditions in terms of construction, trade and consumption. Nelson D. SchwartzSTOCK MARKETShares of Philips Lighting are expected to begin trading on the Euronext stock exchange in Amsterdam on Friday after its initial public offering is priced. Philips Lighting is being spun off from the Dutch electronics giant Philips, which is expected to sell a 25 percent stake in the business in the offering. Chad BrayAdvertisement