AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael Cieply and Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — Sony Pictures needs to keep male moviegoers interested in its “Ghostbusters” reboot after an Internet attack on its female cast. Hillary Clinton wants women to throw their support behind her presidential campaign.In a strange confluence, those agendas risk colliding this week on “The Ellen DeGeneres Show.”To the surprise of Sony, Ms. DeGeneres announced on May 17 that her talk show had booked Mrs. Clinton — a friend, political ally and repeated past guest — to appear Wednesday on an episode for which she had already scheduled the “Ghostbusters” stars Melissa McCarthy, Leslie Jones, Kristen Wiig and Kate McKinnon.“Get your Woman Cards ready,” Ms. DeGeneres wrote on Twitter to her 60 million followers, a reference to the Republican contender Donald J. Trump’s criticism that Mrs. Clinton had relied on playing “the woman’s card.” The show’s website added, “This Wednesday, Ellen’s sitting down with some powerful women!”For Mrs. Clinton, her identification with a hip, and somewhat younger, group of actresses is a chance to score points with younger female voters. On the heels of Ms. DeGeneres’s tweet came a fan-made follow-up post showing a smiling Mrs. Clinton in a “Ghostbusters” jumpsuit standing next to Mr. Trump as the film’s gluttonous Slimer.Ms. DeGeneres is scheduled to tape Mrs. Clinton and the “Ghostbusters” cast separately. That may help to minimize any alignment between film and her campaign, though Ms. DeGeneres’s enthusiasm for both has already been obvious.But the not-quite-joint appearance came as less-than-welcome news to Sony, whose marketing team has been fighting to tamp down what it sees as a misogynistic, Internet-based assault on the movie. The first trailer for the new film, released in early March, became the most disliked trailer in YouTube history after a coordinated campaign by a group of mostly male naysayers.In the best of circumstances, film studios are reluctant to let a big-budget film — “Ghostbusters” cost more than $150 million to make — become identified with a political candidate. Mr. Trump, who must overcome major weaknesses among female voters, has also shown a willingness to fuel the unwanted “Ghostbusters” gender debate. “Now they’re remaking ‘Ghostbusters’ with only women,” he said with derision in a recent video. “What’s going on?”Amy Pascal, a producer of “Ghostbusters,” declined to discuss the “Ellen” booking or its potential perils for the film. Warner Bros., which produces “The Ellen DeGeneres Show,” said no one involved with the show would comment.In a statement, Tom Rothman, chairman of the Sony motion pictures group, made light of the film’s brush with politics. “All this attention is great, but I hope they realize that Slimer is not a registered voter,” Mr. Rothman said of those with an eye on the “Ellen” appearance.From a business aspect, the new “Ghostbusters,” set for release on July 15, carries oversize weight for Sony, which has been hurt by a shortage of blockbusters. Sony urgently wants to resuscitate this franchise, with a separate animated “Ghostbusters” movie also in the pipeline.Multiple people involved with the film, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of confidentiality strictures, said that Sony secured the “Ellen” booking two months ago, and that the studio was thrilled with the chance to promote “Ghostbusters” in such a positive, prominent setting. The date for the appearance was mandated by the schedules of two of the actresses, Ms. Jones and Ms. McKinnon, who portrays Mrs. Clinton as a humorous ball of unbridled ambition on “Saturday Night Live,” which concluded its season over the weekend. Ms. McKinnon portrayed Mrs. Clinton on that episode, and the two appeared in a sketch together last year.In the months since the booking was made, Sony has found itself trying to douse an online brush fire over the film’s female cast and overall decision to revisit the original film. Just last week, the criticism flared anew, when a popular YouTube critic and the operator of Cinemassacre, a movie and video game fan site, announced that he would not review the film.Sony has traced hostility toward “Ghostbusters” to a small number of fan sites that embedded the YouTube trailer. The studio found that a parallel trailer release on Facebook was overwhelmingly positive, and actually was seen by more men than women, according to people briefed on the film.The film’s director, Paul Feig, has fired back at the critics on social media, and male cast members from the original “Ghostbusters” — whose $229 million in 1984 ticket sales would translate to about $584 million today — have helped to mute the gender politics. Bill Murray, who has a cameo, has been openly supportive.Mrs. Clinton has leaned heavily on “Ellen” to help humanize herself beyond policy speeches and personal attacks leveled on cable news. Tuesday’s sit-down is the third time this cycle Mrs. Clinton will appear with Ms. DeGeneres. The appearance coincides with a new ABC News-Washington Post poll showing 53 percent of voters have an unfavorable opinion of Mrs. Clinton, compared to 60 percent who said the same about Mr. Trump.But in helping Mrs. Clinton reach women, the hit daytime show has inadvertently gotten in the way of Sony’s efforts to hold young males, a vital component of the audience for all but a handful of summer blockbusters (like, for instance, “Sex and the City,” in 2008).Sony has circulated online posters for “Ghostbusters” with looks that are more provocative than the janitorlike outfits displayed on one the film’s early promotional images. One set of dark, moody posters shows a shadowy Ms. Wiig in a profile reminiscent of the noir advertisements for the graphic novel-based movie, “Sin City.”Even while swatting at armchair critics who dislike the notion of a female “Ghostbusters,” Sony and its filmmaking team have been weathering accusations of racial bias. Those have come from commentators who note that the three white female “Ghostbusters” are scientists or professionals, while the black partner, portrayed by Ms. Jones, is a transit worker.“Why can’t a regular person be a ghostbuster?” Ms. Jones responded on Twitter.Amy Chozick contributed reporting from New York.Advertisement