By ANDREW POLLACKMAY 23, 2016
LOS ANGELES — Dr. Patrick Soon-Shiong, the new vice chairman and second-largest investor in Tribune Publishing, is believed to be the wealthiest physician in the world and the richest person in this city, surpassing all the Hollywood moguls.Much of that fortune, valued at $11.9 billion by Forbes, came from selling generic drugs and from developing one new type of drug to treat cancer.But his meteoric rise has not been without controversy, either, as he has developed a reputation for exaggerating his prospects and accomplishments.“He thinks big and sometimes his statements come off hyperbolic,” said Dr. Eric Topol, professor of genomics at the Scripps Research Institute. “Only time will tell” how much he really accomplishes, Dr. Topol said.AdvertisementIn a brief interview Monday, Dr. Soon-Shiong said he did not see his $70.5 million investment in Tribune Publishing, which owns The Los Angeles Times and The Chicago Tribune, as a philanthropic exercise. But he said he did consider newspapers a “public trust” and wanted to preserve them.AdvertisementDr. Soon-Shiong (pronounced Soon Shung) said he appreciated the value of a free press after having grown up in apartheid-era South Africa, the son of immigrants from China.“I recognize the press is a very valuable tool for the community, where it really adds to democracy,” he said. He also said the investment could make money if Tribune could be transformed from a “legacy newspaper company” into a technology and content company.On politics, Dr. Soon-Shiong, 63, called himself the “quintessential independent.” He has donated $82,400 to campaigns, according to the Federal Election Commission, including $60,000 to the Democratic National Committee. But he has also donated to Rudolph Giuliani and Rick Perry, both Republicans.Dr. Soon-Shiong said it was his medical projects that got him involved with Tribune. His companies were developing artificial intelligence and machine vision — for such tasks as having a computer analyze pathology slides or helping the vision-impaired to navigate.Michael W. Ferro Jr., who is now the biggest shareholder in Tribune, had been an investor in a medical imaging company, Merge Healthcare, and came to see what Dr. Soon-Shiong had developed. Under a deal also announced Monday, Tribune will have access to that technology for use in the newspaper business, eventually paying royalties to one of Dr. Soon-Shiong’s companies.One use, Dr. Soon-Shiong said, could be to point a phone camera at an article in the printed newspaper and have related video content pop up.Dr. Patrick Soon-Shiong, on CNBC, explained why he invested $70.5 million in Tribune Publishing and the reasons for rejecting Gannett's latest offer for the company.Taking a stake in the owner of The Los Angeles Times would not be out of character for Dr. Soon-Shiong. While not well known outside Los Angeles, he has taken an active role in institutions here.AdvertisementHe is a part owner of the Los Angeles Lakers, buying Magic Johnson’s 4.5 percent stake. He made an unsuccessful bid to buy the Dodgers, losing out to a group that included Magic Johnson.He and his wife, Michele Chan, an actress, have given at least $135 million to Saint John’s Health Center in Santa Monica, and he has helped reopen Martin Luther King Jr. Community Hospital, which serves impoverished South Los Angeles.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After getting his medical degree in South Africa, Dr. Soon-Shiong became a doctor at the University of California, Los Angeles.In 1993, he made headlines for doing the first transplant of insulin-producing pancreatic cells into a patient with Type 1 diabetes. While he proclaimed that the procedure had succeeded, other experts questioned that claim.He started a company selling generic drugs, taking advantage of a financial relationship with Premier, a group that buys drugs for hospitals. The company, APP Pharmaceuticals, was sold to the German company Fresenius for an initial payment $3.7 billion in 2008.His biggest accomplishment was the development of the cancer drug Abraxane. It consists of the widely used drug paclitaxel (also known by the brand name Taxol) linked to particles of albumin, a protein in blood. That helps the drug get to the tumors better and makes the treatment more tolerable.Doctors debate whether any advantages of Abraxane merit the extra cost compared with generic paclitaxel. But Celgene, the large biotechnology company, saw enough in Abraxane to acquire the company that controlled it for an initial payment of $2.9 billion in 2010.Dr. Soon-Shiong’s new project is NantWorks, an “ecosystem” of different companies aimed at medicine. “We like to think NantWorks is combing the inventive spirit of Thomas Edison or Leonardo da Vinci,” its website says. “All at the scale of Bell Labs.”One company in the network, NantKwest, is developing cancer treatments that harness the body’s immune system. It went public last summer with an initial market value of $2.6 billion, a record for a biotechnology company. The stock has lost three-quarters of its value since then.AdvertisementAnother company, privately held NantHealth, is trying to use DNA sequencing and high-powered computing to quickly analyze a patient’s genes and other medical information and suggest the best treatment. It has raised more than $600 million, including from the government of Kuwait.Two former executives filed a wrongful termination lawsuit accusing NantHealth of making fraudulent claims about the reliability of its technology. The company says the suit is without merit.In January, Dr. Soon-Shiong announced a Cancer Moonshot 2020 program, in which companies like Celgene and Amgen would cooperate on certain clinical trials. He has also been an adviser to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., though Mr. Biden’s cancer moonshot program is distinct from Dr. Soon-Shiong’s.A version of this article appears in print on May 24, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Doctor’s Stake in Tribune Is to Preserve ‘Public Trust’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.