AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — Late last year, Hewlett-Packard split itself into two, believing that smaller was better.Now one of those publicly traded companies is making itself even smaller.Hewlett Packard Enterprise said on Tuesday that it would sell its business that focuses on call centers and maintains networks for clients to the Computer Sciences Corporation in an all-stock deal that would create a new company worth roughly $9 billion.The deal is meant to be the next step in the turnaround of the corporate descendants of Hewlett-Packard, which broke itself apart last fall after years of struggling to turn around its fortunes. The Silicon Valley icon split itself into two smaller companies: HP Enterprise, which focuses on selling hardware like servers to corporate customers, and HP Inc., which specializes in personal computers and printers.Behind the split was the belief of Meg Whitman, the former chief executive of Hewlett-Packard and now the leader of HP Enterprise, that focus is better. It is a decidedly different path from what others in the corporate computing business are taking: Dell is in the midst of buying the data storage business EMC to create a huge giant in the field.“These are two quite different strategies,” Ms. Whitman said in a phone interview. “Ours is to get smaller. Theirs is to get bigger.”(On Tuesday, HP Enterprise also said that it earned $300 million during the quarter ended April 30, flat from last year.)HP Enterprise’s turnaround now includes selling off the company’s enterprise services business to Computer Sciences — which also happens to be the product of a corporate breakup. Computer Sciences’ former parent spun out a government-focused business last year and merged it with another company, a structure similar to Tuesday’s deal.That left Computer Sciences as a publicly traded company focused on information technology services, and, executives from both HP Enterprise and Computer Sciences told analysts on Tuesday, perfect for each other.Under the terms of the deal, HP Enterprise will spin off the enterprise services unit, which will then merge with Computer Sciences in an all-stock transaction. Shareholders of HP Enterprise and Computer Sciences will each own half of the new company’s shares.HP Enterprise estimated that its shareholders will get significant value from the deal, including $4.5 billion from their holdings in the new company and $1.5 billion through a special cash dividend. The combination is expected to yield about $1 billion in cost savings after the deal closes.The chairman and chief executive of Computer Sciences, Mike Lawrie, will hold those roles at the new company. Hewlett-Packard Enterprise’s chief executive, Meg Whitman, will join the merged board.The complex maneuver, known in deal-making circles as a reverse Morris Trust, means that shareholders in both HP Enterprise and Computer Sciences will not have to pay taxes on the merger.“The deal that we announced today is a game-changing move that unlocks value,” Ms. Whitman said. “I think it unlocks value in a way that is quite elegant.”Shares of HP Enterprise rose nearly 11 percent in after-hours trading, to $18, while Computer Sciences shares climbed almost 24 percent, to $44.05.Tuesday’s deal essentially undoes HP’s nearly $13 billion takeover of Electronic Data Systems, the outsourcing business founded by H. Ross Perot, in 2008.Ms. Whitman was careful not to overtly criticize the deal, one of several by the old Hewlett-Packard that has drawn criticism over the years. She said only that her predecessors made decisions based on information that was available at the time.“C.E.O.s make judgments in the market about what works,” she said. Referring to cloud computing, the model that has become central to the corporate technology industry, she added, “Nobody knew what cloud was in 2008.”Advertisement