By LESLIE PICKERMAY 23, 2016
The Tribune Publishing Company is testing Gannett’s limits.The publisher of The Chicago Tribune and The Los Angeles Times has rejected both of Gannett’s takeover proposals, the latest valued at nearly double the price of Tribune’s stock before news of their potential combination first surfaced in April.On Monday, in rejecting that latest bid, Tribune Publishing raised the pressure, saying it would issue almost five million shares to an investor who has agreed to side with the chairman, Michael W. Ferro Jr., on major issues. The investor, Nant Capital, and a fund run by Mr. Ferro combine to control nearly one-third of Tribune shares.Separately, a firm that is vital in wrangling shareholder votes rebutted Gannett’s takeover efforts by encouraging Tribune Publishing investors to vote in favor of its board.Gannett responded on Monday by saying it needed to review whether to proceed with the offer after its shareholders meeting next week. In other words, Gannett could very well choose to walk away.AdvertisementThe back-and-forth, which has been intensifying since late April, has many shareholders scratching their heads.Advertisement“The difference between truth and fiction is that fiction has to make sense, and this doesn’t make a lot of sense,” said Bill Smead, the chief executive and chief investment officer of Smead Capital Management, which owns about 5 percent of Gannett shares.Gannett, publisher of USA Today, sweetened its offer for Tribune Publishing a week ago to $15 a share from the $12.25 offer that Tribune rejected in early May. Tribune Publishing said in a statement on Monday that it had “thoroughly evaluated” Gannett’s latest proposal and determined that it was not in the best interest of its shareholders.That rejection came with some firepower in the form of a $70.5 million investment by Nant Capital, founded by Patrick Soon-Shiong, a billionaire who has started several health care companies and is a part owner of the Los Angeles Lakers basketball team. Tribune Publishing agreed to issue Nant Capital 4.7 million shares at $15 each to support the company’s stand-alone strategy, the company announced on Monday. Tribune Publishing shares traded about 20 percent below that price on Monday.Nant Capital has agreed to vote its shares in favor of Tribune Publishing’s election of directors, and said in the case of a takeover, or change in control, Nant would vote proportionately to how all other shares of Tribune were voting.Dr. Soon-Shiong was also invited to join the board of Tribune Publishing as vice chairman, a role that will start on June 2.Tribune Publishing’s largest shareholder is Merrick Ventures, the private equity firm founded by Mr. Ferro.The new investment appears to offset the influence of Oaktree Capital Management, a Los Angeles fund that had been in favor of exploring a potential combination of the two companies. Oaktree was Tribune Publishing’s second-largest shareholder until the investment by Nant Capital.AdvertisementOaktree Capital Management has urged the board in a letter filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to establish an independent committee to consider Gannett’s proposal.John B. Frank, Oaktree’s vice chairman, said that Mr. Ferro had not been acting for all shareholders. He detailed motives by Mr. Ferro, like his unwillingness to engage with Gannett unless he personally got a “piece of the action.”Mr. Ferro had been willing to negotiate with Gannett only if he were able to have a significant role in the combined company and to become its largest shareholder, the letter said, citing a Gannett proxy filing.In response to Oaktree, Justin C. Dearborn, the chief executive of Tribune Publishing, said that “no such committee is appropriate or necessary.” Mr. Dearborn pointed to an offer by a private, independent party to acquire Oaktree’s Tribune shares for $15 each, which Oaktree declined.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Our entire board is perplexed by the apparently coordinated behavior of Gannett and Oaktree, and we question Oaktree’s underlying motives,” Mr. Dearborn said.Those shareholders who disagree with Mr. Ferro’s strategy may have little recourse. Because Gannett missed the window to nominate its own directors to Tribune Publishing’s board, Gannett decided to solicit so-called withhold votes. This tactic, aimed to put pressure on Tribune Publishing to entertain the offer, asks shareholders to boycott their votes as a symbolic way of showing their dissatisfaction.Gannett’s plan, however, did not get much support from an influential proxy advisory firm, Institutional Shareholder Services, which recommended that Tribune Publishing shareholders vote in favor of the company’s board at the annual meeting next month. I.S.S. said that “the board has grounds for declining to engage on an offer with an eye-popping premium to the market.”“The market price itself may not have fairly represented the intrinsic value of the company — let alone its prospects under the revised strategic plan being formulated by its new leadership,” the I.S.S. report said.Gannett said in a statement on Monday that it would review whether to proceed with its acquisition offer after it received the results from the withhold vote campaign.AdvertisementGannett has been looking to acquire Tribune since at least mid-April as part of its strategy to consolidate the newspaper industry to extract costs and streamline operations.It may not be willing to bid much higher than $15 when it could turn around and find another target, analysts and investors said.“Gannett investors like us thought it was great if you could buy them at a nice price, but there’s many more fish in the sea as you consolidate this industry,” Mr. Smead said.Tribune Publishing, on the other hand, has been investing in technology, like artificial intelligence, to increase its revenue.As part of the investment with Nant Capital, Tribune Publishing will receive access to 100 machine vision and artificial intelligence patents for news purposes. According to the term sheet that Tribune Publishing signed with NantWorks, Dr. Soon-Shiong’s company, Tribune Publishing will be able to keep the first $80 million in revenue from those patents and will have to pay NantWorks a 6 percent royalty on revenue thereafter.Even though Tribune Publishing rejected the increased offer, it did invite Gannett to sign a mutual nondisclosure agreement, by which it could start due diligence and discussions to see whether a transaction could be negotiated, Monday’s statement showed. Gannett may not be apt to sign the document, however, if it precludes soliciting shareholder votes in the future.Methuselah Advisors has been advising Gannett, as has the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom. Goldman Sachs and Lazard are providing financial advice to Tribune Publishing, with Kirkland & Ellis on the legal side.A version of this article appears in print on May 24, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Tribune Publishing, With New Backer, Rejects Gannett’s Bid Again.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.