By KATIE ROGERSMAY 23, 2016
Michelle Fields, the former Breitbart News reporter who accused Donald J. Trump’s campaign manager of shoving her at a rally in March, has resurfaced in a familiar role with a new, if slightly unlikely, employer: The Huffington Post, a well-known liberal news outlet.Ms. Fields said that in her move to The Huffington Post, which was first reported by CNN, she will continue covering Mr. Trump’s presidential campaign, an assignment she previously had said she would not take again.“I changed my mind once things cooled down and I had time to reflect,” she said in an email on Monday.The Huffington Post, a site that attaches an editor’s note to all coverage related to the Republican front-runner that calls Mr. Trump a “racist” and a “serial liar” among other things, will be an ideological change for Ms. Fields, 28, who has spent most of her career in conservative media.AdvertisementMs. Fields said that she considered several requests from other conservative outlets, but said she was ready for a change after months of fallout from an altercation with Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski.AdvertisementMs. Fields accused Mr. Lewandowski of grabbing her arm and shoving her when she tried to ask Mr. Trump a question at a campaign rally in Florida on March 8. Mr. Lewandowski was charged with battery, though prosecutors in Palm Beach County decided not pursue a case against him. Though the police said that her account of what happened reflected what was recorded on security cameras, both the Trump campaign and Ms. Fields’s former employers at Breitbart initially questioned Ms. Fields’s credibility.“How do you know those bruises weren’t there before?” Mr. Trump asked after Ms. Fields shared a photo of her arm that showed where she was grabbed. Mr. Trump’s criticism came during a period of heightened scrutiny on his campaign rallies, which were marked by violent scuffles between protesters and Mr. Trump’s supporters.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Fields called the following weeks a “dark time,” and said that in addition to leaving her job at Breitbart, she was forced to move to a new home in Washington after her home address was made public. Both Fox News and BuzzFeed initially published Ms. Fields’s personal information without redacting it from a police report before removing the original reports.Ms. Fields said she also lost a guest role on the Fox News show “Cashin’ In” as a result of the fallout. (Fox News disputes that and the show’s senior producer has said that he was open to Ms. Fields making future appearances.) Several other Breitbart employees left their jobs in solidarity with Ms. Fields.“I had to deal with death threats,” she said.Ms. Fields declined to comment on whether reports that she was planning to file a defamation lawsuit against Mr. Trump and Mr. Lewandowski were true.At The Huffington Post, Ms. Fields would probably continue covering Mr. Trump’s campaign as an outsider: The Huffington Post is among the news organizations Mr. Trump has frequently blacklisted from his campaign events.Jim Treacher, a blogger at The Daily Caller, one of Ms. Fields’s former employers, supported Ms. Fields’s move to The Huffington Post. In a blog post published on Monday, Mr. Treacher wrote that her new role would encourage political diversity in a left-leaning news site.“I’m always glad to see a conservative invading a liberals-only space,” Mr. Treacher wrote, adding, “Preaching to the choir isn’t enough. Sometimes people need to hear things they don’t want to hear.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.