
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

MAY 23, 2016
The case has all the ingredients to put the spotlight back on insider trading: a flawed corporate director accused of repeatedly leaking information to a high-rolling Las Vegas gambler that helped him realize about $40 million in gains and losses avoided, and passing along a tip about an impending corporate spinoff that helped a near-legendary professional golfer repay nearly a million dollars lost on bets.Yet the charges may not be quite as easy to prove as they first appear.The Justice Department charged  William T. Walters, one of the most successful sports bettors in the country, with trading on information provided by Thomas C. Davis, a former investment banker who was chairman of the board of Dean Foods and a consultant in an activist campaign involving Darden Restaurants. Mr. Davis agreed to plead guilty and is cooperating.A lawyer for Mr. Walters said that he was “a true American success story, whose extraordinary accomplishments as a lawful sports gambler have been widely recognized and lauded” and planned to fight the charges.The golfer is Phil Mickelson, winner of five major championships and a member of the World Golf Hall of Fame who was named as a “relief defendant” by the Securities and Exchange Commission in a parallel civil complaint. Although not accused of violating the law, Mr. Mickelson agreed to repay more than $1 million in profits and interest from trading in Dean Foods stock based on information provided by Mr. Walters.AdvertisementPreet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, held a news conference to hail the charges, saying that “brazen insider trading continues to be a blot in our securities markets.”AdvertisementThis was his office’s first major insider trading prosecution since a federal appeals court overturned the convictions of two hedge fund managers in United States v. Newman in December 2014 that led to the reversal of a number of convictions.The Newman decision put a damper on insider trading cases by making it more difficult to prove a violation when tipping confidential information is involved. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit held that the government must show that each recipient who trades on the information, called a tippee, knew the tipper received a benefit from providing the information to prove there was a breach of duty need for securities fraud.The appeals court clouded the law by asserting that when the benefit is based on friendship between the tipper and tippee, then the government must further show “a meaningfully close personal relationship that generates an exchange that is objective, consequential, and represents at least a potential gain of a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature.”Just being buddies would no longer be enough for an insider trading violation, an approach that had been a staple of cases brought by the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission in the past.To avoid the barrier set up by the opinion in the Newman case, the indictment describes the tangible benefit as loans Mr. Walters made to Mr. Davis totaling nearly $1 million during the period when he was providing information about earnings announcements and corporate restructurings at Dean Foods. Mr. Davis did not make any payments on the loans until word of the investigation appeared in the news in 2014.The S.E.C., which must meet the same benefit requirement, stated in its complaint that Mr. Davis gave the information as a way of buying future favors from Mr. Walters, which he cashed in by getting financial assistance when his gambling debts grew larger.Is that enough to meet the benefit requirement identified in the Newman case? An exchange of loans for information shows something of value being passed, and using inside information to build a reservoir of good will can have tangible value.
                Federal authorities announced criminal charges against the ex-chairman of Dean Foods and a sports gambler with ties to prominent athletes and corporate executives.            But neither the Justice Department nor the S.E.C. link a particular loan to dispensing confidential information, focusing generally on a type of mutually beneficial arrangement without any specific quid pro quo exchange. For example, the indictment traces a pattern of illicit disclosures by Mr. Davis going back to 2008, but the first loan from Mr. Walters was not made until 2010.AdvertisementThat raises the issue whether a bookie-gambler relationship is enough to show the type of beneficial exchange needed to establish insider trading. The bookie wants the gambler to keep betting, and so may extend credit to keep the player in the game.If Mr. Davis repaid the loans to Mr. Walters by giving him inside information as a type of betting chit, that would probably be enough to prove a violation. Whether that’s the theory that prosecutors and the S.E.C. plan to pursue will have to await further development of the case.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The issue of what benefit is sufficient to prove insider trading will be argued in the Supreme Court later this year in United States v. Salman, a case from California in which information about impending deals was passed among close family members, but nothing of any tangible value was provided.There is a possibility that the justices will raise the bar for showing when tipping violated the law, which could make proving the case against Mr. Walters more difficult.Prosecutors hedged their bets against that possibility by including wire fraud charges against Mr. Walters that are a carbon copy of the insider trading counts in the indictment. Unlike securities fraud, the elements of wire fraud do not require proving a breach of fiduciary duty by the tipper from receiving a benefit from the tippee, only that the defendant obtained money or property by means of a scheme to defraud.The Supreme Court upheld mail and wire fraud convictions for trading on confidential information in Carpenter v. United States, a case involving information used profitably by a reporter before its publication in The Wall Street Journal. So there is a backup plan in place if the securities fraud charges falter.A potentially more significant problem for the Justice Department is that the prosecution relies largely on the credibility of Mr. Davis, who will be a crucial source of evidence about the benefits he received.In addition to insider trading, he pleaded guilty to perjury and obstruction of justice charges for giving false testimony in the S.E.C.’s investigation and throwing a prepaid cellphone he used to communicate with Mr. Walters into a creek after F.B.I. agents interviewed him about the trading. Mr. Davis also misappropriated $100,000 from a charity he ran. That paints him as a liar and thief, which is unlikely to bolster his testimony if the case goes to trial.AdvertisementOne way to strengthen the government’s proof of insider trading is to call Mr. Mickelson to testify about what Mr. Walters told him regarding Dean Foods. The golfer bought $2.4 million worth of stock in three accounts — his first time investing in the company and by far the largest purchases he had made in the accounts. Just a week later, the announcement of a spinoff of one of the company’s divisions let him sell the shares at a profit of about $931,000, the equivalent of about a second-place finish in a professional golf tournament.To put up that much money, and make such a handsome profit, would probably involve a discussion with Mr. Walters that went beyond him just saying “here’s a good company for you to consider.” As Joe Nocera pointed out in The New York Times, Mr. Mickelson is the real beneficiary of the decision in the Newman case because evidence of his knowledge of any benefit given by Mr. Walters to Mr. Davis appears to be scant, so “he’s off the hook” for any insider trading charges.For prosecutors, Mr. Mickelson’s repayment of the trading profits makes him into a much better potential witness because he is largely untainted by the misuse of inside information, restoring some of his “good guy” image. Add to that his media savvy as a national figure, and he may well be a witness who can bolster the case against Mr. Walters because he does not have the kind of baggage that Mr. Davis carries as a witness for the prosecution.Whether the Justice Department can obtain a conviction is always difficult to predict. And it gets even harder in this case because Mr. Walters has been charged four times before with other offenses, but has never been convicted. So don’t — ahem — bet against him.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »