By DAVID JOLLYMAY 23, 2016
PARIS — The French insurer AXA Group said on Monday that it would join the global movement to exit tobacco investments by unloading about $2 billion in cigarette company stocks and bonds.The decision to exit such investments comes after a campaign by activists at the Union for International Cancer Control, the Tobacco Free Portfolios initiative and other organizations. AXA, which is based in Paris, said on Monday that it would immediately unload about 200 million euros, or about $224 million, of tobacco stocks, and that it would sell off its portfolio of tobacco company bonds, valued around €1.6 billion, as they matured.The move puts an end to the apparent conflict involved with a financial institution that has enormous health and life insurance businesses investing in a product known to cause cancer and other diseases. AXA is one of the world’s top insurance and wealth management companies, with 103 million clients, and revenue last year of €99 billion.“We strongly believe in the positive role insurance can play in society, and that insurers are part of the solution when it comes to health prevention to protect our clients,” Thomas Buberl, AXA’s deputy chief executive, said in a statement. “Hence, it makes no sense for us to continue our investments within the tobacco industry.”AdvertisementAXA’s announcement on Monday is the latest involving investors divesting themselves of tobacco. Six years ago, the Norwegian sovereign wealth fund, a titan of so-called ethical investing, announced that it was dropping tobacco from its portfolio.AdvertisementMany individual investors are not even aware that their mutual funds or retirement accounts include tobacco stocks, but those who act to buy only ethical investments find there can be a financial price to pay.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Indeed, the cost of such divestment can be significant. The California Public Employees’ Retirement System, or Calpers, decided in 2000 to divest its tobacco investments. It is now rethinking that decision, after a study found that divestment had caused it to miss out on $3 billion in investment gains.Mr. Buberl acknowledged that the decision “has a cost for us, but the case for divestment is clear: The human cost of tobacco is tragic; its economic cost is huge.”AXA noted that tobacco was “the major cause of long-term noncommunicable diseases,” responsible for the deaths of six million people each year.“We need companies like AXA to signal that investing in an industry which kills its customers is simply the wrong thing to do,” Cary Adams, chief executive of the Union for International Cancer Control, said in the same statement, “and this announcement to divest €1.8 billion is a milestone step in the right direction.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.