By JOHN HERRMAN and NICK WINGFIELDMAY 24, 2016
The world of competitive video game sports has moved to the mainstream without much help from television. More than ever, though, television wants to get into the action.On Tuesday, ELeague, a new gaming league, began pitting well-known gamers against one another on Twitch, the popular online video streaming service. The game: the first-person shooter Counter-Strike: Global Offensive. The objective: to kill the opposing team.On Friday night, this week’s winning teams will go to virtual war live, but not just online — also on TBS, the national cable television channel.ELeague is not the first attempt to bring e-sports, as competitive video gaming is known, to TV. And, with a 10 p.m. slot in the schedule, the weekly three-hour broadcasts are not getting the most prime placement — this week’s lead-in is a syndicated rerun of “The Big Bang Theory.”AdvertisementBut if previous attempts to televise e-sports, including an ill-fated league founded by DirecTV, have treated the industry as small-time and in need of mainstream attention, ELeague is aiming to translate the online sensibility of e-sports for television. If all goes as planned, ELeague on TBS will be TV created in the image of successful online e-sports, rather than the other way around.Advertisement“E-sports doesn’t need TV,” said Joost van Dreunen, the chief executive of SuperData Research, a firm that tracks the e-sports and game markets. “TV needs e-sports.”There are expected to be about 214 million viewers for e-sports competitions globally this year, up from 188 million last year, SuperData Research estimates. About 85 percent are male and nearly half are between 18 and 25 years old, the firm says.Global revenue for the e-sports market, including corporate sponsorships, prize money, ticket sales and merchandise, is expected to be about $893 million this year, up 19 percent from the year before, according to SuperData.Still, e-sports and the money supporting it have not reached television audiences in the same way other sports have. And Mr. van Dreunen said that those in the largely young, male audience watching e-sports competitions online — when they’re not playing games themselves or otherwise distracted by other digital sources of entertainment — are increasingly difficult for traditional television programmers to reach.With ELeague, in other words, the e-sports competitions may be used as a carrot to attract that audience to TBS. The league itself is partly a creation of Turner, which owns TBS, and of the talent agency WME-IMG.“I thinks it’s a very clever way for Turner to stay relevant,” Mr. van Dreunen said. “This is where the audiences are.”Craig Barry, the chief content officer for Turner Sports, said the ELeague would distinguish itself with high production value and sports-style narratives created around players and teams. But he acknowledged the challenge of entering a world — and a fandom — that is growing so quickly on its own terms.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If you don’t have the community behind you, you’ll fail,” Mr. Barry said. “After the first 10 weeks, if we don’t have acceptance of the community, then the trajectory for us, specifically in Season 2, is exponentially steeper.”AdvertisementELeague’s initial showing, on Twitch on Tuesday, pitted well-known players with handles including SPUNJ and TACO against one another. The show itself also carefully straddled two worlds.Announcers in suits and headsets sat behind a polished black desk on a set arranged in a familiar sports-broadcast manner. (A set for NBA TV is in the same facility.) The majority of the programming, however, showed an individual player’s point of view — often, that meant quick and brutal clashes as seen from behind a knife or a gun.Twitch videos were accompanied by an anarchic stream of text comments from viewers. Comments about the overall production ranged from supportive to mocking — especially during commercial breaks — but remained focused, mostly, on the competition at hand. Viewership fluctuated between 50,000 and 100,000; before the stream ended, total viewers passed the million mark.Mr. Barry said he was cautiously encouraged. “Everyone’s walking around here feeling comfortable that we have some positive feedback,” he said, midbroadcast. “I feel as though we’ve approached it correctly.”ELeague’s next test comes on Friday, when the tournament hits TV. The main stream — with announcers, player interviews and flashy production — will broadcast exclusively to TBS viewers, who will have to turn on their TVs or log in to a TBS streaming service. A stripped-down “observer” feed, which will pipe in audio commentary over gameplay, will broadcast simultaneously on Twitch.Any success may entice competitors to quickly replicate some of the Turner formula. Many big media and game companies have already increased their investments in e-sports. Activision Blizzard, the games publisher behind Call of Duty and World of Warcraft, is building a media business to broadcast e-sports competition that the company’s chief executive, Bobby Kotick, has promised will become the “ESPN of eSports.”Activision hired the former chief executive of ESPN, Steve Bornstein, to run the business, and it acquired Major League Gaming, an organizer and internet broadcaster of e-sports competitions. The company believes there is an opportunity to create tournament broadcasts that are more like the slick productions for N.F.L. games.If Tuesday is any indication, the companies may find that whatever they do will generate a lot of feedback.“It’s so awesome to see CS in a TV-quality production!” said one commenter, referring to the game.AdvertisementBut others criticized the broadcast’s pacing, commentary and music. That led another commenter to chime in, “Be constructive with your criticism guys!”A version of this article appears in print on May 25, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: ELeague Adapts TV for Gamers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.