
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

MAY 24, 2016
Michael W. Ferro Jr. is gambling with the money of Tribune Publishing shareholders.Mr. Ferrro, the chairman of Tribune Publishing, has rebuffed Gannett’s improved offer to buy the company. Instead, he has tapped the deep pockets of Patrick Soon-Shiong for a $70.5 million investment. The move just might draw a higher offer. But a poison pill and other blocking tactics mean Tribune Publishing investors could easily be stuck, powerless, with a declining asset.Rather than engage enthusiastically with the latest $15-a-share cash offer, which values the company at $864 million including debt, the Tribune Publishing board struck an agreement with Mr. Soon-Shiong that is a bit like the one it made with Mr. Ferro in February. For the same price that Gannett is proposing, Mr. Soon-Shiong, a Los Angeles Lakers stakeholder, is getting a nearly 13 percent interest and a spot as vice chairman.Collectively, Mr. Ferro and Mr. Soon-Shiong own about 30 percent of Tribune Publishing, which is also the owner of The Baltimore Sun, The Chicago Tribune and The Los Angeles Times. The publisher has a poison-pill defense against hostile takeovers that sets up a dilutive rights plan if an investor accumulates 20 percent or more – but neither investor has reached that threshold.There are other more subtle signs that Mr. Ferro has no desire to give up ownership. Although Tribune Publishing says it is open to discussing a possible transaction with Gannett, it is asking the company, the publisher of USA Today, to open its books for a two-way due diligence process that seems at odds with a simple all-cash transaction. It also wants restrictions that Gannett says would make it difficult to go hostile for up to two years.Gannett has asked Tribune Publishing’s shareholders to vote against the company’s director nominees at next week’s annual meeting, but it missed the deadline to start a more substantial proxy campaign. The advisory firm Institutional Shareholder Services is behind Tribune Publishing on this issue, partly because Gannett has not put a firm tender offer on the table. But the proxy adviser gives Tribune Publishing its lowest corporate governance grade over all.The first time Tribune Publishing sent Gannett packing, it noted the board’s unanimity. That language is missing this go-round. It is a sign perhaps that other shareholders may get a say eventually. For now, Mr. Ferro has managed to keep their fate in his hands. They may regret that: I.S.S. notes that he did not do so well running The Chicago Sun-Times.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »