AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel AbramsPatrick R. Fallon, a co-founder of the Minneapolis-based advertising agency that made its name with imaginative campaigns for media companies and luxury carmakers like BMW and Porsche, died on Friday in Robbinsdale, Minn. He was 70.The cause was a hemorrhagic stroke, his son Kevin said.Mr. Fallon started the agency, originally Fallon McElligott Rice, with four partners in 1981, and was its president and chairman.The partners favored the kind of creative campaigns that could make traditional clients uneasy. The firm entered some of its boldest work in advertising competitions, reasoning that the attention could put advertisers at ease.Mr. Fallon had a motto: “If you can’t outspend them, you can certainly outthink them.”That approach attracted early clients like The Wall Street Journal, Federal Express and Armour Frozen Foods, a strong roster for a firm far from Madison Avenue.“Clients who never would have thought of going to an agency outside of Manhattan would happily get on a plane and come to Minneapolis,” said Mark Goldstein, who was Fallon’s chief marketing officer and now heads Eleven, a consulting group.The agency had a knack for reviving brands that had lost their way, Mr. Goldstein said.BMW, for instance, had suffered sagging sales before Fallon created a series of short films for the Internet featuring celebrities like Madonna, Mickey Rourke and Clive Owen. Sales soon went up.Porsche, too, faced tougher competition, so the agency came up with a print campaign reminding consumers of Porsche’s legacy as a maker of sporty, well-engineered, highly coveted cars for those who could afford one.“Honestly now, did you spend your youth dreaming about someday owning a Nissan or a Mitsubishi?” one ad said.The agency also created a popular campaign for Rolling Stone, which wanted to shake its image as an underground magazine for young people without much money to spend. In ads that toyed with that image while trumpeting a more affluent, mainstream readership, it paired contrasting photographs, one labeled “perception,” the other “reality:” a political protest picket sign and a tennis racket, for example, or a multicolored Volkswagen bus and a sleek new Mustang.Mr. Fallon worked on the business side, but colleagues said he had a keen eye for a good ad and was willing to challenge the views of clients.“He would fight valiantly for ideas that he believed would help their businesses,” Mr. Goldstein said.That instinct led to one of the firm’s most widely hailed ads: a funny Super Bowl commercial in 2000 for Electronic Data Systems known as “Cat Herders.” Mr. Fallon reviewed several pitches, but he knew immediately that “Cat Herders” was the one, Mr. Goldstein recalled.In the ad, which lasts a minute, grizzled cowboys are interviewed out on the range talking about the difficulties and satisfactions of bringing in a herd of scampering cats. (“In a sense, this is what we do,” a superimposed message for EDS reads. “We bring together information, ideas and technologies and make them go where you want them to go.”)“He was a business guy who had the best creative thumb of any business guy that I ever worked with,” Mr. Goldstein said of Mr. Fallon. “He could instantly tell what was the best idea.”In 2000, the firm was renamed Fallon Worldwide and sold to the Publicis Groupe. Among the firm’s current clients are H&R Block, Arby’s and Loctite, maker of glues and sealants.Patrick Robert Fallon was born on Sept. 7, 1945, in Columbus, Ohio, to Jerome and Katherine Fallon.The family moved to Minneapolis when Mr. Fallon was a toddler, and he stayed there for most of his professional life.He attended Washburn High School and graduated from the University of Minnesota with a degree in philosophy.In addition to his son Kevin, Mr. Fallon’s survivors include four other children, Megan, Duffy, Reilly and Tressa, all with the surname Fallon, and a grandson.Advertisement