AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangHONG KONG — Toyota is recalling more than 1.5 million additional vehicles in the United States over concerns with airbag inflaters from the Japanese parts manufacturer Takata.The announcement late Monday came after the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration accelerated moves to recall vehicles fitted with the potentially dangerous airbag inflater, which is already the subject of the world’s largest auto safety recall. The inflaters use ammonium nitrate, which can become unstable when exposed to heat and humidity. That can cause ruptures when the airbags deploy, sending metal parts hurling into the cabin.At least 11 deaths worldwide have been linked to the defect. The safety agency said in a news release that the ruptures had contributed to more than 100 injuries in the United States.Toyota said it would replace the inflaters at no cost to customers. The company is recalling models of Lexus, Scion, Sienna, 4Runner, Yaris, Corolla and Matrix vehicles.Takata has changed the makeup of the ammonium nitrate compound over the years, and eventually added a drying agent to make it more stable. The safety agency said it was focused on the airbag inflaters without the drying agent, and ordered the recall of 25 million to 40 million more inflaters at the beginning of May, bringing the total of recalled Takata airbags to at least 63 million in the United States.Toyota has recalled 4.7 million vehicles in the United States, including this latest batch, according to Victor Vanov, a Toyota representative. The company dropped Takata as a supplier of airbag inflaters in November last year. Toyota also had to recall nearly three million RAV4 sport utility vehicles in February after discovering flaws in crucial safety equipment.Takata had insisted for years that there was no problem with its inflaters, but admitted the defect last May. The safety agency gave the company until the end of 2018 to prove that the inflaters were safe, but Takata’s future is in doubt as it faces losses and mounting costs related to the scandal.Kenji Endo, managing director of Advanced Research Japan, said the next crucial issue would be who would pay for the widening recalls. Toyota could bear the cost by themselves or insist that Takata pay. He noted that Takata might not be able to survive if it were forced to pay the entire cost.“If Takata disappears, automakers will be in trouble,” he said, because Takata is such a major supplier. “Automakers are not happy with the situation, but they have to pay the cost as a realistic option.”Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement