AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie RogersA conservative news site posted what it said was audio proof that filmmakers behind a documentary about the gun control debate deliberately edited video to portray gun-rights activists as unable to answer questions about background checks.The audio, posted by The Washington Free Beacon on Wednesday, seemed to differ from the video shown in the documentary, “Under the Gun,” in which a group of activists appear to fall silent during an interview with the news anchor Katie Couric.“If there are no background checks for gun purchasers, how do you prevent felons or terrorists from purchasing a gun?” Ms. Couric asks. The next shot in the film is of the activists looking on with blank stares instead of answering the question.In the audio clip of the interview posted by The Free Beacon, Ms. Couric prefaces her question with a remark — “I know how you all are going to answer this but I’m asking anyway” — before she asks about background checks.“One, if you’re not in jail you should still have your basic rights,” someone answers about one second later.Stephanie Soechtig, the director of the film, said in a statement on Wednesday that the editing was not intended to portray activists negatively.“There are a wide range of views expressed in the film,” she said. “My intention was to provide a pause for the viewer to have a moment to consider this important question before presenting the facts on Americans’ opinions on background checks. I never intended to make anyone look bad and I apologize if anyone felt that way.”In a brief statement of her own, Ms. Couric said, “I support Stephanie’s statement and am very proud of the film.”In a phone interview, Stephen Gutowski, the reporter for  The Free Beacon who posted the audio, said that he had received the clip from The Virginia Citizens Defense League, a gun rights organization whose members were interviewed in “Under the Gun.”Philip Van Cleave, the organization’s president, said in a phone interview that one of the people being interviewed had recorded the exchange, and that people in his group often taped encounters with the news media.“It wasn’t an editing issue,” he said, adding, “Why put the question and not put an answer?”When it had its premiere at the Sundance Film Festival last winter, “Under the Gun” was one of several films that explored the debate about gun control in the United States. On its website, Sundance billed the film as “scrupulously comprehensive and decidedly fair to both sides of one of the most polarizing issues that is tearing our country apart.”Epix, the network that broadcast “Under the Gun,” offered support for Ms. Couric and Ms. Soechtig.“Epix stands behind Katie Couric, director Stephanie Soechtig, and their creative and editorial judgment,” Nora Ryan, the company’s chief of staff, said in a statement. “We encourage people to watch the film and decide for themselves.”Advertisement