AdvertisementSupported byBy Les NeuhausST. PETERSBURG, Fla. — A judge on Wednesday denied Gawker Media’s motion seeking a new trial for an invasion of privacy suit brought by the former professional wrestler Hulk Hogan after a jury awarded him more than $140 million over the publication of a sex tape.Lawyers for Gawker had argued that documents sealed by the judge during the trial, some of which included the wrestler making racist statements, should have been made available to the jury, which reached its decision in March. They also tried to show that the jurors’ objectivity had been tainted. The arguments did not persuade the judge, Pamela Campbell, who also ruled that the amount of the damages would not be reduced.Gawker now plans to appeal the original verdict.The case, in Pinellas County Circuit Court, is based on a grainy black-and-white tape made in the mid-2000s, which showed the wrestler, whose legal name is Terry G. Bollea, having sex with the wife of a friend. Gawker posted a brief excerpt from the tape in 2012. Gawker argued that posting the excerpt was protected under the First Amendment and that Mr. Bollea, by talking about his sex life in public, had given up his right to privacy.The jury awarded Mr. Bollea $60 million for emotional distress, $55 million for economic distress and about $25 million in punitive damages.The lawyers for Gawker noted that no other Florida defendant had been awarded such large sums in similar cases, using the economic and punitive portions as specific legal precedents.“Really none of those cases were like this case,” Judge Campbell said in response. “They were medical cases. They were age or wage loss.”The hearing came a day after it was revealed that Mr. Bollea’s legal case had been financed by the PayPal co-founder Peter Thiel.A lawyer for Gawker, Seth Berlin, tried to bring up the issue of Mr. Thiel as new discovery material. But Judge Campbell refused to look at articles published by Forbes and The New York Times about Mr. Thiel’s involvement.“I don’t like looking at all the stuff that’s published out there — it’s not healthy,” Judge Campbell said. “We’ll wait and see.”A lawyer for Mr. Bollea, Kenneth Turkel, said in court that he was not aware of the articles about Mr. Thiel’s involvement.Advertisement