
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

MAY 25, 2016
Meg Whitman, the chief executive of HP Enterprise, said the deal with Computer Sciences would create a more efficient unit.Meg Whitman is letting fuzzy math sully an otherwise clever deal.Ms. Whitman, the chief executive of Hewlett Packard Enterprise, plans to spin off and merge its information technology services business with its rival the Computer Sciences Corporation. HP Enterprise is trumpeting a combination of cost cuts and other benefits worth almost $14 billion today. A rough Breakingviews calculation suggests the potential of creating value of a little over half that – and even that may be generous.HP Enterprise, the corporate computing arm that was spun out of Hewlett-Packard last year, is effectively shedding what is left of Electronic Data Systems, the information technology services company that Hewlett-Packard’s former boss, Mark Hurd, bought in 2008 for nearly $14 billion. Hewlett-Packard wrote down the value of its services business by $8 billion four years later. The unit logged $20 billion of revenue last year but made only about $1 billion of operating profit before special items.Ms. Whitman has dressed the deal up well. HP Enterprise shareholders will receive a $1.5 billion dividend. And because the deal is structured as a so-called reverse Morris Trust, HP Enterprise’s shareholders will be handed their 50 percent share of the new company without having to pay any tax. The new entity will also assume around $2.5 billion of debt and other liabilities from HP Enterprise – half of which will be supported by C.S.C. shareholders.In addition, HP Enterprise stockholders will receive half the value of what the company estimates will be at least $1.5 billion of annual cost cuts from the merger. These would be worth $5 billion once taxed and capitalized by a multiple of 10.AdvertisementThen, though, HP Enterprise’s pitch starts getting wobbly. Ms. Whitman’s company appears to be arguing that at least some of its shareholders’ implied $4.5 billion equity stake in the new company, for instance, is value creation – when it’s really just a transfer.The numbers also arguably take an optimistic view of a sector that has been struggling for some time. HP Enterprise has managed to cut costs in recent years to offset falling revenue in its services business. But if the woes continue, that could be difficult to sustain.AdvertisementHP Enterprise has not yet convinced its owners. The stock jumped 11 percent in after-hours trading on Tuesday, adding just over $3 billion. That’s not a bad salvage operation, but it’s a far cry from what Ms. Whitman and her executives are pushing.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »