By CHAD BRAYMAY 25, 2016
LONDON — The French pharmaceutical company Sanofi said on Wednesday that it would seek to replace the board of Medivation after the American drug maker’s directors rejected a $9.3 billion takeover offer.Sanofi publicly announced its offer for Medivation, the maker of the prostate cancer drug Xtandi, in April, saying at the time that Medivation’s directors had failed to respond to its approach.Medivation’s board has since called the offer “inadequate,” and David Hung, its founder, president and chief executive, has said the French company’s move was “opportunistically timed.”This month, Sanofi said that it had held “extensive conversations” with Medivation’s top shareholders and that it believed there was “overwhelming support” for a transaction. Sanofi threatened to seek the removal of the board if Medivation failed to engage in takeover talks.Advertisement“Despite multiple attempts, both prior to and following the public disclosure of Sanofi’s proposal, Medivation has thus far refused to engage with us regarding the merits of a value-creating transaction,” Olivier Brandicourt, the Sanofi chief executive, said in a news release on Wednesday. “Unfortunately, this has left us with no choice but to commence a process to elect directors who are more open to supporting the best interests of Medivation shareholders.”AdvertisementSanofi’s offer for Medivation, which is based in California, is worth $52.50 a share.The price represented a premium of more than 50 percent over Medivation’s two-month, volume-weighted average share value before takeover rumors emerged, but it was less than 1 percent above its closing price on April 27.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Shares of Medivation closed on Tuesday at $61.91.Mr. Brandicourt, who took over as chief executive of Sanofi last year after Christopher A. Viehbacher was ousted, has said that the French company is looking for midsize acquisitions and that cancer treatment is an area of interest.On Wednesday, Sanofi said it had filed documents with the Securities and Exchange Commission seeking the written consent of Medivation shareholders to replace the board with a slate of eight “independent” directors who were “willing to fully and fairly evaluate all of Medivation’s strategic options, including Sanofi’s acquisition offer.”“In consenting to the removal of the incumbent company board and to the election of the nominees, you are sending a message to the nominees that you want the company to fully and fairly evaluate and engage in discussions regarding strategic options, including the proposed offer,” Sanofi said in a consent statement filed with the S.E.C.The slate of directors included Michael E. Campbell, the former chairman and chief executive of Arch Chemicals; Barbara Deptula, the former chief corporate development officer of the drug maker Shire; Wendy E. Lane, the chairwoman of the investment firm Lane Holdings; and Ronald S. Rolfe, a retired partner at the law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore.Other nominees put forward by Sanofi were Steven J. Shulman, managing partner of the private equity firm Shulman Family Ventures; Charles P. Slacik, the former chief financial officer of the laboratory supplier Beckman Coulter; James L. Tyree, a founder of the private equity firm Tyree & D’Angelo Partners; and David A. Wilson, the former president and chief executive of the Graduate Management Admission Council, the owner of the GMAT exam.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.