By ANDREW POLLACKMAY 25, 2016
The Food and Drug Administration has put off making what is bound to be a controversial decision on whether to approve what could become the first drug cleared to treat Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the company developing the drug said on Wednesday.The agency was supposed to decide on the drug, eteplirsen, by Thursday, a nonmandatory deadline under a federal law aimed at speeding up drug reviews. However, the drug’s developer, Sarepta Therapeutics, said in a news release Wednesday morning that it had been informed that the F.D.A. would miss the goal and would “strive to complete their work in as timely a manner as possible.”Sarepta’s stock price rose more than 20 percent in premarket trading, as investors interpreted the delay as a hint that the drug might be approved. It is also possible, however, that the agency is procrastinating on making what would be an unpopular decision to reject the drug.An F.D.A. spokeswoman said the agency was prohibited by law from commenting on pending applications because the information was considered proprietary to the applicant.AdvertisementThe agency is under heavy pressure to approve the drug from parents of boys with muscular dystrophy, who say the drug has allowed some children to continue to walk years after they would otherwise have been confined to wheelchairs. Members of Congress have also been urging the F.D.A. to be flexible. The situation is an example of the growing influence of patients over the agency’s decisions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the agency’s own reviewers concluded that Sarepta had not demonstrated that the drug worked. It had tested eteplirsen on only 12 boys and without an adequate control group for comparison, the reviewers said.Last month, after an emotional daylong meeting in which parents, doctors and boys with the disease pleaded for the drug to be approved, a committee of outside advisers to the F.D.A. voted that the drug did not meet the standards for approval. However, one vote was very close.AdvertisementThe F.D.A. usually follows the advice of advisory committees but it is not unheard-of for it to go against the advice.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.