By JESSICA SILVER-GREENBERG and NOAM SCHEIBERMAY 26, 2016
A federal appeals court on Thursday ruled that companies cannot force their employees to sign away their right to band together in legal actions, delivering a major victory for American workers and opening an opportunity for the Supreme Court to weigh in.The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago struck down an arbitration clause that banned employees from joining together as a class and required workers to battle the employer one by one outside of court.In its opinion, the three-judge panel said that Epic Systems, a Verona, Wis., health care software provider, violated federal labor law when it required its workers to bring any disputes individually to arbitration, a private system of justice where there is no judge or jury.“The increasing use of mandatory arbitration agreements and the prohibition on workers proceeding as a class has been one of the most major developments in employment the last decade,” said Benjamin Sachs, a professor of labor law at Harvard Law School. “Most of the court decisions have facilitated this development. This is a major move in the opposite direction.”AdvertisementBy preventing employees from joining together in a collective action, the court said, the arbitration clause ran afoul of a critical piece of the National Labor Relations Act, a landmark 1935 law that gave workers the right to unionize and engage in concerted action.AdvertisementThe decision announced on Thursday, in Lewis v. Epic Systems, will almost certainly prove controversial because it directly conflicts with an earlier decision by an appeals court in Louisiana, a split that could prompt the Supreme Court to wade back into the fray. Similar cases are pending across the country.In a pair of decisions in 2011 and 2013, the Supreme Court blessed the widespread use of arbitration in a case pushed by a group of credit card companies. The credit card companies turned to a 1925 federal law that formalized arbitration as a means for companies to hash out their disputes with one another.Arbitration clauses have proliferated over the last 10 years. Companies have added them to tens of millions of contracts for things as diverse as cellphone service and nursing home care.Employers have argued that arbitration provides a more efficient forum for workers to resolve their disputes.That assertion has been largely anecdotal, though. But an investigation by The New York Times found that, once stripped of their ability to join together in a group, many employees simply give up.Federal and state officials have said they are concerned because the individual and closed-door nature of arbitration can obscure patterns of wrongdoing from other employees.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, courts across the country have largely upheld arbitration clauses, deferring to the Supreme Court, which ruled that the Federal Arbitration Act, the 1925 law dusted off by the credit card companies, beats out even muscular federal laws.In a 2012 decision involving D. R. Horton, a homebuilding company in Fort Worth, the federal labor board said that employers could not prevent workers from banding together. Preventing that, the board said, violated the National Labor Relations Act, which explicitly allows for collective action.AdvertisementUndeterred, D. R. Horton appealed the labor board’s decision, sending the case to the appellate court in Louisiana. That court deferred to the earlier Supreme Court cases in a 2013 decision.In its decision on Thursday, the Seventh Circuit ruled that the Federal Arbitration Act did not protect all arbitration clauses. The court found that the law allows illegal arbitration clauses to be thrown out, and that Epic Systems had precisely one of those clauses.The case began when an employee, Jacob Lewis, sued Epic Systems over denying him and other employees overtime wages. Epic, citing an arbitration clause that Mr. Lewis was required to agree to, tried to get the case thrown out. The district court thwarted the company’s request. Ultimately, Epic appealed, sending the case to the court of appeals.The court was unequivocal in answering whether Epic’s arbitration clause violated the law. “The answer is yes,” the court said.An article on Friday about an appeals court’s rejection of an arbitration clause that prevented employees of Epic Systems, a Verona, Wis., health care software provider, from pursuing class actions misstated the location of the court, the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, in some copies. It is in Chicago, not Madison, Wis.A version of this article appears in print on May 27, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Appeals Court Rejects Ruling Upholding Mandatory Arbitration.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.