By STACY COWLEYNOV. 18, 2015
When LaRonda Hunter opened a Fantastic Sams hair salon 10 years ago in Saginaw, Tex., a suburb of Fort Worth, she envisioned it as the first of what would eventually be a small regional collection of salons. As her sales grew, so did her business, which now encompasses four locations — but her plans for a fifth salon are frozen, perhaps permanently.Starting in January, the Affordable Care Act requires businesses with 50 or more full-time-equivalent employees to offer workers health insurance or face penalties that can exceed $2,000 per employee. Ms. Hunter, who has 45 employees, is determined not to cross that threshold. Paying for health insurance would wipe out her company’s profit and the five-figure salary she pays herself from it, she said.“The margins are not big enough within our industry to support it,” she said. “It’s not that I don’t want to — I love my employees, and I want to do everything I can for them — but the numbers just don’t work.”The health care law’s employer mandate, a provision that business groups fought against fiercely, is intended to make affordable health insurance available to more people by requiring employers to bear some of the cost of providing it.AdvertisementWithout the mandate, the law’s creators feared, companies would be tempted to cancel their insurance benefits and encourage employees to move to the online marketplace exchanges created by the law, where many low- and middle-income workers qualify for government subsidies. Those who are offered insurance through their jobs are ineligible to collect subsidies if they instead choose to buy coverage through the exchanges.AdvertisementThe rule took effect this year for businesses with 100 or more workers, but companies with 50 to 99 employees got an extra year to comply. Those with fewer than 50 workers are exempt.For some business owners on the edge of the cutoff, the mandate is forcing them to weigh very carefully the price of growing bigger.“There’s kind of a deer-in-headlights moment for those who say, ‘I have this new potential client, but if I bring them on, I have to hire five additional people,’” said Philip P. Noftsinger, the payroll unit president at CBIZ, a financial services provider for businesses. “They’re really trying to assess how much the 50th employee is going to cost.”Nearly all large companies provide health care benefits, but only 54 percent of businesses with three to 49 workers offered coverage to their workers this year, according to an analysis by the Kaiser Family Foundation. Paying even a portion of the cost can be expensive. The average annual premium for workers at small companies currently tops $6,100 for individual insurance and $16,600 for family coverage.That premium is typically shared between the employer and employee. Businesses that fall under the health care law’s mandate are required to offer their workers “affordable” insurance, which the law defines as individual coverage that costs less than 9.5 percent of the employee’s household income. (Because employers do not know how much money their workers’ relatives make, their options for compliance include basing their calculation on only their own employees’ wages.) For a full-time, minimum-wage employee making $14,500 a year, an employer offering an average-price individual plan would have to pay around $4,700 a year.Added to that cost are the administrative requirements. Starting this year, all companies with 50 or more full-time workers — even those not yet required to offer health benefits — must file new tax forms with the Internal Revenue Service that provide details on employee head count and any health insurance offered. Gathering the data requires meticulous record-keeping.“These are some of the most complex informational returns we’ve ever seen,” said Roger Prince, a tax lawyer with the consulting firm Berry Dunn in Portland, Me.AdvertisementSome of his clients, even small ones, have spent months reconfiguring their human resources and financial systems to track the information that the new forms demand. The health care law defines a full-time-equivalent employee as someone who works an average of 30 or more hours a week — and the hours worked by some part-time employees count toward the calculation.For businesses that use many seasonal, variable-hour or temporary workers, like those in the hospitality industry, simply figuring out how many qualifying employees they have can be a challenge.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think companies are going to have to work with their payroll processor for the basic data, and then their accountant or attorney about what certain items mean,” Mr. Prince said.The expense and distraction of all that paperwork is one of the biggest frustrations for one business owner, Joseph P. Sergio. His industrial cleaning company, Polar Clean, which is based in South Bend, Ind., but dispatches teams nationally, has just under 50 core employees. One of its business lines is disaster restoration, and after a flood or hurricane, its temporary staff balloons.Mr. Sergio offers health insurance to his permanent staff, but the premiums have risen so quickly that he had to switch to a more restrictive plan, with a higher deductible. He is reluctant to go over the 50-employee line and incur all of the new rules that come with it. That makes bidding for new jobs an arduous and risky exercise.“I’ve had to pull my controller and a couple of top people to sit and spend days going through this,” he said. “If you ramp up, and it pushes you over 50, there’s all these unknown costs and complicated rules. Are we really going to be able to benefit from going after that opportunity? It freezes you at a time when you need to be moving fast.”Tony Lamb has 700 franchisees for Kona Ice, his shaved-ice truck business, but his corporate staff in Florence, Ky., has 44 full-time-equivalent positions. It took an outside consultant to confirm that; his internal accountant put the number at 42.Kona Ice offers a retirement plan, profit-sharing and other perks, but no health benefits — and one of Mr. Lamb’s concerns about expanding is the salaries that he priced accordingly.“I said, ‘Instead of paying you $50,000 and $15,000 in health care, I’ll pay you $65,000,’” he said. “You can’t go back on people and change the rules. No one wants a pay cut. I think it’s a very big deterrent to growth.”AdvertisementOf course, plenty of small-business owners offer health insurance without being required to do so. For many, especially those in white-collar fields, it’s an essential part of recruiting and retaining employees. Companies with a significant number of workers making at least $58,000 a year are much more likely to offer insurance than those at which a majority of employees make less, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation’s study.Some owners who began offering insurance this year to comply with the new law have been surprised by how few employees purchased it. Participation rates as low as 1 or 2 percent are not uncommon in industries like restaurants and retailing, in which employees making close to the minimum wage may struggle to afford the premiums.But Ms. Hunter, the salon owner, said that she could not afford the gamble. “I’m a single mom, and I’ve worked really hard at what I have, wanting to build something,” she said. “It’s very frustrating that the government has put something in place that’s restricting the growth plan I’ve been working toward for a decade.”A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Health Care Law Leads Business Owners to Rethink Plans for Growth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.