
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

MAY 26, 2016
For Apple, saying “no” may be getting harder.Eddy Cue, an executive in charge of iTunes and Internet services for the technology giant, raised the possibility of a bid for Time Warner at a meeting with the media conglomerate last year, according to The Financial Times. That seems at odds with the recipe for success championed by Steve Jobs, Apple’s founder: Reject “1,000 ideas” and focus on only the few excellent ones. An aging iPhone, a tepid stock price and a pile of idle cash, however, could make even a mediocre idea look awfully tempting.The deal talk never went beyond a preliminary stage or involved Apple’s chief executive, Tim Cook. Making more movies, television shows and other content available on, say, iPads might help strengthen the device’s popularity and sales. It’s unclear, though, why owning content – not to mention acquiring it by paying perhaps $75 billion for Time Warner, including a control premium – would make more sense than just agreeing to distribute it. Apple’s resources are better spent creating compelling devices, not trying to develop a sequel to “Game of Thrones.”The company has been phenomenally successful sticking to Mr. Jobs’s mantra of minimalism. There is growing pressure, though, for something new.Producing beautiful cutting-edge technology is, in some cases, turning into a business of churning out commodities. About 1.4 billion smartphones were sold worldwide last year, so it’s harder to find new customers willing to spend hundreds of dollars extra for an iPhone, no matter how elegant its design. Investors seem to recognize that. Apple’s stock trades at a roughly 30 percent discount to the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index.The company’s financial strength also feeds an urge for change. Its net cash exceeds $150 billion, and its free cash flow should easily surpass $50 billion this year. That makes almost any acquisition easier to rationalize.Apple is well known for resisting any impulse to splurge on second-rate ideas. It’s tough to imagine one of its top executives even discussing the purchase of a tangentially related company like Time Warner. Yet the news about Mr. Cue suggests a shift. Apple’s best hope may be that Mr. Cook stands firm on his predecessor’s sage advice.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »