AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin WeiserBrendan R. McGuire, a senior federal prosecutor in Manhattan who helped to win convictions in some of the nation’s most prominent international terrorism cases, will join the law firm WilmerHale as a partner in September, the firm said on Thursday.Mr. McGuire, 40, who has spent a decade in the United States attorney’s office for the Southern District of New York, most recently under the top prosecutor Preet Bharara, has overseen terrorism and international narcotics cases since 2014. In the three years before that, he ran the office’s public corruption unit, supervising the prosecutions of more than half a dozen former elected state and city officials, including former State Senator Carl Kruger and former Councilman Larry B. Seabrook, as well as three businessmen who were convicted of defrauding New York City in the so-called CityTime case.Mr. McGuire’s deputy, John P. Cronan, 39, is expected to succeed him as chief of the Southern District’s terrorism unit.Mr. McGuire, who will leave the United States attorney’s office in June, will work in WilmerHale’s white-collar practice in New York and in its national security practice, which is based in Washington, the law firm said. At the firm, he will join a group of former senior Southern District prosecutors, including Boyd M. Johnson III, who is Mr. Bharara’s former deputy; Sharon Cohen Levin, who ran the office’s money laundering and asset-forfeiture unit; Todd Blanche, who oversaw the violent crimes unit; and Anjan Sahni, who was chief of the Wall Street task force.At WilmerHale, Mr. Johnson said, Mr. McGuire will “help manage and lead high stakes investigations for companies and individuals.” He will also bring his expertise to banks and clients in other industries, Mr. Johnson added, where national security issues have become increasingly important, “whether it’s money laundering by terrorist organizations, cybersecurity attacks by nation states or organized criminals, or issues related to import-export and sanctions.”Mr. McGuire, a graduate of Regis High School, Williams College and New York University School of Law, has roots in New York law enforcement: his grandfather, James McGuire, spent more than 40 years with the New York Police Department, and his father, Robert J. McGuire, served for six years as the police commissioner under Mayor Ed Koch.As a prosecutor, Brendan McGuire helped convict Faisal Shahzad, the Pakistani immigrant who tried unsuccessfully to detonate a car bomb in Times Square in 2010; Viktor Bout, a Russian businessman accused of running an international arms-trafficking network; and a Somali man involved in the 2009 hijacking of an American-flagged cargo ship off the coast of Africa.As chief of the terrorism unit, Mr. McGuire supervised the trial of Sulaiman Abu Ghaith, a former spokesman and son-in-law of Osama bin Laden.Before joining the United States attorney’s office in 2005, Mr. McGuire worked as an associate at the law firm Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison; and later with the firm then known as Stillman & Friedman.Advertisement