AdvertisementSupported byBy Barry MeierThe Silicon Valley billionaire Peter Thiel has put the future of Gawker Media in doubt by secretly funding a successful lawsuit that threatens to undermine the media company’s finances.To do it, Mr. Thiel, a co-founder of PayPal, adopted tactics from a strategy used by investment firms and others who are increasingly underwriting lawsuits in the hope of turning a profit on their outcomes. Over the last decade, the types of lawsuits that have attracted outside money range from product liability claims brought by consumers against manufacturers to lawsuits filed by one business against a competitor over commercial issues like copyright violation.But Mr. Thiel has also turned the model of third-party lawsuit funding on its head. Instead of looking for profits, the entrepreneur had a personal goal: extracting revenge against Gawker and warning others who adopted the website’s ethos that they could face similar legal attacks.Now, the question running through many media circles is whether other wealthy people upset with news accounts will decide to follow Mr. Thiel’s example and go after other organizations. And if so, to what extent those suits could hurt the financial future of media companies and stifle free speech.But legal experts said that a lawsuit, regardless of who is funding it, will ultimately succeed or fall based on its merits.“This case is unusual,” said Michael McDonald, an assistant professor of finance at Fairfield University in Connecticut who also works as a consultant to lawsuit investors.Mr. Thiel said he was irate that a website owned by Gawker had, among other things, outed him and several of his friends as gay, solely to be prurient. And an instrument used to channel his outrage was a lawsuit filed by the retired wrestler Hulk Hogan against Gawker that the entrepreneur financed with about $10 million.The former wrestler, whose real name is Terry Gene Bollea, sued Gawker Media for invasion of privacy after it published a video of him having sex, and a Florida jury recently awarded him $140 million.“I saw Gawker pioneer a unique and incredibly damaging way of getting attention by bullying people,” Mr. Thiel said in an interview this week.Experts like Mr. McDonald said they were hard-pressed to find other examples in which someone financed a lawsuit in the hope of settling a score. One exception appears to be a libel action brought in 1990s against James B. Stewart over his book “Den of Thieves,” which examined a series of Wall Street scandals including one involving Michael Milken, the junk bond king.That lawsuit, which was brought by a minor character in the book, was financed by Mr. Milken’s brother, according to a 2002 article in Legal Affairs, a magazine. The case against Mr. Stewart, who is now a columnist for The New York Times, was dismissed, but not before millions of dollars in legal fees were spent.The case involving Mr. Thiel has raised questions about whether media companies may face other such costly cases in the future.Marcus Brauchli, a former executive editor of The Washington Post, wrote on Twitter Thursday that Mr. Thiel’s actions set a “lousy precedent.”Lawsuits financed by third parties are legal. But as the legal financing industry has grown, business groups have claimed that outside investing helps fuel frivolous litigation. Other experts, however, see the involvement of outside funders as a boon that helps plaintiffs without resources take on deep-pocketed defendants.“Many academics fully embrace third-party litigation funding as leveling the playing field,” said Nora Freeman Engstrom, a professor at Stanford Law School.The precise nature of the relationship between Mr. Thiel and Mr. Bollea’s lawyer is unclear. However, legal experts like Ms. Engstrom that say lawyers who accept funds from people who are not parties to a case face certain obligations, like not disclosing confidential information obtained during a lawsuit to an investor or placing an investor’s interests ahead of those of a client.Roy D. Simon, a professor emeritus of legal ethics at Hofstra University School of Law, said the interplay among an investor, a lawyer and a plaintiff could get tricky. While most firms that invest in litigation are happy to settle a case for the right price, an aggrieved individual who doesn’t need money might be more interested in driving a case to judgment. Gawker Media made several settlement offers.“The ordinary investor would not have an ax to grind,” Mr. Simon said.For a plaintiff, significant legal hurdles exist for a lawsuit against a media organization to be successful. In addition, many states have adopted laws intended to deter lawsuits filed by companies and others seeking to chill advocacy on public policy issues. Such actions are known as strategic lawsuits against public participation, or Slapp suits.Anthony Sebok, a professor at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law in New York, said parties in a case were not normally required to disclose whether outside investors were funding a lawsuit. But the issue has come to the attention of Congress.Last year, two Republican Senators, Charles E. Grassley of Iowa and John Cornyn of Texas, sent a letter to three of this country’s largest litigation financing firms, asking about the types of cases they funded, the financial arrangements and their return on investment.“Third-party litigation financing pumps millions of dollars into our justice system,” Senator Cornyn wrote at the time, “and the current lack of oversight makes it difficult to track this money’s influence.”Advertisement