By KATIE ROGERS and MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMAY 26, 2016
Nick Denton challenged the financier, Peter Thiel, who has bankrolled lawsuits against Gawker, to a debate about journalism.A day after Peter Thiel explained why he had given about $10 million to fund multiple lawsuits against Gawker Media, the site’s founder published an open letter to the Silicon Valley billionaire, calling him “thin-skinned” and a “comic book villain” and challenging him to a public debate about the role of journalism in society.The letter from Nick Denton, the company’s founder and majority owner, was published Thursday on Gawker, hours after the company acknowledged that it had hired an investment banker in recent weeks to help it explore strategic options, including a possible sale.Mr. Denton harshly criticized what he said was a lengthy, unnecessary vendetta Mr. Thiel waged against not only Gawker Media but also individual journalists.“This vindictive decade-long campaign is quite out of proportion to the hurt you claim,” Mr. Denton wrote on Thursday. In the letter, Mr. Denton made it clear that he would not back down against a billionaire who showed no sign of stopping his involvement in underwriting the lawsuits, even as the future of Gawker remained in question.AdvertisementOn Wednesday, Mr. Thiel, a co-founder of PayPal and an early investor in Facebook,  acknowledged in an interview  with The New York Times that he had bankrolled lawsuits against Gawker, including one by the wrestler Hulk Hogan, whose real name is Terry G. Bollea. In March, a Florida jury awarded $140 million to Mr. Bollea in his case against the company for publishing a sex tape. The company is expected to appeal the verdict.AdvertisementOther lawsuits against Gawker, led by the same lawyer, Charles Harder, representing Mr. Bollea, are still pending.A spokesman for Mr. Thiel declined to comment on Thursday.In his interview with The Times, Mr. Thiel — who was outed as being gay by Gawker’s Valleywag blog nearly a decade ago — said he did not view his underwriting of the lawsuits as a business venture. “I would underscore that I don’t expect to make any money from this,” he said.In his open letter, Mr. Denton issued a play-by-play of past stories that drew Mr. Thiel’s ire and of two defamation lawsuits currently pending against Gawker, and criticized what he characterized as an inability by Silicon Valley figures to accept criticism from journalists.“I can see how tempting it would be to use Silicon Valley’s most abundant resource, a vast fortune, against the harsh words of the writers of a small New York media company,” he wrote. “We have our devices; you have yours.”Mr. Denton also assured Mr. Thiel that Gawker’s journalists would be reporting on his involvement in lawsuits against the company.“We, and those you have sent into battle against us, have been stripped naked, our texts, online chats and finances revealed through the press and the courts,” Mr. Denton wrote. “In the next phase, you too will be subject to a dose of transparency.”Also on Thursday, Gawker confirmed that it had hired Mark Patricof, a senior banker at the firm Houlihan Lokey, in recent weeks to provide financial advice. Houlihan Lokey is known for its expertise in mergers and in corporate restructuring, but the company would not directly address reports that a potential buyer had emerged. (“Everyone take a breath,” began a statement released by Gawker on Thursday.)AdvertisementIn the statement, Gawker said that it had worked with investment bankers for some time, and that Mr. Patricof was only the latest. Gawker said word of Mr. Patricof’s hiring “seems to have stirred up some excitement, when the fact is that nothing is new.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Gawker’s strategic review is in its early stages, and Mr. Denton has not decided on how to proceed, according to the people with direct knowledge of plans.The company has been considering its options for months. Gawker had weighed potential offers earlier this year that were as high as approximately $350 million, according to people with direct knowledge of the matter.Also this year, Gawker agreed to sell a minority stake to the tech venture capital firm Columbus Nova Technology Partners. As part of the deal, Jason Epstein, a managing partner at Columbus Nova, would join Gawker’s board. The companies did not disclose the size of the stake.Gawker’s legal complications appear to have given pause to some other potential investors. Gawker confirmed in April that it had been in talks with Univision. An acquisition deal was nearly complete, according to two people briefed on the discussions, but discussions cooled after the Hogan verdict was reached.Last year, Mr. Denton revealed that Gawker Media generated about $45 million in advertising revenue in 2014 and profit of about $7 million. But the prospect of further litigation draining the company’s coffers prompted the media outlet to prepare contingency planning around what the company described as Mr. Thiel’s “revenge campaign.”In the middle of a legal odyssey that threatens to cripple the company, Mr. Denton and Gawker journalists are standing behind their reporting. On Thursday, Gawker posted an article  that chronicled the reporting that it and the affiliated tech site Valleywag had done on Mr. Thiel over the years.“The refusal to engage in public relations or access journalism,” the post read, “is usually the mark of an outlet’s credibility. For Thiel and his peers in Silicon Valley, such a refusal amounts to repudiating their way of life.”The post’s headline was “This Is Why Billionaire Peter Thiel Wants to End Gawker.”For his part, Mr. Denton ended his letter with a series of reported questions that challenged points Mr. Thiel had made in the interview with The Times and elsewhere, and questioned whether Mr. Thiel’s personal political opinions had affected his decisions as a board member for Facebook.He also asked what Mr. Thiel ultimately hoped to achieve.“Is your goal to bankrupt, buy, or wound Gawker Media?” Mr. Denton wrote. “If you were to own the company after a final judgment in the Hogan case, what would your editorial strategy be?”John Herrman contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on May 27, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Gawker’s Founder Challenges Billionaire.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.