By RAVI SOMAIYANOV. 18, 2015
Condé Nast will stop publishing Details magazine at the end of the year, the company’s president, Robert A. Sauerberg Jr., said in a memo to employees on Wednesday.Details, a men’s magazine with a circulation of about 560,000 according to Condé Nast’s own figures, had long been the subject of speculation that it would close. Its December 2015/January 2016 issue will be its last, Mr. Sauerberg said, and its editor, Dan Peres, and chief revenue officer, Drew Schutte, will leave the company.The changes were presented as part of a broader business restructuring. GQ will expand its GQ Style offshoot to fill the space left by Details, with a larger digital presence and a new quarterly print schedule. The sales and marketing teams at Glamour and Self will also combine, and the publisher and chief revenue officer of Self, Mary Murcko, will leave the company.The closing ends a 33-year run for Details, which was founded as an avant-garde magazine, covering fashion and the downtown Manhattan scene, to great acclaim. Condé Nast bought it in 1988, for what some reports suggested was around $2 million.AdvertisementIn 1990, it underwent the first of several reincarnations, the most recent of which, in 2000, put Mr. Peres, formerly a senior editor at the fashion magazine W, in charge. Details also shifted its focus to men’s lifestyle. The authors Augusten Burroughs and Michael Chabon and the photographer Steven Klein are among those who have contributed to the magazine.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The decision to close Details is one of a number of recent changes at Condé Nast. Last week Linda Wells, who founded Allure magazine in 1991, was replaced by Michelle Lee, formerly the editor and chief marketing officer of Nylon magazine. Last month, the company acquired the music website Pitchfork for an undisclosed sum.In recent years Condé Nast has sold Fairchild Fashion Media, combined Bon Appétit and Epicurious and named new editors at Self, Condé Nast Traveler and Lucky. (The latter magazine was subsequently spun off as a separate company.)AdvertisementMr. Sauerberg is set to become chief executive of Condé Nast in January, replacing Charles H. Townsend, who will become chairman. Samuel I. Newhouse Jr., who ran the company for decades at the peak of its gloss and verve, but who is now approaching 90, will be chairman emeritus.A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Condé Nast to Close Details Magazine as Part of a Broader Business Realignment.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.