
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

MAY 27, 2016
The German chemical group Bayer’s bid for Monsanto may yield a poor financial harvest. Bayer’s rejected $62 billion offer for Monsanto, an American seed maker, already appears to violate one of its crucial management principles: sticking to projects whose returns beat their cost of capital. Raising the price from the current $122 a share to win over its intended partner would require heroic sales-growth assumptions to stack up.Monsanto’s revenue could reach $13.7 billion for its fiscal year that will end in August, according to the average estimate of analysts on Wall Street. Assuming that Bayer can increase its revenue by a chunky 10 percent a year, it would hit $20 billion by 2020, allowing for a year or so to secure the necessary deal approvals. That is also the year when expected annual cost savings of $1.5 billion would fully kick in.Apply Monsanto’s average margins over the last five years, lump in the expected synergies, and tax everything at 25 percent, and Bayer’s investment would throw off about $4.7 billion of operating profit before interest costs.It would amount to a 7.5 percent return on the $62 billion of debt and equity tied up in the investment — assuming Monsanto can increase sales aggressively. That’s not far off the 7.6 percent cost of capital that Bayer estimated for its business last year. The more relevant figure, though, is the cost of capital of the acquired business, which Morningstar estimates at 8.3 percent. On that benchmark, Bayer falls short.Raising the offer to $135 a share – a price some analysts think could persuade Monsanto to sell – would be even harder to justify. Using the same math, it would take more than $25 billion of annual sales for Bayer to clear the value hurdle. That would require nearly doubling Monsanto’s sales in less than five years.There could, perhaps, be more costs to squeeze out – it’s common for acquirers to lowball them. Werner Baumann, the chief executive of Bayer, may also reason that combining Monsanto’s high-tech seeds with Bayer’s crop sprays could bring in handsome extra rewards. It would be tough, though, to reap enough from the investment to keep shareholders happy.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »