By LESLIE PICKERMAY 27, 2016
Thermo Fisher Scientific has agreed to acquire the FEI Company, a maker of microscopes that examine close-up images of metals, biological cells and semiconductors, for $4.2 billion.The transaction will incorporate FEI’s so-called electron microscopy platform into Thermo Fisher’s analytical instruments business. Thermo Fisher, a Waltham, Mass., maker of devices and materials for scientific research and lab and diagnostic equipment, will pay $107.50 a share in cash for FEI, which is based in Hillsboro, Ore. The deal is expected to add to earnings in the first full year after it closes.Analysts at Leerink called the combination a “logical fit,” while Evercore ISI said the acquisition was a “nice tuck-in.”The move also seemed to please shareholders. Thermo Fisher’s shares were flat on Friday, and FEI’s stock jumped 14 percent.AdvertisementLast week, Thermo Fisher outlined its plans to use capital. So far this year, Thermo Fisher has signed two acquisitions – the one on Friday with FEI as well as one for Affymetrix, a maker of genetics analysis technology, for $1.3 billion, which closed in March. It has also bought back $1 billion in stock and paid $240 million in dividends.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thermo Fisher’s chief executive, Marc N. Casper, said in an interview, “We’ll continue to be active in evaluating other opportunities over time to continue to strengthen the company and create shareholder value.”The transaction is expected to close by early 2017. Thermo Fisher said it planned to pay for the deal with debt and cash on hand, and it expected to extract about $80 million from both cost cuts and revenue gains.AdvertisementJPMorgan Chase advised Thermo Fisher, while Goldman Sachs was the financial adviser for FEI. On the legal side, Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz advised Thermo Fisher, and Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati provided counsel to FEI.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.