By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINMAY 27, 2016
The retrial of two former Dewey & LeBoeuf executives for fraud will go ahead without one of the defendants representing himself, which was under consideration a few weeks ago.Instead, Stephen DiCarmine, the former executive director at Dewey, has retained a new lawyer to defend him at the coming trial, which is now scheduled to begin early next year in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan.Earlier this month, Mr. DiCarmine told Justice Robert M. Stolz of State Supreme Court in Manhattan that he wanted to defend himself and replace his longtime lawyer, Austin Campriello. Justice Stolz said he was reluctant to allow it and told him to think about it for a few weeks.Mr. DiCarmine considered representing himself in part because of the mounting legal costs associated with the long-running criminal matter and potential disagreement in legal strategy.AdvertisementHis new lawyer is Rita Glavin, a partner at Seward & Kissel and a former federal prosecutor.The retrial of Mr. DiCarmine and Joel Sanders, Dewey’s former chief financial officer, had been scheduled to start in September, but the judge delayed the start to give Ms. Glavin more time to prepare.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Dewey prosecution has been a bit of a sore spot for Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, after beginning with a flourish of press attention in March 2014. At that time, Mr. Vance, in announcing the filing of a 106-count indictment, charged that the seeds of Dewey’s 2012 bankruptcy filing stemmed from a four-year scheme to manipulate the law firm’s books to defraud bank lenders and institutional investors. But since then, things have not gone as planned for Mr. Vance in the courtroom.AdvertisementThe first trial, which began around this time last year, lasted for nearly six months before ending in a hung jury on most of those charges. Then in January, prosecutors reached a deferred prosecution agreement with Steven H. Davis, the law firm’s former chairman, that would avoid a second trial for him.Peirce Moser, an assistant prosecutor working for Mr. Vance who participated in the first trial, has told Judge Stolz the second trial will be much shorter, and prosecutors on their own have dismissed many of the charges on which the jury deadlocked. Judge Stolz further whittled down the case by dismissing some of the most serious grand larceny charges against Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders.If Mr. DiCarmine had been permitted to represent himself, it would have created more drama at the coming trial. Mr. DiCarmine, a 1983 graduate of California Western School of Law, practiced law for only a few years, was not a litigator and has no trial experience.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.