AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonAssumed dead after Air Products and Chemicals failed to take over Airgas, hostile takeovers seem to be again sprouting up everywhere.An examination of the most significant deals pending provides a nice lesson not only in how hostile takeovers work but in how would-be acquirers often make common mistakes.The chief hurdle to take into account when planning a hostile takeover is the shareholder rights plan, more commonly known as the poison pill. Invented in the 1980s by the lawyer Marty Lipton, the poison pill changed takeover strategy. Before the poison pill, target companies were often on the back foot, lacking a defense against a barbarian at the gate.The poison pill effectively allowed a board to cap the number of shares a hostile bidder could acquire at a certain threshold. These days, that threshold is typically 10 to 15 percent of the outstanding shares. To avoid setting off the poison pill, a hostile bidder had to replace a majority of the target’s board. The new board would then eliminate the poison pill, allowing the hostile bidder to acquire the target.As a result, any hostile bid must be paired with a bid to replace the target board. As the many hostile takeover deals out there show, though, sometimes this is not that easy.Tribune Publishing/GannettThis is probably the most public hostile situation at the moment. Unfortunately for the Gannett Company, and for reasons unknown, it missed the deadline to nominate directors at Tribune Publishing’s coming annual meeting.This was a big mistake. Lacking any real leverage, Gannett is running a campaign asking shareholders to withhold their votes for Tribune Publishing’s directors at the June 2 annual meeting as a show of support for its offer.This is a weak straw poll, at best, as Tribune Publishing’s directors are elected by the plurality of shareholders present, and Tribune Publishing does not require its directors to obtain a majority of the votes cast. So even if there is overwhelming shareholder support for Gannett’s campaign, the Tribune Publishing board can just ignore it. (And there may not even be such support, because two proxy advisory services, Institutional Shareholder Services and Glass Lewis, have come out in favor of Tribune Publishing, calling Gannett’s latest offer underpriced.)Tribune Publishing’s board raised the ante by selling a 12.92 percent stake to the billionaire entrepreneur Patrick Soon-Shiong. This type of move, known as a white squire, is permitted under the laws of Delaware, where Tribune is incorporated. It will be reviewed by Delaware courts under the so-called Unocal test, which looks to see whether the response is reasonable in relation to the threat posed and not preclusive or coercive.The board probably has ample justification because it received a price of $15 a share and some technological exchanges, but it does not preclude Gannett from succeeding, provided that Gannett waits a whole year to submit a slate of directors at the next annual shareholder meeting. Tribune Publishing’s maneuver would not have stopped Gannett had it been able to run a director election, but it does make Gannett’s effort that much harder.Prediction: Gannett’s hostile takeover attempt is not long for this world.Medivation/SanofiSanofi holds all the cards in its attempt to take over Medivation. The reason is that although the nomination deadline for Medivation’s annual meeting has passed, Medivation allows shareholders to act by written consent at any time. Under the law in Delaware, where Medivation is incorporated, directors on a board in which every director is up for election at the same time can be removed at any time with or without cause. Companies typically limit this maneuver by eliminating the right of shareholders to call a special meeting or act by written consent. This forces the hostile bidder to wait until the annual meeting to try to replace the directors and then have them remove the poison pill.Sanofi has started the consent solicitation, and Medivation will have to fight the hardest fight – persuading its shareholders not to support the Sanofi slate.Prediction: Medivation will be sold, to a third party if it can find another bidder in time, or it will be forced to make a deal with Sanofi.Monsanto/BayerBayer has made a $62 billion bid for Monsanto. It, too, has missed the deadline for nominations for Monsanto’s board. And Monsanto has yet to adopt a poison pill, although this can be done in a matter of hours. Because Bayer would have to obtain antitrust approval before buying a substantial number of Monsanto shares, Monsanto does not have to rush.But the strategy here is different. Bayer is doing what is called a teddy bear hug – softly wooing Monsanto and saying, ‘Let’s get together, but I am not going to be too ferocious about it.’ It seems to be working: Monsanto said it would consider a higher offer that allowed its shareholders to participate in the upside.This is a not an uncommon strategy, to use shareholder pressure in lieu of an uncertain full hostile bid and proxy contest. Foreign bidders in particular have been loath to pursue hostile deals because of the scrutiny it brings, although the aversion is less these days.An interesting twist is also pushing Bayer’s strategy: Its offer of $122 a share is all in cash. Should it want to offer a stock component in a sweetened offer, things would get complicated. Bayer, a German company, is not listed in the United States, and to acquire Monsanto, an American company, in a share exchange, it would have to register its shares with the Securities and Exchange Commission. This could be an arduous process for Bayer that could take months or longer. On top of that, if Bayer pays stock, it will need a shareholder vote, something that will probably not be necessary if Bayer pays cash. This means Bayer is likely to face limits in pushing for an all-cash deal.Prediction: Stay tuned for more maneuvering, but Bayer seems to be a bit skittish about going fully hostile.Westlake Chemical/AxiallThe Westlake Chemical Corporation has been bidding for the Axiall Corporation since January. In March, Westlake raised its bid and nominated directors to replace Axiall’s board at its annual meeting. Westlake got the timing right. Axiall’s charter forbids shareholders from calling a special meeting or otherwise acting by written consent.The pressure is getting to Axiall. On May 4, Axiall announced that it was putting itself up for sale by saying it would consider “strategic alternatives.” Westlake is putting together a revised bid.Prediction: It looks as if Axiall has been forced to make a deal by the pressure of the proxy contest. The only question is whether a white knight can emerge.The Andersons/HC2 HoldingsThis is a quirky deal and shows that when a company is organized outside Delaware, things can become harder for the acquirer.In this case, HC2 Holdings, run by the hedge fund manager Philip A. Falcone, has missed its chance to nominate directors to the board of The Andersons, the American agriculture company. And The Andersons prevents shareholders from acting by written consent or calling a special meeting. The Andersons has not yet adopted a poison pill, a fact it has trumpeted. But it really does not need to take this defensive maneuver.The reason is that it has other defenses. First, under the company’s charter, if any bid is not approved by the board, the votes of two-thirds of the shareholders are required to approve any merger.The Andersons has adopted a control share acquisition statute in its charter, which is even more prohibitive of a hostile bid. It requires that any acquisition of more than 20 percent of the company’s shares must be approved by the shareholders if the acquirer wants to be able to vote those shares. The company also has a business combination statute that says that if an investor acquires more than 10 percent of the company’s stock but less than 85 percent without board approval, it cannot incorporate the remaining shares through a merger for three years.These in the aggregate make it impossible for HC2 Holdings to acquire The Andersons unless the board bows to shareholder pressure and approves the bid.Prediction: Unless Mr. Falcone can offer a rich price, this hostile takeover attempt is also destined for failure.There is a lesson here – the defenses a company adopts when it goes public, something that may have happened decades ago, can make all the difference in a hostile situation. Be forewarned.Advertisement