MAY 28, 2016
“Successful? You’ve Already Won the Lottery” by Robert H. Frank of Cornell (The Upshot, Economic View, May 22) looked at the role that chance — even in such things as a person’s date of birth or the first letter in a last name — can play in life.The article had 402 comments.And there it is. Second from last paragraph. If government just confiscated more of your money, we’d all be happier. Trust us. And you’re welcome.Barry Colvin, New YorkThis is just another way of saying “if you are successful, you didn’t earn it.” Your hard work, smart choices, deferred gratification mean nothing. And by the way, if you ARE successful, since you didn’t really earn it, you should give away the fruits of that success.Brenda, PennsylvaniaAs to getting your rich friends to chip in more toward the common good by reminding them of their good fortune — I say, yeah, good luck with that.AdvertisementJBL, BostonLuck? How about being tall, male, blue-eyed, with a neutral surname, and born into the post-World War II middle class? That’s luck.AdvertisementView from the hill, Vermont“The safest way to get what you want is to try and deserve what you want.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tell this to children born to deprivation and neglect, with a parent incarcerated or involved with drugs or in foster care or living in shelters.Charles, New York CityI used to tell people that I earned my success, that I worked hard for it. Then a friend asked, “Did you choose the genes you were born with, that gave you your talent, or the formative experiences you had, that gave you your work ethic?” Now I simply tell people I’ve been very fortunate.Phat, Waterloo, Ontario“Even the most able, industrious people in South Sudan have little chance at success.”That depends what you mean by success. I hope I’m not the only reader who stumbled over this equation, “success = becoming extremely rich by U.S.A. standards.”ept, WisconsinA version of this article appears in print on May 29, 2016, on Page BU5 of the New York edition with the headline: Comments.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.