By SARAH MAXMAY 27, 2016
Decades before TED Talks, so-called massive open online courses and YouTube videos made top educators accessible to the masses, the Great Courses built a loyal audience of lifelong learners by making “the world’s greatest professors” available to anyone with a VCR or cassette player.Larry Weinberg, 72, typifies the Great Courses’ core customer: A voracious learner, he got hooked on the Great Courses video and audio classes shortly after he retired from Boeing a decade ago. His personal library now includes more than 200 courses, as varied as “Understanding Multivariable Calculus” and “Yoga for a Healthy Mind and Body,” all carefully cataloged on bookshelves and computer hard drives.“I haven’t watched all of them yet,” said Mr. Weinberg, who has a Ph.D. in math and a law degree. “They are kind of like books. I have lots of books, but that doesn’t stop me from buying new ones.”When so much educational material is available online, much of it free, courses like these are something of a throwback. Nevertheless, for the last 25 years, the format has gained the company a loyal customer base, made up primarily of older professionals and retirees. Customers pay from $35 to more than $500 for audio and video courses that offer the intellectual stimulation of college without the worries of finishing assignments or taking final exams.AdvertisementNow the Great Courses program hopes to broaden its demographics with an all-you-can-learn streaming service, Great Courses Plus, which it introduced late last year. With the streaming option, customers are not limited to a single course. For $19.99 a month, or about $180 for an annual subscription, they have unlimited online access to more than 280 of the most recent and popular courses from the company’s library of roughly 600 courses on topics including astrophysics and wine tasting.Advertisement“I’m a big believer that we are the Netflix of learning,” said Paul Suijk, chief executive of the Teaching Company of Chantilly, Va., which owns the Great Courses and has $150 million a year in revenue. “Looking at Netflix and where they are going, I think there are many similarities.”For years, Great Courses was just about the only game in town. Its advertisements have long been familiar to anyone who reads The New York Times Book Review or The New Yorker. But now it faces competition from massive open online courses, or MOOCs, offered by colleges and even from outlets like YouTube.Coursera, for example, offers courses from more than 140 universities and organizations around the world, with topics as varied as grammar and punctuation, and Tibetan meditation. Students can take classes free or pay for a more complete experience, with assessments and interaction with professors.About 25 percent to 30 percent of Coursera users “are purely enrichment learners, and the demographics of the Great Courses,” said Daphne Koller, president and co-founder of Coursera. The average age of a Coursera student is 33, versus 45 plus for the typical Great Courses customer.“I think there’s an appetite for a broad range of learning experiences,” said Jonathan Haber, an educational researcher who tried to learn the equivalent of a four-year liberal arts degree in one year using only MOOCs and other forms of free education, including Great Courses. He wrote about his project on his blog and in the book “MOOCs,” published by the MIT Press.“If you are interested in community and interaction, MOOCs may be your best option,” Mr. Haber said. “If you are interested in lectures, the Great Courses are probably your best option.”The Great Courses do not offer the same opportunity as MOOCs to interact with professors. Instead, writers and producers “try to predict as much of that exchange as possible” by addressing common questions in the lecture, said Marcy McDonald, who was senior director of content for the Great Courses and is now a freelance course producer.AdvertisementThe production quality and depth of Great Courses’ material is still a cut above most of what is available free. “People go to YouTube looking for an answer to a question,” said Ron Davis, a chemistry professor at Georgetown University who has a YouTube channel and recently finished his second Great Courses series on chemistry. “The Great Courses is about immersing yourself.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While the plots do not have the same twists and turns as those of “House of Cards” or “Breaking Bad,” the courses do attract “binge learners” who power through dozens of 30-minute lectures on a weekend. Data on Plus subscribers show that many are sampling a wide range of courses that suit their moods or circumstances, whether it is a high school student needing to catch up on organic chemistry or a foodie interested in the finer points of French cuisine.The inspiration for the Great Courses came after its founder, Tom Rollins, skipped his evidence class on federal rules during his second year in law school at Harvard. In a panic before the final exam, he found a series of video lectures taught by Prof. Irving Younger of Cornell University.“I was prepared for the worst weekend of my life,” Mr. Rollins said. Instead, he was captivated, got an A on the exam and, after serving as chief of staff to Senator Edward M. Kennedy’s Labor Committee, built a business based on that experience. “It made me realize that we dramatically undervalue the power of great teachers,” he said.Mr. Rollins filmed the first courses — which covered psychology, political theory and Shakespeare — at Georgetown University but quickly realized that taking crews and equipment on location added cost and complexity. In 1992, he brought production in house to the original headquarters in Springfield, Va., shooting with two cameras and the same backdrop.A turning point came in 1996, when Mr. Rollins shifted gears from thinking solely about content to creating a successful business. He pored over Harvard Business School case studies, sought outside expertise and created a 120-page playbook for doing business and building customer loyalty. Through direct marketing and abundant print advertising, he built a loyal audience of repeat customers.Despite the successes, Mr. Rollins started looking for a buyer around 2000, when many of his early investors were ready to leave. He ultimately struck a deal with Brentwood Associates, a private equity firm based in Los Angeles.In 2006, Brentwood invested $50 million, a majority stake, in the Teaching Company with the goal of improving production quality and expanding the company’s reach. When streaming video took off, it made the business model that much more appealing. “We bought a fantastic DVD company,” which sold DVDs via direct marketing, said Bill Barnum, who helped found Brentwood’s private equity group. “And then there was an incredible revolution on the device side and with new online distribution channels.”Under Brentwood, the company has more than tripled the circulation of its course catalogs to about 70 million. In 2013, it added indirect distribution channels, including Audible.com, Amazon Instant Video, Comcast Video on Demand and even Netflix.AdvertisementIn addition, the company has forged partnerships with the Culinary Institute of America, the Smithsonian Institution and the Mayo Clinic, among others, to produce videos. These partnerships offer access to experts, locations and resources, and expand the marketing reach. The Fundamentals of Photography, which is produced with National Geographic, is the best-selling course in the history of the company.Most videos are still produced in one of the company’s two studios, one with a permanent set and one that changes with the topic. One week it resembles the site of an archaeological dig, and the next it is a physiology lab. Increasingly, postproduction animation is part of the equation, though it is still a far cry from Hollywood. Most courses are easily converted into audio-only products, which account for roughly 20 percent of the company’s revenue.New customers might be drawn to a single topic, but the company’s direct marketing aims to turn them into repeat customers. Roughly a third of first-time buyers buy more courses, according to the company.Great Courses producers typically generate ideas for new courses, but those ideas are tested using customer surveys. If a topic gets the green light, internal talent scouts search for the expert best suited to write the course and present it on camera. “You could be Einstein, but if you’re not engaging, you’re not going to cut it,” said Mr. Suijk, the chief executive. “We’re trying to find the professors who are truly special.”A version of this article appears in print on May 29, 2016, on Page BU4 of the New York edition with the headline: Born in the VCR Era, Great Courses Seeks to Evolve.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.