AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesThis is what to expect in the week ahead.AUTO INDUSTRYVolkswagen could reveal more about the cost of its emissions scandal when it reports first-quarter earnings on Tuesday. The company has set aside about $18 billion so far to cover fines and legal settlements stemming from its admission that it programmed cars to deliver false emissions data. Volkswagen, which also makes Audi and Porsche vehicles, previously announced that its car sales rose less than 1 percent in the first four months of the year, a sign the scandal is taking a toll. Jack EwingECONOMYOn Tuesday, at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department will release the latest data on consumer spending and income in April. Economists are looking for a 0.4 percentage point increase in both income and outlays, as spending rebounds from a soft start to the year. Consumers are benefiting from steady gains in hiring and signs of life in wage growth, which should provide a tailwind for consumer activity in the months ahead. Nelson D. SchwartzOIL INDUSTRYOfficials of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries are scheduled to meet in Vienna on Thursday to discuss the oil markets. Analysts say that major agreements are most unlikely, but the gathering will be notable as the first since Saudi Arabia’s King Salman replaced Ali al-Naimi, the country’s oil minister for more than 20 years, with Khalid al-Falih, an industry executive, this month. Since 2014, Mr. Naimi had dismayed some OPEC members by advocating a survival of the fittest strategy of producing large volumes of oil to preserve market share rather than cutting production to support prices. But his departure is unlikely to bring relief for other exporters. Mr. Falih has already committed himself to these policies, and some analysts say he may even favor an increase in output to bolster Saudi Arabia’s ambitious economic growth plans. Stanley ReedECONOMYThe Governing Council of the European Central Bank is not expected to adjust monetary policy when it meets in Vienna on Thursday as it waits to see the effect of higher oil prices as well as relatively strong growth in the eurozone over the first three months of the year. Mario Draghi, the president of the central bank, will hold a news conference after the meeting and is expected to call on governments to do more to improve economic performance in the eurozone, rather than relying on monetary stimulus. The council periodically meets outside its base in Frankfurt. Jack Ewing On Friday, at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department is scheduled to release its report on the nation’s hiring and unemployment for May. Analysts are expecting that employers hired 160,000 workers in the month. Although that consensus estimate equals the additions to April’s payrolls, it is well below the 200,000-plus monthly gains that the economy has been averaging over the last three years, which have brought the jobless rate down to 5 percent. Experts noted that May’s figures could appear softer than they really were, a reflection of the more than 35,000 workers who had been on strike at Verizon since mid-April. (An agreement in principle was reached last week.) Some of the decline may be offset by temporary workers hired by Verizon to fill in for striking union members. Economists, as well as the public, will be looking to see if average hourly earnings continue to rise and whether the job market is strong enough to bring sidelined workers back to the labor force. Patricia CohenAdvertisement