AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Shirley Ann Jackson, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant. Q. What were your early years like?A. I grew up in Washington, D.C., a child of the ’50s and ’60s. So when I started school, the schools were segregated by law. After the famous Brown v. Board of Education decision in 1954, Washington immediately integrated the schools the next year. A tracking system was put into place, and we were tested in the sixth grade. Based on that, I was placed in an accelerated program. I ended up being my high school valedictorian.I was pretty quiet in many ways but always assertive. When I was young, I used to organize the kids on the block to actually sweep the sidewalk before the street-sweeping truck came. It just seemed like the thing to do. I don’t know why they would do it, frankly, but somehow they did it. I would say to them, “Why have the streets clean if the sidewalks aren’t?”I also did experiments as a kid. I started with collecting bees in our yard and doing little environmental and dietary experiments with them. I always tried to let them go before they died. I never wanted a dead insect collection.Tell me about your parents.My father started working after the 11th grade because his father had passed away. He was always mechanically gifted. My father was in World War II — in a segregated unit, and he was at Normandy. He ended up getting a Bronze Star because in the battle, he was able to repair the amphibious landing vehicles that the troops came in on. The rudders kept breaking. Other people had tried different things, but they would come apart, and he figured out a particular way to splice cables that worked. That saved a lot of lives.He used to work on projects all the time, and I spent a lot of time with him when I was young. My mother was the one who made sure we all were really good in the language arts. She taught us to read before we went to kindergarten.Any favorite family expressions?My father always said, “Aim for the stars so you can reach the treetops.” Then he always said that the way you get your next best job is to do as well as you can in the one you’re in.What were some important leadership lessons for you?It’s important to know when one is the leader and when one is the follower. Even if you lead an organization, there are times you follow other people. I certainly learned that as chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.I also learned — because I had to testify before Congress a lot, starting with my own confirmation hearings — that it’s very important to be consistent in messaging. Not necessarily rigid, but consistent, because the words mean something.The last thing is that a lot of people talk about sticking to your guns and having the courage of your convictions, and it is true. You can’t second-guess yourself every day, but at the same time you cannot be so arrogant as to never change your mind.What advice do you often give when you’re coaching managers?It’s important to listen carefully, because it helps you understand the other person, and you cannot expect to really reach them if you do not understand. Listening can also help you make better decisions because nobody is the fount of all knowledge.The second is empathy. The world is complex, and people come from various backgrounds. I have my own sensitivities based on how I grew up. Sometimes I let them get the better of me, but I learned an important lesson early on.As a freshman at M.I.T., I did volunteer work in a hospital in Boston, in the pediatric ward. I was feeling kind of down at the time because I was this African-American woman and people weren’t always so great to me. But the volunteer work was important because it kept me grounded. You’re with these little kids who have all these ailments.There was a little blond-haired baby who had no face. He had just sockets for eyes. His nose was very deformed. He had a mouth to eat, but it was deformed, too. Nobody ever came to see him, at least that I could see. But every time I was finished with all the other things I had to do, I would just go hold him. It helped me realize that sometimes my own demons can get the better of me, but that everybody has a burden they carry. It’s important to understand that.How do you hire?I ask people just to tell me about their lives — how they grew up, and how they got to where they are. What I really am looking for is self-discernment. How seriously they take what they do versus taking themselves too seriously.What career and life advice do you give to new college grads?You start out with a trajectory, a direction. But you have to understand that there are a lot of forces along the way that can change the trajectory. But you try to keep your eye on that North Star and understand why you started down the path in the first place.And you can’t lose your confidence. That’s easier said than done, but one way to do that is even when you’re doing something hard and not feeling totally successful, you should find something in the work that you can be successful at and just do it.The other thing is not to stew about things. Stewing doesn’t help you because then you miss opportunities. None of us love what we do every day of the week and every hour of the day.Any favorite expressions of your own?It’s not original, but I like this one: “If you don’t come down off the porch, you can’t run with the big dogs.” You’ve got to be in the game. You can’t be afraid. I had many days of my own self-doubt, but I’ve always been willing to try.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement