AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — Housing starts in the United States fell to a seven-month low in October, weighed down by a steep decline in the construction of multifamily homes. A surge in building permits, though, suggested that the housing market remained on solid ground.Groundbreaking dropped 11 percent to a seasonally adjusted annual pace of 1.06 million units last month, the lowest level since March, the Commerce Department said on Wednesday.October was the seventh consecutive month that starts remained above one million units, the longest stretch since 2007. Building permits increased 4.1 percent to an annual rate of 1.15 million units.Rapidly rising household formation, driven mostly by young adults’ leaving their parental homes along with a strengthening labor market, is supporting the housing sector.“Over all, fundamentals for the sector remain solid. Household formation is rising, demand for new homes is outstripping supply, and homebuilder confidence remains near its highest level in a decade,” said Michelle Girard, chief economist at RBS in Stamford, Conn.Highlighting the housing market’s underlying strength, a second report from the Mortgage Bankers Association showed applications for loans to purchase homes jumped 6.2 percent during the week that ended Nov. 13 from a week earlier.After the soft October housing numbers, Barclays trimmed its fourth-quarter gross domestic product estimate by one-tenth of a percentage point, to a 2.2 percent annual rate.Housing has contributed to G.D.P. growth in each of the last six quarters, adding 0.2 percentage point to the third-quarter’s 1.5 percent growth pace.Economists had forecast that housing starts would drop to only a 1.16-million-unit pace last month. Many viewed the weakness in October as being related to land and labor shortages, constraints that have been flagged by homebuilders.“Structural issues including a shortfall in immigrant labor are inhibiting construction. The supply shortage in the single-family market is not likely to be alleviated anytime soon,” said David Nice, an economist at Mesirow Financial in Chicago.Groundbreaking on single-family home projects, the largest segment of the housing market, fell 2.4 percent to a 722,000-unit pace in October. Single-family starts were pulled down by a 6.9 percent plunge in groundbreaking activity in the South, where most homebuilding takes place. Single-family starts rose in the Northeast, the Midwest and the West.Starts for the volatile multifamily segment plunged 25.1 percent to a 338,000-unit pace.Single-family building permits rose 2.4 percent last month to their highest level since December 2007. Single-family permits in the South also hit their highest level since December 2007. Multifamily building permits increased 6.8 percent.“The October permit requests were above the starts number, and for the past three months permits have been running a little ahead of the building pace, so don’t be surprised if housing activity rebounds solidly in November,” said Joel Naroff, chief economist at Naroff Economic Advisors in Holland, Pa.Advertisement