AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelViacom’s directors vowed on Monday to fight any potential moves by the ailing media mogul Sumner M. Redstone and his daughter, Shari Redstone, to eject them from the company’s board.As a power struggle looms over the future of Mr. Redstone’s $40 billion empire, Viacom’s lead independent director said in a letter that an attempt to remove Viacom directors from the board “would be completely inconsistent with Sumner’s lifetime commitment to an independent board and professional management for Viacom after his incapacity or death.”The letter underscores how the board of directors has sided with Philippe P. Dauman, Viacom’s embattled chief executive, in the fight that has erupted over Mr. Redstone’s companies. Sent on behalf of Viacom’s independent directors, the letter pre-empts any public moves by Mr. Redstone or Ms. Redstone to remove board members. Changing Viacom’s board would signal a step toward dismissing Mr. Dauman from the helm.The proclamation continues the dramatic turn of events that has seized Mr. Redstone’s companies in recent weeks. Mr. Dauman was ousted on May 20 from Mr. Redstone’s trust and the board of National Amusements, the private theater chain company through which Mr. Redstone controls 80 percent of the voting stock in Viacom and CBS, two of the world’s largest entertainment companies.That control will pass to an irrevocable trust after Mr. Redstone dies or if he is declared incompetent. Mr. Dauman promptly filed a lawsuit, challenging whether Mr. Redstone had the mental capacity to make such moves and suggesting that Mr. Redstone had been manipulated by his daughter.The letter is a sign of how Viacom’s directors are preparing their own legal challenge in the event they, too, are dismissed.“To a person, we feel the responsibility to challenge in court what we honestly believe would be legally flawed removals,” the letter states. “That is especially so because the flaw we see would be the inexplicable assertion that Sumner was acting of his own free will and with the mental competency to do so.”In the letter, which was sent to Viacom employees, investors and the news media, the directors took a direct shot at Ms. Redstone. Frederic V. Salerno, Viacom’s lead independent director, said in the letter that an attempt to remove Viacom’s board would be inconsistent with Mr. Redstone’s “stated judgment for many years that his daughter, Shari, should not control Viacom or his other companies.”A spokeswoman for Ms. Redstone declined to comment. A spokesman for Mr. Redstone also declined to comment.In a statement on Friday, Mike Lawrence, a spokesman for Mr. Redstone, said: “Sumner Redstone will make every decision with the same deliberation and consideration with which he removed Philippe Dauman and George Abrams as trustees, based on the best interests of shareholders.” Mr. Abrams, a longtime director at Viacom, was pushed aside along with Mr. Dauman.Viacom’s stock price has declined about 35 percent in the past year, and the company has continued to report weak earnings. Last week, Viacom’s stock price increased about 13 percent after the announcement that Mr. Dauman had been removed from the trust.On Friday, the activist investor Eric Jackson of SpringOwl Asset Management outlined his plan for what he believed should happen next at Viacom. First, he said, Mr. Dauman should be fired immediately. Viacom then should merge with CBS, he said, and move to spin off Paramount Pictures, the film and television studio owned by Viacom.In the letter, Mr. Salerno acknowledged Viacom’s dismal numbers, stating that the board was “not happy with where Viacom’s performance stands.” He added that one important step to spur growth was for the company go ahead with its plans to sell a minority stake in Paramount.“We hope that the fight over control does not impair or completely undermine this potential step with Paramount,” Mr. Salerno said.Through representatives, Mr. Redstone has previously stated that he is against a Paramount deal.Mr. Salerno acknowledged the continued controversy over Mr. Redstone’s mental capacity. This month, a Los Angeles judge dismissed a trial challenging Mr. Redstone’s competence. Yet the judge did not make a decision about whether or not Mr. Redstone was mentally competent. That question has resurfaced in Mr. Dauman’s suit.“If Sumner is found competent and acting without undue influence, we may be legally removed simply for having explored strategic options that might include a minority investment in Paramount,” he added. “That said, our job is to try to do our job, not to try to keep our job. That is all we can promise — and we do promise it.”Advertisement