By WILLIAM GRIMESJUNE 1, 2016
Nanette Rainone, who as a reporter and programmer at the New York radio station WBAI in the late 1960s and early ’70s created some of the first programs dedicated to feminism and women’s issues, died on May 23 at her home in Manhattan. She was 73.The cause was complications of breast cancer, her son, Bruno Blumenfeld, said.Ms. Rainone (pronounced ray-KNOWN) was a volunteer at the station in 1969 when she developed the idea for “Womankind,” a feminist news and information radio show that included interviews.At the time, feminism was struggling to earn a place in left-wing politics, where radical ideas still coexisted with sexist attitudes. Ms. Rainone hoped to overcome this paradox, taking a point of view shaped by her membership in groups like the Feminists and New York Radical Feminists.She soon added “Electra Rewired,” a program produced entirely by women for women. It was broadcast live at night and ran until dawn, with listeners calling in to discuss the topics addressed by the host, Liza Cowan, and her guests.AdvertisementIn late 1970, Ms. Rainone came up with a third program, “Consciousness Raising,” in which seven regular guests gathered at the WBAI studio in Manhattan once a week to talk about topics such as marriage, divorce, housework and sexuality.Ms. Rainone edited the talk down to 45 minutes, broadcast it on Fridays at noon and let listeners call in to express their opinions for another 45 minutes. The idea, she once wrote, was simple: to present “a group of women honestly discussing their lives.”In 1971, she became the head programmer for WBAI. She was a producer of “The Sex Programme,” which encouraged listeners to call in and seek advice from sex therapists, and of a radio series on women’s diaries.Nanette Rainone was born on Dec. 4, 1942, in Queens, where she grew up in Middle Village. Her father, Massimo, was a printer. Her mother, the former Anna Solomita, worked as a bookkeeper. On their first date, they had attended the musical “No, No Nanette,” which inspired the name they would give their daughter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Rainone attended Newtown High School in Queens and in 1965 earned a degree in English from Queens College, where she was active in leftist groups like the Student Peace Union and the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.She pursued graduate studies, but after marrying Ralph Blumenfeld, a reporter for The New York Post, in 1966, she left school to work as a clerk at Life magazine. The marriage ended in divorce. Her second husband, Harvey W. Schultz, New York City’s commissioner of environmental protection during the last of Mayor Edward I. Koch’s three terms, died in 2007.AdvertisementIn addition to her son, Ms. Rainone is survived by a brother, Martin; three stepsons, Jason, Matthew and Daniel Schultz; a granddaughter; and three step-grandchildren.After leaving WBAI in 1976 Ms. Rainone worked on the mayoral campaign of Representative Bella Abzug and became the communications director for Howard Golden, the Brooklyn borough president. While in Mr. Golden’s office, she created the Fund for the Borough of Brooklyn — now called BRIC, for Brooklyn Information and Culture — to present free performances and cultural programs as a way of attracting visitors to the borough.As the fund’s president, an office she held until 2002, she organized the annual Celebrate Brooklyn! festival in Prospect Park and played a key role in creating the Rotunda Gallery on Clinton Street, which showcases the artwork of Brooklyn residents, as well as Brooklyn Community Access Television (now called the Brooklyn Public Network).In the mid-1970s, when radical politics seemed to be losing some of its fervor and sense of direction, Ms. Rainone reaffirmed her faith in WBAI’s mission in its program guide: “The station stands — having been the first to present women’s programing — as the only media institution which has not virtually abandoned the questions raised by the movements since the demonstrators left the streets.”A version of this article appears in print on June 2, 2016, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Nanette Rainone, 73, Feminist-Radio Creator.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.