By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMAY 31, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — When the Alibaba Group was barely a year old in 2000, the fledgling Chinese e-commerce company gained an early believer and investor in Masayoshi Son, the outspoken Japanese telecommunications mogul.Sixteen years later, Mr. Son and his telecommunications company, SoftBank, are finally selling a portion of that stake after its value has mushroomed to billions of dollars.SoftBank said on Tuesday that it planned to sell approximately $8 billion of its shares in Alibaba. The reason: The Japanese company is seeking to pay down some of its hefty debt load.SoftBank said it would remain one of Alibaba’s biggest shareholders, with a stake of about 28 percent after the share sale.AdvertisementThe move comes as the Japanese telecom concern tries to cut costs and focus on turning around Sprint, the American cellphone service provider it controls. Though the rest of SoftBank, including its expansive Japanese wireless network and the Yahoo Japan business that it runs, is performing well, Sprint remains far behind its United States counterparts in customers and sales.AdvertisementThat has prompted SoftBank, under its president, Nikesh Arora, to focus on cutting costs and shedding debt in its “SoftBank 2.0” strategy. The company reported holding about 8.5 trillion yen, or just under $77 billion, worth of long-term debt as of March 31, according to Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ, a research service.Alibaba has become one of the most valuable assets in SoftBank’s portfolio of businesses. The Chinese e-commerce giant made its debut as a public company on the New York Stock Exchange in 2014 and now holds a market value of about $209 billion.The share sale, which has been in the works for months, has not been driven by concern over Alibaba’s financial prospects, according to people with direct knowledge of the matter, who were not authorized to speak publicly. The Chinese e-commerce giant disclosed recently that the Securities and Exchange Commission of the United States had been looking into its accounting practices, and the company has said that it is cooperating.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Under the terms of SoftBank’s plan, approximately $5 billion of the stake sale would be packaged into a financial security that would convert into shares of Alibaba after three years.Alibaba itself will buy back about $2 billion worth of shares from SoftBank. The Chinese company’s partnership, a group that essentially controls it through its ability to nominate a majority of directors, plans to buy an additional $400 million worth of shares.“As SoftBank looks to strengthen its own balance sheet, Alibaba determined that it was the best use of our capital to reinvest in our own business through an efficient buyback of a large number of shares in our own company that is accretive to our stockholders,” Jack Ma, one of Alibaba’s founders and its executive chairman, said in a statement.SoftBank will sell another $500 million shares to an unnamed government’s investment fund.Even after the sale, however, the two companies said that they would retain significant ties to each other. Mr. Son, Softbank’s chairman and chief executive, will remain on Alibaba’s board. Mr. Ma will still be a director of SoftBank.“This investment has been phenomenally successful and, over the past 16 years, we have built a close relationship, working together on many exciting projects,” Mr. Son said in a statement. “In that time, we have not sold any Alibaba shares. There are huge opportunities ahead for Alibaba and SBG looks forward to the continued partnership.”Shares of Alibaba fell nearly 2.4 percent in after-hours trading, to $79.61.A version of this article appears in print on June 1, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: SoftBank Plans to Sell an $8 Billion Stake in Alibaba.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.