AdvertisementSupported byBy David JollyPARIS — Martin Senn, the former chief executive of Zurich Insurance Group, has killed himself, the company said on Monday, citing information from his family.Mr. Senn had resigned in December, mentioning business “setbacks in recent months.’’News of his death drew comparisons in the European news media to the suicide less than three years ago of the company’s chief financial officer.Details of Mr. Senn’s death were not made public by the company, beyond confirmation that his family had said he killed himself on Friday.But Swiss news outlets, including the daily newspaper Blick, reported that Mr. Senn had died at his vacation home in Klosters, near Davos, in eastern Switzerland.Roman Rüegg, a spokesman for the police of Graubünden canton, which includes Klosters, said on Monday that police officers had confirmed Mr. Senn’s death Friday evening. He said he could neither confirm nor deny Swiss news reports that Mr. Senn had shot himself, as the investigation was continuing.Mr. Rüegg said that if there had been a suicide note, the police had not obtained it.Mr. Senn, 59, who had a long career in finance, joined Zurich Insurance in 2006. He rose to the chief executive’s job in 2010, earning high marks for helping the company navigate the financial crisis without major losses. He stepped down in December, citing “setbacks” that included the company’s failure to acquire RSA Insurance Group, a smaller British rival, and losses that arose from insurance claims related to huge chemical explosions in Tianjin, China, last August.Less than three years ago, in August 2013, Zurich Insurance’s chief financial officer, Pierre Wauthier, a 53-year-old father of two, killed himself, leaving behind a note in which he referred to tensions with Josef Ackermann, the demanding Swiss executive who was the company’s chairman. (Mr. Ackermann stepped down soon after.)Subsequent investigations by Zurich Insurance and Finma, the Swiss financial watchdog, found that Mr. Wauthier had not been under undue pressure, although those findings were disputed by Mr. Wauthier’s survivors.At the time of Mr. Senn’s departure in December, Tom de Swaan, the Zurich Insurance chairman, had praised him as “a leader of the highest integrity, someone with a very rare sense of how to balance the interests of different stakeholder groups.” Mr. Senn, he said, had “set in motion a transformation that will make our company more customer-centric, more efficient and more successful.”Mario Greco, the former chief executive of the Italian insurer Generali, became chief executive of Zurich Insurance in March.On Monday, the company issued a statement, saying: “With the passing of Martin, we lose not only a highly valued former C.E.O. and colleague, but also a close friend. Our thoughts are with his bereaved family and friends, to whom we extend our deepest sympathies.”Advertisement