By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONNOV. 18, 2015
BlackRock, the world’s biggest asset manager, is closing a billion-dollar hedge fund that made money for investors with bets on macroeconomic trends around the world.The BlackRock Global Ascent hedge fund has lost 9.4 percent this year and investors in the $1 billion fund were notified over the last week that it would be closed down, according to a person with direct knowledge of the firm’s decision. The hedge fund — which as recently as two years ago had $4.6 billion in assets under management — is now almost completely cashed out, that person said.BlackRock is the latest firm to wind down in a string of hedge fund closures, many of them focused on global macro strategies. Macro hedge fund managers have struggled to stem losses that have come from tumultuous and unexpected moves in markets around the world this year.At the start of the year a group of managers were stuck with large losses from making wrong-footed currency bets after the Swiss National Bank decided to lift a cap on the Swiss franc against the euro. Later in the year, the Chinese central bank suddenly devalued its currency, the renminbi, a move that reverberated across Asia over the summer. Plunging oil prices and a rout in the commodity markets also caused a headache for many managers.AdvertisementInvestor dissatisfaction has grown after months and years of disappointing performance, and so has the list of hedge funds that have closed down in the last month. The private equity giant Bain Capital decided to liquidate its multibillion-dollar Absolute Return Capital hedge fund at the beginning of October. Fortress Investment Group followed days later, shuttering its $1.6 billion flagship macro fund, run by Wall Street’s star trader Michael Novogratz. Other well-known hedge fund firms like Renaissance Technologies have chosen to shut down poor-performing funds, too.AdvertisementThe third quarter has been the worst the industry has seen since the financial crisis of 2008. Over a period of weeks, many managers saw their gains for the year wiped out. William A. Ackman’s Pershing Square Capital Management has lost 21 percent this year, suddenly reversing earlier gains in August. Other hedge funds run by stars like David Einhorn and Daniel S. Loeb also suffered losses in August. .Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The total amount of money that hedge fund managers have to invest in stocks, bonds, commodities and currencies dropped by $95 billion over the quarter, according to data from HFR, a firm that tracks the industry. That is the biggest decline in assets since the depths of the financial crisis in 2008.BlackRock is better known for its mutual funds and exchange traded funds but it runs $51 billion in hedge funds, including $20 billion in funds of hedge funds. The Global Ascent fund was its only dedicated global macro fund.“We believe that redeeming the Global Ascent Fund was the right thing to do for our clients, given the headwinds that macro funds have faced,” said Ed Sweeney, a spokesman for BlackRock. The firm continues to invest in other managers who use macro strategies, he said. In recent years, BlackRock has closed on average 200 funds a year, Mr. Sweeney added.News of the hedge fund closure was reported earlier by Bloomberg News.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.