By EMILY STEELMAY 31, 2016
Shari Redstone lashed out Tuesday in the battle over her father’s $40 billion media empire, making one of her boldest statements yet about the need for new leadership at Viacom.Ms. Redstone underscored that she had no desire to manage Viacom nor to lead its board, but said she wanted “the best management in place” and “strong, independent directors who will properly oversee that management,” according to the statement issued by her spokeswoman, Nancy Sterling.Ms. Redstone has publicly opposed Philippe P. Dauman’s leadership as Viacom’s chairman and chief executive. She was the sole director to vote against his appointment as chairman of the company in February. Her statement on Tuesday signaled her resolute stance in trying to bring about change at Viacom and could be a prelude to the dismissal of the company’s board and, ultimately, of Mr. Dauman.Ms. Redstone said shareholders had made their wishes clear. “They want new management at the top and strong directors with independent oversight on the board,” the statement said.AdvertisementOn May 20, Mr. Dauman was ousted from the trust that will control Sumner M. Redstone’s companies after his death. Mr. Dauman was also ejected from the board of National Amusements, the private theater chain company through which Mr. Redstone controls Viacom and CBS. Mr. Dauman immediately filed suit, challenging the competency of Mr. Redstone, who is 93, and questioning whether he had been influenced by Ms. Redstone.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many on Wall Street viewed the changes at the top of the Redstone empire as the first step in an overhaul of the leadership at Viacom, the huge entertainment company that includes Nickelodeon, MTV, Comedy Central and the Paramount film studio. The company’s stock price has increased about 13 percent in the last week. That is a stark reversal from its performance over the last year, when Viacom’s stock price declined 34 percent as the company reported persistent weak results.AdvertisementMs. Redstone’s declaration on Tuesday continued the vicious war of words that has surrounded Viacom in the last week and a half.On Monday, Viacom directors issued their own letter, in which they vowed to fight any potential moves to remove them from the company’s board. The letter challenged Mr. Redstone’s mental competency and took aim at Ms. Redstone, stating that Mr. Redstone for many years had said that she “should not control Viacom or his other companies.”Ms. Redstone responded on Tuesday by saying that board members should spend less time focusing on her and how to keep their own positions, and “more time on a long-term strategy to increase the value for shareholders and to develop a specific long-term plan to turn around the current state of Viacom.”A version of this article appears in print on June 1, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Shari Redstone Intensifies Call for a Shift at Viacom.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.