AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonSumner Redstone’s failure to quickly remove Philippe P. Dauman as chief executive of Viacom may have been a misstep, a symptom of a man who is struggling with the predicament of ill health.To understand why Mr. Redstone may be acting too slowly, it is probably worth reflecting on what he might have done 20 years ago.A younger Mr. Redstone would most likely have adopted a “Godfather”-like “Today, I will settle all family business” approach. After all, that was Mr. Redstone’s modus operandi back in the day, suddenly firing his longtime confidant Tom Freston as chief executive after his failure to buy Myspace.In the settle-all-business situation, Mr. Redstone would have taken the following steps all on the same day:Step 1: Remove Mr. Dauman and George Abrams, Mr. Redstone’s longtime lawyer, as trustees of the Viacom trust, which holds Mr. Redstone’s controlling interest in Viacom and CBS upon Mr. Redstone’s death or incapacity. These two men would be succeeded with new allies sympathetic to Mr. Redstone’s daughter, Shari Redstone.Step 2: Remove Mr. Dauman as a director of National Amusements, Viacom’s controlling shareholder.Step 3: Sue in Los Angeles County Superior Court to establish the validity of the trustee removal and the National Amusements removal. The court has the virtue of having just dismissed another lawsuit against Mr. Redstone that raised issues over his competency. (Although to be fair, the judge, there was not a specific finding of competency.)A suit in that California state court would ensure that if Mr. Dauman tried to countersue in Massachusetts — headquarters of the trust and a jurisdiction that perhaps would be more favorable to Mr. Dauman — the court there would defer to the court in Los Angeles, home of the “first-filed” complaint.To be sure, there are jurisdiction issues — Mr. Redstone would be litigating issues over a Massachusetts trust in California, but this would at least ensure the early litigation took place in the Los Angeles court.Step 4: Remove the Viacom directors and replace them with handpicked successors, including Ms. Redstone. Presumably, they would meet immediately and fire Mr. Dauman.As I discussed in a previous Deal Professor, as a result of a mistake in Viacom’s organizational documents, Mr. Redstone, acting through National Amusements, can remove the Viacom directors anytime.Step 5: Sue in Delaware, Viacom’s place of incorporation, to establish the validity of the director removal.This is a whirlwind of activity, but its purpose would be to ensure that Mr. Dauman and the Viacom board were put on the back foot to hinder them from fighting back. In particular, while Viacom is required to maintain its neutrality in this battle, this mass removal would deprive Mr. Dauman and the Viacom board of any corporate resources during this period.This is not what happened.Mr. Redstone stopped at Step 2. He simply removed Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams as trustees and also Mr. Dauman as a director of National Amusements.He did take Step 3, suing in Los Angeles, but on the same day Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams did indeed sue in Massachusetts. The pause allowed Mr. Dauman to hire top corporate litigators and to establish jurisdiction in Massachusetts, where Mr. Dauman could relitigate Mr. Redstone’s competency, rather than in Los Angeles, where the issue had just been heard. And the two plaintiffs are getting some traction, at least initially, with a hearing on the case scheduled for June.The pause in Mr. Redstone’s strategy has also allowed the Viacom board and Viacom to respond.In the case of the Viacom directors, they are already preparing for being removed and suing over any removal attempt. Indeed, Viacom’s lead independent director, Frederic V. Salerno, has been so kind as to criticize Mr. Redstone and to call for a meeting, even issuing an agenda for the meeting.How trite.This is an independent director who never seemed to care much about speaking to Mr. Redstone before his removal was imminent. This board paid Mr. Redstone millions for years without a peep about his competency and decided not to pay him only a few weeks ago.The directors have also written a letter to “Viacom constituencies” stating that they would challenge their removal “because we see that as our responsibility to the noncontrolling shareholders of Viacom who own 90 percent of the equity in the company.” Funny that a board so beholden to Mr. Redstone and willing to dole out excessive compensation to both Mr. Redstone and Mr. Dauman over the years now cares about other constituencies.In any event, there is no corporate law that I know of that requires a controlling shareholder to speak to the directors of the company he controls. If Mr. Redstone wanted to communicate by carrier pigeon, that would be his prerogative. So Mr. Salerno is engaging in a public relations battle, but one that is not on very firm legal ground.Viacom itself also initially made murmurs of discontent. But as I pointed out before, the employees of Viacom should be careful. Taking sides against your majority shareholders on behalf of your chief executive is a breach of fiduciary duty, not to mention something that could get you fired when that controlling shareholder inevitably takes control back of the company.As for that Delaware litigation, it might still be coming.That litigation, by the way, is probably a loser for the Viacom directors. If you want to know why, you can read one of the key opinions on the rights of controlling shareholders and their companies, Adlerstein v. Wertheimer. In that opinion, the court held that a controlling shareholder, no matter how nefarious, had a right to control the board of the company. And that case even featured Ilan K. Reich. (If you don’t know who he is, you really should.)In that case the court ordered the company into receivership, but that was because it was failing. In this case we have a simple business dispute. The law is pretty clear that a majority shareholder can act over a company unless it is looting it. The Viacom directors may try and litigate in New York to get a judge who is less versed in these issues, but that is probably their best option.I would add that the main law firm representing the company started representing the directors and then was sued for that conflict. I can’t overemphasize the importance here that must be placed on keeping the company neutral in this fight.And here the majority shareholder is National Amusements. In that case, the board is made up of Sumner Redstone and two people he just appointed, along with Shari Redstone, her son Tyler and David Andelman, a CBS director. While the Viacom directors will try to argue that there is a conflict, it is hard to see how this establishes legal grounds to void National Amusements’ actions. It is also hard to see the Delaware courts wanting to wade into the question of Mr. Redstone’s capacity and trying to go higher up the chain.So the Viacom board is doomed, but still it will have time to strategize and fight a better fight.So why the wait? One theory may be that there is a bit of disorder in the Redstone camp and that he just hasn’t been able to act as quickly as he used to. After all, his chief legal talent is actually at Viacom. And his slow boat actions are likely only to draw this out more as it gives time to prepare.Another view is that by being slow and deliberate, Mr. Redstone can show that he still has the mental capacity and the ability to make hard decisions. The irony, of course, is that the Sumner Redstone of old was anything but deliberate.In either case, the delay is only making it worse for Viacom the company.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.Advertisement