By LIZ MOYERNOV. 18, 2015
From 2009 to 2014, employees of Barclays’ automated foreign exchange trading system were directed to “obfuscate and stonewall” if anyone asked why client trade orders were being rejected by the system.“Blame it on the weekend IT release and say it’s being fixed,” said one internal message from the head of automated electronic foreign exchange trading to another trader about how to handle questions, even from the firm’s own sales staff.The activity, cited by New York State’s financial industry regulator in announcing a $150 million settlement with Barclays on Wednesday, “highlights the need for greater oversight and action to help prevent the misuse of automated, electronic trading platforms on Wall Street, which is a wider industry issue that requires serious additional scrutiny,” said Anthony Albanese, the acting superintendent of financial services in the state.Barclays also agreed to fire its global head of electronic fixed income, currencies and commodities automated flow trading. It already fired eight employees in connection with a $2.4 billion settlement in May over assertions that its traders were manipulating trading in the currency market.Regulators say that a group of London traders, known as the “cartel” and the “mafia,” illegally dipped into the $5.3-trillion-a-day currency trade.That earlier settlement included $485 million paid to New York State’s Department of Financial Services, though the regulator left the door open to additional investigations into electronic trading activities.AdvertisementMr. Albanese said Barclays used its electronic trading system to reject client orders that would not be profitable for the bank and did not disclose why trade orders were being rejected by its system.AdvertisementMr. Albanese’s investigation focused on an automated trading system that Barclays called “last look.” The system was intended to deter electronic traders who try to exploit tiny delays in the flow of information to and from electronic traders.But instead of using last look as a defensive tactic, Barclays used it as a general filter to reject customer orders that Barclays predicted would not be profitable to the bank. Barclays has since upgraded its trading systems.Customer complaints about the high number of rejections they were getting on orders through the system went unanswered in many cases, Mr. Albanese said, or they got vague answers.In one internal message, the head trader instructed fellow workers to “avoid mentioning” the last look features to Barclays sales staff. “If you get enquiries just obfuscate and stonewall,” the email said.In a statement on Wednesday, Barclays said it “continues to cooperate with other ongoing investigations and to manage related litigation risks as previously disclosed.”The latest regulatory action comes as a former JPMorgan Chase executive, James E. Staley, is set to take the reins of London-based Barclays, which is trying to stage a turnaround.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Regulators in the United States and Europe have been investigating the foreign exchange markets, focusing on the trading activities of large global banks like Barclays, as well as UBS, JPMorgan, Citigroup and the Royal Bank of Scotland, extracting large penalties for manipulations of the market.Four of the banks agreed in May to enter guilty pleas and pay hefty penalties to settle Justice Department investigations into the manipulation of the foreign currency spot market, as opposed to the electronic platform. For the fifth bank, UBS, the accusations of misconduct cost it an earlier nonprosecution agreement related to the manipulation of the London interbank offered rate, or Libor. The Justice Department voided that nonprosecution agreement, prompting UBS to plead guilty to Libor manipulation.The foreign exchange investigations painted pictures of a Wall Street trading culture that lacked strict oversight, where traders succumbed to pressure to squeeze profits from seemingly mundane activities.A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Barclays Settles With Regulator in Currency Inquiry.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.