By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMAY 31, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Three years after Michael S. Dell and the investment firm Silver Lake took Dell Inc. private, a Delaware judge has decided that the $24 billion deal was 21 percent too cheap.That said, most investors who held shares in the computer company at the time of the takeover will not be able to collect, owing to the intricacies of Delaware corporate law.In an opinion published on Tuesday, Vice Chancellor J. Travis Laster of the Delaware Court of Chancery found that Dell shares were worth about $17.62 at the time of the 2013 leveraged buyout, rather than the $13.75 that Mr. Dell and Silver Lake paid.The court filing caps a lawsuit brought by a number of Dell investors who argued that they had been shortchanged by Mr. Dell, the founder of the company, which is incorporated in Delaware. Those shareholders brought what is known as an appraisal suit, calling on the Chancery Court to determine the fair value of their holdings at the time.AdvertisementA number of investors, including Carl C. Icahn, publicly protested the deal. Mr. Icahn proposed several takeover offers and threatened to scuttle the agreement with Mr. Dell and Silver Lake. The pair eventually raised their bid by 10 cents a share, while the board agreed to ease the voting requirements needed to approve the deal.AdvertisementYet one of the biggest proponents of the Delaware appraisal suit, the mutual fund manager T. Rowe Price, will not be able to collect. Vice Chancellor Travis disqualified the firm’s roughly 27 million shares because of a wrinkle in what he called the “byzantine” system in which shareholders voted on the deal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Though T. Rowe publicly declared that it was opposed to the leveraged buyout, it actually — and mistakenly, because of the complexities of modern shareholder systems — voted in favor of the transaction.To qualify for any compensation that a favorable appraisal can bring, shareholders must have voted against the deal in question.That leaves a small percentage of Dell shareholders eligible for any additional payout. Among them is the hedge fund Magnetar Capital. That group will receive the difference, plus interest.Spokesmen for Dell and Silver Lake declined to comment.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.