
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

MAY 31, 2016
Great Plains Energy has charged up for a $12.2 billion purchase of larger neighbor Westar Energy. The transaction unveiled on Tuesday has features typical of pairings between regulated American electric utilities. Investors may be right, though, to worry that the buyer is overpaying.The two companies serve neighboring territories from their respective Kansas City, Mo., and Topeka, Kan., headquarters. They already operate power plants together. So it is not surprising that Great Plains, with a market capitalization of $4.8 billion on Friday, won the auction that had bred rumors about a Westar sale.The $8.6 billion that Terry Bassham, the chief executive of Great Plains, is paying for Westar’s equity is about $1 billion more than Westar’s value on Friday, a 13 percent premium. Given that talk has already pushed the shares up, though, the markup is really larger. Regulated utilities are usually cautious on premiums because cost savings often only last until watchdogs push prices down and shift most of the benefit to customers.That is also why the likes of Great Plains and Westar are often cagey about synergies. Executives did, however, compare the transaction with the former’s 2008 purchase of Missouri-based Aquila. In that case, targeted synergies topped 11 percent of the combined entity’s operating and maintenance expenses excluding fuel, according to a regulatory filing at the time. Using the same figure, the implied savings for Great Plains and Westar could be around $120 million a year.AdvertisementTaxed at 35 percent and capitalized on a multiple of 10, those synergies would be generously valued at less than $800 million today, not counting the expense or time required to realize them. That is short of even the headline premium, helping to explain why Great Plains investors marked the company’s shares down about 5 percent by midday.Preserving Great Plains’ credit rating, while funding 85 percent of the consideration in cash, is no picnic, either. To balance $4.4 billion of new debt, Mr. Bassham is planning over $3 billion of equity issuance. As a first step, he has the Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement System buying $750 million of convertible preferred stock. With dividends running at 7.25 percent and not deductible for tax, that is expensive.AdvertisementScale may bring greater efficiency than expected, help keep two states’ regulators happy and even nudge growth higher. But with Great Plains taking such a big bite and the likelihood that gains will be short-lived, it is no wonder its shareholders are signaling the deal lacks spark.An earlier version of this article misstated a dividend rate associated with a planned purchase of Westar Energy. To balance $4.4 billion of new debt, Great Plains’ chief executive, Terry Bassham, plans over $3 billion of equity issuance. As a first step, he has the Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement System buying $750 million of convertible preferred stock. Those dividends are running at 7.25 percent, not 7.5 percent.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »