AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — Consumer spending surged in April, led by a big jump in purchases of autos and other durable goods, while home prices kept climbing in March.Consumer spending rose 1 percent in April after a flat reading in March, the Commerce Department reported Tuesday. Incomes were up a solid 0.4 percent, matching the gain in March. Wages and salaries, the most important component of incomes, rose 0.5 percent.The strong showing for consumer spending, which accounts for 70 percent of economic activity, signals that the economy is performing notably better this quarter after nearly stalling out at the start of the year. Many economists say the economy is growing at a 2.5 percent rate, outpacing a 0.8 percent gain in the first quarter.“American shoppers came racing back to the malls, auto shops and online stores in April,” said Sal Guatieri, senior economist at BMO Capital Markets.The April spending figure was the biggest one-month climb since a 1.3 percent increase in August 2009.Separately, the Conference Board reported Tuesday that its May confidence index fell to a reading of 92.6 from 94.7 in April. This stood in contrast to the University of Michigan’s consumer sentiment survey, which rose in May to its highest reading in a year.Economists said that given the surge in consumer spending seen in April, they thought the Michigan survey was a more accurate reflection of how consumers were feeling.All major spending components showed solid gains in April, led by a 2.3 percent surge in spending on durable goods like autos. Spending on nondurable goods, like clothing and food, expanded a solid 1.4 percent, while spending on services such as rent payments and utility bills increased 0.6 percent.Janet L. Yellen, the chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, said Friday that an increase in a crucial Fed interest rate would be appropriate in coming months if the economy keeps improving and inflation keeps moving toward the Fed’s 2 percent goal.Another report showed that the Standard & Poor’s/Case-Shiller 20-city home price index increased 5.4 percent in March compared with the same period a year earlier.Solid job growth, modest increases in wages and salaries, and low mortgage rates are feeding Americans’ willingness to buy homes. Yet there is also a limited supply of homes on the market, which pushes up prices.The number of available homes fell 3.6 percent in April, according to the National Association of Realtors.“It remains a tough home buying season for buyers, with little inventory available among lower-priced homes,” said Svenja Gudell, chief economist at the real estate data firm Zillow. “The competition is locking out some first-time buyers, who instead are paying record-high rents.”Even so, sales of existing homes rose 1.7 percent in April, the second consecutive increase, to an annual rate of 5.45 million.Portland, Seattle and Denver had the highest yearly gains. Prices rose 12.3 percent in Portland, 10.8 percent in Seattle and 10 percent in Denver. All three cities have rapidly growing technology industries and strong job gains.Prices rose in all 20 cities, but at a slower pace in the Northeast and Midwest. The cities with the smallest year-over-year increases were Washington, Chicago, New York and Cleveland.A revived housing market is helping feed faster economic growth. Sales of new homes rose to their highest level in eight years in April, and home construction has also increased.Mortgage rates remain at historical lows: A 30-year fixed rate mortgage averaged just 3.64 percent last week.Advertisement