AdvertisementSupported byEconomic SceneBy Eduardo PorterWhat did we learn from the Great Recession? With economic growth creeping ahead at a glacial pace and another cyclical downturn looming not far in the future, questions about how to stimulate growth and protect the most vulnerable loom large on the list of priorities.Last week in Washington, I sat down with Shaun Donovan, director of the White House’s Office of Management and Budget, and Lawrence H. Summers, former Treasury secretary and onetime economic adviser to President Obama, to discuss the issue. Our conversation was hosted by the Hamilton Project, a research group within the Brookings Institution.Edited selections from the conversation are below.Eduardo Porter: Good afternoon. We are here to chat about how to mitigate the effect of the inevitable future recession. What can we learn from our response to the last one? At this moment, interest rates are near zero and the Federal Reserve is arguably out of ammunition. And we’re already seven years into the recovery. Maybe this prospect is not that far down the line.The question is not just about how to reignite growth after the next downturn. Another very important question is about how to protect the most vulnerable when the next recession hits. The experience of the last one suggests our social safety net needs some redesigning. Too many disenfranchised people were left without assistance. The programs that we have missed too many.Shaun Donovan: Let me start with a simple point, which is that it did work and worked better than I think many people recognized. The recovery act alone saved about four- to five-and-a-half-million people from falling into poverty as a result of the recession. And there were 12 additional measures that were passed beyond the recovery act that took us to a total response that was about $1.4 trillion.One of the most profound mistakes, I think, was Congress shifting toward austerity and producing a set of manufactured crises that hurt the economy. If you look at the combination of sequestration and the government shutdown, you are looking at likely over a million jobs lost as a result.At a time where the politics to do what we did in the aftermath of the Great Recession are arguably even harder, the automatic stabilization that can be provided in the safety net is even more important.Lawrence Summers: I think it is a mistake to be too satisfied with where we have been. If we look at the period from 1929 to 1940 and what happened to G.D.P. [gross domestic product] per adult American and we look at the period from 2008 to 2019 as best we can judge it, it is equivalent.The odds are better than 50-50 that we will have a recession within the next few years. What does the Fed normally do when that happens? The Fed normally cuts real interest rates by five percentage points. Is it conceivable that there is going to be room to do that, even maybe allowing for Q.E. [quantitative easing], even recognizing that maybe rates could become negative 50 basis points? I submit that it’s not.So, changes in the fiscal monetary mix are essential. They are the only tools available when the next recession comes, and I would submit that they are desirable right now.What are the crucial elements of changing the fiscal monetary mix? One is a substantial increase in public investment. It is insane that federal investment in infrastructure is now net negative at a moment when interest rates have never been lower. And precious little is happening at the state and local level, either.Second, strong support for social insurance. When Keynes came to the United States in 1942, he pointed out that an important virtue of Social Security was that it could absorb the excess savings that would potentially hold back U.S. economic growth after the Second World War. Those considerations were not relevant in the succeeding 60 years, but they potentially are relevant in our current period of secular stagnation. Note that an expansion of pay-as-you-go Social Security does not raise the annual budget deficit, but in every economic model contributes to raising aggregate demand by enabling households to look forward to more secure retirements.Third, there is a strong case for doing what we can to promote housing investment. We are managing the cycle in the worst way possible from the point of view of housing. We got all of the lower-middle-income and poor people into their own houses when the price was going up and was a bubble. Then when the price plummeted, they all sold to private equity firms who rented the houses out at a 10 percent yield and earned tremendous capital gains. This is exactly the wrong moment for support for housing to be at a minimum rather than a maximum.Fourth, related to my first point, this is the moment to be maintaining the infrastructure we have. The one thing we know — if you look at airports, if you look at highways, if you look at the water system of Flint, Michigan — it is much more costly to defer maintenance than it is to do maintenance promptly. It is every bit as much a burden on my children’s generation to defer maintenance as it is to issue paper debt, and I promise you that the costs compound far more rapidly with deferred maintenance than they do with the 13 basis points that represent the real interest costs of current long-term federal debt.The most important determinant of our long-term fiscal picture is how successful we are at accelerating the economy’s growth rate in the next three to five years, not the austerity measures that we implement. People concerned with our long-term fiscal health should be redoubling their focus on the currently inadequate growth rate.Mr. Porter: What about the politics? How do we overcome gridlock?Mr. Summers: We need to move from a politics of either/or to a politics of both. I stress some of the problems that I think are most important but I think the argument that there are changes in the corporate tax code that would stimulate investments has some validity. Complaints about excessive regulation that holds back small and medium-sized business have some validity. There are a whole set of issues around stimulating private investment that warrant attention as well.I believe passionately in more infrastructure investment, but the concerns that government doesn’t do it so well are not stupid concerns. There is a bridge right outside my office. It connects Harvard Square with Boston. The bridge is 232 feet long. It has been under repair, with traffic blocked, for four and one-half years. It took 11 months to build the bridge the first time.You’re not going to get a commitment to a public sector-led fiscal policy strategy without also having a strategy that is about private sector activity and private sector investment.Mr. Porter: Perhaps we can talk about social insurance. One criticism of our current system is that it is excessively tied to work, to provide an incentive to work and to reward work. So it malfunctioned when there was no work to be had. An idea that has been making the rounds, that has the support of even some people on the right, is a universal basic income, which is totally disassociated from work. Is there a case to be made for something like that?Mr. Summers: As a relevant response to current problems in the current context, I think not. The core problem with the universal income is that, how do you finance it? If you give $5,000 to everybody, that’s $1.5 trillion. Now the right-wing view of that is that you’re going to get that money by cutting all the existing needs-tested programs, which means that some of the poorest people around are only going to be getting $1,500 so that you and I can get our share of the universal income. I don’t think that’s a very good idea.The basic truth is that giving people benefits does influence their behavior. There are a large number of people in our society — little children, people who are 75 years old, people who are disabled — who aren’t going to work no matter what. Then there is what you can prudently afford to give to people where there are going to be large incentive effects. So there are a variety of incremental reforms that would broaden eligibility for various existing programs that I would support, but the universal basic income is one of those ideas that the longer you look at it, the less enthusiastic you become.Mr. Donovan: I think it’s important that we are able to re-look at these programs and understand both the short-term costs that there may be and how to design around those, and also the enormously powerful difference in long-run effects.Literally over decades you are seeing improvements of a third to a half in lifetime earnings from things like housing vouchers or others. If you think of the costs of someone not working, if you think of all the attendant health care, criminal justice and other impacts, the truth is that these investments may actually pay for themselves multiple times over.Advertisement