By BROOKS BARNESJUNE 2, 2016
LOS ANGELES — Michael Lynton, the chief executive of Sony Entertainment, revamped the studio’s growing television division on Thursday, a move that will streamline operations and increase his personal oversight.For more than 15 years, Sony Pictures Television, the maker of shows like “Breaking Bad,” “The Goldbergs” and “Shark Tank,” has been run by Steve Mosko. But the studio and Mr. Mosko parted ways on Wednesday — Mr. Mosko has long been eager for expanded responsibilities — and he will not be replaced. Instead, five of Mr. Mosko’s lieutenants will now report directly to Mr. Lynton.They are Zack Van Amburg and Jamie Erlicht, presidents of programming; Andy Kaplan, president of Sony’s lucrative roster of overseas networks; Keith Le Goy, president of distribution; and Amy Carney, president of ad sales and research.“We have incredibly strong leadership within our TV divisions,” Mr. Lynton said in a statement. He thanked Mr. Mosko for helping to build Sony Pictures Television into “one of the strongest television studios in the business.”AdvertisementSony’s television fortunes vastly improved under Mr. Mosko’s leadership, but the company remains one of Hollywood’s smallest suppliers of small-screen programming. A consolidation in the television industry — all of the broadcast networks and many major cable channels now buy shows primarily from in-house studios — has left Sony, which is not aligned with a network, without a dance partner.But growth can still be achieved. Lionsgate, for instance, which does not have a sibling network, but has made its television operation a priority, makes more than 30 scripted series and about 50 reality shows.AdvertisementSony’s television division, which makes 34 shows, including unscripted ones like “Jeopardy” and “Wheel of Fortune,” has long felt like a stepchild at Sony, which has historically placed most of its emphasis on movies. Mr. Lynton’s move on Thursday, the company emphasized, was designed to more fully integrate Sony’s television unit into the broader studio.A version of this article appears in print on June 3, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline:  Sony TV Is Revamped After Exit of Chief.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.