

      By EMILY STEEL

UPDATED December 12, 2016

After surviving a fire at a Boston hotel at the age of 55, Sumner M. Redstone emerged as one of the entertainment industry’s most tenacious titans. Through National Amusements, the private theater chain company started by his father, he wrested control of a vast $40 billion media empire that includes the CBS television network and Viacom, the big entertainment company with properties like MTV, Nickelodeon, Comedy Central and Paramount Pictures. He was the king, and he battled constantly, with rival moguls, trusted executives and his own family. He’s now 93. As his health deteriorated in recent years, a war broke out over who would take ultimate control of his empire. At stake have been the fortunes of his family and several one-time confidants as well as the fate of Viacom and CBS. A settlement agreement reached in mid-August leaves Mr. Redstone and his daughter, Shari E. Redstone, decidedly in control of his corporate empire. Here’s the latest: Mr. Redstone, through a spokesman, May 24, 2016 The long-estranged, but recently reconciled daughter, had famously feuded with her father. Opponents claim she is manipulating him in a quest for control of the empire. The longtime general counsel of National Amusements. He was recently appointed to the trust that will control Mr. Redstone’s companies after he dies or is declared incompetent. A friend of Shari Redstone, the former media executive who is now an “abstract, impressionistic artist.” She was recently appointed to the trust and National Amusements board. Once a confidant of Mr. Redstone, he is no longer on the board of National Amusements and Viacom and has stepped down as chief executive of Viacom with a severance package valued at about $72 million.Lawyer and close friend of Mr. Redstone for 50 years, he was also ousted from the trust and National Amusements board. A Viacom director, he is seen as Mr. Dauman’s ally. The onetime romantic partner of Mr. Redstone, who filed suit challenging his competency. She was removed from his inheritance, which would have left her $50 million and his $20 million mansion. Shari’s daughter, 34, who lives in New York. A lawyer by training, she has been newly appointed to the board of National Amusements. Shari’s son, 30, who lives in New York. A lawyer and rabbi by training, he is a voting member of the the trust and the National Amusements board. Shari’s son, 33, who lives in Los Angeles and is managing partner of Panoply Properties, a real estate investment firm. He worked at National Amusements and MTV. The 34-year old daughter of Brent Redstone, Shari’s brother, and lives in Los Angeles. She has sided with Viacom directors in their legal battle and also aligned with Ms. Herzer in her competency suit, pitting her against her aunt. Brent Redstone’s 29-year-old daughter lives in Washington, where she works as a health researcher. She has not played a prominent role in the corporate saga. Last November, Philippe Dauman submitted a declaration as part of the Herzer suit over Mr. Redstone’s mental competency, siding with his boss. In a recently filed suit contesting his ouster from the trust, Mr. Dauman gave a bleaker depiction of the mogul. Mr. Dauman’s own words were then used against him by Mr. Redstone’s representatives as he waged his own legal battle challenging the media mogul’s competency. Mr. Dauman’s explanation for the apparent discrepancy is in the third paragraph.  MR. DAUMAN’s VIEW THEN: Nov. 24, 2015, from the Herzer lawsuit MR. DAUMAN’s later view: May 23, from the suit contesting his ouster From Robert Klieger, MR. REDSTONE’S LAWYER: From Mr. DAUMAN and MR. ABRAMS: May 23, from the suit contesting their ouster From MS. HERZER: From Nancy Sterling, MS. REDSTONE’s Spokeswoman: May 23, from a statement From Robert klieger, MR. REDSTONE’S LAWYER: A suit challenging Mr. Redstone’s mental competence, filed by a former companion who was removed from his house and his will, goes to trial on Friday.AdvertisementA suit challenging Mr. Redstone’s mental competence, filed by a former companion who was removed from his house and his will, goes to trial on Friday.