By BROOKS BARNESJUNE 1, 2016
LOS ANGELES — A changing of the small-screen guard continued on Wednesday, with Steve Mosko, the chairman of Sony Pictures Television, leaving the studio after having carried out a hard-fought turnaround.The departure of Mr. Mosko, 60, came a day after NBC Entertainment pushed out Bela Bajaria as president of Universal Television, which suffered a sharp decline in orders for the fall season, and four months after the ouster of Paul Lee as president of ABC, which has endured quick cancellations and aging hits.Mr. Mosko’s situation was somewhat less clear cut, according to two people briefed on the circumstances of his exit. A Sony spokesman declined to comment.Sony Television, which makes shows like “Bloodline,” “The Blacklist,” “The Goldbergs” and “Jeopardy,” has been considered a success, especially compared with Sony’s considerably larger film operation. In some recent years, Mr. Mosko’s unit — left for dead in a 2001 downsizing — has provided more than half of the overall studio’s annual operating income.But that imbalance has been a source of frustration for Mr. Mosko, who joined Sony in 1991 after working at local stations in Pennsylvania and Maryland. As a result, it became widely known in Hollywood that his relationship with the person he viewed as responsible for it — his boss, Michael Lynton, chief executive of Sony Pictures Entertainment — was increasingly strained.AdvertisementMr. Mosko’s contract was set to expire. A decision was made not to renew it. Sony is expected to put a new television management regime in place rapidly. The likely outcome involves promoting Mr. Mosko’s longtime lieutenants, Zack Van Amburg and Jamie Erlicht.AdvertisementSony’s television business, which also includes a roster of overseas networks and the Crackle streaming service, is particularly reliant on the development of shows that buyers like ABC, NBC and CBS say they cannot do without. That is because the big broadcast networks have become increasingly aligned with their own internal studio suppliers. Sony is the only studio left that does not have a network sibling.For the fall season, Sony sold shows to ABC, NBC and CBS, with some new series landing in prime slots on Thursday and Monday nights. Sony also controls the still-lucrative distribution rights to old sitcoms, including “Seinfeld.”Mr. Mosko is known in Hollywood as the consummate insider. His ability to foster deep business relationships began during his earlier days in television, when he sold ads for a Baltimore station; he once closed a deal by plying a client with flaming shots of sambuca and then arm-wrestling him for the business.A version of this article appears in print on June 2, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Chief of Sony Pictures TV Leaving After Turnaround.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.