By DANIELLE IVORYJUNE 2, 2016
Roger Enrico, the PepsiCo chief executive who nearly dethroned Coca-Cola in the 1980s, died on Wednesday while vacationing in the Cayman Islands. He was 71.His death, on Grand Cayman, was sudden, his family said, and the cause was not immediately specified.Mr. Enrico joined PepsiCo in 1971 after serving in the Navy in the Vietnam War, and he rose swiftly through the ranks. He oversaw the company’s advertising campaign during the so-called Cola Wars, making marketing deals with celebrities like Michael Jackson, Madonna and Michael J. Fox. Pepsi’s market share grew, prompting an anxious Coca-Cola to change its formula in 1985, only to quickly change it back in the face of a tide of customer wrath.“We have lost one of the true legends of our company and our industry,” Indra K. Nooyi, the chairwoman and chief executive of PepsiCo, said in a statement on Thursday.AdvertisementBorn on Nov. 11, 1944, in Chisholm, Minn., Mr. Enrico was the son of a foreman at an iron-ore processing plant. He attended Babson College and then enlisted in the Navy.AdvertisementAfter returning from the war, he worked as a brand manager in 1971 for Frito-Lay, a PepsiCo subsidiary, where he helped market the onion-flavored crunchy snacks called Funyuns. He later moved to Japan and South America, where he headed PepsiCo’s regional operations. In 1983, at 38, he became the chief executive of Pepsi-Cola USA and almost immediately signed a multimillion-dollar sponsorship deal with Michael Jackson.“He personally conducted negotiations with Michael Jackson,” said Allen Rosenshine, the former chairman and chief executive of BBDO, the advertising company that helped develop PepsiCo’s marketing campaign during the Cola wars and beyond. The two worked closely with Alan Pottasch, a PepsiCo advertising executive, who is sometimes referred to as the father of the “Pepsi Generation.”“You’re the Pepsi generation,” Mr. Jackson sang, and moonwalked with a young Alfonso Ribiero, who would later gain stardom as Carlton Banks on the sitcom “The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air.”Other celebrities jumped onboard.“We made our choice,” Lionel Richie crooned while dancing through the streets, flanked by young people. Madonna sipped from a can of Pepsi after singing part of “Like a Prayer.” (Pepsi canceled the ad after the “Like a Prayer” music video was condemned by the Vatican for its use of Roman Catholic imagery.)The celebrity-laden, youth-oriented “Pepsi Generation” advertising blitz was paired with the Pepsi Challenge, which featured people doing a blind taste test of Pepsi and Coke — and usually choosing Pepsi as tastier. Together, the campaigns helped bolster the company’s market share.Feeling threatened, Coca-Cola changed its 99-year-old top-secret formula and introduced New Coke, which was supposed to be sweeter than the old version.“After 87 years of going at it eyeball to eyeball, the other guy just blinked,” Mr. Enrico said in a full-page advertisement in American newspapers on the day that Coca-Cola announced the change. “There is no question the long-term market success of Pepsi has forced this move.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To celebrate, Pepsi U.S.A. gave its workers a day off.Unhappy Coke drinkers revolted, flooding Coca-Cola with telephone calls, letters and telegrams criticizing the decision to change the formula. The company acted quickly in response, reviving the old formula with Coca-Cola Classic.AdvertisementMr. Rosenshine credited Mr. Enrico with creating a real distinction between Pepsi and Coke.“He probably did more than anyone else to drive Coke to their famous formula change,” Mr. Rosenshine said in an interview. “You don’t generally have a chief executive who is intimately involved with an advertising campaign, but Roger was.”Mr. Enrico chronicled PepsiCo’s battle with Coca-Cola in his 1986 memoir, “The Other Guy Blinked — How Pepsi Won the Cola Wars,” written with Jesse Kornbluth. (In the end, Pepsi did not win its war with Coke. Coca-Cola regained market share and continues to reign.)In a statement, Muhtar Kent, the chairman and chief executive of Coca-Cola, called Mr. Enrico “an inspirational leader” who had “challenged us all to compete harder and think bigger.”Mr. Enrico was named chief executive and chairman of PepsiCo in 1996. The next year, he spun off the restaurant division, composed of Taco Bell, KFC and Pizza Hut chains, as an independent public company, creating what is now known as Yum Brands. In 1998, he oversaw the acquisition of Tropicana and, in 2000, he struck a deal to acquire Quaker Oats, which included Gatorade.Mr. Enrico retired from PepsiCo in 2001 and was later named chairman of DreamWorks Animation, serving from 2004 to 2012.Mr. Enrico retired to Dallas, where Mike Rawlings, a friend, is mayor. The mayor met Mr. Enrico while working at TracyLocke in the 1980s, an advertising firm that worked with PepsiCo. Mr. Rawlings later took the helm of Pizza Hut, which was part of PepsiCo at the time, and continued working with Mr. Enrico.The two men, along with others, had periodically gone on fishing and horseback-riding trips to Montana since the 1990s. Before he died, Mr. Enrico had just invited him on a trip for this summer, Mr. Rawlings said.Aaron Enrico, the executive’s son, said his father was an avid scuba diver and had been diving in Grand Cayman. His oldest grandson, who had just learned to dive, was there with him on vacation.In addition to his son and grandson, Mr. Enrico is survived by his wife, Rosemary, and two other grandchildren.A version of this article appears in print on June 3, 2016, on Page A17 of the New York edition with the headline: Roger Enrico, PepsiCo Chief Who Made Coke Squirm in ‘Cola Wars,’ Dies at 71.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.