By ANITA RAGHAVANJUNE 2, 2016
LONDON — The main investment bankers involved in the merger between Deutsche Börse and the London Stock Exchange worked at one of Wall Street’s biggest companies, Morgan Stanley, the last time the two exchanges flirted with the idea of getting married.Today, the bankers are no longer at Morgan Stanley. Rather, in a sign of the fast-changing landscape on Wall Street, they compete with their old company, operating out of boutique investment banks that did not even exist in late 2004, when the two exchanges last tangoed.Perella Weinberg Partners, one of whose founders is Joseph R. Perella, a former head of investment banking at Morgan Stanley, is leading a clutch of banks representing the Deutsche Börse.The main banker for the London Stock Exchange is Simon Robey, who was co-chairman of global mergers and acquisitions at Morgan Stanley and today runs his own firm, Robey Warshaw.AdvertisementA onetime rival for the London Stock Exchange — Intercontinental Exchange, or ICE — was helped by Caroline Silver, the former head of Morgan Stanley’s European financial institutions group. Ms. Silver, who is now at Moelis & Company, was working with her former employer to upend the talks between the Deutsche Börse and the London Stock Exchange. ICE said recently that it would not make an offer for the London exchange.AdvertisementThis decade-old diaspora from Morgan Stanley clustered around one deal underscores the changing market for merger advice. Increasingly, boutique and independent investment banks have prospered as companies turn to them instead of the big global banks.Without even counting the potential fees on the London Stock Exchange deal, boutique and independent companies represented 30.5 percent of the $5.35 billion in completed merger fees in the first quarter of this year, according to Thomson Reuters, which tracks corporate finance activity.Last year, of the $26.1 billion in fees that were paid to Wall Street for merger deals, 31.3 percent went to boutique and independent investment banks, compared with 23.8 percent in 2005, when the London Stock Exchange and Deutsche Börse last flirted with merging.The shift is remarkable particularly for a company like Morgan Stanley, which for much of its history prided itself on taking a firm public and then catering to all its banking needs, like raising debt or providing additional equity financing and advising on mergers and takeovers.Decades ago, when young bankers joined Morgan Stanley, executives would trot out one of the company’s oldest clients, the telecommunications giant AT&T, as an illustration of the kind of company Morgan Stanley served.“We did almost everything for them,” recalled Scott Moeller, who was an investment banker at Morgan Stanley from the early ‘80s to 1996 and is now director of the M.&A. Research Center at the City University London’s Cass Business School.The more specialized advisory banks may be gaining, but Morgan Stanley is still a powerhouse, showing the durability of the global giants. Last year, the investment bank ranked No. 2 in worldwide mergers and acquisitions, with a market share of 29 percent in announced deals, behind Goldman Sachs with 34 percent of the market, according to Thomson Reuters.AdvertisementMorgan Stanley did not advise either the London Stock Exchange or Deutsche Börse when they tried to merge in 2004. But after the French-born Xavier Rolet, a former Lehman Brothers executive, was appointed chief executive of the London exchange in 2009, he met with Mr. Robey, who also headed Morgan Stanley’s British operations.Over the next few years, Mr. Robey helped Mr. Rolet frame his vision for the London Stock Exchange. In 2011, he assisted Mr. Rolet in orchestrating the London exchange’s acquisition of the 50 percent stake in FTSE International that it did not already own. That same year, he also advised on the failed merger attempt by the London Stock Exchange and the TMX Group, the parent company of the Toronto Stock Exchange.Their relationship deepened after Mr. Robey, 55, left Morgan Stanley in January 2013. He later teamed up with Simon Warshaw, former co-head of investment banking at UBS, to start a new firm.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Robey Warshaw has only 14 employees. It takes up four floors of a stately Georgian townhouse on St. James Place in London; one of its neighbors is the British banker Jacob Rothschild. But last year, Robey Warshaw was ranked No. 16 in announced global mergers and acquisitions with a 4.5 percent market share.Mr. Robey and Mr. Rolet forged a friendship.In the summer of 2014, Mr. Rolet invited Mr. Robey to visit him at his vineyard in Provence, France. During the trip, Mr. Robey joined other guests of Mr. Rolet’s at a performance of “Nabucco,” an opera by Verdi that was part of a summer opera festival held in an ancient Roman theater north of Avignon.As a young man, Mr. Robey nearly pursued a career as a professional singer. He attended Oxford University on a choral scholarship. Today, he indulges his passion for music by overseeing the board of trustees at the Royal Opera House in London’s Covent Garden.In November 2014, when Mr. Robey remarried, Mr. Rolet and his wife, Nicole, attended his wedding.In the case of Perella Weinberg, it was actually a Goldman Sachs alumnus that cemented ties with Deutsche Börse’s new chief executive, Carsten Kengeter.When Peter A. Weinberg was chief executive of Goldman Sachs International in London more than a decade ago, he got to know Mr. Kengeter, a fast-rising fixed-income executive in Goldman’s Frankfurt offices.The two kept up with each other when Mr. Weinberg left Goldman to start a merger advisory boutique with Mr. Perella.AdvertisementAs it happens, Mr. Weinberg was also at Morgan Stanley in the 1980s. But he did not overlap with Mr. Perella, who joined the bank in 1993. The two men knew each other because Mr. Perella had gone to Harvard Business School on a scholarship established by Mr. Weinberg’s grandfather, Sidney J. Weinberg.In the early days of Perella Weinberg, when some Wall Street rivals sniffed at the new banking upstart, Mr. Kengeter was welcoming. At the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, Mr. Kengeter and his boss, Oswald Grübel, the chief executive of UBS at the time, invited Mr. Perella and Mr. Weinberg to an investment banker’s dream: a dinner with some of UBS’s biggest clients.Andrew Bednar, a merger banker for Perella Weinberg in New York, had also developed a relationship with some of the executives at Deutsche Börse.Several years ago, a former Goldman partner, Duncan L. Niederauer, who at the time was chief executive of NYSE Euronext, hired Perella Weinberg to work on a plan to create the world’s biggest exchange by marrying the New York exchange with Deutsche Börse. Even though European Union regulators vetoed the deal in February 2012, Mr. Bednar became better acquainted with the Deutsche Börse team during the friendly merger talks.In late 2012, when ICE announced that it would acquire the New York Stock Exchange, leaving Perella Weinberg without a client in the exchange arena, Mr. Bednar began courting Deutsche Börse.In June 2015, soon after Mr. Kengeter took over as chief executive of Deutsche Börse, Mr. Weinberg sat down with him. Like any new chief executive, Mr. Kengeter charged his team with thinking about the exchange’s future and areas of exploration. Later that summer, Mr. Bednar also met with Mr. Kengeter on a trip to Frankfurt.The meetings were a prelude to a get-together between Mr. Kengeter and Mr. Rolet, who knew each other, having both worked in Europe for Goldman Sachs.Left out, now that ICE has decided against making a counterbid, is Ms. Silver, who was behind some of the biggest mergers between exchanges, including advising the New York Stock Exchange Euronext on its acquisition by ICE several years ago.A version of this article appears in print on June 3, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Corporate Marriage’s Boutique Counselors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.