AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesExecutive pay is difficult to measure and compare — both year to year and company to company — because institutions can choose to reward executives in a wide variety of ways. Some compensation plans involve stock options or grants that vest over many years. Or a plan may be structured to pay out in full only if the company hits certain benchmarks.For these and other reasons, an annual compensation study such as this one may be viewed as a snapshot in time, as opposed to a definitive accounting of the precise sums each executive might take home. What is important is that the methodology treats each executive consistently and tries to calculate the entirety of a compensation package.To provide a snapshot of the sums that chief executives were paid last year, Sunday Business asked Equilar, an executive compensation data firm, to compile and analyze pay data from corporate filings, using a consistent and precise method.The data set includes information for the 200 highest-paid chief executives at American public companies with revenue of at least $1 billion that filed proxy statements by April 30 of this year.Here are 200 of the highest-paid chief executives in American business.For each executive, total compensation is calculated as the sum of base salary, discretionary and performance-based cash bonuses, the grant date value of stock and option awards, and other compensation. Other compensation typically includes benefits and perquisites. All data is taken from the summary compensation table provided in each company’s proxy statement.Whenever grant-date values are not provided for option awards, Equilar calculated the value of stock option grants using the widely accepted Black-Scholes method and the company’s own option valuation assumptions.Grant-date values represent the estimated value of new stock and option awards. Although companies disclose grant-date values for these awards, there is no guarantee that executives will actually realize these amounts. They may earn more or less, depending on stock price movements.Equilar’s analysis reports equity awards in the fiscal year when they were granted. In some cases, especially in the financial sector, companies grant equity awards at the beginning of each fiscal year based on performance in the previous fiscal year. Therefore, the equity awards granted in a fiscal year should not necessarily be viewed as indicative of corporate performance in that same year.Percentage change in pay for each executive is calculated by using compensation data from the previous fiscal year. For some executives, particularly recent hires or newly promoted chief executives, their change in pay is listed as “N.A.” in our pay table. Their compensation, however, is included in averages and medians for other columns in the table.Advertisement