By MICHAEL FORSYTHEJUNE 1, 2016
HONG KONG — Anbang, a politically connected Chinese insurer, has hit a bump in its effort to buy an insurance company in Iowa for $1.57 billion, the latest setback to its multibillion-dollar global shopping spree.Anbang Insurance Group has struck a remarkable spate of deals including an  agreement two years ago to buy the Waldorf Astoria hotel in New York. It has also reached a $6.5 billion deal to buy hotels from the private-equity firm Blackstone Group, and it has agreed to buy financial firms in Europe and South Korea.The Chinese insurance company — which until recent years was not well-known even in its home country — is near the forefront of a growing wave of Chinese companies buying firms abroad.But the campaign hit a setback with Fidelity & Guaranty Life, the Des Moines-based insurer that Anbang agreed to buy last year. Anbang withdrew its application with the New York State Department of Financial Services to acquire the company, Fidelity said in a filing on Tuesday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.AdvertisementFidelity had hoped that Anbang could come back, saying the withdrawal was not final and that it expected Anbang to refile in the “near future.”Paul Marriott of FTI Consulting in Hong Kong, which represents Anbang, did not have an immediate comment on why Anbang withdrew its application. Fidelity did not say why Anbang withdrew its application, which was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal.AdvertisementThe setback adds to Anbang recent stumbles. In March, it abruptly ended its $14 billion bid to buy Starwood Hotels and Resorts. It said little about why it had retreated, mentioning only “various market considerations.”Anbang, which owns insurance companies, a bank and a leasing company, says it has almost $300 billion in assets; it is owned by 39 corporate shareholders, according to China’s State Administration of Industry and Commerce. Two of the shareholders are state-owned companies, while the other 37, which own more than 95 percent of Anbang, are an opaque web of interconnected companies. Many share phone numbers, email addresses and management, The New York Times reported in March.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Anbang’s chairman, Wu Xiaohui, married a granddaughter of China’s former leader, Deng Xiaoping. One Anbang director is the son of Chen Yi, a former long-serving foreign minister and top army general who died in 1972. Another former director is the son of Zhu Rongji, China’s prime minister from 1998 to 2003.Anbang must obtain regulatory approval for its takeover from states where Fidelity does business. It also has a pending application in Iowa, Fidelity said in its filing on Tuesday. Fidelity shares fell by more than 3.3 percent on Tuesday in New York, their biggest drop since August.Anbang’s purchase of Fidelity, announced in November, was cleared by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, a government panel that checks whether planned acquisitions of American companies raise national security concerns, Fidelity said in March.Follow Michael Forsythe on Twitter @PekingMike.A version of this article appears in print on June 2, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Bid for Iowa Insurer Hits a Snag.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.