AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersPARIS — The world economy is locked in a “low-growth trap” and will expand this year at its slowest pace since the financial crisis, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said on Wednesday, urging governments to increase spending.With businesses wary of investing and consumers cautious about spending, the global economy will grow only 3 percent this year, the O.E.C.D., the research and policy organization estimated in its Economic Outlook report, which it releases twice a year.That figure would be no better than last year’s, when growth was at its lowest level since 2009. The O.E.C.D. did predict, however, that growth would pick up modestly, to 3.3 percent, in 2017.Limited economic expansion can deprive young people of job opportunities and means that many older people will not get the health care or pension benefits they expect, Catherine L. Mann, the O.E.C.D.’s chief economist, told Reuters.“We are breaking promises to young people and old people. Therefore, policy makers have to act to break us out of the low-growth trap,” she said.With O.E.C.D. countries growing at half their estimated potential, on average, it would take 70 years to double living standards. Two decades ago, economic growth rates meant they could double living standards in half that time.Ms. Mann warned against counting on central banks alone to drive a return to higher growth rates, as their loose monetary policies become more risky.She said governments should not hesitate to direct money to initiatives that bolster growth, like education and infrastructure, taking advantage of low interest rates in many countries to finance the higher spending.“The low-interest-rate environment created by the central banks opens up fiscal space to governments, and we are saying that you should use it,” Ms. Mann said.Though the O.E.C.D. did not lower its global growth forecast from its estimates in February, it said the outlook for the United States had dimmed.The organization cut its prediction for American growth this year, to 1.8 percent from a previous forecast of 2 percent, on the back of weak foreign demand and a dearth of investment in the oil and mining sector.The O.E.C.D. also repeated a warning that Britain would suffer a sharp economic slowdown if voters opted to leave the European Union in a referendum on June 23.In light of the political uncertainty surrounding that vote, the organization cut its forecast for growth in Britain this year, to 1.7 percent from 2.1 percent, assuming voters opted to stay in the 28-member union.A vote to leave the bloc could shear half a percentage point off British growth annually in the coming years, the organization warned.The O.E.C.D. raised its 2016 growth estimate for the eurozone, which does not include Britain, to 1.6 percent from the 1.4 percent forecast in February, based on an improved outlook for the French and German economies.OpinionPaul KrugmanAdvertisement