By JONATHAN SOBLEJUNE 1, 2016
TOKYO — Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan announced on Wednesday that he would delay an unpopular increase in the national sales tax, in what amounted to an acknowledgment that the country’s economy remained worryingly fragile.The decision, which was widely expected, was informed by a painful experience: After Mr. Abe allowed a tax increase to go ahead in 2014, consumer spending dried up and Japan fell into recession. It was a serious setback for a leader who won office on a promise to turn around Japan’s long-struggling economy.Mr. Abe’s handling of the economy remains a contentious issue. Despite more than three years of sustained stimulus, the robust increase in wages and prices that he promised has failed to materialize. The governing Liberal Democratic Party and its smaller ally, Komeito, face an election for the upper house of Parliament next month, adding to the pressure.Mr. Abe defended his economic record on Wednesday, saying that although it was still “a work in progress,” certain areas, like the unemployment rate and the frequency of corporate bankruptcies, had improved substantially. He blamed a weaker global economy — in particular the slowdown in China — for what he said was a growing threat to Japan.Advertisement“At worst, there’s a risk that we could return to the long tunnel of deflation,” he said. “We need to take action to guard against risks.”AdvertisementMr. Abe said he would delay the planned increase of two percentage points in the sales tax, known in Japan as a consumption tax, by two and a half more years, to October 2019.Higher taxes have never been a natural fit for Mr. Abe, whose economic agenda has focused more on encouraging growth than fighting deficits. The plan for a higher sales tax was passed into law by a previous government, and the prime minister has struggled with how to put it into effect.Japan’s giant government debt is equal to nearly two and a half years’ worth of the country’s economic output. But Mr. Abe and his supporters say that trying to close deficits by increasing tax rates or cutting government spending risks damaging the economy.The approach Mr. Abe has offered instead, commonly known as Abenomics, has centered on more government spending and, especially, vigorous stimulus by the Bank of Japan.The central bank has been flooding financial markets with cheap money. It even set its benchmark interest rate below zero, a policy tried in only a few other countries, in hopes of propping up prices and encouraging spending. Although those goals have proved elusive, higher taxes could make them even more so.The consumption tax plan that Mr. Abe inherited called for the tax to rise in two stages.The first, which he allowed to go ahead as scheduled in April 2014, brought the tax to 8 percent, from 5 percent. The second increase is supposed to take it to 10 percent. That is still low by the standards of many developed countries, especially in Europe, where value-added taxes are often twice that or higher.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Opponents of the increase say Japan would be better off simply borrowing more money from bond markets. Its debt may be large, but it is almost entirely funded by domestic savers, making a crisis like the one in Greece much less likely. And rock-bottom interest rates in Japan mean the government is spending less to service its borrowing than more lightly indebted countries like Germany or the United States are.Mr. Abe said he remained committed to an official goal of closing the government’s spending gap by the end of the decade. If the economy can stay out of recession and the tax increase is not delayed again, the government says, it can balance the budget, minus interest payments on the debt, by 2020. Many private-sector economists doubt that can be done, however.Advertisement“The remaining question is how to make Abe’s decision to delay the consumption tax hike consistent with the fiscal consolidation objective,” Masaaki Kanno, an economist at JPMorgan Chase, wrote in a research note this week.Mr. Abe had already put off the second stage of the sales tax increase once — also before an election, a snap vote he called in late 2014, which his party won handily. The increase was initially supposed to happen in October 2015, but Mr. Abe pushed it back to April 2017, a target from which he postponed it further on Wednesday.News reports suggest that the tax is widely disliked, and that delaying the increase again could earn votes in the coming election. The Liberal Democrats are already ahead in the polls. Mr. Abe has confirmed that the vote will be held on July 10.When Mr. Abe delayed the tax increase the first time, he pledged to uphold the new timetable unless an economic crisis on the scale of the global financial meltdown in 2008 occurred. He acknowledged on Wednesday that the risks facing Japan today “are not at all on that level.” But he appeared to be gambling that tax-averse voters would approve of his decision anyway.“I am prepared for criticism that I broke my promise,” he said. “Letting voters judge is democracy.”Follow Jonathan Soble on Twitter @jonathan_soble.A version of this article appears in print on June 2, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Citing Weak Economy, Japan’s Prime Minister  Puts Off Sales Tax Rise.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.