By EMILY STEELJUNE 2, 2016
A geriatric psychiatrist hired by Sumner M. Redstone has concluded that the ailing mogul had the “legal mental capacity” to oust two longtime confidants from the trust that will control his $40 billion media empire after he dies or is declared incompetent.In excerpts from a report released late Thursday based on two examinations over the last two weeks, the psychiatrist, Dr. James E. Spar, said the 93-year-old Mr. Redstone indicated that he no longer trusted Philippe P. Dauman, the chief executive of Viacom, and George S. Abrams, a longtime Viacom director.“I asked Mr. Redstone why he was removing Mr. Dauman as trustee and director, and he said, ‘He’s done a bad job running Viacom,’” Dr. Spar said in the statement. “I asked the same question about Mr. Abrams, and Mr. Redstone said, ‘He’s not listening to me.’”Two weeks ago, Mr. Redstone unexpectedly removed Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams from the trust and the board of National Amusements, the private theater chain company through which Mr. Redstone controls his $40 billion media empire. The moves were viewed as a precursor to the ultimate ousting of Mr. Dauman as chairman and chief executive of Viacom.AdvertisementThe company’s share price has dropped about 30 percent in the last year.Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams immediately filed a suit in Massachusetts seeking to invalidate the decisions, challenging Mr. Redstone’s mental capacity and claiming he had been manipulated by his daughter, Shari Redstone. Lawyers for Mr. Redstone filed a petition of their own in Los Angeles.AdvertisementThe examination by Dr. Spar provides one window into the mental state of Mr. Redstone, who is in poor health and has not been seen publicly in more than a year. Mr. Redstone has been a patient of Dr. Spar’s since 2014.In the last two years, Mr. Redstone has had a series of minor strokes that left him with a severe speech impediment. He cannot read, write or do simple arithmetic, according to assertions in various court filings. In videotaped testimony taken May 5 for a different suit challenging his mental competency, Mr. Redstone relied on an interpreter to answer basic questions.The full report from Dr. Spar is expected to be included by Mr. Redstone’s lawyers as part of their legal filings in the Massachusetts case. His testimony was included by Mr. Redstone’s lawyers as part of the earlier suit challenging his mental competency brought by Manuela Herzer, his former companion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Les Fagen, a lawyer for Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams, said the evaluation had been conducted by a “paid medical consultant and does not answer the question of whether Sumner Redstone had sufficient capacity to make complex decisions impacting the governance of billion dollar publicly-held corporations, nor does it acknowledge that undue influence was exercised to manipulate his views.”Most recently, Dr. Spar examined Mr. Redstone on May 20, the day that he ousted Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams from their roles, and May 24, the day after he filed the petition in Los Angeles to validate his decisions.Dr. Spar said that during the May 24 meeting, Mr. Redstone “reminded me that he makes all the decisions about Viacom and CBS.”Dr. Spar said that Mr. Redstone indicated that he had been following Viacom’s stock price and was not happy with Mr. Dauman’s leadership of the company. He added that Mr. Redstone was “particularly displeased” with Mr. Dauman’s decision to sell a stake in Paramount Pictures, the company’s film and TV studio.“Mr. Redstone said that he had clearly expressed his feelings about the Paramount sale to both Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams, but in his view they ignored his wishes,” Dr. Spar said.Dr. Spar also performed a “Mini-Mental State Exam” to test Mr. Redstone’s cognitive functions and found that Mr. Redstone had a “mild degree” of impairment, given his age and education level.A version of this article appears in print on June 3, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Redstone Said to Have Legal ‘Capacity’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.