By DIANE CARDWELLJUNE 3, 2016
When Mauricio Gutierrez became chief executive at NRG after his predecessor’s ouster last year, analysts and investors anticipated that the company would retreat from its money-burning rush into green energy. Instead, they expected it to focus on the conventional power business that had made it a leading — and profitable — supplier in a competitive energy market.But the strategy emerging under Mr. Gutierrez, who released NRG’s annual sustainability report on Friday, is less a retreat from green energy than a turn away from a nascent system of decentralized energy production. The focus has returned to large-scale power development, regardless of the fuel source.“I think it was important for our employees and the marketplace to recognize that our value proposition is quite straightforward,” he said. “We generate electricity, and we sell that electricity and other products and services to consumers.”The company is still pursuing clean energy solutions, he said, and remains committed to its sustainability goals, among the most aggressive in the industry: to reduce carbon emissions 50 percent by 2030 and 90 percent by 2050. NRG began construction on a big community solar project last year, it is developing energy storage in California and it is working to provide renewable energy for companies like Dow Chemical, Unilever and Whole Foods Market.But while it is also converting coal plants to natural gas and experimenting with carbon capture and sequestration for coal, it is reducing investment in some growing markets that the previous chief executive, David Crane, aggressively pursued, like residential solar power, electric vehicle charging and home automation. It was all part of a bid to lead the shifts toward the use of renewable energy and a decentralized power system — one in which customers could generate power in their own homes and feed it back into the electric grid.AdvertisementMr. Gutierrez, who said he had been driving an electric vehicle for six years, is not exactly undoing all of that, but he is slowing it down. He is selling a majority stake in the electric vehicle charging business. He has also brought the home solar division into NRG’s retail electric company, which will sell the customer agreements it originates to two partners once the arrays are installed.AdvertisementUnder the new arrangements, NRG will be able to offer electric vehicle charging mainly to its commercial and industrial customers and solar arrays to homeowners, but as part of larger product and service arrangements.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s not entirely opposite but certainly a serious diversion from the path” that Mr. Crane set NRG on, said Shayle Kann, the head of GTM Research, which focuses on clean energy industries. He said Mr. Gutierrez had “basically pulled back on all the bets that had to do with decentralization and kept everything that has to do with decarbonization.”It is an approach tailored to keep a hand in innovation and emerging technologies while steering the company through economically challenging markets, and to align the company’s pursuits better with the interests of its investors, Mr. Gutierrez said.“I think in the future, renewables will become a bigger part of the industry, and it will become a bigger part of NRG,” he said. “It would be irresponsible not to embrace renewables, but we have to do it in a way that we create value for our shareholders.”A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: NRG Shifts From Plan to Empower Individuals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.