
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

JUNE 3, 2016
In a recent series of articles, The New York Times explored how corporations are increasingly forcing their customers, clients and employees – through little-read provisions in seemingly innocuous contracts — to use an opaque system of arbitration to settle financial and other disputes.The result has been to deprive many millions of Americans of what they thought was a constitutional right to use the judicial system, as imperfect as it may be, to try to right injustices, perceived or real. Forced arbitration may be the single-largest – and rarely explored – theft of legal rights visited on the American public, without either its knowledge or its choice.Wall Street is one of many industries that benefits from the use of forced arbitration, requiring its employees and its customers into arbitration whenever a financial dispute arises. Most people who work on Wall Street or who have brokerage accounts with a Wall Street firm – in other words, millions of people – do not realize that by signing their employment or brokerage agreements, they have agreed in advance to settle financial disputes with the firm in arbitration, not in court.Adding to this deeply flawed and unfair system is the inconvenient fact that most Wall Street arbitrations fall under the auspices of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, the financial industry’s self-regulatory organization. The regulator, known as Finra, owes its existence to the Wall Street firms that sit on its board of governors and generate much of its nearly $1.5 billion in annual revenue.AdvertisementIf you have the misfortune of ending up in a monetary dispute with a Wall Street firm (as I once did) and you either work on Wall Street or have a brokerage account with a Wall Street firm, your only redress is basically Finra arbitration.AdvertisementIt will come as no surprise that the Wall Street overlords win the vast majority of the cases that get brought before Finra arbitrators. Some 92 percent of the cases involving employee disputes and some 80 percent of the cases involving customer disputes are decided in favor of Wall Street banks. It just would not do for a Wall Street-controlled organization to be handing down rulings adverse to Wall Street’s interests. And the arbitrators themselves, whom Finra pays at least $300 to $425 (for the chairman of the panel) a day for their services, would not last long if they often ruled against the big Wall Street firms.So not only is forced arbitration a major curbing of legal rights, but Finra’s version of arbitration also comes with an additional dollop of what seems like bias. This has long been suspected but is difficult to prove unless you happen to be involved with an arbitration case and have firsthand knowledge of how unfair it can seem.That’s where William Thomas Pair comes in. His case is detailed in subsequent court filings, hearing transcripts and a recording that were provided to me.Mr. Pair, 47, had been in the securities business for 17 years before joining Barclays Capital in September 2010 as a wealth manager, or what used to be called a broker. Barclays heavily recruited Mr. Pair, who used to work at UBS. As part of his contractual agreement to join Barclays, the firm made Mr. Pair a forgivable loan of just more than $1 million, to be extinguished in equal installments over seven years as long as he remained employed at Barclays Capital. This type of deal has become a standard part of luring brokers from another firm.Because Barclays Capital is a securities firm in the United States, and is therefore regulated by both Finra and the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr. Pair had no choice but to agree to Finra arbitration if there was a financial dispute.In December 2010, at Barclays’ insistence – Mr. Pair’s continued employment at the firm depended on it — Barclays and Mr. Pair entered into a new loan agreement whereby Barclays Bank would make him a roughly $1 million loan. He used the second loan from Barclays Bank to pay off the first loan that he owed to Barclays Capital.The new loan agreement explicitly stated that any financial dispute between them would be resolved in a New York State court, not in Finra arbitration, because the parent company, Barclays, was a British bank not subject to Finra rules.AdvertisementIn January 2014, Barclays fired Mr. Pair. Just under $600,000 remained outstanding on the note. The next day, without Mr. Pair’s consent and in seeming violation of the December 2010 agreement between Mr. Pair and Barclays Bank, Barclays Bank assigned the note to Barclays Capital, its United States securities subsidiary. On May 12, Barclays Capital filed a Finra arbitration against Mr. Pair, seeking the repayment of the balance of the loan.The Finra arbitration was conducted over four days last November in Atlanta. The arbitrators were Robert H. Putnam Jr., the chairman of the panel, along with Perry Lee Taylor Jr. and Chandler R. Bridges. The proceeding was recorded and transcribed. Mr. Pair acted as his own counsel. The gist of Mr. Pair’s legal defense was to ask – correctly, it seems — why he was in Finra arbitration at all. Why had Barclays been able to assign his note agreement from its bank, where a dispute would end up in New York State court, to its securities division, where a dispute would end before Finra’s Wall Street-friendly arbitration system? Why had Finra even accepted Barclays filing of an arbitration request?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Finra declined to comment on Mr. Pair’s case.At one point, Mr. Pair said that the wrong party – Barclays Capital — had forced him into arbitration. In a nifty bit of circular logic, though, G. Wayne Hillis Jr., a lawyer for Barclays Capital, countered that because Finra wanted such disputes to be arbitrated, the note was assigned to Barclays Capital after Mr. Pair was fired, ignoring the fact that Barclays Capital was no longer a party to Mr. Pair’s loan.Mr. Pair wanted to know how and why the assignment had happened, which seems like a reasonable line of inquiry. His first witness in his defense was to be Gerard LaRocca, the chief executive of Barclays Capital.Through discovery, Mr. Pair had obtained numerous documents with Mr. LaRocca’s name on them and he saw that Mr. LaRocca had signed the loan assignment to Barclays Capital from Barclays Bank.Not surprisingly, Mr. Hillis, the Barclays lawyer, objected to having Mr. LaRocca appear or to even call into the arbitration case.Barclays did not respond to a request for comment.The arbitration panel then considered Mr. Pair’s request, asking Mr. Pair and Mr. Hillis to leave the room. When they came back in, Mr. Putnam announced that Mr. LaRocca would not be permitted to testify.“We have determined that this particular witness, although he may have signed that assignment in this case, that he really has nothing to contribute to any issues before this panel, including the issues raised by the counterclaims,” he said, according to a recording of the proceeding.“Therefore, we will exclude testimony of this witness.” Also, according to the recording, one of the arbitrators, Mr. Taylor, said about Mr. Pair, “I think we should just slam the door in his face.” The proceeding was barely 30 minutes old. Then the other arbitrators worried rightly that one of the recording devices might have picked up Mr. Taylor’s comment.On Dec. 3, three weeks after the end of the proceeding, that’s exactly what the three Finra arbitrators did. They awarded Barclays Capital the nearly $600,000 in the unpaid loan plus nearly $20,000 in unpaid interest plus another $360,000 in lawyers’ fees for Mr. Hillis.AdvertisementIn an interesting twist, Mr. Pair is now trying to vacate Finra’s award to Barclays in a federal court in Georgia. The odds are long, of course, but it’s nice to see this dispute in a court of law where it belongs, instead of in a place where a fair hearing is apparently difficult to get.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »