By BEN PROTESSJUNE 3, 2016
Steve Cohen is moving on. Not the one investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission, but the one who works there.Stephen L. Cohen, a senior enforcement official at the S.E.C., announced his departure on Friday. The move ends a 12-year career at the agency during which he oversaw some of its most prominent financial cases.One such case was against ETrade Financial subsidiaries over the unregistered sales of microcap stocks. He helped handle the fraud investigation into former Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac executives. And he oversaw one of the agency’s biggest accounting fraud cases in years, filing charges against the Computer Sciences Corporation and former executives in the manipulation of financial results.(He did not work on the case against Steven A. Cohen, the hedge fund billionaire who faced a long-running S.E.C. insider trading investigation and ultimately settled accusations that he had failed to supervise an employee convicted of insider trading.)Advertisement“He has supervised significant cases involving a wide variety of misconduct and has been closely involved in the implementation of various enhancements to the enforcement program,” Andrew J. Ceresney, director of the S.E.C.’s enforcement division, said in a statement. “His keen intellect and enthusiasm will be missed.”Before Mr. Cohen became a senior enforcement official in 2011, he was an adviser to Mary L. Schapiro, who was chairwoman of the S.E.C. at the time. He also oversaw the creation of the agency’s tips, complaints and referrals system. Mr. Cohen, 44, who previously worked at the law firm Boies, Schiller & Flexner, has not announced his plans.AdvertisementIn the statement, he said he had been “inspired” by his colleagues at the S.E.C.“The talented professionals at the commission routinely overcome daunting challenges to protect investors, and it has been an absolute privilege to work alongside and learn from such exceptional public servants,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.