AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Drew Houston, chief executive of Dropbox, the file-sharing and storage service, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant. Q. What were your early years like?A. An early formative experience for me was toddling into the living room as a kid and seeing this glowing box with all these buttons. We had a PC Junior, and my dad showed me how to write my first couple lines of code in Basic, and that began this odyssey of learning how computers work.Initially, it was about playing games, and when I was about 11, I was pretty sure I was going to make computer games for a living. Part of my interest was also just discovering what makes these games tick. I would get the source code of a game and then modify it to work how I wanted.That’s how I got my first job, actually. I was a beta tester for this game, and I was frustrated because the developers weren’t moving fast enough. So I started poking around under the hood, and I found all these security problems.I emailed the developers, saying, “Hey, guys, you’ve got all these problems and here’s how you should fix them.” And they wrote back, “Great, do you want to work for us?” They said I could work remotely, too, so I said, “Is it O.K. if my dad fills out the paperwork, because I’m 14?” They said, “We couldn’t care less.”And your college years?I studied computer science at M.I.T. I had some vague idea about wanting to start a company. But my first management experience was being rush chairman for my fraternity, and I learned a bunch of things. You get a budget — it was $12,000 back then — and then you have the challenge of motivating 35 unpaid volunteers.You deal with a lot of the same broad questions — who do we want to be as an organization, what kind of culture do we want, what kind of people are we looking for? — that you do when you’re starting a company.Tell me about your parents.My dad is an engineer and my mom retired recently as the librarian of the high school I attended. One of the challenges was that she always knew about a half-hour before I did what all my test scores were. So I could always walk by the library, catch my mom’s eye and get a sense of whether it was going to be a good afternoon or a bad afternoon.And how have they influenced your leadership style?As you go up through the family tree, there’s a bit of an entrepreneurial streak on my mother’s side, and on my dad’s side it’s all engineers. My dad is also very even-keeled. So I have a kind of calm and resilience, which has been helpful, because starting a company is a crazy ride. The good news is that I won’t really lose it over anything, but the downside is that my leadership style is to not be the guy jumping on the table.What were some early leadership lessons after starting Dropbox?The first thing is having a healthy paranoia for trying to find out what you don’t know that you don’t know. The question I would ask myself — even in the beginning, and I still do today — is, six months from now, 12 months from now, five years from now, what will I wish I had been doing today or learning today?Reading has been essential. I have always wondered why people put so much energy into trying to have coffee with some famous entrepreneur when reading a book is like getting many hours of their most crystallized thoughts.What have you done to build culture?Culture always starts out as the sort of bizarre average of the founders’ personalities. But a couple of years ago, we decided to define our values and make our culture explicit.There are a lot of ways to think about it, but one of them is, how do you build something that sustains excellence over a long period of time? Or to put it another way, it seems that most companies, most organisms, decay as they get older and bigger, and so how do you inoculate your company from the most common things that tend to go wrong?So we approached it as kind of an engineering problem — what is the opposite of each of those things? We came up with five: Be worthy of trust; sweat the details; aim higher; “we,” not “I”; and the fifth is just an image of a smiling cupcake, because we don’t want to take ourselves too seriously.How do you hire?I’m drawn to people who really love their craft, and treat it like a craft, and are always trying to be better and are obsessed with what separates great from good. And so I’ll ask a lot about those things. Like who is the best in the world at what you do, and who are your influences?I’ll also ask, what have you learned in the last year? And if you were able to sit yourself down 10 years ago, what advice would you give your younger self? What are the most important lessons you’ve taken away?What’s your advice to new college grads?I did the commencement speech for M.I.T. in 2013. I said that if I had a cheat sheet that I could give myself at 22, it would have three things on it: a tennis ball, a circle and the number 30,000.The tennis ball is about finding the thing you’re obsessed with. The most successful people and successful entrepreneurs I know are all obsessed with solving a problem that really matters to them. I use the tennis ball for that idea because of my dog, who gets this crazy, obsessed look on her face when you throw the ball for her.The circle is really about the idea that you’re the average of your five closest friends, so make sure to put yourself in an environment that pulls the best out of you. And the last is the number 30,000. When I was 24, I came across this website that says most people live for about 30,000 days. So you have to make every day count.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement