AdvertisementSupported byLettersBased on an Equilar survey of 200 chief executives of American companies, “Top C.E.O. Pay Fell — Yes, Fell” (May 29) reported that average compensation last year fell 15 percent from 2014, to $19.3 million.The article received 223 comments. The following were edited and condensed.If my income dropped to $19.3 million from $22.6 million, I simply don’t know what I would do. How would I take care of my family, not to mention my loss of self-esteem?WLK, West Hartford, Conn.What on earth do these people do with all their money? There aren’t enough consumer goods on earth for them to buy. I know what Bill Gates and Warren Buffett are doing philanthropically. What about the other megaearners?gigi, Oak Park, Ill.The American approach is simple: If a C.E.O. gets a million bucks a year, how can I get it too? The idea that I am somehow “cheated” if someone else makes money is moronic.Mark Menser, Fort Myers, Fla.I would really like someone (preferably with a straight face) to explain what these people do that makes them worth their compensation.My hunch is that this is nothing more than financial manipulation with little actual “product,” more “gaming of the system.”Michael Grattan, Key West, Fla.The only solution to this problem is to reinstate punitive federal income tax rates for the highest brackets, say 70 to 90 percent in excess of $10 million, whether received as ordinary income, stock grants or otherwise.Gary Clark, Los AngelesI’m fairly certain not one of these C.E.O.s would regard themselves as overpaid. I’m also confident that their employees who were denied raises, denied medical insurance or who were otherwise chronically exploited would regard these C.E.O. compensation packages as absurdly inflated, with little or no connection to what their demonstrable economic value is. It is a true moral outrage, and must not be allowed to continue.CHintermeister, MaineLetters for Sunday Business may be sent to sunbiz@nytimes.com.Advertisement