AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberMost magazines these days are trying to attract print advertising dollars. Not Prevention.Prevention, a health and wellness magazine that is published by the family-owned Rodale company, will become ad-free starting with its July issue, which will hit shelves next week.The move is part of a broader rethinking of the magazine, which first came out in 1950. It recently brought on a new editor in chief, Barbara O’Dair, and it plans to introduce a paywall section for its website in the fall.A handful of magazines, including Cook’s Illustrated and the nonprofit Consumer Reports, already purposefully contain no outside advertising. But the changes at Prevention are in some ways driven by necessity.“Let’s put it this way,” said Maria Rodale, chairwoman and chief executive of the magazine’s publishing company. “If we were going to continue with advertising, I could never see a future where we would be profitable.”Like many other publications, Prevention’s print advertising dollars have suffered with the shift to digital. But Ms. Rodale said other factors have also made it difficult to draw advertisers. For one, Prevention is physically smaller than most magazines, meaning the ads are smaller, too. The magazine also has an older demographic — it is aimed at women over 40 — that is not as appealing to advertisers as, say, the ever-alluring millennial.By going ad-free, Ms. Rodale said, Prevention will reduce its operating expenses by more than 50 percent. The savings will come in part because the magazine will no longer have to maintain a certain circulation level — a number very important to advertisers — which can result in magazines doing things like printing many copies of issues and offering steep discounts or giving them away free. Prevention has also cut its print sales staff.“We’re going to save tons of money,” Ms. Rodale said.Of course, Prevention, which has a circulation of about 1.5 million, will also be giving up print ad revenue of roughly $12 million a year. But as part of the new business model, it is doubling its subscription price, from $24 to $48. It has already increased the cost of a single copy by a dollar, to $4.99.Ms. O’Dair, the new editor in chief, emphasized the editorial freedom that the magazine would have without ads. She said she planned to “bring in controversial stories” on topics such as medical errors, toxic cosmetics and the anti-aging industry.In the July issue, for instance, there is an article about medical marijuana. “In the past, advertisers might not have wanted to be side by side with that content,” Ms. O’Dair said.Ms. Rodale said the company plans to continue selling print ads for its other titles, which include Runner’s World, Rodale’s Organic Life and Men’s Health.Advertisement