AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.30 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.43 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.19 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: Florida Board of Education, $145.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Corning City, N.Y., School District, $69.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Georgia, $1.34 billion of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Lawrence, Kan., $67.5 million of water and sewage system revenue bonds. Competitive.Maine, $64.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Prince George’s County, Md., $177.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Clark County, Nev., $108 million of highway revenue bonds. Competitive.Fayetteville, N.C., Public Works Commission, $111.6 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Maryland, $1 billion of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Naperville, Ill., $62.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Nassau County, N.Y., $147.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Seattle, $165 million of drain and wastewater revenue bonds. Competitive.Massachusetts, $500 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.South Broward, Fla., Hospital District, $168 million of hospital district revenue bonds. Competitive.Arizona State University, $119.4 million of revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.California Statewide Communities Development Authority, $220 million of health care revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Chicago Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, $432 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Clarksville, Tenn., $90.9 million of water, sewer and gas revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Harris County, Tex., $514 million of toll road revenue refinancing bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Hernando County, Fla., School Board, $87 million of refinancing certificates of participation. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Hobart Industry Building Corporation, Indiana, $67.2 million of first mortgage refinancing bonds. City Securities.Idaho, $500 million of debt securities. Piper Jaffray.Indiana Finance Authority, $137.9 million facilities revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Indiana Finance Authority, $70.1 million water utility revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Indiana Housing and Community Development Authority, $80 million of single-family mortgage revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Kentucky Housing Corporation, $72 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Lansing, Mich., School District, $60 million of school building and site bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Los Angeles County, $800 million of tax and revenue anticipation notes. Wells Fargo Securities.Lower Colorado River Authority, $190 million of transmission contract refinancing revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Maine Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $62.5 million of revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.New York City Housing Development Corporation, $425.7 million of multifamily housing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York Transportation Development Corporation, $850 million of airport project debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Pennsylvania State University, $349.3 million of refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, $440 million of debt securities. Piper Jaffray.Pima County, Ariz., $202.7 million of sewer system revenue refinancing obligations. RBC Capital Markets.Riverside County, Calif., $340 million of tax and revenue anticipation notes. Stifel Nicolaus.San Diego County Water Authority, $86.8 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.San Diego County Water Authority, $295 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Sumner, Wash., School District, $72.4 million of unlimited-tax general obligation bonds. D. A. Davidson.University of North Carolina, $55.5 million of refinancing limited obligation bonds. Raymond James.University of Texas System, $215 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Washington, D.C., $421.8 million of general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.West Hollywood, Calif., $82.5 million of lease revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.West Palm Beach, Fla., $50.3 million of pension funding special obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Wichita Falls, Tex., $74.6 million of water and sewer system revenue bonds. Hilltop Securities.Wisconsin Center District, $160.9 million of appropriation revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Advertisement