
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

JUNE 6, 2016
Reports a few years ago that global banks manipulated the London interbank offered rate, or Libor, to reap profits on their investments showed how easy it was to manipulate benchmarks used to set rates for trillions of dollars in mortgages, student loans and other financial products. Tell a few lies about the interest rates, and then watch the profits roll in – sounds like a classic fraud if ever there was one.Whether traders who tried to push their bank’s Libor submissions to favor their positions actually violated the federal wire fraud statute will be a central question as two defendants challenge convictions and the Justice Department pursues new charges against two former traders at Deutsche Bank.The Libor scandal exploded in July 2012, when Barclays admitted to submitting false information used to set the interest rate benchmark and paid about $450 million in fines and civil penalties. The bank’s chief executive, Robert E. Diamond Jr., soon lost his job. Since then, five other banks have resolved cases over their role in rigging Libor, including Deutsche Bank, which paid $775 million and entered into a deferred-prosecution agreement with the Justice Department while its London-based subsidiary pleaded guilty to wire fraud.Two traders at Deutsche Bank, Matthew Connolly and Gavin Campbell Black, were indicted last week on conspiracy and wire fraud charges for their role in manipulating the submissions used to set Libor. As in many cases involving traders, the government highlighted messages showing how unabashed they were in pushing for the bank to submit an interest rate that would help their investment positions.AdvertisementIn one exchange, Mr. Connolly emailed the person responsible for submitting the bank’s information – using the typically clipped terminology that traders favor – asking that “if possible, we need in NY 1 mo libor as low as possible next few days … tons of pays coming up over all … thanks!” The response came back, “Will do our best Matt.”AdvertisementThat kind of exchange makes it hard to deny there was an intent to make a false submission on behalf of Deutsche Bank.The latest charges follow the pattern set in an indictment filed in 2014 against traders at Rabobank for manipulating its yen Libor submissions. Anthony Allen and Anthony Conti were convicted last November of conspiracy and wire fraud. Judge Jed S. Rakoff of the Federal District Court in Manhattan sentenced Mr. Allen to two years in prison, while Mr. Conti received a punishment of a year and a day in prison. They remain free on bail pending appeal.Judge Rakoff rejected their argument to overturn the guilty verdicts. The defendants argued that the interest rates submitted to the British Banker’s Association, which set Libor at the time, were not false or misleading because they reflected rates that could have been accurate. The judge found that the “defendants effectively represented that they were responding in good faith to the B.B.A.’s query about the rate at which Rabobank could borrow funds.”“A jury could reasonably find that defendants gave counterparties the false impression that they were making good-faith estimates of Rabobank’s borrowing costs instead of making Libor submissions to benefit Rabobank’s trading positions,” Judge Rakoff explained.A recent decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan, which will review the convictions, may present the Justice Department with a substantial hurdle to show the Libor submissions were sufficient to support a conviction for wire fraud.In that case, which I wrote about last week, the appeals court overturned a jury verdict finding that Bank of America violated the wire fraud statute for selling questionable mortgages to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac that fell well short of the contractual requirements for the loans to be sold.
                Abuse of interest rates and the failure to address the problem is one of the most expensive scandals to hit Wall Street since the financial crisis.            Judge Rakoff also presided over that case, finding that the bank had engaged in a “brazen fraud.” But the appeals court reached the opposite conclusion, finding that a breach of contract, standing alone, would be insufficient to constitute a fraud absent an affirmative misstatement at the time of the sale of the mortgages.AdvertisementThat analysis is sure to be seized on by lawyers for Mr. Allen and Mr. Conti to argue that even if their efforts to influence the interest rate submission were successful, it was not the type of misstatement sufficient for a wire fraud conviction.The question asked of the 16 banks that helped set Libor was, “At what rate could you borrow funds, were you to do so by asking for and then accepting interbank offers in a reasonable market size just prior to 11 a.m.?” The B.B.A. then threw out the four highest and lowest figures it received, and used the mean of the remaining eight to set Libor for that day.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.No particular bank could move the rate on its own, and there was not a contractual obligation to supply an exact figure, only a rate at which it “could” borrow funds – a process that is inherently subjective.Each bank’s Libor submission carried an implicit assertion that it was an accurate figure at which it could borrow if it so desired. But whether that implication, which can result in a “false impression” about the true borrowing costs of a bank, constitutes wire fraud is an open question when a knowing breach of contract itself was insufficient to prove a violation by Bank of America.The Libor rate submissions can be viewed as an affirmative statement by Rabobank and Deutsche Bank about the proper interest rate, which may be enough to distinguish the prosecution of Mr. Allen and Mr. Conti from the Bank of America case in which flawed loans were sold without any claim about compliance with the contract. Moreover, evidence of the purpose to enhance the value of the bank’s portfolio by making misleading submissions is abundantly clear in the various messages exchanged by the traders, so the proof of a strong profit motive may be enough to support the wire fraud charges.If the convictions of Mr. Allen and Mr. Conti are overturned, however, it would undermine the case against Mr. Connolly and Mr. Black while dealing a substantial blow to the Justice Department’s efforts to crack down on individual traders involved in Libor manipulation. The oral arguments in the appeal will be heard later this year, which means a decision should not be expected until 2017.The banks involved in setting Libor received a dose of bad news two weeks ago when the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed the district court’s dismissal of class-action lawsuits for violation of the antitrust laws. Because the cases were thrown out at an early stage, the appeals court had to accept the claims of the plaintiffs as true for deciding whether to let them proceed.The crucial claim was that the banks engaged in a horizontal price-fixing conspiracy to artificially affect Libor, which the courts have found to be a per se violation of the law. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit rejected the district court’s conclusion that the plaintiffs could not show any injury, finding that they “have alleged an anticompetitive tendency: the warping of market factors affecting the prices for Libor-based financial instrument.”The lawsuits were returned to the lower court for further proceedings, which is likely to mean protracted discovery that will drag out for years. The danger to the banks from the antitrust claims is the potential for triple damages for any violation, which means the cost to settle a lawsuit may be much higher as the case moves forward.The evidence developed by the Justice Department showing how traders tried to manipulate Libor is copious, and in some instances they coordinated with their counterparts at other banks to generate profits.AdvertisementBut just showing a desire to make money by manipulating Libor may not be enough to prove wire fraud, strange as that may seem, even if the banks may be liable for antitrust violations.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »