AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la Merced and Emily SteelFor Viacom, selling a stake in its Paramount film studio has become potentially more difficult — thanks to its controlling shareholder.National Amusements, the theater chain through which Sumner M. Redstone controls his media empire, said on Monday that it had altered Viacom’s corporate bylaws to prevent the entertainment company from selling any part of Paramount without the approval of the full board.National Amusements holds about a 10 percent stake in Viacom — but nearly 80 percent of Viacom’s voting stock. Among Viacom’s board members are Mr. Redstone himself and his daughter, Shari Redstone.Viacom said in February that it was exploring selling a piece of Paramount after receiving interest from a number of potential buyers. Philippe P. Dauman, Viacom’s chief executive, has said that a sale could help share the costs of movie productions and improve the studio’s distribution.The announcement on Monday is likely to delay a potential sale until the legal disputes can be resolved, which could be months or longer. Through his representatives, Mr. Redstone has made known his objections to a Paramount deal.The studio has long been described as one of Mr. Redstone’s most prized assets. A geriatric psychiatrist who examined Mr. Redstone recently said that Mr. Redstone referred to Paramount as “his baby,” and that he expressed his “emphatic disapproval” of a sale. Mr. Dauman in a court filing on Monday said the doctor’s report was biased.In a statement on Monday, Carl Folta, a Viacom spokesman, said, “These illegitimate actions stem directly from the invalid changes made to the National Amusements Inc. board and are completely at odds with good corporate governance.”A Paramount spokesman declined to comment.The decision puts yet another wrinkle in the struggle between Mr. Redstone and Mr. Dauman, who was once the 93-year-old mogul’s top lieutenant.Over the last several weeks, Mr. Dauman has begun waging open warfare with representatives for Mr. Redstone and with Shari Redstone. Their dispute revolves around the May 20 dismissals of Mr. Dauman and George S. Abrams, another Viacom director, from the trust that will oversee Mr. Redstone’s companies when he dies or is declared incompetent.War has spread across the empire of Sumner Redstone, one of the entertainment industry’s most tenacious titans. At stake are the fortunes of his family and confidants, as well as the fate of Viacom and CBS.Both men were also removed from the National Amusements board.Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams have filed a lawsuit contesting the moves, arguing in court that Mr. Redstone lacked the mental capacity to make those decisions. They have accused Ms. Redstone of manipulating her father.In its statement on Monday, National Amusements said that its move regarding Paramount was not connected to that legal dispute. Instead, the company said that it wanted to ensure that a sale of any part of Paramount was done as part of a sensible long-term strategy.“While National Amusements is not opposed to a transaction that would unlock value at Paramount, it firmly believes that any proposed transaction should be thoroughly vetted and approved by Viacom’s full board, and the rationale for such a transaction should be clearly articulated to Viacom’s stockholders in advance,” National Amusements said.In its statement, National Amusements criticized recent comments by Frederic Salerno, Viacom’s lead independent director, who said last week that it was important for the company’s growth to proceed with its plans to sell a stake in Paramount.“We hope that the fight over control does not impair or completely undermine this potential step with Paramount,” Mr. Salerno said in a letter that also proclaimed the Viacom directors’ intention to fight any attempt to remove them from the board.The theater chain said that those comments showed that Viacom’s independent directors appeared more interested in their own positions than in doing what was right for all of the media company’s shareholders.But other Viacom investors have supported a deal for Paramount, including Mario Gabelli, whose investment firm, Gamco, is the second-largest voting shareholder in Viacom and CBS behind Mr. Redstone. He has called a Paramount transaction a logical step for Viacom.Paramount executives, caught by surprise when Mr. Dauman said in February that Viacom was entertaining offers for a minority stake, are likely to greet Monday’s development with a sigh of relief. New stakeholders could have agitated for a management shake-up at the studio, which has been struggling with little end in sight.Paramount, which for the last four years, has ranked last among Hollywood’s major studios in terms of domestic market share, is trying to rebuild its pipeline after a long period of lessening risk by releasing fewer films, which also limited profits. Last year, Paramount released about a dozen movies. Most major studios release about 20. Efforts by Paramount to restart older franchises, including the “Terminator” series, have also run aground.Over the weekend, Paramount suffered another setback. “Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows,” one of the studio’s big summer bets, turned in a weak $35.3 million in domestic ticket sales.Not everything at Paramount has been a disaster. The low-cost thriller “10 Cloverfield Lane” was a modest hit in March, and the studio has been aggressively trying to build a television division. Leonardo DiCaprio’s production company, Appian Way, recently ended an alliance with Warner Bros. in favor of Paramount.Brooks Barnes contributed reporting from Los Angeles.Advertisement