
Another View By                     
DAVID ZARING

JUNE 6, 2016
The new payday lending rule, once complete, will force many payday lenders out of business. That means that a legal challenge is certain, and also the courts, which worry about regulations that require bankruptcies, will take it seriously.That is good news for challengers of the rule. The bad news is that their claims will probably fail.Payday lenders will challenge the authority of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to issue the rule, the cost-benefit analysis behind the rule and the constitutionality of the consumer agency itself.When they fail, we will know that we have a new and powerful financial regulator, one that can touch not just banks but any source of credit, including credit cards, payday lenders and other informal ways to get money.The challenge to the authority of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to put out the rule will be pointed at one of the quirks of the agency’s jurisdiction. The Federal Reserve regulates banks and the Federal Communications Commission regulates phone companies. But the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has not been given an industry to regulate. Why us, the payday lenders might put it, when you do not regulate anything else about what we do?AdvertisementThe bureau’s governing statute instructs the agency to regulate “unfair, deceptive, or abusive” lending practices. The agency argues in its proposed rule that anyone issuing short-term loans without taking a series of steps to prevent abuses from occurring is engaging such a practice.AdvertisementIf the courts agree, it means that the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau can regulate any short-term loan provider, be it a payday lender, a car title loan financier or, presumably, a grocery store that extends credit. The idea is that this agency does not regulate a particular industry, but rather a practice — lending — no matter who does the lending.I think that the courts will find this interpretation of the agency’s jurisdiction acceptable. Other agencies regulate unfair and deceptive practices, no matter who is practicing them. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s remit to regulate similar sorts of practices in the lending industry looks reassuringly analogous.The most far-reaching claim against the rule would be the one that argues that the agency that promulgated it is unconstitutional.Conservative lawyers have been muttering about the constitutionality of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau for years, but their best argument is pretty novel.It is a “death by a thousand cuts” separation of powers claim. The idea is that if you count up all the ways that the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has been given unfettered authority to regulate the way that financial services are provided to consumers, you get an agency that is not controlled by Congress or the president.That, in turn, is inconsistent with our baseline separation of powers principles, where Congress guides agencies by passing laws and appropriating budgets, and the president makes sure that they are executing on their missions.
            The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has provided for $11 billion in relief for over 25 million consumers and has issued about one regulation a month.        The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau was undoubtedly given unique guarantees of independence. The agency is funded by the Federal Reserve, rather than by a congressional appropriation. The Fed is also not funded by Congress; it makes money by buying and selling government debt to adjust interest rates. The agency’s budget is set at a percentage of Fed operating expenses.AdvertisementUnlike most other financial regulators, the agency has a single head, rather than a board of Democratic and Republican appointees. That head can only be fired by the president for cause, which means mere political disagreements are not a good enough reason to replace the agency’s director.Its employees are not hired through the regular federal personnel process overseen by the Office of Personnel Management, either.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Finally, although “unfair” and “deceptive” trade practices have been regulated and defined by the courts for centuries, there is no common law tradition about “abusive” practices. The payday lenders will argue that this means that the agency has been given a blank check by Congress to define lending abuses as it wishes, and define its jurisdiction however it likes.The claims sounds like Andrew Jackson’s fight against the Second Bank of the United States in the 19th century. Jackson argued that the bank was a “danger to our liberty and independence” not just because it was a congressionally created bank, but also because of the lack of accountability of the directors of the bank, the lack of constraints on the business of the bank and the novelty of that quasi-governmental institution.But the argument has never worked since, and for Jackson, it made a political case, not a legal one.Plenty of agencies have single heads, plenty have “for cause” protections against removal, plenty are self-funded, and Congress often gestures broadly in its guidance to agencies. It has told the Federal Communications Commission to regulate in the “public interest,” a term that could mean anything, but that has been deemed acceptable by the Supreme Court for decades.To be sure, an appellate court has recently — and surprisingly — asked for briefing on the constitutional case against the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. Perhaps the payday lending industry will get lucky, and draw judges similarly worried about the new regulator.But even if they act against the fledgling agency, those judges have hinted that they might resolve any constitutional difficulty by making the agency director removable at will by the president — a remedy that will not do the payday lenders any good at all, unless a sympathetic president is elected in 2016.The final salvo that the payday lenders will fire will concern the cost-benefit analysis conducted by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau that supports the rule. The analysis in the proposed rule has been qualitative and mixed in with the other reasons it has given for proposing the rule.Will a qualitative, instead of quantitative, analysis cut it? The agency must “consider the potential benefits and costs” for consumers and payday lenders before promulgating a rule. It clearly believes that this requirement does not require the sort of quantified analysis that the Securities and Exchange Commission has grudgingly started providing in its proposals.AdvertisementCourts ordinarily defer to agencies when they define terms like “benefits and costs.” If the regulator does not think that such an analysis requires math, then a court would ordinarily agree.But there is undoubtedly some litigation risk here, as well. Some judges have found a need for a quantified cost-benefit analysis in the bowels of many statutes. There have been requests for the Securities and Exchange Commission to do one because its statute contains the word “efficiency.” The Financial Stability Oversight Council has also been asked to do one because its governing statute contained the word “appropriate.” So given the right court, the payday lenders could get lucky here as well.That’s a good reason to give litigation a try, and you never know. But the payday lenders will be gambling on a long shot. Perhaps the industry is familiar with those kinds of odds.David Zaring is associate professor of legal studies at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »