AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressUnited States markets rose on Monday, as shares of energy companies rose along with the price of oil. Fertilizer companies also gained ground, but shares of retailers slumped. Stocks wobbled but remained higher after the Federal Reserve chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, gave a mixed view of the economy.KEEPING SCORE At the close, the Dow Jones industrial average rose 0.64 percent and the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index was up nearly 0.5 percent. The Nasdaq composite index gained 0.53 percent.YELLEN SPEECH Ms. Yellen spoke to the World Affairs Council in Philadelphia on Monday afternoon. She said the economy was improving, but was marked by so many uncertainties that it was not clear when the Fed should resume raising interest rates.Until Friday most investors had expected the Fed to raise interest rates this summer, but after a surprisingly weak May jobs report, they are unsure of the Fed’s intentions. Ms. Yellen, who called that report “disappointing,” had said recently that the Fed would probably raise interest rates in the next few months if the economy kept getting stronger. The Fed’s policy makers will meet next week.THE QUOTE The investment manager Luke Bartholomew of Aberdeen Asset Management said Ms. Yellen was noncommittal and investors may have been hoping for more details.“I don’t think there was enough to sort of swing the market either way,” he said. Stocks weakened during Ms. Yellen’s remarks but returned to their prior levels within an hour.ENERGY Benchmark United States crude oil pared earlier gains and was up $1.07, or 2.2 percent, to settle at $49.69 a barrel in New York. Brent crude, which is used to price international oils, gained 91 cents, or 1.8 percent, to $50.55 a barrel. Natural gas prices also rose.Shares of Chesapeake Energy climbed 11.7 percent and Southwestern Energy stock rose nearly 5 percent. Shares of Exxon Mobil added 1.1 percent.OIL TURMOIL The price of oil has rebounded over the last few months, but remains far lower than it was two years ago, causing a lot of pain for energy companies.The oil and gas exploration company Devon Energy said Monday it would sell almost $1 billion in assets later this year, sending its stock up 4.6 percent. The oil field services company Hercules Offshore filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection for the second time in less than a year. Hercules plans to sell all of its assets to pay off investors, including international divisions.Halliburton shares gained 4.8 percent and shares of Baker Hughes rose about 7 percent.FERTILIZER Shares of CF Industries climbed 8.9 percent, and Mosaic stock rose 6.2 percent. That helped pull materials and chemicals companies higher.BANKS Bank shares traded higher as bond yields made a modest recovery after a big drop on Friday. As bond prices fell, the yield on the 10-year Treasury note rose to 1.72 percent from 1.70 percent. Higher bond yields drive interest rates higher on long-term loans such as mortgages, which helps banks make more money from lending.ABBVIE STUDY Shares of the drugmaker AbbVie slid after investors were disappointed with results from a study of a lung cancer drug that AbbVie is acquiring. In April, AbbVie agreed to buy Stemcentrx for $5.8 billion, gaining the company’s stem cell treatment ova-T in the process. But after the results were announced, AbbVie stock declined 3.4 percent.DOWN ON TYSON Shares of Tyson Foods slumped after a BMO Capital Markets analyst downgraded the company to “Market Perform.” Tyson stock fell 3.7 percent but is up 48 percent over the last 12 months.LAGGING THE MARKET Retail stocks edged lower. Some of the biggest losses went to the home improvement store chain Home Depot, which lost 2 percent and its competitor Lowe’s, which gave up 1.9 percent.EUROPEAN MARKETS In Germany, the DAX ended the day up 0.2 percent and in France, the CAC 40 closed barely higher. The FTSE 100 rose 1 percent in Britain.ASIA’S DAY The Nikkei 225 declined 0.4 percent in Japan, while in Hong Kong, the Hang Seng gained 0.4 percent. The Shanghai composite index lost 0.2 percent in China.CURRENCIES The dollar rose to 106.88 yen from 106.68 yen. The euro inched up to $1.1385 from $1.1347.Advertisement