AdvertisementSupported byBy Elizabeth OlsonIt took exactly one day for two major law firms to follow in the footsteps of Cravath, Swaine & Moore and end the nine-year drought in salary increases for elite junior lawyers.Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy said on Tuesday that it would match the raise Cravath announced on Monday, bringing the basic annual pay for new law school graduates to $180,000. On the heels of that announcement, Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, with some 900 lawyers, also said it would bump up its associates’ pay scale to match.The three leading firms will now pay associates on a scale that rises from $180,000 for first-year associates to $315,000 a year, or slightly more, after eight years of service. In addition, associates can earn annual bonuses, which range from $15,000 for the newest lawyers to as much as $100,000 for more seasoned ones.Scott A. Edelman, Milbank’s chairman, said the firm’s new salary scale, set to take effect on July 1, did not come about “because of agitation or demands from our associates” but was intended “to ensure the firm’s attorneys were paid consistent with the top firms.”The decision to move speedily on raising salaries was made, he said, because “we wanted our associates to know how much we value them. We didn’t want a lot of speculation about that, so we decided to do it quickly.”Milbank, which has 640 lawyers and earned $771 million in revenue last year, gives annual bonuses to all of its lawyers, Mr. Edelman said.Even as the leading firms moved in near concert to increase salaries, this was not happy news for clients. Some have already lodged complaints over the raises, which can seem high to those outside Manhattan, according to some law firm partners.“You wonder what clients will say about the raises,” said Bruce MacEwen, an expert on law firm economics who has a website, Adam Smith, Esq. In-house lawyers at corporate clients have been exercising increasing authority over legal invoices and have been more reluctant to pay for junior lawyers.“Some of the most senior associates now make over $415,000, if you count annual bonuses,” Mr. MacEwen said, “and some general counsels don’t make that much.”Even so, he noted that at the top of the legal market, law school graduates “have options today outside law firms. They are not just going into private equity but choosing, for example, start-ups or going in-house at places like Facebook or Google.”While the most prestigious firms will offer more because high pay is a sign of premier status, the pay raise, he noted, squeezes the layer of firms just below the superelite.“Many firms in the middle are now face-to-face with an unwelcome and unavoidable decision” over whether to pay an additional $20,000 to each new lawyer recruit, Mr. MacEwen said.Advertisement