AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsPatti Grace Smith, a federal aviation official who loosened the regulatory reins in Washington to help spur the growth of the embryonic commercial space transportation industry, died on Sunday in Washington. She was 68.The cause was pancreatic cancer, her brother, Douglas Jones Jr., said.Appointed in 1998 to a newly created post, Ms. Smith was the first person to head the Federal Aviation Administration’s agency for commercial space transportation.During her tenure, the F.A.A. licensed the first inland commercial spaceport in the country, the Mojave Air & Space Port in California, and the launch there in 2004 of SpaceShipOne, the first privately developed manned vehicle to reach space.She oversaw the rule-making for human spaceflight in privately developed programs and for reusable launch vehicles, and she retained her office’s jurisdiction over suborbital space travel, rather than ceding it to aviation officials who were more likely to impose stricter protocols.In an email, Elon Musk, the PayPal and Tesla entrepreneur who founded SpaceX, a company that has developed launch vehicles, wrote that Ms. Smith had “helped lay the foundations for a new era in American spaceflight.”“We are closer to becoming a multiplanet species because of her efforts,” he added.Ms. Smith said it was important to build an unambiguous regulatory framework in which business could flourish.“She would tell you that the role of writing laws and regulations is every bit as important to space travel as the rocket itself,” said James A. M. Muncy, founder of the space policy consulting firm PoliSpace.The agency’s primary goal, Mr. Muncy said, was “to protect the public, national security and foreign policy.” But after that, he said, Ms. Smith’s focus was on licensing, “biased toward allowing people to risk their own money and their own lives and a mandate to encourage, facilitate and promote the growth of the industry.”An English major in college, Ms. Smith might have seemed an unlikely pioneer in the rarefied, mostly male vanguard of private investors and scientists who would become captivated by the potential of space travel.But rocketry was table talk in her native Alabama. (The Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, site of the Marshall Space Flight Center, is a major employer in the state.) And it was a place where she learned to overcome limits imposed by others. She gained valuable experience, she said, as a young black woman immersed in Macon County’s protracted legal struggle to integrate her all-white high school in the mid-1960s.In her public speaking, Ms. Smith was a proselytizer for space travel.“Space is an attitude,” she said during a lecture in 2013 at the Arthur C. Clarke Center for Human Imagination at the University of California, San Diego. “It’s a set of capabilities, an acceptance of risk-taking activities to uncover potential breakthroughs and endless possibilities. That is precisely why we love it.”“What really gets me excited,” she said, “is thinking about the endgame: the opportunity to explore it, to one day inhabit it and create a civilization that includes all the lessons learned from living on Earth — to one day getting it right.”Patricia Grace Jones was born in Tuskegee, Ala., on Nov. 10, 1947. Her father, Douglas Sr., managed the canteen at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Tuskegee after retiring from the Air Force. Her mother, the former Wilhelmina Griffin, was a personnel clerk at the hospital.As a teenager Patricia, along with other black students, was barred from the all-white Tuskegee High School, prompting a 1963 lawsuit and wrangling between Gov. George C. Wallace and the federal government over integrating the school.The lawsuit, Lee v. Macon County Board of Education, was later expanded to include all of Alabama’s public schools and universities and led to a blanket desegregation order that was upheld by the United States Supreme Court.Besides her brother, she is survived by her husband, John Clay Smith; three sons, Eugene, Michael and Stager; a daughter, Michelle Davis; 12 grandchildren; and a sister, Wilma Scott.Ms. Smith graduated from Tuskegee Institute with a bachelor’s degree in 1969 and worked in broadcasting. She started her government career with the Federal Communications Commission, working on satellite communications, before going to work for the Defense Communications Agency and the Department of Transportation, where she was chief of staff of the Office of Commercial Space Transportation when that office was transplanted to the aviation agency in 1995. Her title at the F.A.A. was associate administrator.She retired in 2008 and opened a consulting firm.“She had a vision, and she saw it much more clearly and earlier than other people did,” said Bretton Alexander, director of business development and strategy for Blue Origin, the space transportation company owned by Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon.com. “And she plodded away to get there and never let the bureaucratic encumbrances of Washington stop that from happening.”Ms. Smith said she had been looking forward to traveling in space herself, once the price of a routine flight dropped. “I am ready to go whenever I can,” she said.Advertisement