By SAM ROBERTSNOV. 19, 2015
Beth Curry, co-founder of a $25 billion investment firm, Eagle Capital Management, and a $180 million philanthropy, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan. She was 74.The cause was a recurrence of breast cancer, her son Ravenel Boykin Curry IV, known as Boykin, said.The Ravenel and Elizabeth Curry Foundation, which Ms. Curry established with her husband, Ravenel Boykin Curry III, was a major contributor to the Rockefeller University, Weill Cornell Medical College and Queens University of Charlotte, N.C. She also sat on their boards.Her interest in financial management was whetted when she was a volunteer establishing a nonprofit day care center in New Jersey while raising her three children.In 1979 she returned to her alma mater, Queens College, and enrolled in its M.B.A. program. Four years later, she began working as a securities and equities trader for Summit Bancorp in New York.AdvertisementHer husband had been a partner at H.C. Wainwright and a portfolio manager at the Duke Endowment when they founded Eagle Capital Management in 1988. It invests for pension funds, families, universities and other nonprofit organizations.Advertisement“Her financial savvy came from having a generally sharp mind, plus curiosity, plus a sense, always, that she might have everything wrong,” her son Boykin said. “That led her to keep asking questions and to keep revising and refining her thesis. It wasn’t financial brilliance; it was tenacious humility.”“She never took anything for granted,” he continued. “When she couldn’t understand how banks were making their money, we sold our bank stocks. When she was sitting next to someone — anyone — she just asked them question after question. Why do you do it that way? Why doesn’t everyone else do it that way? What would change your mind?”The couple’s foundation has donated about $5 million to Weill Cornell and $3 million to Queens University.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mary Elizabeth Rivers was born in Wadesboro, N.C., about 50 miles southeast of Charlotte, on Sept. 5, 1941. Her parents, James Rivers and the former Elizabeth Maynard, ran a peach and soybean farm in Chesterfield, S.C., just south of the state border.“When she was little, she made $5 contributions to send to a missionary or to help a best friend, whose house burned down, buy new clothes,” her daughter, Caroline, said of Ms. Curry on Thursday. “She has always found joy in helping others.”She graduated with a bachelor’s degree in English in 1963 from what was then Queens College and married Mr. Curry, whom she had met on a summer vacation in Europe before her junior year.He survives her. Besides her daughter and her son Boykin, her survivors include another son, Marshall; seven grandchildren; a brother, Jay Rivers; and two sisters, Rebecca Sullivan and Melinda Ford.”If you met her you didn’t have to scratch the surface to see that she was a farm girl — it was on the surface,” Marshall Curry said on Thursday.“If anything, you had to scratch to see the business side, and sometimes that was why she’d be dismissed by more type-A aggressive businessmen, who figured from her accent and sweet demeanor that she had just fallen off the turnip truck.Advertisement“But if they were smart, they didn’t think that for too long.”A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Beth Curry, 74; Founded Investment Firm .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.