By VICTORIA FINKLEJUNE 7, 2016
“We believe that we need a banking system that has a federal safety net that has a whole lot more capital and a whole lot less federal control,” the Republican chairman of the House Financial Services Committee said.WASHINGTON — A proposal by a senior House Republican to dismantle portions of the 2010 Wall Street reforms known as the Dodd-Frank Act has rekindled a partisan debate over the state of banking regulation eight years after the financial crisis.Representative Jeb Hensarling of Texas, who is chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, outlined the main parts of his plan on Tuesday during a speech in New York. He plans to introduce the legislation this month. The debate shows how divided Washington remains over how to supervise the financial industry, from the big banks to the small community institutions.Mr. Hensarling’s plan, called the Financial Choice Act, builds on longstanding Republican hostility to the financial reform law, rolling back significant provisions and limiting the role of regulators in overseeing the country’s biggest banks. But it also advocates stronger penalties for financial fraud and puts a focus on capital buffers for large banks.“Simply put, Dodd-Frank has failed,” Mr. Hensarling said in remarks to the Economic Club of New York. “It’s time for a new legislative paradigm in banking and capital markets.”AdvertisementAfter the speech, Mr. Hensarling planned to meet with the Republican presidential candidate Donald J. Trump, who has called for a repeal of Dodd-Frank. The Trump campaign did not immediately respond to a request for comment.AdvertisementBack in Washington, Democrats had sharp words for the plan. “We’ve only seen a summary of the bill so far, but even from that, it’s clear that Congressman Hensarling and his fellow Republicans think that the poor Wall Street banks have suffered too much under the new rules, and it’s time for them to return to the good old days before the 2008 crisis, when these banks could run wild,” Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, said during a hearing of the Senate Banking Committee on Tuesday.Senator Warren called the bill “Congressman Hensarling’s wet kiss for the Wall Street banks.”Sherrod Brown of Ohio, the top Democrat on the banking panel, said in a statement that the plan “underscores the collective amnesia of many in Congress and on Wall Street about how devastating the financial crisis was for an entire generation of working and middle-class Americans.”One of the plan’s central provisions would allow the country’s biggest banks to exempt themselves from capital and liquidity requirements and other regulatory standards if they held enough capital to surpass a certain threshold.Mr. Hensarling estimated that the biggest banks would be required to collectively raise “several hundred billion dollars in new equity” to benefit from the proposal.That is likely to dissuade many of the top financial institutions from offering broad support for the measure.Isaac Boltansky, a policy analyst at Compass Point Research & Trading, said, “The nation’s largest banks are unlikely to throw their weight behind it, as they would have to raise hundreds of billions of dollars to benefit, and doing so would undermine the tens of billions they have already spent to comply with the Dodd-Frank Act.”According to an outline released on Tuesday, the bill would also repeal the Volcker Rule, which restricts trading activities at banks, and replace the Dodd-Frank Act’s process for winding down a failing institution with a new chapter of the bankruptcy code.AdvertisementOn Tuesday, Mr. Hensarling said, “I also would point out, regulators essentially bailed out Bear but let Lehman fail,” references to Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers, which ran into trouble around the time of the financial crisis. “Although it was painful, somewhat chaotic,” he continued, “those in the bankruptcy arena would tell you the Lehman bankruptcy, to some extent, worked as it should have worked.”The White House has been critical of the proposal, including changes to the process for dealing with distressed institutions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The proposal “will allow big banks to go back making risky bets and put taxpayers on the hook once again for bailing out those banks to prevent a second Great Depression,” said Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary. “That doesn’t make any sense.”The plan also takes aim at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the brainchild of Ms. Warren. Mr. Hensarling proposes to restructure it and other agencies as bipartisan commissions and subject them to congressional appropriations.In addition, a body of regulators known as the Financial Stability Oversight Council would lose its ability to designate risky nonbanks as “systemically important.” The legislation also includes a number of regulatory relief items for community banks, some of which are widely supported and others that have been opposed by Democrats.James Ballentine, executive vice president of congressional relations and political affairs for the American Bankers Association, said the group appreciated efforts to improve Dodd-Frank, though more details were needed.“We really need to see the language on this bill. From the outline, there are several proposals, particularly in the regulatory relief area for community banks, that we’ve advocated for quite some time,” he said.As Mr. Hensarling delivered his speech, a handful of protesters stood outside, asserting that he had received millions of dollars in campaign funding from major banks in his role as chairman of the powerful House banking panel. In a statement, the group, Take on Wall Street, called the bill a “free pass” for the financial services industry. It is backed by several labor organizations and grass-roots networks.Representative Maxine Waters, a Democrat from California and the ranking member on the House committee, said the plan “immediately takes two steps backward by eliminating any oversight of the riskiest activities at banks and nonbanks by dismantling the Financial Stability Oversight Council and subjecting bank regulators to the appropriations process.”For now, the proposal remains a messaging tool for House Republicans, one that might influence the presidential debate.Advertisement“There is much that Donald Trump has said and done with which I disagree, but one thing I do agree with is that it is time to rebuild and replace Dodd-Frank,” Mr. Hensarling said.An earlier version of this article misstated the name of a group protesting Mr. Hensarling’s bill. It is Take On Wall Street, not Take Back Wall Street. Because of an editing error, an earlier version also misstated when the Dodd-Frank Act was enacted. It was in 2010, not 2008.A version of this article appears in print on June 8, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Republicans Unveil a Plan to Dismantle Dodd-Frank.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.