AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelCANTON, Mass. — An army of lawyers marched into the courthouse in this quiet New England town Tuesday morning, facing off for the first time in a high-stakes legal battle over the competency of the media mogul Sumner M. Redstone and the future of his $40 billion empire.After a hearing that lasted two and a half hours and included the appearance of 22 lawyers for all sides in the tangled dispute, Judge George F. Phelan of Norfolk County Probate Court said he had “a lot to digest” before ruling on whether to expedite proceedings in a case that could determine the fortunes of the Redstone family and the fates of Viacom and CBS, two of the world’s largest entertainment companies.The case centers on the abrupt dismissal of two of Mr. Redstone’s longtime confidants from the trust that will control his companies after he dies or is declared incompetent.The two men, Philippe P. Dauman and George S. Abrams immediately filed suit, challenging Mr. Redstone’s mental capacity and asserting that he had been manipulated by his daughter, Shari Redstone. Lawyers for Mr. Redstone said the moves were valid and reflected his wishes.Judge Phelan heard starkly different views of Mr. Redstone’s mental and physical well-being. He listened to the contrasting perspectives of lawyers for Mr. Redstone, his daughter, his five grandchildren and his longtime business associates at Viacom. He was presented with the trust agreement itself, which he said he would read confidentially.“I grew up in a housing project where I was happy to have a quarter in my pocket,” Judge Phelan said. “I’m trying to grasp the idea of billions with a B.”Billions, indeed, hang in the balance.Mr. Redstone, who is 93 and in poor health, controls 80 percent of the voting stock in Viacom and CBS through National Amusements, the private theater chain company whose headquarters are in Norwood, Mass., less than two miles from the courthouse.Controversy erupted in recent weeks after Mr. Redstone suddenly ousted Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams from the trust and the board of National Amusements. Many in the industry viewed the development as a harbinger to the firing of Mr. Dauman as chairman and chief executive of Viacom. (Mr. Abrams is a Viacom director.)Lawyers for Mr. Redstone said the dismissals were justified given Viacom’s loss of $7 billion in market capitalization in the last year.War has spread across the empire of Sumner Redstone, one of the entertainment industry’s most tenacious titans. At stake are the fortunes of his family and confidants, as well as the fate of Viacom and CBS.Judge Phelan said Tuesday that he “may or may not” decide on a request by Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams to expedite legal proceedings before a hearing on a motion from Mr. Redstone’s lawyers to dismiss the case outright, expected this month.Lawyers for Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams urged Judge Phelan to take immediate action, including ordering an immediate medical evaluation of Mr. Redstone as part of a request to expedite the process of gathering evidence and a trial.“Today, Sumner Redstone is 93 years old, and he is very sick,” said Leslie Fagen, a lawyer for Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams. “This poor man is holding onto life by a thread.”Lawyers for Mr. Redstone and his daughter urged the judge not only to reject the motion for an expedited hearing but also consider a new motion to dismiss the case outright, planned in the coming weeks.“There is no imminent risk to his health,” said Robert N. Klieger, a lawyer for Mr. Redstone. He cited recent doctor exams that showed “significant improvement” in recent weeks and stated that Mr. Redstone exercises daily.The jurisdiction for the dispute is also in question. While Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams filed suit in Massachusetts where the trust was established, lawyers for Mr. Redstone have filed a petition to validate the changes made to dismiss the two men in Los Angeles, where Mr. Redstone has lived for about 10 years.Judge Phelan said he wondered why someone with Mr. Redstone’s “business acumen” would not amend the trust to reflect his California residence rather than his Massachusetts roots.As the lawyers made their case, Judge Phelan interrupted arguments with a series of questions. He asked Mr. Fagen whether his clients had heard from Mr. Redstone about his dissatisfaction with Viacom over the last several months. Mr. Fagen said no.The judge delved into Mr. Redstone’s stormy relationship with his daughter, asking whether they had only recently reconciled.“There has always been healthy disagreement,” said Peter Biagetti, a lawyer for Ms. Redstone. “But the bond of family, of connection to one another and most importantly of trust has endured.”Multiple times, Judge Phelan asked whether a finding of undue influence should invalidate the dismissals from the trust, and cited a section of Massachusetts trust code on the matter. Mr. Fagen said yes. Mr. Klieger said the decision should not apply.Advertisement