AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie ThomasJoseph C. Papa, the new chief executive of Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, strove to signal on Tuesday that the company’s worst problems were behind it, telling analysts that the company’s future was “bright,” despite what he repeatedly described as “speed bumps.”But Valeant’s first-quarter earnings report, released Tuesday after more than a monthlong delay, told a different story, revealing trouble in core business areas, including its dermatology, gastrointestinal and ophthalmology units. And it suggested that the company’s troubles were not limited to the legal issues and investigations before it.A big loss of nearly $374 million in the quarter — and lower guidance for the rest of the year — raise particularly difficult problems for the company. Valeant is weighed down with $30 billion in debt and has said it will no longer rely as heavily on price increases and big acquisitions to drive profits, its strategy in the previous few years.In comments to analysts, Mr. Papa, who took over as chief executive in May, said that he realized that the company’s business was encountering challenges but that he was optimistic.“I believe we have a solid future ahead,” he said.Investors did not appear to agree. Valeant’s stock, which has plunged about 90 percent over the last year, fell about 13 percent in midday trading. The company’s first-quarter earnings report was about a month later than usual, after the release in April of an equally delayed annual report in the face of a series of earnings restatements.Over the last year, Valeant has faced questions about its business and accounting practices, including investigations by Congress, federal prosecutors and the Securities and Exchange Commission.In recent months, the company has taken steps to emerge from its struggles, getting rid of its chief executive, J. Michael Pearson, who had led Valeant since 2008 and was the mastermind of the company’s now-pilloried practice of buying up companies, slashing costs and raising drug prices. It replaced him with Mr. Papa, previously of the Perrigo Company, and shook up the board.William A. Ackman, whose Pershing Square Capital Management is one of Valeant’s biggest investors, took a seat on the board and pledged to Congress that the company would take a fairer approach to setting its drug prices, a practice that had come under harsh scrutiny by regulators and others.To truly recover, however, many analysts have said that Valeant must get back to the core business of selling its drugs, focusing on its most promising products. The earnings report on Tuesday showed the company still had a long way to go.Revenue in its dermatology unit fell 43 percent in the first quarter of 2016 compared with the same quarter last year, and its prescription ophthalmology business fell by 30 percent. Sales of Xifaxan, a gastrointestinal drug that is Valeant’s top product and was acquired last year when the company bought Salix Pharmaceuticals, reached $208 million in the first quarter. But those sales were lower than expected, the company said, and that was one reason Valeant lowered its guidance for the year.The company said it was lowering its revenue guidance for the year to a range of $9.9 billion to $10.1 billion, down from $11 billion to $11.2 billion. It also lowered its earnings forecast to $6.60 to $7 a share, compared with its previous guidance of $8.50 to $9.50.Mr. Papa said the dermatology unit’s poor performance mainly stemmed from problems with the company’s new deal with Walgreens, a prescription program that was intended to replace its relationship with Philidor, a mail-order pharmacy. Philidor’s ties to Valeant are now being investigated by federal authorities, including the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr. Papa said on Tuesday.After a flurry of questions from analysts, Mr. Papa said that some patients had been receiving drugs before it was learned whether the patients’ insurer would pay for them, resulting in a loss.“Every time a prescription goes out the door, we are taping dollar bills to that prescription,” he said. “That is something we have to get fixed.”Valeant executives said they were confident that the company’s challenges could be overcome, saying they were working with insurers to secure better coverage of crucial drugs like Xifaxan and Jublia, which treats toenail fungus. Mr. Papa also said he believed the “speed bumps” with the Walgreens deal would be fixed soon.But some analysts did not seem to be persuaded, noting that because Valeant was so deeply in debt, it had little room for error.“If the business stays the way it is, or continues to deteriorate, we believe Valeant will be challenged in making those debt payments,” said David Maris, an analyst for Wells Fargo. “Based on this quarter’s cash from operations, we do not see debtholders being enthusiastic about restructuring Valeant debt.”Advertisement