By BENJAMIN WEISER and BEN PROTESSJUNE 7, 2016
Arlo Devlin-Brown, a veteran federal prosecutor in Manhattan who led a string of prominent Wall Street cases and more recently oversaw the prosecutions of two of New York State’s most powerful politicians, is departing for the private sector.In August, he will join the law firm Covington & Burling as a partner in New York, the firm said on Tuesday.Mr. Devlin-Brown’s departure caps a nearly 11-year tenure in the United States attorney’s office for the Southern District of New York. Under Preet Bharara, the United States attorney there, Mr. Devlin-Brown took aim at JPMorgan Chase, SAC Capital and other Wall Street giants.He spent the last two years as chief of the public corruption unit, when it won the convictions of Sheldon Silver, the former State Assembly speaker; Dean G. Skelos, the former State Senate majority leader; and other public officials. Mr. Devlin-Brown is expected to be succeeded as the unit’s chief by his deputy, Andrew D. Goldstein, 42, who joined the office in 2010.AdvertisementMr. Devlin-Brown is the latest federal prosecutor to move through the so-called revolving door and land at Covington. The firm’s Washington office is already home to Eric H. Holder Jr., the former attorney general, as well as Lanny Breuer and Mythili Raman, each of whom ran the Justice Department’s criminal division in Washington. Michael Chertoff, who also led the criminal division and later became secretary of homeland security, is of senior counsel to the firm.Mr. Devlin-Brown, 43, a native of Vermont, will increase the presence of former prosecutors in the New York office, whose partners include Alan Vinegrad, a former United States attorney in Brooklyn, and Nancy Kestenbaum, a former chief of the general crimes unit in Manhattan.Before joining the United States attorney’s office, Mr. Devlin-Brown was an associate at the law firm Wilmer Hale.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At Covington, Mr. Devlin-Brown will join the firm’s white-collar and investigations practice, and he could end up representing clients accused of the kinds of crimes he once prosecuted.AdvertisementAs a senior prosecutor on Mr. Bharara’s Wall Street task force, Mr. Devlin-Brown helped secure the insider trading conviction of Mathew Martoma, a former trader at the hedge fund SAC Capital. Mr. Martoma, who was accused of carrying out the largest insider trading scheme ever charged, is appealing while serving a nine-year prison sentence. (Mr. Devlin-Brown and Mr. Martoma were students at Harvard Law School at the same time).Mr. Devlin-Brown was also on the team of prosecutors that indicted SAC Capital itself. The fund ultimately pleaded guilty and paid more than $1 billion to resolve the case.In the case against JPMorgan, which was accused of failing to thwart Bernard L. Madoff’s Ponzi scheme, Mr. Devlin-Brown and his colleagues stopped short of indicting the bank. They did, however, reach a deferred prosecution agreement and extracted a $1.7 billion payment.As chief of the corruption unit, Mr. Devlin-Brown also supervised the office’s investigation of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s interference with and shutdown of the Moreland Commission, an anticorruption panel that he created in July 2013 and abruptly disbanded nine months later in a deal with the legislature. No charges were brought against Mr. Cuomo. Mr. Devlin-Brown also oversaw the prosecution of a still-pending bribery case involving a former United Nations official and other defendants.“He has this exceptional level of experience, having done securities cases and corruption cases,” said Mr. Breuer, the former Justice Department official, who is now vice chairman of Covington. “He’ll very quickly become a central figure of the firm.”Matthew Goldstein contributed reportingA version of this article appears in print on June 8, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Prosecutor  of Wall St. to Join Firm in New York.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.