AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaTribune Publishing’s board gets an A-plus in testing the patience of shareholders. More than 40 percent withheld votes for the eight directors put forward by the company, publisher of The Los Angeles Times. That is virtually unheard of, especially when proxy advisers like Institutional Shareholder Services favor the candidates.As with other unlikely situations, such as Walt Disney’s investor revolt in 2004, the squeals of jilted minorities can kick directors into action. This should be embarrassing enough for Tribune’s board to force its tin-eared chairman, Michael W. Ferro Jr., to listen to Gannett’s overtures.Tribune, which also owns The Baltimore Sun, The Hartford Courant and The Chicago Tribune in its hometown, has twice rebuffed offers — the latest at $15 a share in cash, double what investors previously thought it was worth — from Gannett, the largest American newspaper chain.Gannett missed the window to nominate its own set of directors but instead started a vote-withholding campaign against Tribune’s nominees. At least two-fifths of Tribune’s owners went along, according to a filing released Monday. Exclude the 17 percent stake held by Mr. Ferro and a few other insiders, and the number of withheld votes climbs just above a majority and even toward 60 percent for some board candidates, a Breakingviews analysis shows.That’s a remarkable rebuke given the outsize impact of I.S.S. A joint paper from the University of Colorado, Columbia University and the University of Zurich about the adviser’s influence on uncontested director elections found that less than 1 percent of board elections resulted in more than 20 percent of the owners withholding their votes unless I.S.S. advised them to do so. Over a decade ago, after 43 percent of shareholders at Walt Disney didn’t cast a vote for Michael Eisner, then the chairman, the board stripped him of his title.Tribune says it is open to discussions with Gannett. But directors are busy with other tasks, such as changing the corporate name to the risible Tronc to reflect its new direction as a digital-content curator. A switch from the New York Stock Exchange to Nasdaq is also in the works. Investors have given a clear, negative response to these patent stalling maneuvers: Tribune’s go-it-alone strategy has landed with a “thunc.”Separately, view the e-book on the story of Valeant Pharmaceuticals, “Bitter Pill: The Wild Rise and Fall of Valeant Pharmaceuticals.”Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement