AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Nearly a decade ago, Guy Hands, the British founder of the European private equity firm Terra Firma Capital Partners, made a big bet on the storied music group EMI.The acquisition – announced in 2007 and valued at 4 billion pounds, or about $5.8 billion – was the largest private equity transaction ever completed in Britain. But it proved to be a disastrous one for Mr. Hands, damaging his reputation as an astute deal maker and erasing much of his personal wealth.Facing a crushing amount of debt, EMI was seized by its lenders in 2011 and acquired by the Universal Music Group the next year.Mr. Hands has placed much of the blame at the feet of Citigroup, which was Terra Firma’s preferred bank before a falling out over the EMI transaction. He initially sued in New York, claiming that the American banking giant made a variety of misrepresentations ahead of an auction for EMI in 2007 that encouraged him to pursue a deal.A jury in Manhattan found in 2010 that Citigroup was not liable in the matter, but that verdict was thrown out by an appeals court. On Tuesday, Mr. Hands resumed his long-running legal battle with the American bank, this time in London.The latest case is centered around “oral misrepresentations made to Mr. Hands in 2007 by three senior executives of Citigroup,” Anthony Grabiner, a lawyer representing Terra Firma, said in court in London on Tuesday.Terra Firma is seeking £1.5 billion in damages, reflecting its full investment, as well as lost profits and management fees it claims it would have earned if it had not invested in EMI. Citigroup provided £2.5 billion in financing for the transaction.“As with the previous claim, this case is entirely without merit,” Citigroup said on Tuesday. “Citi did not make any dishonest statements to Guy Hands or Terra Firma throughout the auction process for EMI and is confident the U.K. trial will confirm this.”Mr. Hands is expected to take the stand on Wednesday as the first witness in the case, which is being heard by a judge, rather than a jury, and is expected to run into July.“Your lordship will have to decide who is telling the truth,” Mr. Grabiner said in court on Tuesday.At the time of the Terra Firma deal, EMI was one of four major record labels worldwide, but it faced financial pressures as consumers moved away from buying compact discs and record albums in favor of digital music.Despite pressure on its results, the company remained an attractive takeover target to buyout firms. EMI’s stable of artists over the years included the Beatles, Coldplay and Katy Perry.In November 2006, a consortium of funds managed by the private equity group Permira tried unsuccessfully to buy the company (and Terra Firma briefly considered a takeover proposal at the time.)In April 2007, after two profit warnings, EMI decided to put itself up for sale in an auction, with Cerberus Capital Management and Fortress Investment Group initially expressing interest.As he did in the New York case, Mr. Hands claims he was misled by David Wormsley, Citigroup’s head of investment banking in Britain and a longtime banker to Mr. Hands, about plans by Cerberus to offer a competing bid in an auction for EMI.Terra Firma ultimately was the only bidder in May 2007.Mr. Hands also claims he was misled by two former Citigroup executives about the financial health of EMI: Michael Klein, Citigroup’s former head of global banking; and Chad Leat, then co-chief of Citigroup’s global credit markets.“We are confident in the merits of our claims and look forward to a positive result,” a Terra Firma spokesman said on Tuesday.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @ChadbrayAdvertisement