By AMIE TSANG and ALAN WONGJUNE 7, 2016
HONG KONG — When Lancôme organized a small concert in Hong Kong featuring a local Cantopop star, the company billed the event as “Made of Unstoppable Energy.”Well, it turns out the energy was stoppable. With little explanation, Lancôme canceled the show on Sunday.The singer, Denise Ho, said the reason was clear: Lancôme, the French cosmetics company owned by L’Oréal, wanted to avoid upsetting the government of China, one of L’Oréal’s largest markets.To Beijing, Ms. Ho would be a divisive figure. She has publicly supported the pro-democracy Occupy movement in Hong Kong, and she has posted a photograph of herself with the Dalai Lama on Facebook.AdvertisementSince the cancellation, Lancôme has faced accusations of self-censorship, stoked on social media in Hong Kong and mainland China. There have been calls online for a boycott.Advertisement“Such commercial self-censorship isn’t happening to me alone,” Ms. Ho said, referring to the Taiwanese singer Chou Tzu-yu, who had to apologize to China after waving the Taiwanese flag on a television show. “There are values you need to protect whether you’re an artist, a public figure, or a brand,” Ms. Ho said. “I don’t think we want a society where we live in fear for supporting these values.”Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many multinationals and global industries tread carefully in China, wary of risking the ire of the government and losing access to the world’s second-largest economy, after that of the United States.Hollywood, for example, has adjusted plots to appease censors in China. In 2013, Keanu Reeves said the State Administration of Radio, Film and Television had forced him to take the fighting scenes in his film “Man of Tai Chi” out of mainland China and into Hong Kong. The zombie apocalypse film “World War Z” changed the source of the undead infection to Taiwan from Sichuan, in mainland China.The networking site LinkedIn censors politically delicate content on its Chinese and English language sites in China. Users whose posts are blocked get a boilerplate email advising them that a posted item contains “content prohibited in China.”And the American Bar Association decided not to publish a book by the human rights lawyer Teng Biao because of concerns about upsetting the Chinese government and putting at risk its Beijing office, which aims to build up the legal system in China.The controversy for Lancôme centers on an important market for the parent company.China is the second-largest sales market, after the United States, for L’Oréal, according to its 2015 financial report. Sales of L’Oréal products grew 3.2 percent from a year earlier in China, although the company noted that Hong Kong had been a “difficult market.”Fu King-wa, an associate professor at the Journalism and Media Studies Center at the University of Hong Kong, said the episode involving Ms. Ho would be a lesson in the need to better understand local culture and to formulate better communications strategies.Advertisement“I don’t know what happened, maybe some miscommunication between headquarters and local branch,” Dr. Fu said.“International brands, if they want to do business in China, that always has certain kinds of risk,” he added. “If you choose to stay in this market, either you pay attention to all these kinds of politically sensitive issues, or you just follow Google” and leave the market.Polina Huard, a spokeswoman for the L’Oréal Group in Paris, said the company had no comment beyond a statement distributed on social media. Listerine, a brand that Ms. Ho also promotes, said on Tuesday that the company was still working with her.The first sign of trouble for Lancôme came on Saturday, when The Global Times, a Chinese state-supported publication, posted on the microblog site Weibo that Lancôme and Listerine had hired “Hong Kong Poison, Tibet Poison” for publicity events. “Poison” and “Independence” sound similar in Chinese.The Global Times asked its more than four million followers to comment, and thousands did. “Making Chinese people’s money, and hiring this kind of person as a spokesperson? Let’s boycott them, shall we?” one user wrote.“The two brands probably don’t want to do business in China anymore,” another wrote.The next day, Lancôme issued its statement on Facebook. “Lancôme pays utmost attention to its fans,” it read. “However, due to possible safety reasons, Lancôme has decided to cancel the event.”The largest pro-democracy parties in Hong Kong have called a protest on Wednesday at a busy Lancôme retail location to condemn the brand for what they said amounted to “kowtowing to money.” The groups are calling for people in Hong Kong to boycott all brands under L’Oréal.“What is most ironic is that L’Oréal is an international brand from France, known for its history of democracy and freedom movements against totalitarianism,” the parties said in a joint statement on Tuesday.Follow Amie Tsang @amietsang and Alan Wong @alanwongw on Twitter.David Jolly contributed reporting from Paris.A version of this article appears in print on June 8, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline:  Lancôme Provokes Fury Over a Hong Kong Concert.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.