By CHAD BRAYJUNE 8, 2016
LONDON — Guy Hands, the founder of the private equity firm Terra Firma Capital Partners, denied in court on Wednesday that he had made up conversations he claimed he had with senior executives at Citigroup ahead of a disastrous deal to buy EMI in 2007.His firm is suing Citigroup in London over several misrepresentations that Mr. Hands claimed Citi executives had made to induce him to bid for and complete a deal to buy the storied music label.The acquisition – valued at 4 billion pounds, or about $5.8 billion – came at a high cost for Mr. Hands, damaging his reputation as a shrewd investor and erasing much of his personal fortune.EMI was seized by its lenders in 2011 as it faced a crushing amount of debt. It was acquired by the Universal Music Group the next year.AdvertisementMr. Hands said on Wednesday that he had personally lost 200 million euros, or about $227 million, on the deal.AdvertisementOn Wednesday, Citigroup’s lawyers pressed Mr. Hands on the motivation behind his lawsuit against the bank and questioned whether a claim Mr. Hands filed against the lender in 2013 in Manchester while separately pursuing litigation in the United States was an attempted “shakedown.”At the time, Terra Firma accused Charles O. Prince III, the former chief executive of Citigroup, of fraud. That claim is no longer part of the case.Mark Howard, a lawyer for Citigroup, questioned whether the claim against Mr. Prince had been filed to embarrass the bank and to force a settlement.“That is not correct,” Mr. Hands said.This is the second time that Terra Firma has gone to court over claims that Citigroup misled Mr. Hands about EMI and the auction process.A jury in Manhattan found in 2010 that Citigroup was not liable in the matter, but that verdict was later thrown out by an appeals court.The latest trial began on Tuesday before a judge in London and is expected to last into July. Mr. Hands, who will continue his testimony on Thursday, is the first witness to testify in the case.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Citigroup has said that it believes that Terra Firma’s lawsuit is without merit and that it did not make any dishonest statements to Mr. Hands or Terra Firma throughout the EMI auction.Terra Firma is seeking £1.5 billion in damages, reflecting its full investment, as well as lost profits and management fees it claims it would have earned had it not invested in EMI in the first place. Citigroup provided £2.5 billion in financing for the transaction.AdvertisementAs part of the lawsuit, Mr. Hands said he was told by David Wormsley, Citigroup’s head of investment banking in Britain and a longtime banker to Mr. Hands, that Cerberus Capital Management was prepared to bid 262 pence a share for EMI and that Terra Firma would need to make a higher bid than that to win the auction. Terra Firma ultimately was the only bidder for EMI in May 2007.Terra Firma also claims that two other former Citigroup executives made additional misrepresentations to Mr. Hands about the bank’s view on the financial health of EMI to encourage him to complete the deal after winning the auction. Terra Firma injected £205 million in additional equity into the company after discussing financing with Citigroup, Mr. Hands said.On Wednesday, Mr. Howard pressed Mr. Hands on why his conversations with Mr. Wormsley – which Mr. Hands said were a driving force behind the deal discussions – were not documented in the minutes of meetings by Terra Firma’s investment committee or the boards of its general partners.“The real reason there is no documentation is because none of it is true?” Mark Howard, a lawyer for Citigroup, said.“That is not correct,” Mr. Hands said.Mr. Hands said he did not always share the sources of his information with the committee.On Wednesday, Mr. Hands also said it was “market practice” for information to be shared by agents of selling companies about the price other bidders were willing to pay in a confidential auction, even when there was a confidentiality agreement in place between the parties.It happens “on an everyday basis in the City,” Mr. Hands said, referring to London’s financial center.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @ChadbrayA version of this article appears in print on June 9, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Financier Testifies He Did Not Make Up Claims Against Citigroup.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.