By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJUNE 9, 2016
Stuart Anderson, the founder of the Black Angus Steakhouse chain, known for offering big meals for a small price, died on Monday at his home in Rancho Mirage, Calif. He was 93.The cause was lung cancer, his wife, Helen, said.At its peak, the restaurant chain had more than 120 outlets around the country. It currently has about 46, most of them in California.When Mr. Anderson founded the chain in Seattle in 1964, customers got steak, soup or salad and a baked potato for just $2.99.“They were lined up outside the doors,” Mrs. Anderson said.But the price did not include dessert. “He wanted to get them out of there,” she said. “That was his whole theory. But he gave them a lot of food for the money.”AdvertisementMr. Anderson was born on Nov. 27, 1922, in Tacoma, Wash. He was a tank driver with Patton’s Third Army during World War II. After the war, he bought a hotel in Seattle.“As fast as I could, I installed a small bar in the lobby,” Mr. Anderson wrote in his 1997 book, “Here’s the Beef! My Story of Beef.” “Hookers, seamen, hustlers and wrestlers made up most of my trade.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The hotel had a small restaurant. “He decided that he didn’t like the hotel part,” Mrs. Anderson said, “but he loved the restaurant part.”He opened the first Black Angus in Seattle in 1964. The chain was sold in 1972, but Mr. Anderson stayed on to run it before retiring in the mid-1980s.In addition to his wife, survivors include his daughters, Christopher Carol Gee and Quincy Anderson; a stepson, Michael Ranta; two grandsons; a great-grandson; and a step-grandson.While Mr. Anderson liked steak, he never got the hang of cooking it — or cooking much of anything else.“The best he could do,’’ Mrs. Anderson said, “would be peanut butter sandwiches or frying eggs, if I weren’t home.”A version of this article appears in print on June 10, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Stuart Anderson, 93, Restaurateur.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.