AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter Eavis and Leslie PickerIn recent years, Wall Street firms have reaped big profits in the scrappy reaches of the credit markets, selling the debt of companies with weak credit ratings to investors who crave higher returns.But now, as investors have suddenly grown skittish, some big Wall Street banks have been stuck with piles of debt that they are struggling to sell. As a result they are starting to book multimillion-dollar losses as they write down the value of these positions.The investment banks that focus on this market appear to be sitting on potential losses that may exceed $600 million, according to an analysis by debt market specialists of several deals that are struggling. These deals have not closed yet, but the markings are based on the lower prices investors are demanding.A large portion of the paper losses is from debt issued by Veritas, a software entity that the private equity firm Carlyle Group is buying in a $5.5 billion leveraged buyout. Morgan Stanley and Bank of America led this transaction. A lack of demand for the debt has effectively left it on the books of the banks.None of the banks would comment on the calculations.If the market recovers, the value of the troubled debt may rise again, shrinking or reversing any losses. The hits are also a fraction of those that the banks suffered in the financial crisis of 2008.Still, they are a reminder of how Wall Street can be wrong-footed at crucial turns in the market. The problems in the debt markets could also weigh on merger activity. Banks that are unable to sell debt may now become more stringent in their lending for acquisitions.And the pain may worsen if the debt markets react badly to an increase in interest rates. The Federal Reserve is expected to raise interest rates next month, a potentially seismic move that could limit the flow of money that has buoyed speculative markets in recent years.Among those markets is the one for leveraged loans, the type of debt that is causing many of the losses right now for the banks.Banks make these loans to companies that have junk credit ratings in the hope of quickly selling the debt to investors, including mutual funds, hedge funds and entities called collateralized loan obligations.Investors have been eager to buy up the debt obligations because their returns have been higher than those on less risky debt.Private equity firms have been huge users of leveraged loans. They finance their purchases of companies with the loans — and then put the debt on the balance sheet of the acquired company.After the crisis, bank regulators, concerned that the banks might stoke and then get hurt by excesses in the debt markets, have told the banks to avoid leveraged loan deals that would overburden companies with debt.But even within such constraints, the leveraged loan market has ballooned. Since the end of 2008, for instance, corporations have borrowed $4.6 trillion with leveraged loans, according to data from Thomson Reuters.But the market has lately begun to sag. So far this year, companies have borrowed some $700 billion in leveraged loans, compared with $940 billion for all of last year, according to Thomson Reuters.Fears about what a rise in rates might do to speculative markets are a reason investors have stepped back. At the same time, recent events have made them less keen on certain industry sectors within the market. The problems swirling around Valeant, a pharmaceutical company, have, for instance, dampened demand for loans issued by other drug companies.When demand dries up for leveraged loans and junk bonds, Wall Street traders know which banks are stuck with which debt. They also look at how far the prospective prices in the market have dropped for the debt the banks are holding.Banks build financial cushions into deals to protect themselves against losses. But on some deals, the prospective prices have fallen so far that they appear to have blown through those buffers, leaving the banks with paper losses that they in theory will reflect in their income statement and balance sheet. The losses could become permanent if the banks sold at the lower price.The estimate of $600 million in losses was attributed to several struggling deals by the market specialists, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the deals publicly.The debt taken on for Carlyle’s purchase of Veritas is a big source of pain right now.Morgan Stanley and Bank of America have taken a lead role in underwriting Veritas’s $5.5 billion debt package, which consists of both leveraged loans and junk bonds. Traders and bankers estimate that the losses on the Veritas deal, after taking the cushion into account, are about $250 million, or 4.5 percent of the deal total. Since lead banks underwrite around 20 percent of the deal, this analysis suggests that the three lead banks could each have around $50 million of paper losses on the Veritas debt.The losses may be smaller or larger depending on the terms of the deal.Other debt deals are also contributing to the potential losses.Some of the debt used by Apax Partners, a private equity firm, to take a controlling stake in Fullbeauty, an apparel company, was being offered to the market with as much as a 15 percent discount to its face value, according to a person briefed on the terms. Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase were among the underwriters on the deal.Lannett, which produces generic drugs, agreed to acquire specialty generic pharmaceutical company Kremers Urban for $1.23 billion, financed through debt and cash on hand. Morgan Stanley and RBC Capital Markets are serving as underwriters and may need to book losses, the people said, as Kremers lost an important customer while marketing the deal.Morgan Stanley and Credit Suisse are providing financing for Sterling Partners’ acquisition of eBay Enterprise from eBay, which is also experiencing difficulties, the people said. Belk, a department store chain in the South, agreed in August to be acquired by the private equity firm Sycamore Partners for $3 billion including debt. Its underwriters are also facing tough market dynamics, they said.Advertisement