By HIROKO TABUCHIJUNE 10, 2016
Toyota said on Friday that it had instructed its dealers to disclose which of its new cars still use airbags that may deteriorate over time and become prone to violent ruptures. And the automaker said it had instructed dealers to tell potential buyers about the issue.Last week, a Senate report highlighted the continued use of defective Takata airbags in new models sold by at least four automakers: Toyota, Volkswagen, Fiat Chrysler and Mitsubishi.Toyota and Fiat Chrysler had initially refused to name new models that contain airbags that are deemed especially risky, and will need to be recalled by 2018 under a plan laid out by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.Because the cars do not need to be recalled until then, automakers are technically not required to disclose that those cars contain the defective airbags.AdvertisementOn Thursday, Toyota identified those models as the 2016 Toyota 4Runner midsize sport utility vehicle and the Lexus GX 460 in its luxury line. But on Friday, a company spokeswoman, Cindy Knight, said that Toyota dealers would disclose information about the defective airbag to potential buyers of those models.AdvertisementToyota’s 2015 model year Lexus IS 250C and 350C luxury cars, its Scion xB compact, and the 2015-2016 Lexus GX 460 and Toyota 4Runner models, which may still remain in dealer inventories, also contain the defective Takata airbags, the automaker said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At least 13 deaths worldwide have been linked to the defective airbags. The defect has also been linked to more than 100 injuries, many of them critical. Fourteen automakers are recalling more than 60 million vehicles to fix the defect in the biggest and most complex recall in automotive history.The interior of the bags is sensitive to moisture, and over time it can become prone to deploying violently and rupturing, sending shards of metal flying toward the car’s occupants. The higher-risk airbags lack a drying agent that helps protect the interior from moisture.Regulators have emphasized, however, that the newer airbags do not pose an immediate threat, because it takes time for them to deteriorate.Chrysler has said just one new model contains the riskier airbag. On Friday, Eric Mayne, a company spokesman, again declined to disclose which model, and stressed that the cars were not yet under recall.Volkswagen earlier disclosed that its 2016 Volkswagen CC, and its Audi brand’s 2016 Audi TT and 2017 Audi R8 models contained the riskier Takata airbags. Mitsubishi said that the 2016 and 2017 model years of its i-MiEV electric vehicle contained the riskier airbags.A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Toyota Dealers to Disclose Faulty Airbags in New Cars.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.