AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Guy Hands, the founder of the private equity firm Terra Firma Capital Partners, abruptly abandoned his yearslong legal pursuit of Citigroup on Friday, a case in which he had claimed that the American banking giant misled him ahead of a deal to buy the music label EMI.The acquisition of EMI in 2007 turned out to be a disastrous one for Mr. Hands, damaging his reputation as a savvy investor after his clients lost all of their investment and personally costing him 200 million euros, or about $227 million, according to Mr. Hands.The storied music label, which counted the Beatles, Coldplay and Katy Perry among its artists over the years, was seized by its lenders in 2011 as it faced a crushing amount of debt. It was sold the following year to the Universal Music Group.Mr. Hands, who first took Citigroup to court in New York six years ago, had claimed that he was misled by Citigroup executives about the auction process ahead of the EMI sale and the bank’s view on the music group’s financial health as he moved to complete financing for the deal, which was valued at 4 billion pounds, or about $5.8 billion.At a special hearing in London on Friday, Terra Firma withdrew its fraud allegations against Citigroup and agreed to pay the bank’s court costs.“I’m sure this is the right result,” said Justice Michael Burton, the judge hearing the trial in London. “Perhaps it will mean the parties will work together in the future.”Mr. Hands spent two days on the stand being grilled by Citigroup’s lawyers, who called his memory “hazy” and questioned whether claims he filed against Charles O. Prince III, Citigroup’s former chief executive, were simply a “shakedown” to get the bank to settle.The claim against Mr. Prince was dropped ahead of trial, and Mr. Hands admitted on the stand that statements attributed to Mr. Prince in his complaint originally filed in Manchester were wrong and there was no proper basis for those claims to be filed.Terra Firma had been seeking the entirety of its investment, about £1.5 billion, as well as potential lost profits from other deals the firm might have made if it had not bought EMI.“These claims were brought in good faith,” Mr. Hands said in a statement on Friday. “However, it has become evident that our documentation of the fast-moving and complex events, and memories of these events after nine years, are no longer sufficient to meet the high demands of proof required for a fraud claim in court.”Mr. Hands, who had attended every day of the trial this week, was not in court when his legal team announced on Friday that the case was being withdrawn.“The matter is now closed,” Mr. Hands said. “Terra Firma is looking to the future.”Terra Firma declined to comment further.This is the second time he has pursued Citigroup, which was advising EMI and providing financing for the deal.A jury in Manhattan in 2010 found Citigroup not liable, but an appeals court later ordered a retrial. The parties eventually agreed to move the case to Britain.As he had in the New York case, Mr. Hands claimed he was misled by David Wormsley, Citigroup’s chairman of investment banking in Britain and a longtime banker to Mr. Hands, about plans by Cerberus Capital Management to offer a competing bid in an auction for EMI.Terra Firma ultimately was the only bidder in May 2007.Mr. Hands also claimed in his case in London that he was misled by two former Citigroup executives about the financial health of EMI: Michael Klein, Citigroup’s former head of global banking; and Chad Leat, then co-chief of Citigroup’s global credit markets.Mr. Hands had claimed Terra Firma agreed to inject £205 million in additional equity into the company after discussions with Citigroup executives ahead of securing financing for the transaction. Citi provided £2.5 billion in financing for the deal.“We have always maintained that the allegations made by Terra Firma were entirely baseless and that Citi, specifically David Wormsley, Michael Klein and Chad Leat, acted at all times with absolute honesty and professional integrity throughout the EMI transaction,” Citigroup said in a statement. “We are very pleased that Terra Firma has unreservedly withdrawn the allegations.”Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @ChadbrayAdvertisement