AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel VictorThe internet is full of bad people. This is not breaking news.But in the past week, the anti-Semitic corners of social media have received increased attention because of sustained harassment campaigns against journalists and other public figures and a highly visible effort to combat them by Twitter users.Jonathan Weisman, the deputy Washington editor at The New York Times, created a stir when he said Wednesday he would quit Twitter, where he had almost 35,000 followers. He was fatigued by a month’s worth of anti-Semitic messages and photos sent his way, an experience he wrote about in May.One of the Times' social media gurus went through the worst of the Nazi anti-Semites and forwarded them to @twitter..@twitter response: we see nothing here that violates our rules.So I will be moving to Facebook where at least people need to use their real names and can't hide behind fakery to spread their hate.Mr. Weisman said Thursday that he had left Twitter because he was frustrated that it allowed people to spew their hate anonymously and that jousting with the bigots had taken up too much of his time.“But I did feel like it should be brought to the public consciousness,” he said. “People should know this kind of hate is out there.”Mr. Weisman said Twitter suspended about 30 accounts shortly after he tweeted that he would be leaving.The anti-Semitic strain of trolls gained renewed attention after Mic, a news site, reported last week that neo-Nazis were using parentheses as a way to target social media users for harassment campaigns. When they suspected that a Twitter user was Jewish, they put parentheses around the target’s name, essentially inviting other anti-Semites to attack them.Soon afterward in a countercampaign, Jeffrey Goldberg, a national correspondent for The Atlantic, added the parentheses to his own name. That inspired Yair Rosenberg, a senior writer for Tablet Magazine, to suggest others do the same:Now, a wide swath of Twitter users, both Jews and gentiles, has also adopted the parentheses, hoping to spread awareness of the issue and make it more difficult to target individuals. In an interview, Mr. Rosenberg said it would also allow more people to see the parentheses and ask what they’re all about, turning anyone into a potential educator on anti-Semitism.He said the typical cycle of exposing bigotry — someone says a dumb thing, the target retweets it, other people get outraged — is a bit of a downer, and typically reaches people who are already aware that bigotry is bad. Instead, he prefers to mock the vile attacks he receives, hoping humor will help him find a wider audience and increase awareness.“The only thing you can do is mock it, and show these people: ‘You are outside our discourse,’ ” he said.Mr. Goldberg said that his skin had thickened over 25 years of receiving anti-Semitic threats and that he had reported a Twitter user only once, when he threatened his family. Most of the harassment he receives is, if nothing else, boring — he’s heard it all before, and trolls tend not to be overly creative with their insults.“It would bother me more if they used their real names, because that would be an indicator they believe that their positions are somewhere near socially acceptable,” he said Thursday.Twitter allows users to report other users for harassment and block them from communicating, and its policies explicitly prohibit hate speech, harassment and threats, but trolls often find their way around the barriers by creating new accounts. The company has been frequently criticized for being unresponsive or dismissive of complaints.Naturally, Jews are far from the only targets of abusive behavior. In April, a widely shared video showed men struggling to read the missives other men had sent to female sports reporters.At The Times, as at many other publications, journalists have denounced the insults and threats they’ve received, online and offline. Hiroko Tabuchi, a business reporter, said in May that Twitter took no action about an offensive tweet that she had flagged, while Amy Chozick, a political reporter, said this week that her harassment had spread to her phone line.Advertisement