By MICHAEL SCHUMANJUNE 9, 2016
TANGSHAN, China — The hulking, white-and-brown buildings of the Songting Iron & Steel Company stood silent one chilly February afternoon. The only signs of life came from the handful of guards at the compound’s gate, and from the disheveled middle-aged man who emerged to shout to the plant’s visitors, “Get lost!”Once one of the largest steel mills in this dreary industrial city, Songting had ceased production, a victim of China’s slowing economy. Its workers — many unpaid for months and worried about their future — were let go to fend for themselves, and steel works that can churn out five million metric tons a year had gone quiet.Three months later, the silence was broken. Trucks trundled between Songting’s buildings. Rows of cars were parked outside. Around the corner, smoke billowed from a tall chimney.Songting has risen from the dead — and that is bad news for China and the global economy.The mill’s story illustrates the challenge Beijing faces in overhauling the slowing Chinese economy. China desperately needs to eliminate unnecessary, unprofitable factories in many industries to shift the economy toward more productive businesses.The national government has repeatedly pledged to tackle the problem. In the steel industry alone, Chinese leaders announced plans this year to reduce the country’s steelmaking capacity by as much as 150 million metric tons by 2020 – an amount larger than the entire industry in Japan.AdvertisementBut as Songting shows, closing even the most troubled plants can prove problematic.At a local level, Communist Party cadres and businessmen sometimes keep unwanted steel mills and other factories operating to preserve financial and social stability. Steel mills are large employers, and closings can cause widespread layoffs. China’s plan would throw an estimated 500,000 steelworkers out their jobs.AdvertisementBeijing hopes that the workers laid off from excess steel mills and other bloated factories will find new employment in healthier sectors of the economy, especially in services. But several Songting workers — who spoke on the condition that their names not be revealed because they hoped to be rehired — complained that they could find few jobs in a region dominated by stumbling heavy industry. Many quickly fell on hard times, and some even resorted to public protests — exactly the social instability Chinese officials fear most.Concerns about labor unrest, combined with worries that closing factories will saddle China’s big banks with bad debt, have slowed factory closures. By one estimate, China permanently shut less than 2 percent of its total steelmaking capacity last year, a period when roughly one-third of that capacity went unused.“There is no concrete policy or plan that can resolve these problems in the near term,” says Laura Zhai, a director at rating agency Fitch in Hong Kong. “The capacity elimination is not going to happen right away.”Stubborn steel capacity is also causing friction with Washington. Both the United States and the European Union are up in arms over a flood of cheap steel pouring into global markets from excess Chinese factories. In response, Washington has slapped steep tariffs on some Chinese steel imports.“Implementing policies to substantially reduce production in a range of sectors suffering from overcapacity, including steel and aluminum, is critical to the function and stability of international markets,” the United States Treasury secretary, Jacob J. Lew, said during a Beijing visit this week.Songting — which employed about 6,000 workers, according to the local government’s website — was among the larger, privately owned mills in town. But with construction of new homes and infrastructure in the doldrums, prices of steel plunged, and Songting, along with the entire industry, began to suffer. Workers say they stopped receiving regular paychecks in early 2015. A section of the plant was idled for part of the year, and management began laying off staff.One of the unfortunate was C. F. Shi, 45, who worked in Songting’s factory for 21 years and asked that her full name not be used. One morning last September, she arrived at the plant to find her boss dropping folded slips of paper into a box. As the box was passed around the room, each worker had to draw a slip, and only those who selected one with a mark on the inside could stay on the job.AdvertisementMs. Shi lost out in the lottery and got sent home, without five months of unpaid wages or severance. She was distraught. “I even thought of trying to hang myself,” she said.On the morning of Nov. 14, as the workers assembled at their posts as usual, managers informed them that the factory was shutting down indefinitely. According to a December report from HSBC, the money-losing mill was forced to suspend production after it was unable to pay a fee owed to the local power supply bureau.Some employees began demanding their paychecks, according to workers who were there. By that point, Songting owed them about six months of wages. Fifteen workers climbed to the roof of one company building and threatened to jump as hundreds of horrified staff looked on below, said one worker.In desperation, hundreds of Songting workers held a protest in November outside a local government office demanding their unpaid salaries, workers said, but to no avail. With few local job options, some of the laid-off employees quickly tumbled into destitution.Ms. Shi and her husband, who had also lost his job at Songting, were unable to find steady work, leaving her scrimping to support her two young children in a drafty concrete house not far from Songting’s plant. She and her husband sometimes had nothing to eat but cabbage.“We don’t even have the basic requirements for life,” Ms. Shi said.Starting in late February, some workers began getting calls from their former managers asking them to return. Part of the plant, they were told, was going to start production again.The reason was not clear. Industry experts say other owners have restarted factories to generate cash. A recent jump in steel prices widely attributed to a new Chinese lending binge and a pickup in construction activity has also encouraged factory owners.Maintaining jobs is a major consideration as well, said Xu Xiangchun, chief information officer at Chinese research firm Mysteel. “The employment problem is the biggest problem for the government and the enterprises,” he said. “So the companies adopt various measures to activate capital and to give workers jobs.”AdvertisementThe industry’s woes are far from over. Fitch, the bond-rating firm, estimates that the industry may be saddled with as much as $600 billion in debt. That burden, combined with low prices and sagging demand, has moved the steel sector into the red. The China Iron and Steel Association said that its members lost a combined $9.8 billion last year, compared with a combined profit of $3.4 billion in 2014.“Even if there is no government push, the market conditions will drive out more capacity,” said Rachel Zhang, a steel analyst at Morgan Stanley. “It is just a matter of time.”Because Songting is a private company, it does not disclose financial details. The company declined requests for comment.Its workers are simply happy to have their jobs back. Ms. Shi returned to her old job in late April, just as the mill started operating again, though at a reduced salary. She still worries about what might come, but for now, she hopes her fortunes will revive with Songting’s. “At least the living standard of my two kids has improved,” she said.Zhang Tiantian in Beijing contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on June 10, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Mill, Back From the Dead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.