AdvertisementSupported byBy Paul MozurHONG KONG — Line, the Japanese messaging mobile app service, may want to rethink its bear mascot. A bull might be more appropriate.The company, which is famous across Asia for its use of cute, animated emoticons it calls stickers, is seeking to raise about $1 billion in listings in New York and Tokyo next month, according to a filing on Friday. That would value Line at more than $5 billion, which could make it the biggest market debut for a technology company so far this year.Line, which is owned by the South Korean online portal Naver, will be tapping capital markets at a time when tech start-ups have had increasing difficulty raising funds from investors. But with more than $300 million in revenue, and the backing of a major South Korean internet company, Line stands out from private start-ups that may seek to raise funds by listing in the coming years.Line also lets people share images and make voice calls. It makes money by selling stickers of characters like Brown, its poker-faced ursine mascot, and through video games and conventional advertising.Like other Asian rivals, Line allows celebrities and brands to host official accounts to engage with users over social media. More recently, it has added ride-hailing and online payments to increase its sources of revenue.Line, which has more than 200 million users, is the messaging mainstay in Japan, the third-largest economy in the world, after the United States and China. It has been competing with the likes of WhatsApp, owned by Facebook, and WeChat, owned by Tencent of China, to draw smartphone users in markets across Asia. About half of its users come from outside Japan, mostly in Indonesia, Taiwan and Thailand.The company’s revenue has grown steadily in recent quarters.With the new round of fund-raising, Line will most likely continue to push into new markets, and also to expand services like payments.Still, the company faces competition from numerous messaging competitors, many of which have holds over important markets or demographics.So extreme is the competition that Line does not dominate in South Korea, even though its parent, Naver, is well established there. Kakao Talk prevails instead. In China, WeChat is the most popular app.Line has signaled that it intends to do more to compete in markets like the United States, where it also faces rivals like Facebook Messenger and Snapchat.Follow Paul Mozur on Twitter @paulmozur. Hisako Ueno contributed research from Tokyo.Advertisement