
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

JUNE 9, 2016
A supposedly ironclad $22 billion pipeline deal is showing some cracks. The Williams Companies said on Wednesday that it expected to cut its dividend if its sale to its rival, Energy Transfer Equity, fell through. Despite Energy Transfer’s attempts to renegotiate or wriggle out of the merger, Williams has held firm until now. The payout warning may be a tactic, but the target now seems to be admitting the possibility of failure.Energy Transfer in September agreed to acquire Williams for what was originally a $33 billion cash and stock deal. That was before the sustained slump in oil prices savaged the stock prices of both companies, raising questions about the deal’s financial logic and the debt Energy Transfer is taking on to finance the transaction.With no easy way out in the fine print of the merger agreement, Energy Transfer has turned to unorthodox methods to encourage Williams and its shareholders to reconsider. It slashed by 90 percent its estimate of the financial benefits of the merger, began a dilutive private share placement and warned of big job cuts in Williams’s hometown, Tulsa, Okla.Last month, Energy Transfer said that problems securing a tax opinion from its lawyers meant it might not be able to complete the transaction by a June 28 deadline. While Williams may be open to modifying the deal terms, it has filed a lawsuit to stop Energy Transfer from using the tax issue as an excuse to abandon the merger.Shareholders are skeptical. They valued Williams’s equity at just over $17 billion on Thursday — a more than 20 percent discount to the value of Energy Transfer’s offer. Yet even as it flagged the threat to the payouts its investors receive, Williams said it was committed to closing the deal as soon as possible after a scheduled June 27 shareholder vote.The warning may be intended simply to persuade undecided owners. The Williams board may also be acting out of an abundance of caution, given the rising probability that the merger’s fate ends up being decided in court. Either way, it suggests the possibility that a once watertight deal has developed a stress fracture.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »