By KATIE THOMASJUNE 10, 2016
Jonathan Roper, once a sales manager at Insys Therapeutics, a small pharmaceutical company, had a problem. The end of the quarter was near, and for the first time, Insys was in danger of missing sales goals for its only product, a spray called Subsys that contains the powerful painkiller fentanyl.So Mr. Roper sent out a blistering email to his staff members at the time, in March 2014, urging them to make a final push. “There is no excuse for any of your docs to not take care of you at this crucial time of the quarter,” he wrote. It’s time, he said, for the top-prescribing doctors “to give back for all of the hard work, long days and late nights you have spoiled them with.”Mr. Roper and a former sales representative, Fernando Serrano, were arrested on Thursday on federal anti-kickback charges, accused of paying thousands of dollars to doctors to participate in what federal prosecutors described as “sham” educational programs in exchange for prescribing millions of dollars worth of fentanyl. Criminal charges against drug company employees are unusual, legal experts said, underscoring the sordid nature of the case and its connection with fentanyl, which is frequently abused and can lead to deadly overdoses if inappropriately prescribed.The federal indictment, which quotes Mr. Roper’s emails, does not mention Insys by name. But other details in the document — including when the drug was approved and its annual sales in 2015 — make it clear that Insys, based in Arizona, is the company in question. Insys has previously disclosed that it is under federal investigation for its sales and marketing practices. Last year, a nurse pleaded guilty to federal charges of accepting kickbacks from the company.AdvertisementFederal prosecutors say that the case is particularly egregious because it involves inappropriate marketing of fentanyl, a drug that is 100 times more potent than morphine and abuse of which has been skyrocketing in the United States. Fentanyl is the drug that the musician Prince accidentally overdosed on, killing him, although it is not clear what form he took. Fentanyl is a generic drug and is sold in many forms. The version sold by Insys is for cancer patients.Advertisement“Fentanyl is an incredibly dangerous and highly addictive drug that is finding its way into, and destroying, too many lives in our communities,” Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, said in a statement. “As alleged, Roper and Serrano helped feed this devastating surge of opioid addictions by tapping into another age-old addiction, greed.”A spokeswoman for Insys, Lisa Wilson, says the company holds its employees to standards that require they comply with the law. “Insys is committed to working with health care providers, patients and other stakeholders in the health care community to help ensure the proper prescribing and use of our product,” she said.A lawyer for Mr. Roper, 37, of Commack, N.Y., declined to comment. A lawyer for Mr. Serrano, 30, of Manalapan, N.J., did not return a call. It is unclear why the two employees left the company.In the indictment, filed in the Southern District in Manhattan, prosecutors said that doctors were paid as much as $3,000 per speaking engagement and that the events were held in fancy restaurants. Rather than inviting doctors who were new to using the product, the guests were often friends of the speakers, or were doctors who had already attended similar events and were unlikely to learn anything new. Sign-in sheets contained signatures that were forged to make the events look legitimate, the prosecutors said.After the dinners, the doctors and sales representatives sometimes left for a strip club, where the doctors were not asked to pay a cover charge or for their drinks. Instead, they were entertained at a reserved table with bottles of liquor, according to the indictments.But all of this attention did not come free, prosecutors argued: Mr. Roper and Mr. Serrano expected that the doctors would return the favor by prescribing more Subsys.One top speaker, according to Mr. Roper’s indictment, was paid $147,245 in speaking fees in 2014 and accounted for about $1.2 million in prescriptions of Subsys that were reimbursed through Medicare. Another doctor singled out in the complaint was paid $112,340 in speaking fees in 2014 and prescribed $1.4 million worth of Subsys that was paid for by Medicare, according to the indictment. The doctors were not named in the indictment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Approved in 2012, Subsys is a form of fentanyl that is sprayed under the tongue and is approved for use only in patients who have cancer and experience pain even though they are already on round-the-clock painkillers. Fentanyl can be deadly if it is prescribed in large doses to someone who has not already become tolerant to opioids.AdvertisementDespite the drug’s tight restrictions, sales of Subsys have been strong, taking in $330 million in 2015. Although Insys was an early favorite with Wall Street, it has struggled as it has faced questions about its marketing practices. Its stock is down more than 50 percent in the last year, and fell more than 12 percent on Friday alone.In 2014, an analysis by the research firm Symphony Health found that just 1 percent of prescriptions for Subsys were from oncologists, those who would be most likely to treat cancer patients. Doctors who prescribe Subsys must take a test that proves they understand the drug’s risks. But according to the indictment on Thursday, Mr. Roper gave a doctor answers to the test questions.Drug companies have paid billions of dollars in fines in recent years to settle allegations that they improperly marketed their drugs. This case has unfolded in an unusual way: prosecutors pursuing criminal charges against various people.In 2014, a Michigan neurologist was arrested after federal prosecutors said he defrauded Medicare of $7 million and improperly prescribed Subsys. Last year, a nurse at a Connecticut pain clinic who pleaded guilty for receiving $83,000 in kickbacks from Insys acknowledged that the money influenced the prescribing of the drug. The nurse, who was authorized to prescribe medication, was responsible for more than $1 million in Medicare claims and was the highest prescriber of Subsys in Connecticut.“We’re not talking about acne cream here,” said Patrick Burns, the executive director of Taxpayers Against Fraud, an advocacy group for whistle-blowers. “We’re talking about one of the most addictive substances known to man, that puts people in a box on a daily basis.”He predicted that further action against Insys was likely. “I suspect that they are zeroing in on their scope in order to go for a larger corporate hunt,” he said.Agustin Armendariz contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Charges of Kickbacks at Drug Maker.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.