By JOHN HERRMANJUNE 10, 2016
The Gawker Media Group is up for sale. The question now is not just who will buy it, but what exactly they will be paying for.The company on Friday filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy and announced the beginning of an auction process to sell itself. The decision came after a year of escalating controversies and setbacks at Gawker, culminating in a $140 million legal judgment in a lawsuit by Hulk Hogan and the revelation that the suit had received financial support from the Silicon Valley billionaire Peter Thiel.But while company’s public image — and troubles — have centered around its aggressive and boundary-testing flagship news site, Gawker.com, potential buyers may be interested in a less visible part of its business: e-commerce.In recent years, Gawker Media has tried to build up its e-commerce revenue — earned from lucrative commissions taken from referrals to sites like Amazon — as a hedge against an increasingly uncertain online news environment, in which platforms like Google and Facebook take ever-larger shares of advertising revenue.AdvertisementIn this alternative view of Gawker, its Lifehacker service site, or Kotaku, a video game site, are seen not just as publications. With audiences presorted by interests and demographics, they also become prime venues for product recommendations and affiliate links. In that way, they resemble something between news sites and Gawker’s commerce-centric blog, Kinja Deals. (Sample headline: “The New King Of the Coffee Makers Is On Sale Today.”)AdvertisementGenerating more revenue through e-commerce was a strategy the company adopted several years ago as a way to maintain financial independence, in contrast to competitors who were backed by venture capital. In 2014, the company was already generating around $10 million from consumer transactions; in an interview in April, Gawker’s founder, Nick Denton, claimed that e-commerce revenue “now covers our editorial spending.”But while that kind of revenue was growing, Gawker Media’s commerce plans never fully came to fruition. The effort was hindered by an obsessive focus on developing Kinja, the company’s internal content management and commenting system, as well as the creation of numerous subsites with distinct brands, according to a person briefed on the company’s financial situation who spoke on condition of anonymity.Now, with financial independence off the table, Gawker Media’s e-commerce operation may nonetheless play an outsize role in determining the company’s fate. Vivek Shah, the chief executive of Ziff Davis, a technology publisher that entered a first bid for the company — reportedly between $90 million and $100 million — wrote in a memo to staff that “like us, GMG is heavily active in driving commerce-based revenues, and has an impressive publishing and commerce platform with Kinja.”Mr. Denton also referred to the consumer component in his own announcement.While affirming his site’s commitment to “telling the true stories that underpin credibility with our millions of readers,’’ he also wrote, “a combination would marry Ziff Davis’ strength in e-commerce, licensing and video with GMG’s premium media brands.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ziff Davis, a major presence in the pre-blog technology and gaming press, filed for bankruptcy itself in 2008, and is now, in a substantially different form, a subsidiary of the internet services and publishing conglomerate j2 Global. The company’s interest in a deal was fueled by Gawker’s portfolio of tech, lifestyle and gaming sites that together, through e-commerce and advertising, make up 85 percent of Gawker Media’s total revenue, according to another person briefed on the finances.If it was difficult to imagine Gawker Media, the persistently antagonistic outsider, as part of a larger and more risk-averse company, Mr. Shah’s memo provided some clues.“The additions of Gizmodo, Lifehacker and Kotaku would fortify our position in consumer tech and gaming,” Mr. Shah wrote in his memo. “With the addition of Jalopnik, Deadspin and Jezebel, we would broaden our position as a lifestyle publisher.”The memo did not mention Gawker.Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting from San Francisco.A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Suitors Home In on Gawker’s E-Commerce Potential.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.