AdvertisementSupported byBy Stanley ReedAs it looks to navigate a period of more modest energy prices, BP said on Friday that it would merge its oil and gas operations in Norway with Det norske, a Norwegian exploration and development company.The deal, with the much smaller oil company controlled by the Norwegian industrial giant Aker, appears to be a way for BP to slim down while keeping a hand in Norway, a major oil and gas producing nation. The new company, to be called Aker BP, will also use its heft to take advantage of a weak energy environment to make targeted acquisitions.“BP needs, in this hypercompetitive world, to think about different commercial models in different places,” Robert Dudley, the British company’s chief executive, told analysts on Friday during a conference call.BP operates five oil and gas fields in Norwegian waters. There is the potential to expand some of these fields and extend their lives by finding new, usually smaller, oil and gas deposits around them and by tying them into existing platforms.But more efficient operations are required to make such opportunities profitable. Royal Dutch Shell recently said that it might exit operations in up to 10 countries where its oil and gas operations were too small to make financial sense.Oil giants like BP and Royal Dutch Shell acknowledge that smaller companies are often better at operating existing fields.Over the last two and a half years, the oil industry experienced its deepest downturn since at least the 1990s.In 2003, for example, Apache, a midsize company based in Houston, acquired part of the once-impressive Forties Oil Field in the North Sea from BP, where production had fallen more than 90 percent from peak levels. Apache has made a success of the deal, raising production about 20 percent.Analysts said BP, whose production would probably have otherwise declined in Norway, had found a low-risk way to try to bolster a weak business. “The transaction strengthens BP’s position in Norway, where it has long been underweight,” analysts at Bernstein Research in London wrote in a note to clients on Friday.BP’s exploration and production chief, Bernard Looney, said on the analysts’ call that Det norske’s lean approach would benefit the oil giant. The two sides expect the combined company, which now produces about 122,000 barrels a day, to double its output by the early 2020s.Mr. Dudley suggested that other deals might be in the offing. He has already created a separate subsidiary to operate BP’s shale oil and gas business in the United States.Like other oil companies, BP is under pressure to bring costs in line with the sharply reduced revenue resulting from lower oil prices, which are now in the range of $50 a barrel. In the first quarter of this year, BP lost $1.2 billion on its once-lucrative oil and gas exploration and production operations.BP has led the oil majors in selling assets because it also needed cash to pay for liabilities from its Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010. The oil giant has raised $60 billion through disposals in recent years.Under the deal announced on Friday, BP would have a 30 percent shareholding in the Oslo-listed Aker BP and receive $140 million in cash. Aker would have a 40 percent stake, and the other shareholders 30 percent.Advertisement