AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaViacom’s chief executive, Philippe P. Dauman, proving he may be the world’s highest-paid indentured servant, is defying his boss.At an investor conference, Mr. Dauman said Viacom, the American media company, is moving ahead with plans to sell 49 percent of its movie studio, Paramount Pictures, over the objections of Viacom’s controlling shareholder, Sumner Redstone. Abrupt changes to Viacom’s bylaws directly related to the auction underscore how acrimonious the drama has become. The dispute is a red flag for any buyer considering wading into the morass.Mr. Dauman was replaced last month as a trustee overseeing Mr. Redstone’s business interests when Mr. Redstone, the 93-year-old chairman emeritus of Viacom, dies. Mr. Redstone cited the Paramount sale as one reason for the decision. He bested his rival, the media mogul Barry Diller, in a $10 billion battle for Paramount two decades ago. Granted, the mental state of Mr. Redstone is unclear. A transcript from his court testimony in May suggested an ailing man, at turns fiery and grasping for responses.Mr. Dauman, in speaking to investors, has acknowledged his long history with Mr. Redstone — he referred to him as his “great friend” — and the sensitivities involving the studio. (He has been paid richly for his tenure of 30 years, making $54 million in compensation last year.) Partnering, however, with a Hollywood-minded investor could strengthen distribution and, he argues, unlock a $4 billion windfall, worth $10 a share, for the company, which also operates the MTV and Nickelodeon cable channels.Shareholders might like some help with Paramount. It was ranked a dismal sixth last year in box-office sales. “Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows” is its latest flop. Mr. Redstone’s unusual move to change bylaws — the board must unanimously approve a partial or full sale of the studio — complicates things further. Until this family matter is resolved, only a foolhardy investor would dare scale the rock of Paramount.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement