
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
JUNE 10, 2016
This interview with Soledad O’Brien, chief executive of the Starfish Media Group, a production company, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were your early years like?A. I grew up on Long Island, in a small town that was somewhat rural back then. I have five brothers and sisters, and I’m No. 5, and my parents were both immigrants. My dad’s Australian and my mom is Cuban, and my mom’s black and my dad’s white. That framed a lot of my thinking about the work that I would do in my career, and also how I think about big American issues.I did a lot of after-school activities: student council, Rotary Club, track, the badminton team. We didn’t have a lot that you could do otherwise, so if you didn’t push yourself to go do something, you just couldn’t do it. There was no sitter who schlepped you to ballet classes and then made sure that your interest in art was being nurtured.Because we were middle class, there was not a ton of money. So if there was something I wanted, then I’d have to be able to pay for it. When I was about 13, I wanted to ride horses, and I got a job mucking stalls so I could pay for riding lessons.AdvertisementHelping kids figure out how to make things happen on their own is just good strategy anyway. But I think if you want your kids to be entrepreneurial, it’s probably critical.Tell me more about your parents.My dad was a professor of mechanical engineering, and my mom taught Spanish and French at the local high school. They were the kind of people you’d turn to for really good advice.I remember when I first had kids and I was working, and I just was completely overwhelmed. My mother used to say: “You can always quit tomorrow. Just try to get through the day.” The point was to never quit when you’re in the throes of feeling terrible, and you should take a bit of time to get some perspective. I’ve given that advice to so many people.They were of the era when people thought that, at the end of the day, hard work wins out. And so I grew up on that idea. If you’re going to do something, do it well. If you’re going to plant tomatoes in the garden, my parents would make sure they looked good. They just never did anything halfway.What were some leadership lessons you learned during your years in TV news?When I was at CNN, I worked under five different news presidents over a period of about six years. It was the most chaotic time I’d ever experienced in a corporate workplace. How do you carve out a niche in an environment that is changing all the time?AdvertisementWhat I learned there was that you have to go back to the basics of thinking, “Here is what I do well, and I am going to make sure that everything I touch is good and solid.”Is this your first management role?Yes. When you’re an anchor, you don’t really manage people. You manage the ideas. So it was a real challenge when I started this company three years ago, because this was really the first time I was fully and utterly responsible for managing a team.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was a very steep learning curve, mostly because there was not a lot of overlap between the kind of journalism I was doing and running a business. A key insight for me was that if you want good feedback from people, you have to create an environment where people want to come and tell you things. But I had no concrete idea of how to do that.Another challenge was that I was successful in my previous role because I really worked hard and took a lot of responsibility for making things good. But that’s not actually a great skill for being a boss. The job of the boss is to help other people reach their goals and their dreams.The area where I’ve grown the most is that I am good at making decisions in the macro and helping other people make the decisions in the micro.The broader learning curve has been exciting, but while you’re in it, it’s also kind of annoying. It felt like a slog. At what point will I actually grow into this job, because I have the title? At what point will I actually be making decisions like someone who is the C.E.O. of the company? I would say it took a solid year before I felt good about it.How do you hire?You hire for character and teach people skills. And environment is very important to me. It’s important to me that people aren’t unpleasant and that they treat each other respectfully. It’s hard to be creative when there’s someone or something that’s really irking you.So are you a person of integrity who makes the environment a really nice space? I will watch how they treat the person at the front desk versus me. We have people spend time with other people who they think wouldn’t necessarily be assessing them for a job.I also think there are two qualities you can’t teach people. You have to want to understand something, and I don’t think you can teach people to be curious. You can interest people in a topic and they become curious, but I think you’re born interested in things or you’re not.And I’m obsessed with attention to detail. I don’t know that you can teach that — either that triggers you to stay for the next two hours to fix something, or you’re the kind of person who will just let it slide.AdvertisementWhat advice do you give to new college grads?It goes back to what my parents always said. I think hard work does get you really far. And treating people well gets you really far — farther than I think it gets credit for in the greater world.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on June 12, 2016, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Seek Out the Curious and the Fastidious.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »