AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.26 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.41 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.19 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:  Chesterfield County, Va., $90.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Memphis, $68 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Union County, N.J., $63 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Frederick County, Md., $90 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Chesterfield County Water and Sewer, Va., $56 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Illinois, $550 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Monroe, N.Y., $55.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Orange County, Fla., $63.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Alameda County, Calif., Peralta Community College District, $155 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.California Infrastructure and Economic Development Bank, $138.4 million of revolving fund revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.California, Lancaster Successor Agency, $51.8 million of redevelopment project refinancing bonds. Hilltop Securities.California, Santa Cruz County Redevelopment, $47.6 million of tax allocation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Connecticut, South Central Connecticut Regional Water Authority, $123.5 million of water system revenue bonds. Janney Montgomery Scott.Cook County, Ill., $300 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Dutchess County, N.Y., Local Development Corporation, $378 million of health systems project revenue refinancing bonds, Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Idaho Health Facilities Authority, $45 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Idaho, Red River Educational Health Facilities, $74.7 million of revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.Indiana, Hobart Building Corporation, $67.2 million of mortgage refinancing bonds. City Securities Corporation.Maryland Economic Development Corporation, $333 million of light rail project revenue bonds, J. P. Morgan Securities.Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority, $375 million of system revenue refinancing bonds, J. P. Morgan Securities.New Jersey, Housing Authority of the City of Newark, $57 million of police facility revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.New York State Environmental Facilities Corporation, $497.5 million of clean water and drinking water revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Oregon, Klamath Intercommunity Hospital Authority, $50 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Rhode Island Commerce Corporation, $42.3 million of airport revenue bonds. Raymond James & Associates.Snohomish County, Wash., Lake Stevens School District, $70.5 million of general obligation bonds. D. A. Davidson.Spokane, Wash., Central Valley School District, $40.5 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds.Texas, Arlington Higher Education Finance Corporation, $43.2 million of education revenue bonds. Robert W. Baird.Texas, Waco Independent School District, $48.5 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Oppenheimer.Tucson, Ariz., $44 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Utah County, Utah, $57.3 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Utah, Jordan Valley Water Conservancy, $64.3 million of water revenue bonds. George K. Baum.Advertisement