AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — Blue Coat Systems seemed poised to begin life as a public company, after selling itself to a private equity firm last year.Now, the cybersecurity software company plans to sell itself to Symantec instead.Blue Coat said late on Sunday that it would sell itself to Symantec for $4.65 billion. As part of the deal, Blue Coat’s chief executive, Greg Clark, will take over as the chief executive of the combined security software maker.To help finance the transaction, Blue Coat’s existing majority investor, Bain Capital, will invest an additional $750 million in the deal. The private equity firm Silver Lake, which invested $500 million in Symantec in February, will invest an additional $500 million.The deal will create a big provider of security products, both the traditional antivirus kind that has long been Symantec’s focus and the newer online protection services in which Blue Coat has specialized. Executives see little overlap between the two businesses.“With this transaction, we will have the scale, portfolio and resources necessary to usher in a new era of innovation designed to help protect large customers and individual consumers against insider threats and sophisticated cybercriminals,” Dan Schulman, Symantec’s chairman, said in a statement.In selling itself to Symantec, Blue Coat will abandon its effort to go public, after having filed plans to do so earlier this month. Many companies weighing an initial public offering also run a private sales process, choosing to sell themselves if they receive an attractive enough offer. While Blue Coat did not formally put itself up for sale, it received interest from a number of potential buyers, and held talks primarily with Symantec.“Once combined, we will offer customers around the world — from large enterprises and governments to individual consumers — unrivaled threat protection and unmatched cloud security,” Mr. Clark said in a statement.Blue Coat has had a number of private equity owners in recent years, including both Bain Capital and, before that, Thoma Bravo.In its I.P.O. prospectus, Blue Coat said that it lost $289 million on top of $598 million in sales for the 12 months that ended on April 30. That compares with a $271 million loss on top of nearly $569 million in sales for the same period a year before.But the company has sought to grow itself under Bain Capital, having made a number of acquisitions to bolster its capabilities.“This represented a compelling opportunity for us because we could realize some gains for our investors but also reinvest into the combined company,” said David Humphrey, a managing director at Bain Capital. “We believe very much in the industrial logic and strategic rationale of this transaction.”Symantec, meanwhile, has sought to turn around its fortunes after years of declining sales. Earlier this year, it sold its Veritas data storage unit to the Carlyle Group for $7.4 billion after failing to fully integrate that business into its core offerings.The acquisition of Blue Coat is in some ways a move out of the playbook of Silver Lake. The investment firm previously took a stake in the publicly traded chip maker Avago — and then supported that company through a string of acquisitions, culminating in a $37 billion takeover of Broadcom last year.Roughly two months after Silver Lake came on board as an investor in Symantec, the software maker’s chief executive at the time, Michael Brown, stepped down amid disappointing financial performances.Symantec then hired Ajei Gopal, a Silver Lake operating partner, as interim president and chief operating officer, as it embarked on a series of cost cuts. The company had also begun to look for a new chief executive, and Mr. Clark of Blue Coat emerged as a candidate.Silver Lake’s investment in Symantec back in February anticipated a transaction like the Blue Coat deal, with the firm setting itself up to provide additional financing if Symantec were to pursue a deal that needed private equity help. And Silver Lake believes that other, smaller acquisitions may be in the offing for the security software provider in the future.“Silver Lake has had a history of trying to invest in and catalyze leaders in important categories in technology,” Ken Hao, the Silver Lake managing partner who sits on Symantec’s board, said in an interview. “Symantec will become the most valuable, profitable and deepest, widest leader in cybersecurity.”Symantec received financial advice from JPMorgan Chase, Barclays, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Citigroup and Wells Fargo. It took legal counsel from Fenwick & West and Simpson Thacher & Bartlett.Blue Coat received financial advice from Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and Credit Suisse, and legal counsel from Ropes & Gray and Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati.Advertisement