AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesHere’s a look at the week ahead:TECHNOLOGYApple will hold its annual conference for software developers on Monday, previewing new features that will be in the next version of the operating systems powering its devices. Sales of Apple’s biggest product, the iPhone, are slowing, and there has been little in recent months to excite consumers. The company is likely to show off a new version of Apple Music, its streaming music subscription service, and new photo-editing features.Apple is also trying to improve its sometimes testy relationship with developers. One big announcement geared to that crowd: Developers will be able to use Siri, the company’s voice-activated digital assistant, within their apps. Developers are also expecting the company to finally offer Apple Pay to online retailers as a checkout method for their websites. The digital payment service is currently restricted to physical stores and apps, where it has gotten a lukewarm response. But the ability to pay on the web with a thumbprint would be more convenient, which could drive wider use. Vindu GoelBANKING INDUSTRYThe Libyan Investment Authority, the country’s sovereign wealth fund, is expected to square off against Goldman Sachs in a London court beginning on Monday in a dispute over $1.2 billion in derivative transactions it purchased in 2008. In its lawsuit, the Libyan fund claims that the transactions were rendered worthless during the financial crisis, but Goldman still earned $350 million in profit on the transactions. Chad BrayTECHNOLOGYThe Electronic Entertainment Expo, or E3, video game convention in Los Angeles is usually the most cacophonous of trade shows, where lots of earsplitting new games debut. But the event that begins on Tuesday will be a little less deafening than normal. Major game publishers like Activision and Electronic Arts have decided not to exhibit on the show floor this year; instead, Electronic Arts held its own expo nearby on Sunday. Nintendo has already told fans not to expect to see its next-generation game console, code-named NX, at E3. Still, Sony and Microsoft are likely to get gamers buzzing on Monday when they hold events showcasing the games coming to their consoles. Analysts are also expecting the companies to announce updated versions of their existing consoles, the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One. Nick WingfieldRETAIL INDUSTRYRetail sales data for the United States, due on Tuesday, is expected to show a rise in consumer spending for May. Still, it probably will not be as robust as that in April, when spending rose to the highest levels in more than a year. Rachel AbramsMARKETSFinancial policy makers in China will be hoping their languid stock markets get a vote of confidence on Wednesday (Tuesday evening in New York), when a decision on whether to include domestic Chinese shares in a major global stock index is to be announced. The MSCI emerging markets index, a benchmark tracked by hundreds of billions of dollars in investment funds around the world, is set to announce the results of an annual review on whether to include stocks listed in Shanghai and Shenzhen for the first time. Even though it is the world’s second-biggest by market value, China’s domestic share market remains only partly open to foreign investors, and values have remained depressed since the government bungled a stock bailout attempt last summer. Neil GoughECONOMYFederal Reserve officials drained much of the drama from their scheduled meeting on Tuesday and Wednesday by making clear in recent days they were once again postponing any increase in the Fed’s benchmark interest rate. But there still will be substance: In addition to the post-meeting policy statement, the Fed will release a fresh batch of economic projections, and the Fed’s chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, is scheduled to hold a news conference on Wednesday afternoon. The looming question is whether the Fed will raise rates this summer. The Fed’s next scheduled meetings are in July and September. Fed officials are likely to debate whether the recent slowdown in job growth indicates that their mission of restoring the health of the labor market is largely accomplished, or a more worrisome sign of fresh economic weakness. Binyamin Appelbaum On Wednesday, at 9:15 a.m., the Federal Reserve will report data for industrial production in May. After industrial production rose 0.7 percent in April, economists are expecting to see a slight decline for last month, with the sector facing headwinds from depressed mining and drilling, lagging overseas demand for manufactured goods and adverse weather in some parts of the United States. Nelson D. Schwartz On Thursday, at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department will release data on consumer prices in May. Economists are expecting to see a 0.3 percent increase in overall consumer prices, with a 0.2 percent rise in the less volatile core Consumer Price Index. Inflation remains tame, with a likely increase in May driven, in part, by higher gasoline prices. Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisement