By CHRISTINE HAUSERNOV. 19, 2015
Jared Fogle, the former pitchman for the Subway sandwich chain, was sentenced on Thursday to more than 15 years in prison after pleading guilty to sex acts with minors and distribution of child pornography.Appearing before Judge Tanya Walton Pratt in Federal District Court in Indianapolis, Mr. Fogle was given a term of 188 months, said Timothy Horty, a spokesman for the United States attorney’s office. He must also pay a $175,000 fine.Mr. Fogle, who had been free on bail before the sentencing, was taken into custody afterward.Mr. Fogle, 38, gained fame after losing more than 200 pounds by eating Subway sandwiches and exercising. He first appeared in ads for Subway in 2000 and founded a nonprofit organization, the Jared Foundation, in 2004 to combat childhood obesity.In July, investigators raided Mr. Fogle’s home in the Indianapolis suburbs after he was linked to a child pornography case involving the former executive director of the foundation, Russell C. Taylor.AdvertisementMr. Taylor was charged in May with producing and possessing child pornography. Acting on a tip, the authorities found more than 400 videos of child pornography in Mr. Taylor’s home office in Indianapolis.AdvertisementThe United States attorney in Indianapolis, Josh J. Minkler, said in a statement after the court decision that the judge had rejected a plea by Mr. Fogle for a five-year sentence.The statement noted that Mr. Fogle knew that the children in the homemade images or videos were under 18, and that he was aware of Mr. Taylor’s family relationship or association with the victims, including their names in many cases.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It also gave details about the other charge in which he traveled to New York City in 2012 and engaged in paid sex with a 17-year-old in a hotel. He then sent her text messages, offering to pay her if she could find other underage girls to have sex with him.He returned to New York for paid sex with a minor two more times, the statement said.“Those who engage in child exploitation received a clear message today,” Mr. Minkler said. “If you engage in this conduct, you will be investigated, identified and prosecuted, and you will go to prison.”Mr. Fogle has been paying restitution, starting with a total of $1 million in payments to 10 of his 14 victims, under a plea agreement, a prosecutor said in October.The prosecutor, Steven DeBrota, had said the payments were drawn from $1.4 million put aside under the agreement for the victims to receive $100,000 each. Two victims have yet to be paid, Mr. Horty said Thursday.According to accounts of Mr. Fogle’s statements delivered in the Indianapolis court, and reported by The Indianapolis Star, Mr. Fogle sobbed as he said, “Not a day will go by when I don’t think about what I did.”A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Former Subway Spokesman Gets 15 Years for Sex Crimes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.