AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael M. GrynbaumDonald J. Trump on Monday said his campaign would revoke the press credentials of The Washington Post, effectively prohibiting journalists from one of the nation’s largest newspapers from joining the traveling press corps of the presumptive Republican nominee.Barring journalists is an almost unheard-of practice for a modern presidential candidate. The Post is the latest major news organization that Mr. Trump has barred from his rallies and events this year, following Politico, BuzzFeed News, The Huffington Post and others.In a Facebook post on Monday, Mr. Trump accused The Post of “incredibly inaccurate coverage and reporting” and deemed it “phony and dishonest,” although he has granted frequent interviews to the paper’s editors and reporters in the past.It was not immediately clear if Mr. Trump’s announcement meant he would end all his communications with Post journalists. Mr. Trump has a propensity to attack the news media, but he is also a keen cultivator of journalists, and he has been known to criticize reporters, then meet with them cordially shortly afterward.Combined with Mr. Trump’s promise to “open up” the nation’s libel laws, his punitive attitude toward the press has prompted concern among media and free-speech advocates. Martin Baron, the executive editor of The Post, issued a statement on Monday calling Mr. Trump’s action “nothing less than a repudiation of the role of a free and independent press.”“When coverage doesn’t correspond to what the candidate wants it to be, then a news organization is banished,” Mr. Baron wrote, referring to Mr. Trump’s practice. “The Post will continue to cover Donald Trump as it has all along — honorably, honestly, accurately, energetically and unflinchingly.”Mr. Trump’s pique stemmed from a Post headline on Monday that suggested that the Republican candidate had linked President Obama to the Orlando, Fla., shooting massacre. The article, published on Monday, cited vague but insinuating comments made by Mr. Trump in a Fox News interview, in which he said Mr. Obama’s response to the shooting meant “he doesn’t get it or he gets it better than anybody understands.”The Trump campaign cited the Post headline in a statement, adding: “We no longer feel compelled to work with a publication which has put its need for ‘clicks’ above journalistic integrity.” The campaign added: “Mr. Trump does not mind a bad story, but it has to be honest.”On Twitter, news outlets facing similar treatment from the Trump campaign reached out in sympathy. “Welcome to the club,” Ben Smith, BuzzFeed’s editor in chief, wrote to Mr. Baron.This was not Mr. Trump’s first run-in with The Post. Last month, the candidate accused Jeff Bezos, the paper’s owner, of using The Post to avoid high taxes and stricter regulation on Amazon, the company he founded. Mr. Trump repeated those claims, which are unsubstantiated, in his statement on Monday. (Mr. Bezos has said that Mr. Trump’s comments about him were “not an appropriate way for a presidential candidate to behave.”)Journalists without credentials can attend Trump events by obtaining tickets available to the general public. But a Politico reporter, Ben Schreckinger, said he was ejected from a Trump rally in California earlier this month by a campaign staff member and a private security guard. Mr. Schreckinger, like other Politico reporters, had been denied credentials to that event.Nick Corasaniti and Sydney Ember contributed reporting.Advertisement