
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

JUNE 13, 2016
Satya Nadella, the Microsoft chief executive, may have abandoned his prudent approach.His $26.2 billion deal to buy LinkedIn could reinvigorate the software giant’s slipping grip on corporate computer systems and employee interactions. Paying a nearly 50 percent premium for a flawed business raises several red flags, however.The Windows operating system and Office software suite once gave Microsoft a chokehold over corporate computing. But the growth of the cloud and mobile devices has thrown the market wide open — first to alternative operating environments, and more recently to new collaborative software that threatens Microsoft’s email, word processing and spreadsheet revenue. The company’s efforts to move users to cloud versions of its programs may help, but its traditional dominance is under attack.Buying LinkedIn means Microsoft will control the best-known network where companies and employees — especially potential employees — interact. Making the LinkedIn bazaar operate smoothly with tools like Office, Skype and other services run on Microsoft’s Azure platform is the overarching vision.Satya Nadella of Microsoft and Jeff Weiner of LinkedIn said that they began talking in earnest about their $26.2 billion cash deal in February.LinkedIn has problems, though. Less than a year ago, its stock was trading nearly 30 percent higher than the agreed offer price of $196 a share. A growth warning, the reputational damage of a huge security breach and the introduction of new features that provide revenue but annoy users have hurt the company. The board’s decision to sell suggests the stand-alone outlook was not especially alluring.AdvertisementMicrosoft’s history with acquisitions raises questions, too. It has written down essentially the entire $9.5 billion it paid for Nokia. In 2012, it wrote off nearly all the $6.3 billion shelled out for digital-advertising agency aQuantive. Those deals were sealed by Mr. Nadella’s predecessor, Steven A. Ballmer, and it may be that the current chief executive will prove more attentive to integration.But the LinkedIn deal is the biggest Microsoft has ever tried. Making such transactions pay off is tough, especially when the seller’s adviser, Frank Quattrone’s Qatalyst Partners, is known for scoring improbably high prices.AdvertisementIt’s also hard to see past the news-release drivel. Mr. Nadella says the merger could increase growth as “we seek to empower every person and organization on the planet.” As for LinkedIn, “today is a re-founding moment” according to Reid Hoffman, a co-founder and board member. Concrete indications of the deal’s financial benefits are in worryingly short supply.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »