AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningThere may be no more fertile ground for obtaining damaging information in an investigation than from a lawyer about a client. People tend to be more open with their lawyers, or perhaps worse, try to lie to them to use legal advice to keep from getting caught.The issue about how far prosecutors can go in requiring a lawyer to testify against a client was on display last week in two cases that show how tempting it can be to get evidence from lawyers in white-collar crime investigations.The New York Times described how two lawyers were called to produce documents and testify before a federal grand jury investigating their client, Morris E. Zukerman, for tax evasion. They represented him in filing a “tax protest letter” with the Internal Revenue Service, appealing a determination made in an audit that he failed to report income from the sale of an oil company.The lawyers were required to disclose information about their interactions with Mr. Zukerman because the communications were no longer protected by the attorney-client privilege under a doctrine known as the crime-fraud exception. If the government can show a client sought a lawyer’s advice to engage in a current or future crime or fraud, then the protections normally afforded to those communications fall by the wayside.The Federal District Court in Manhattan concluded that Mr. Zukerman used his lawyers to mislead the I.R.S. An appeals court upheld that decision last October in a terse order that is typical in such cases. The appeals court provided few details about the case, with nothing identifying Mr. Zukerman or his lawyers, because the investigation may not develop into a prosecution, so anonymity must be maintained.The Justice Department did later file charges that gave a more detailed description of how Mr. Zukerman used his lawyers to try to dupe the I.R.S. According to the indictment, he lied to the lawyers about the existence of documentation for the oil company transaction, which they in turn described in their filing with the I.R.S.A letter from federal prosecutors to the court indicates that Mr. Zukerman intends to plead guilty in the case, and he agreed in a hearing to continued representation by the two lawyers despite the fact that the lawyers were called to testify, creating the potential for a conflict of interest. Because the case is likely to end with a plea bargain, the court allowed the lawyers to represent him.Judges are much more likely, however, to disqualify a lawyer called to testify against a client if there is a likelihood that the case will go to trial because of the problems with having a lawyer as both a witness and an advocate in the same proceeding.The growing presence of lawyers in all aspects of deals means there are more situations in which they may be called on to testify against their clients as part of a white-collar crime investigation. The release of the Panama Papers showed that work performed by the Panamanian law firm Mossack Fonseca on behalf of clients for whom it helped set up shell companies included arranging repairs for a car and hiring a contractor to fix pool tiles, as The New York Times reported. That level of involvement in the lives of their clients exposes lawyers to being hauled in front of a grand jury to explain what was done if there is evidence their services were misused.The specter of having to testify against a client can have a chilling effect on the attorney-client relationship because clients may come to fear that their secrets will be exposed. The defense bar has protested that the government has been too willing to seek information from lawyers at the risk of undermining their representation.The American Bar Association tried to limit the potential for the government to call lawyers to testify about their clients in its Model Rules of Professional Conduct. A provision of Rule 3.8, which deals with the “special responsibilities of a prosecutor,” prohibits subpoenaing a lawyer for information about a client unless the prosecutor reasonably believes it is not privileged, it is essential to the case and “there is no other feasible alternative to obtain the information.”Putting the protection in the ethics rules is a backdoor means to regulate how often prosecutors can pursue lawyers for information about their clients because the provision is adopted by the courts in each state, not the legislature. Moreover, a 1998 rule, called the McDade Amendment, requires federal prosecutors to adhere to the rules governing lawyers “to the same extent and in the same manner as other attorneys in that state.”The rule could stymie an investigation because trying to compel a lawyer to provide information about a client puts the prosecutor’s license to practice law at risk, something few would chance doing. The limitation on trying to obtain evidence about clients from their lawyers is only applicable to prosecutors, not defense lawyers or in private litigation, so it focuses on only one area that makes it more difficult for the government to pursue a case.New Mexico adopted this requirement in 2013, which the Justice Department challenged as an infringement on the power of the federal government to pursue grand jury investigations. The United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit in Denver found that the rule violated the supremacy clause of the Constitution and could not be applied to federal prosecutors during the investigation of a violation.“Because such heightened requirements for attorney subpoenas would impede the grand jury’s broad investigative mandate — which the framers specifically envisioned in enacting the Grand Jury Clause of the Fifth Amendment — the challenged provisions of Rule 16-308(E) conflict with federal law and are pre-empted,” the appeals court ruled.A few other states adopted similar rules in the 1990s, including a requirement that a court approve a subpoena to a defense lawyer before it is issued. The appeals courts split on the question of its application to federal prosecutors. The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in Boston found such a requirement in Rhode Island permissible while the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in Philadelphia held that the same rule in Pennsylvania violated the supremacy clause.That kind of division in the lower courts is often the basis for the Supreme Court to step in to clarify the law, but the decisions did not result in further review. One reason may be that there was not a broad trend to follow the American Bar Association’s lead in adopting Rule 3.8’s limitation on prosecutors, and those provisions do not appear to have hampered the Justice Department to any great degree, so there was no pressing need to address the issue.But if a state like New York or California, where a number of prominent federal white-collar investigations take place, were to try to restrict the prosecutor’s authority to obtain information about clients from their lawyers, then that could set the stage for the battle to move to the Supreme Court if the Justice Department could not prevent the rule from being enforced against its lawyers.The decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit may serve as a deterrent to other states to adopt provisions along the lines that the bar association has in its model rule. Mr. Zukerman’s case shows how the government will pursue information from lawyers if there is a hint that legal services were misused, and any effort to blunt that power is guaranteed to draw a quick challenge from the Justice Department.Advertisement