
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

NOV. 19, 2015
Pfizer’s $150 billion Botox gamble is a high-risk, low-benefit deal.If the drug giant does clinch a deal to buy Allergan, the maker of Botox, it would gain a low-tax domicile in Ireland, one lucrative drug and a bunch of less-attractive ones. At the reported price, however, Allergan would accrue nearly all of the obvious financial upside. Pfizer would be left with a possible integration hangover – and tax savings that might disappear.The higher rate Pfizer pays compared with rivals domiciled in other jurisdictions has long stuck in the craw of the company’s chief executive, Ian C. Read. In addition to higher payments to the authorities, it creates a disadvantage when chasing acquisitions. Companies facing lower taxes, including Allergan, Valeant Pharmaceuticals International and Shire, can justify paying higher prices in takeover battles.Buying Allergan would finally satisfy Mr. Read’s ambition to change Pfizer’s tax address. The combined company would be domiciled in Ireland. And it would check another box, as Allergan’s chief executive, Brenton L. Saunders, would be a natural successor to the Pfizer boss, who is nearing retirement.Pfizer would have to pay for the privilege, though. Cutting Pfizer’s tax rate to 15 percent would save $2.1 billion in 2017, based on analysts’ estimates. At a multiple of 10, that’s worth just over $20 billion. At the reported deal price, Pfizer would be paying a premium of more than $35 billion for Allergan based on its undisturbed price.Some of the difference might be made up by cutting costs. If Pfizer could reduce expenses by $2 billion a year, as JPMorgan Chase suggests, these savings could be worth about $15 billion after applying the lower tax rate, a similar multiple and a 10 percent discount for the time it would take to implement cuts. Add it up, and the deal’s cost and tax savings are worth about the same as the reported premium.Yet many big mergers do not go smoothly. And the tax benefits may not be reliable, either. The United States Treasury is once again complaining about deals that reduce taxes in this way, known as inversions. At a minimum, the controversy could delay any transaction. A bigger danger is that lawmakers pursue broader change in the rules so as to help American companies compete. That means Pfizer risks paying up for a fleeting benefit.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »