By REED ABELSONJUNE 14, 2016
A federal judge ruled on Tuesday that the merger of two large Illinois hospital systems could proceed despite the efforts by the Federal Trade Commission to block it. The decision represents a significant setback in the agency’s continuing attempts to police the industry during a flurry of deal making among hospitals and physician groups.Without explaining his reasoning, the judge, Jorge L. Alfonso, denied the agency’s request for a preliminary injunction to block the proposed merger of Advocate Health Care, the state’s largest health system, and NorthShore University HealthSystem. His decision will be made public after the parties have the opportunity to redact sensitive competitive information. The case was heard in the Federal District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division.Last December, the F.T.C. sought to prevent the merger, arguing that the 16-hospital system would dominate the North Shore area of Chicago. Federal officials said the combination could result in people there paying higher prices for medical care and receiving lower-quality care.But the hospitals justified the merger by pointing to the major changes occurring in health care, including health systems being held more accountable for the overall cost of care for their patients. Hospital executives said the proposed merger was in keeping with the federal government’s goal of promoting alliances among hospitals and doctors so they could better coordinate care and improve quality while reducing prices.AdvertisementWithout the judge’s reasoning, it was unclear exactly how damaging the decision would be to related cases the agency is pursuing. But the decision raised hopes among advocates for the spate of mergers that it wouldresult in more courts ruling in their favor, accepting their argument that the combinations were being encouraged by the Affordable Care Act, known informally as Obamacare.Advertisement“I really believe this case was precedent-setting,” Mark R. Neaman, president and chief executive of NorthShore, said in an interview. “It really reflects the first time a decision is grounded in the realities of the Affordable Care Act.”Federal officials said they had not decided whether they would appeal the judge’s decision. “The court’s ruling is disappointing, and we will be considering our options,” Debbie Feinstein, director of the F.T.C.’s bureau of competition, said in an emailed statement. A spokeswoman for the agency declined further comment.If the merger takes place, the combined systems will serve more than three million patients a year and will be the 11th-largest nonprofit health system in the United States, according to the hospitals.The agency’s challenge to the Advocate-North deal was its third attempt in recent months to stop a proposed hospital merger. The F.T.C. took similar action to halt the merger of two hospitals in West Virginia last November and joined state authorities to try to halt a deal in Pennsylvania in last December.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The agency’s willingness to try to stop these deals “came off a winning streak for the F.T.C.,” said Lisl Dunlop, a partner and antitrust expert for Manatt, Phelps & Phillips, a law firm in New York. While hospitals were arguing that the federal health care law was forcing them to combine, the courts were ruling that “the A.C.A. made me do it” was not a defense.But Tuesday’s ruling is the second time a federal judge has found the hospitals’ argument more persuasive. In the Pennsylvania case, which the F.T.C. is appealing, the judge ruled last month against the agency’s efforts to block the merger between Penn State Health Milton S. Hershey Medical Center and PinnacleHealth System.Advocate and NorthShore argued that the merger would benefit consumers, saying they could offer a health plan priced 10 percent below the lowest-cost H.M.O. in the Chicago area. The savings would come by being able to better manage care in their network of hospitals and doctors.Advocate is already able to offer a less expensive plan, said James H. Skogsbergh, Advocate’s president and chief executive, where “real savings are being generated, not theoretical.”AdvertisementSuch efficiencies are routinely promised in mergers, but they frequently do not materialize. Ms. Dunlop said the evidence of savings would be weighed against any possible decrease in competition in the market.The Illinois hospitals also emphatically denied the agency’s contention that the merger would result in less choice for patients in the area. “They had gerrymandered the geography to make their case,” Mr. Neaman said.Skeptics of these combinations argue that hospitals can achieve the benefits of collaboration and coordination, which is encouraged by federal officials, without having to formally combine.“The question remains, if even all of that is true, do you need the merger to achieve those things?” said Martin Gaynor, an economist and health policy professor at Carnegie Mellon University who is also a former F.T.C. official. “That’s a big question mark.”A version of this article appears in print on June 15, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Rejects Attempt by F.T.C. to Prevent Health System Merger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.