By MICHAEL CORKERYJUNE 14, 2016
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has identified possible suspects in its long-running investigation into the murder of a banker in Puerto Rico, but it is now asking the public for help in solving the 2011 killing.Five years ago this week, Maurice Spagnoletti, a top executive at Doral Financial, the holding company that owned a Puerto Rico bank, was gunned down on his way home from work in San Juan.The F.B.I. announced on Tuesday a $20,000 reward for information that leads to an arrest and began advertising the reward on billboards across Puerto Rico.An F.B.I. spokesman said that investigators had identified suspects, but that the agency was looking for more information to “put the finishing touches on the investigation.”Advertisement“We are attempting to connect the dots,” Carlos Osorio, a media representative for the F.B.I.’s San Juan field office, said in an interview.AdvertisementMr. Spagnoletti, who grew up in Jersey City, started as a teller and worked his way up through small and midsize banks before being recruited by Doral Financial, whose Doral Bank had been one of the largest banks in Puerto Rico before it was shut down by federal regulators in February 2015.Mr. Spagnoletti had been at the bank only a few months when he was killed while driving home in rush-hour traffic in San Juan on June 15, 2011. The killer shot into his car multiple times and fled. At the time of his death, Mr. Spagnoletti, who had a young daughter, was 57.Mr. Spagnoletti’s widow, Marisa, is raising money to contribute to the reward fund, starting with a $10,000 contribution of her own. In a news conference at the law offices of McCarter & English in Midtown Manhattan, Ms. Spagnoletti appealed for the public and specifically banks to contribute to the fund.“He devoted his life to the banking community because he strongly believed it was the ‘cornerstone of the American economy,’” said Ms. Spagnoletti, who has set up a fund-raising page on GoFundMe.com.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Over the last five years, theories have swirled around Puerto Rico about who might have wanted to kill Mr. Spagnoletti. Friends and former colleagues described him as affable and a fastidious banker.In a statement on Tuesday, the F.B.I.’s San Juan office said the agency had conducted hundreds of interviews and generated “scores of leads.”“Through these efforts, the F.B.I. and the police have obtained a great deal of information about this murder and those who are responsible for it,” the agency said in the statement.Doral, one of several banks that have failed on the island in recent years, was taken over by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Before its closing, Doral had reported losses over eight consecutive years.A version of this article appears in print on June 15, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: F.B.I. Asks Help in Investigating Killing of Banker in Puerto Rico.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.