By EMILY STEELJUNE 15, 2016
The ailing media mogul Sumner M. Redstone declared in a rare missive sent on Wednesday that he no longer trusted Philippe P. Dauman, Viacom’s embattled chief executive, or those who support him.“I am being sued by my fellow board members and my wishes are being ignored,” Mr. Redstone said in the 81-word letter to Viacom’s lead independent director, Frederic V. Salerno. Mr. Redstone went on to state that he was “determined to act in the best interests of the company and all of its shareholders.”“I do not trust you or the current board to do the same,” Mr. Redstone continued. Of Mr. Dauman, he said, “I no longer trust Philippe or those who support him.” The letter was sent via email through Mr. Redstone’s longtime assistant at Viacom.Mike Lawrence, a spokesman for Mr. Redstone, sent a copy of the letter to The New York Times.The communication did not address the repeated requests for a meeting made by Mr. Salerno. On Tuesday, Mr. Salerno sent a 726-word open letter to Mr. Redstone in which he made yet another request to meet with him. Previous attempts have been put off or received no response, Viacom directors have said.AdvertisementIn his letter, Mr. Salerno expressed concern that Mr. Redstone’s views were not being heard and that they had been misinterpreted by “a host of new advisers and spokespeople.”Advertisement“They claim that strongly held views you have expressed for decades have, in the past few months, completely reversed,” Mr. Salerno said. “They say you no longer trust your friends, your advisers, or your board. They tell us to believe that you have put your daughter Shari in charge of your trust and your board at National Amusements despite your clearly stated wishes and planning over many years that are to the contrary.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Salerno also disclosed in the letter that new representatives of Mr. Redstone “staged a drive” with him to the Paramount studio last week, but that Mr. Redstone, who has not been seen in public for more than a year, did not get out of the car.In his letter Wednesday, Mr. Redstone said there was “no doubt” that his two new lawyers “are my attorneys and are acting at my direction.”Mr. Salerno’s letter prompted Mr. Redstone to respond directly, Mr. Lawrence said. “When the letter was read to him today, Sumner was put off by both the substance and the public nature of it,” he said.Later on Wednesday, Mr. Salerno shot back in a statement: “We could clear a lot of this up if Sumner would share his thoughts with me face to face.”The exchange continues the drama engulfing Mr. Redstone’s $40 billion media empire. Mr. Dauman and George S. Abrams, a longtime Viacom director, are challenging Mr. Redstone’s competency in court, saying he does not have the mental capacity to have made the recent decisions that have shaken his media conglomerate.A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: In Letter, Redstone Lashes Out.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.