AdvertisementSupported byBy Danny HakimNone of the 108 board members of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce came forward to explicitly support the lobbying group’s policies on tobacco and climate change, according to a new report from a group of eight Senate Democrats, including Senator Elizabeth Warren and Senator Bernie Sanders.The report, which was written by Senator Warren and Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, followed on reporting by The New York Times that revealed the chamber’s international campaign against antismoking laws and its efforts to undermine policies aimed at curbing global warming.“The chamber’s lobbying is at odds with its own public positions,” the report found. It noted that the “organization strongly professes that it is anti-tobacco” and has claimed to support “efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.”In a statement, the chamber described the report’s contents as a “partisan line of attack” that was “egregiously false” and recycled “old myths and tired talking points.”The Times reported that the chamber had focused on antismoking measures advanced by health advocates from Ukraine to Nepal to Australia. The measures targeted by the chamber included restrictions on smoking in public spaces, bans on menthol and slim cigarettes, curbs on tobacco advertising, excise-tax increases and graphic warning labels. Thomas J. Donohue, the head of the chamber, personally lobbied the speaker of the House, the United States trade representative and the Irish prime minister on the tobacco industry’s behalf.The chamber’s campaign has aroused the ire of the World Health Organization, and it put the four health care companies that serve on the chamber’s board — Anthem, the Health Care Service Corporation, the Steward Health Care System of Boston and the Indiana University Health system — in an awkward position. CVS Health Corporation quit the chamber over the revelations.Another report from The Times last year focused on the chamber’s efforts to dismantle President Obama’s climate change regulations. The chamber convened regular meetings of corporate lawyers, coal lobbyists and Republican political strategists more than a year before the regulations were introduced.The report highlights that even though the board is described as “the principal governing and policy-making body of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce,” the members are often left in the dark.“Approximately half of the companies on the chamber’s board of directors have adopted anti-tobacco and pro-climate positions that contrast sharply with the chamber’s activities,” according to the report. “Not a single board member explicitly supported the chamber’s lobbying efforts,” it said.Ten companies serving on the board told the Senate inquiry that “they had no knowledge of or input into the chamber’s lobbying activities on tobacco or climate issues.”The report was also backed by Senators Barbara Boxer of California, Sherrod Brown of Ohio, Jeff Merkley of Oregon, Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut and Ed Markey of Massachusetts. It was undertaken to determine whether the chamber’s board actually supported its secretive lobbying activities, and to further publicize the gap between the chamber and its board.The chamber has found itself in a difficult position. Under the leadership of Mr. Donohue, the chamber has become the country’s largest lobbying organization and a stalwart of the Republican Party that has made keeping control of the Senate a priority. But it has been thrown off its stride by the elevation of Donald Trump, who opposes chamber priorities like the Trans-Pacific Partnership.In a December interview with Bloomberg, Mr. Donohue said Mr. Trump “won’t be the next president,” adding that he is “entertainment, but he’s not leadership for the American people.” In May, he said, “I hear mostly concern from our members. Who is this guy? What do we know about him? How will he behave?”Advertisement