By EMILY STEELJUNE 17, 2016
As he wages legal battles in multiple states to keep his position in Sumner M. Redstone’s media empire, Philippe P. Dauman’s legal bills are being paid by Viacom.The company disclosed on Friday that it entered an agreement this week with Mr. Dauman, Viacom’s chief executive, and George S. Abrams, a Viacom director, to pay the expenses related to continuing court battles in Massachusetts and Los Angeles.The total costs, which include legal bills and fees to public relations consultants, were not disclosed, but industry analysts described them as likely to be “significant.” The agreements were approved by Viacom’s independent directors.Mr. Dauman, 62, was awarded $54.1 million last year in total compensation. If he is forced out of his position, he stands to make tens of millions more in severance.AdvertisementAlso on Friday, Viacom disclosed that its profit for the quarter ending June 30 would fall well below Wall Street expectations. The company has reported persistent weak results, and its stock price has tumbled 33 percent in the past year.AdvertisementThe company, which owns the MTV, Nickelodeon and Comedy Central cable networks and the Paramount Pictures film and television studios, said it expected its adjusted earnings per share for the quarter to be about $1 to $1.05; analysts had expected $1.38 per share. On Friday, Viacom shares declined 1.4 percent.In a statement, Mr. Redstone’s National Amusements company characterized Viacom’s payment of the legal bills as a misuse of company resources and said that “the need for strong, independent oversight of Viacom could not be more apparent.” Through National Amusements, the private theater chain started by his father, Mr. Redstone controls about 80 percent of the voting stock in Viacom and CBS.“Viacom’s disclosures reveal that, under Philippe Dauman’s leadership, Viacom is diverting valuable corporate resources to mount a legal and P.R. campaign against Sumner Redstone, despite the fact that Redstone is Viacom’s founder, chairman emeritus and controlling shareholder,” said Justin Dini, a spokesman for National Amusements.He said the action was particularly troubling “in light of Viacom’s announcement that its fiscal third-quarter earnings will fall short of estimates.”In response, Carl Folta, a Viacom spokesman, said that actions by Mr. Redstone’s daughter, Shari, are “impeding Viacom” and that the issue concerns the control of the company. “It is certainly in the interests of all of Viacom’s stockholders that the Massachusetts actions be pursued in order to preserve the independence of Viacom’s board,” he said.The legal disputes roiling Mr. Redstone’s media conglomerate center on the dismissal of Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams from the trust that will control Mr. Redstone’s companies after he dies or is declared incompetent. Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams filed suit in Massachusetts challenging Mr. Redstone’s mental capacity to make decisions related to his businesses and asserting that he had been manipulated by his daughter.Lawyers for Mr. Redstone have maintained that he is competent and acting independently. They filed a separate petition in the Superior Court of California in Los Angeles to validate the changes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the company filing this week, Viacom stated that Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams would be required to repay Viacom if a court found that they had breached their fiduciary or other duties or had not acted in the best interests of Viacom in filing the Massachusetts suit.AdvertisementThat case is just the beginning of the legal bills for Viacom, as fights erupt in courtrooms across three states in the fierce power struggle for Mr. Redstone’s $40 billion media empire.Viacom is also covering the legal costs for Frederic V. Salerno, Viacom’s lead independent director, who filed suit Thursday in a Delaware court seeking to block moves by Mr. Redstone’s National Amusements company to replace five directors on the Viacom board.And on Friday, yet another front emerged in the legal battle. Eric Gilbert, who owns nonvoting stock in Viacom, filed a class-action lawsuit in Delaware against National Amusements, Viacom and Viacom directors. Mr. Gilbert filed on behalf of all nonvoting shareholders, asserting that the defendants have breached their fiduciary duties and that control of the company should go to public stockholders.Representatives for Viacom and National Amusements declined to comment.Viacom attributed its revised financial expectations, in part, to the dismal box-office performance of its film “Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows.” Paramount Pictures had high hopes for the film, which cost about $135 million to make and at least another $100 million to market worldwide. Yet the film took in a disappointing $35.3 million its opening weekend.Another factor affecting results was a delay in completing a significant streaming video deal. Viacom said completion of a deal was “negatively impacted’’ by the “highly public governance controversy.’’ The company also said that its domestic advertising sales for the quarter would drop about 4 percent, the eighth consecutive quarter of decline in advertising sales in the United States.Industry analysts said the numbers signaled that Viacom leaders would face significant challenges regardless of who ends up in charge. “We believe that Viacom’s portfolio of assets is structurally challenged in an evolving media world,” Michael Nathanson, an analyst with MoffettNathanson Research, said in a research report titled “We Interrupt the Circus …. for Fundamentals.”A version of this article appears in print on June 18, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Viacom Will Pay Chief’s Legal Bills in Court Battles Over Redstone Empire.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.