By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINJUNE 17, 2016
The Justice Department’s pursuit of Angelo R. Mozilo, one of Wall Street’s most recognizable names tied to the subprime mortgage crisis, is ending with a whimper.After dropping a criminal investigation of Mr. Mozilo earlier, federal prosecutors recently decided against filing a civil fraud case against him, his lawyer, David Siegel, confirmed on Friday.Prosecutors in Los Angeles, in coordination with those at the Justice Department in Washington, spent more than two years reviewing the merits of pursuing a civil fraud case against Mr. Mozilo, a co-founder of Countrywide Financial, which was one of the largest originators of subprime mortgages in the run-up to the financial crisis.Mr. Mozilo, 77, and several other former Countrywide executives received letters in the last few weeks from federal prosecutors notifying them that the prosecutors had officially ended an investigation into the sale of billions of dollars of mortgages to home buyers with questionable credit histories, Mr. Siegel said. He added his client was “pleased to see the investigation concluded.”AdvertisementNews of the Justice Department’s decision was first reported on Friday by Bloomberg News.The decision by federal prosecutors to not proceed with a civil fraud case under the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act is not too surprising, given the length of the review process.AdvertisementThe possibility of the Justice Department filing a so-called Firrea lawsuit against Mr. Mozilo came to light when Bank of America reached a $16.65 billion settlement of its own Firrea case in August 2014. The inquiry by the Justice Department of Mr. Mozilo was seen by some legal critics as a way for prosecutors to address complaints that little had been done to hold individuals accountable for the financial crisis.Bank of America acquired Countrywide and assumed its liabilities in 2008, as the financial crisis erupted.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But lawyers for Mr. Mozilo argued a civil fraud case would duplicate the efforts of the Securities and Exchange Commission, which sued Mr. Mozilo and two other former Countrywide executives in 2009. On the eve of the trial in 2010, Mr. Mozilo and the other defendants reached a settlement that required the mortgage financier to pay $67.5 million in fines and restitution.Over the last few years, federal prosecutors used the threat of a Firrea civil fraud lawsuit to extract tens of billions of dollars in settlements from other big banks. The law proved to a be a useful tool for prosecutors because of its 10-year statute of limitations for bringing a case — much longer than the standard three- or five-year statute of limitations for most civil fraud lawsuits.But in May, prosecutors suffered a blow when an appellate court in Manhattan overturned a jury’s verdict that had found Rebecca Mairone, a former Countrywide executive, liable under Firrea. The appellate panel said that although Countrywide may have sold flawed mortgages to two government-sponsored mortgage finance firms, there was insufficient evidence that the firm and Ms. Mairone had engaged in any deliberate deception.In the past, the Justice Department had used the potential of filing a civil fraud lawsuit against Mr. Mozilo as the basis for denying Freedom of Information Act requests seeking details about the decision by Los Angeles prosecutors to drop their criminal investigation into Countrywide and Mr. Mozilo.Presumably, it will now be possible for those who want to learn more about the aborted criminal investigation to seek information from the government.A version of this article appears in print on June 18, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Countrywide Co-Founder Will Not Face U.S. Lawsuit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.