By BEN SISARIOJUNE 17, 2016
After Prince died on April 21, one of the most urgent questions for the music industry was how quickly the estate could hire professionals to handle the star’s vast collection of songs and other media content.The answer was two months. On Friday, Bremer Trust, a Minnesota bank that is acting as the special administrator for Prince’s estate, confirmed that it had appointed two seasoned executives, L. Londell McMillan and Charles A. Koppelman, to manage Prince’s entertainment assets, according to Marcia A. Jensen, a spokeswoman for the bank.The appointments, for an initial term of 90 days, were announced a week after the probate judge overseeing the estate gave the bank authorization to name experts from the entertainment industry who could “take all prudent steps to monetize the estate’s intellectual property.”Prince, who died at age 57 from an accidental overdose of fentanyl, an opioid painkiller, left no will, and estimates of his estate have varied widely. In a recent court hearing, a lawyer for Bremer Trust said that the estate’s tax bill in January could range from $47 million to $146 million, depending on the estate’s ultimate value.AdvertisementBoth Mr. McMillan, a lawyer who had a long association with Prince, and Mr. Koppelman, a former chairman of EMI Records, are well-known figures in the entertainment world, and their appointments should establish confidence in the handling of the music side of the estate. (Prince also had tens of millions of dollars in real estate holdings.)AdvertisementMuch of the estate’s value could depend on the management of Prince’s music, including his storied vault of unreleased recordings. Contained at Prince’s studio complex outside Minneapolis, the sheer size of the vault is legendary in the music world; musicians and producers who have worked with Prince say it may include thousands of recordings and even unreleased films.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The material in the vault could supply years’ worth of posthumous releases, but it would need to be handled tastefully, music executives said.For Mr. McMillan and Mr. Koppelman, the job should involve quickly organizing the unreleased material as well as setting up appropriate deals to manage Prince’s music assets. Although Prince was well known for maintaining strict control over his music rights, he also died with few of the standard licensing and management deals in place that would be necessary for further releases.Mr. McMillan represented Prince when he battled Warner Bros. Records in the 1990s, and he is now the chief executive of NorthStar Enterprises Worldwide, a media company. While at EMI, Mr. Koppelman negotiated with Prince to release “Emancipation,” his first album after leaving Warner Bros.Both declined to comment on their appointment.For Mr. McMillan and Mr. Koppelman, the standard they will be compared to is the management of the Michael Jackson estate. It had more than $500 million in debt when Jackson died in 2009, but it was righted through a series of media deals.This year, the Jackson estate also reached a deal with Sony to end its partnership in the Sony/ATV music catalog for $750 million, which, according to representatives, should leave the estate debt-free.A version of this article appears in print on June 18, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Prince Estate Names 2 to Manage Entertainment Assets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.