By VICTORIA FINKLEJUNE 16, 2016
WASHINGTON — Federal regulators on Thursday took up the fight for their right to label certain financial institutions as “too big to fail” after a Federal District Court threw out their designation of the insurance company MetLife earlier this year.The Financial Stability Oversight Council, a body of regulators led by the Treasury Department, said in April that it would contest the decision, shortly after the ruling was handed down. Late Thursday, the government filed its first substantive brief in its appeal.The Dodd-Frank Act gave the council, which includes the heads of the banking agencies, the authority to designate large nonbanks as “systemically important” to prevent the kind of fallout seen from the near-collapse of American International Group during the height of the financial crisis. The institutions so designated will be subject to greater capital requirements and regulatory scrutiny.“The district court overturned the collective judgment of the heads of the nation’s financial regulatory agencies that material distress at MetLife could pose a threat to the country’s financial stability,” the council, which is being represented by the Justice Department, said in the brief. “The court’s ruling leaves one of the largest, most complex and most interconnected financial companies in the country without the regulatory oversight that Congress found essential.”AdvertisementIn addition to MetLife, regulators have designated A.I.G., Prudential Financial and General Electric’s finance unit, though G.E. has applied to have the “systemically important” label removed after shedding significant assets.AdvertisementMetLife, which filed its case against the government in January 2015, is the only company to combat the label in court so far. Judge Rosemary M. Collyer of the Federal District Court for the District of Columbia ultimately ruled in favor of the insurer in March.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The judge said that the council had failed to assess the likelihood of MetLife’s going under and the impact that severe material distress at the company would have on the financial system at large. Judge Collyer also said that regulators should have weighed the costs and benefits of the designation.The council sought to address those concerns head-on in its filing on Thursday with the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, calling the lower court judge’s analysis of its efforts “profoundly mistaken.” It also argues that the financial reform law does not require the council to take into account costs or “any other effect of designation on the company” as part of its decision process.A MetLife spokesman declined to comment except to say said that the company “will respond to the government’s brief in its own filing by Aug. 15.”Supporters of the council will file amicus briefs with the court next week. A date has not been set for oral arguments, though the hearing is likely to be scheduled for sometime this fall.“We continue to believe that the council acted well within its legal authority in designating MetLife and are vigorously defending the council’s work on appeal,” the Treasury said in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on June 17, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Regulators Push Back on ‘Too Big to Fail’ Tag.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.