By EMILY STEELJUNE 16, 2016
Philippe P. Dauman’s days as the chief executive of Viacom may be numbered — unless court battles go his way.On Thursday, Sumner M. Redstone’s National Amusements company announced that it had moved to replace Mr. Dauman and four other directors on the Viacom board. The development sets the stage for the firing of Mr. Dauman as the company’s chief executive, escalating the war for control of Mr. Redstone’s $40 billion media empire.The new directors are most likely aligned with Mr. Redstone’s daughter, Shari Redstone, who has publicly opposed Mr. Dauman’s leadership of Viacom. On his watch, the company has delivered weak results, and its share price has fallen about 35 percent in the last year. Viacom’s stock price rose nearly 7 percent Thursday on the news.The moves do not take effect immediately, and the changes are subject to a court ruling in Delaware. Until then, Viacom’s current board remains intact, and Mr. Dauman is expected to remain as chief executive. National Amusements said in a statement that the “newly constituted board’’ would evaluate current top executives and take steps “to ensure that Viacom has in place strong, independent and effective leadership.”AdvertisementThrough National Amusements, Mr. Redstone controls about 80 percent of the voting shares in Viacom and CBS. By removing directors loyal to Mr. Dauman, the Redstones would have a clear majority on the 11-member board, giving them the power to oust him.AdvertisementNational Amusements said none of the new directors are affiliated with National Amusments, Viacom or any Redstone family trust. They include Kenneth Lerer, a venture capitalist, co-founder of the Huffington Post and chairman of Buzzfeed, and Nicole Seligman, a former Sony executive and lawyer who represented President Bill Clinton during his impeachment trial.Thursday’s development is the latest in a series of moves by Mr. Redstone to shake up his media empire, which includes CBS and Viacom properties like MTV, Nickelodeon and the Paramount Pictures film and television studio. And it incited yet another legal dispute over whether Mr. Redstone, who is 93 and in poor health, has the mental capacity to make decisions about his companies. Already, the issue of his competency is the subject of court battles in Massachusetts and Los Angeles.National Amusements filed documents in Delaware court on Thursday seeking to validate its changes to Viacom’s board. The move pre-empted a lawsuit to block the changes filed in Delaware court by Frederic V. Salerno, Viacom’s lead independent director.“This is a brazen and demonstrably invalid attempt by Ms. Redstone to gain control of Viacom and its management in disregard of Sumner Redstone’s wishes and to undermine the current board’s ability to represent the best interests of all of the stockholders of Viacom,” Mr. Salerno said in a statement.Here’s a look at who is in, who is out and who remains on the Viacom board:Kenneth Lerer Mr. Lerer is a well-known New York venture capitalist and digital media executive. He is the managing partner at Lerer Hippeau Ventures, which has backed dozens of consumer tech companies. Mr. Lerer also is the chairman of Buzzfeed and on the board of Business Insider.Previously, Mr. Lerer was chairman and co-founder of the Huffington Post. About 20 years ago, Mr. Lerer’s corporate communications firm did work for Mr. Redstone.Thomas J. May Mr. May lacks the media industry name recognition compared with the other new directors. He is the chairman of Eversource Energy, one of New England’s largest energy delivery companies, and previously was chief executive of the company until he retired in May.AdvertisementMr. May also is on the board of Bank of America and the Liberty Mutual Holding Company.Judith McHale Ms. McHale’s career has spanned business and diplomacy. She was general counsel for MTV Networks in the 1980s. Ms. McHale was chief executive at Discovery Communications from 1995 to 2006.Ms. McHale worked in the State Department from 2009 until 2011. She now is the chief executive of Cane Investments, a private investment company based in Irvington, N.Y. She also is on the boards of SeaWorld Entertainment, the Ralph Lauren Corporation and Yellow Media Limited.Ronald Nelson Mr. Nelson’s background is a mix of business and media. He is the executive chairman of Avis Budget Group, the rental car company where he was chief executive from 2006 to 2015. Mr. Nelson was co-chief operating officer of DreamWorks SKG from 1994 to 2003.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nicole Seligman Ms. Seligman has worked in journalism, law and business. In the late 1970s, she was the associate editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. She later was a law clerk to Justice Thurgood Marshall on the Supreme Court and was a partner at the Washington law firm Williams & Connolly, where she represented President Clinton during his impeachment trial.Ms. Seligman later became president of the Sony Corporation of America and Sony Entertainment. She stepped down in March.Ms. Seligman also is on the board of WPP, the world’s largest advertising company.Philippe P. Dauman The embattled chairman and chief executive of Viacom has been on its board since 1987. He formed a close bond with Mr. Redstone in the late 1980s while working as a young corporate lawyer, and that relationship fueled his ascent to the top of the company.George S. Abrams Mr. Abrams is the lawyer and longtime confidant of Mr. Redstone and has been a Viacom director since 1987. In May, along with Mr. Dauman, he was ousted from the trust and the National Amusements board, and is challenging the dismissals in a Massachusetts lawsuit.Frederic V. Salerno Mr. Salerno* was named Viacom’s lead independent director in March and has been on Viacom’s board since 1994. He is the retired vice chairman and chief financial officer of Verizon Communications. Until this year, Mr. Salerno was a director of CBS. He is aligned with Mr. Dauman.Blythe J. McGarvie Ms. McGarvie* has been on Viacom’s board since 2007. She is a former faculty member at Harvard Business School; former chief of Leadership for International Finance, a consultant group.AdvertisementWilliam Schwartz Mr. Schwartz* has served on Viacom’s board since 1987. He is a counsel in the New York office of the law firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft and has known Mr. Redstone for decades.Sumner M. Redstone In February, Mr. Redstone ceded his positions as chairman of Viacom in the face of questions from shareholders about his health and competency. He remains chairman emeritus and a director of Viacom and CBS and controls the two companies through National Amusements.Shari E. Redstone Ms. Redstone is the long-estranged, recently reconciled daughter of Mr. Redstone. She is the vice chairman of Viacom and CBS; president of National Amusements and managing partner of the venture capital firm Advancit Capital. Ms. Redstone opposes Viacom’s current leadership.Deborah Norville Ms. Norville,* the anchor of the newsmagazine TV show “Inside Edition,” has been on the Viacom board since 2013. While she is classified as an independent director, her show is produced by CBS, and Mr. Redstone also controls CBS.Charles E. Phillips Jr. Mr. Phillips,* the chief executive of Infor Global Solutions, has been on the Viacom board since 2004. Previously, he was president of Oracle.Thomas E. Dooley Mr. Dooley is the chief operating officer of Viacom and has been a member of Viacom’s board since 2006. He started at Viacom in 1980 and had been part of Mr. Redstone’s inner circle since the media mogul took over the company in 1987.Cristiana Falcone Sorrell Ms. Sorrell,* the senior adviser to the chairman at the World Economic Forum, has been a Viacom director since 2013. She is married to Sir Martin Sorrell, chief executive of WPP, the world’s largest advertising company, which does business with Viacom.(* signifies one of the six directors who signed a letter vowing to fight any moves to oust Viacom’s board.)A version of this article appears in print on June 17, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Redstone Moves to Replace 5 Viacom Directors, Escalating Battle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.