AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonDonald J. Trump is holding a fund-raiser in New York City next week to be hosted by a who’s who of the financial world, including John A. Paulson, whose hedge fund made billions betting on the collapse of the housing market.Joining him are Stephen A. Feinberg, the secretive financier and founder of Cerberus Capital Management, and Peter Kalikow, the politically connected real estate magnate. Neither man had publicly announced his support for the Republican presidential candidate and presumptive party nominee, until now.The joint Republican National Committee and Trump fund-raiser will take place on Tuesday, at an undisclosed location in the city, according to an invitation seen by The New York Times. Tickets are going for $50,000 a person, though the hosts are paying $250,000 a couple. Additional details, the invitation said, will be disclosed when a reservation for a seat is made.It is a sign that a small, but growing, crowd in the financial world is warming up to the idea of backing Mr. Trump. The financial industry represents a crucial group for the presidential candidate as he prepares to face off with Hillary Clinton, his well-financed political rival, before the general election in November. Mrs. Clinton’s donor network includes the former hedge fund star George Soros, who recently warned against the “siren song of the likes of Donald Trump.” She also has the backing of some well-known Wall Street executives.With enormous coffers, hedge fund and private equity founders have become some of the biggest political donors in this election. Some of these executives have already pumped tens of millions of dollars into “super PACs” supporting candidates, often with the hope of helping to shape the views of the political candidates they have backed.Other hosts of the fund-raiser next week will include the distressed-debt specialist Wilbur L. Ross, who was named by the Republican National Committee to its finance committee to help raise money for Mr. Trump and the party, and Anthony Scaramucci, the hedge fund executive and political operative who runs an annual hedge fund conference in Las Vegas called SkyBridge Alternatives Conference, or SALT.Mr. Scaramucci said on Thursday that he expected about 50 or 60 people to attend the dinner, which is expected to be held at someone’s home, although the Secret Service will not disclose the location until the day before the event. As to who else might emerge as Trump donors in the next few weeks, he said, “There are a lot of people saying ‘maybe’ and ‘I’m considering it.’”Mr. Scaramucci was among the first on Wall Street to publicly announce his support for Mr. Trump and has been instrumental in introducing Mr. Trump to the hedge fund and private equity world. In May, he invited Mr. Trump to make a surprise guest appearance at his SALT conference, which has been called the hedge fund Super Bowl. Instead, the former Goldman Sachs executive Steven T. Mnuchin, Mr. Trump’s campaign fund-raiser, flew to Las Vegas to meet with hedge fund managers at the Bellagio Hotel during the conference.But for some executives on Wall Street, supporting Mr. Trump has been tricky. Until recently, the candidate has spoken out against the hedge fund industry and the generous compensation packages hedge fund managers give themselves, saying that they “get away with murder.” At one point, Mr. Trump said he planned to end a tax advantage called carried interest that allows private equity and hedge fund executives to pay lower taxes by treating their income as capital gains, which is taxed at a lower rate than ordinary income.These executives and the candidate may find other issues to debate. Mr. Feinberg’s Cerberus Capital Management has come under pressure from large pensions for its controlling ownership of Remington Outdoor, the manufacturer of the gun used in the Newtown, Conn., school shootings in 2012. Mr. Trump has boasted about his endorsement from the National Rifle Association.Advertisement