AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CieplyLOS ANGELES — Capping months of speculation about major executive changes, 21st Century Fox said on Thursday that Stacey Snider, the co-chairwoman of its film studio, would succeed Jim Gianopulos as chairman and chief executive when his contract expires on June 30, 2017.Ms. Snider, a longtime film executive who earlier headed Universal’s film operation, joined Fox’s studio, 20th Century Fox, in 2014 after leaving DreamWorks Studios, where she oversaw that company in partnership with one of its founders, Steven Spielberg. Her hiring was widely viewed as an attempt to bolster Fox’s presence among filmmakers after the departure of a previous co-chairman, Tom Rothman, who had shared equal footing with Mr. Gianopulos.Mr. Gianopulos is expected to remain in a “strategic role,” Fox said in a statement on Thursday.Though well liked, and respected for relationships with powerful filmmakers like James Cameron, Mr. Gianopulos has been known as a solid operator, better attuned to industry issues and economics than star relationships and narrative story points.Fox ranks second at the domestic box office, with over $900 million in ticket sales for the year, much of that from the arch antihero hit “Deadpool.” But it is well behind the industry’s box-office leader, Walt Disney, whose stack of hits has brought in nearly $1.5 billion.Last year, Fox ranked fourth among studios in domestic ticket sales. But in 2014 it was No. 1, with major hits in “X-Men: Days of Future Past” and “Dawn of the Planet of the Apes.”In its latest nine months, ended March 31, 21st Century Fox’s filmed entertainment revenue fell to about $6.5 billion from $7.6 billion, while operating income dropped to $921 million from about $1.2 billion for the period.Ms. Snider, 55, joins a new generation of senior leadership at Fox, as Rupert Murdoch, its executive chairman, passes control of his businesses to his sons, Lachlan and James.She oversaw films as impressive as “Lincoln” and “The Help” during an eight-year run with DreamWorks. But she spent much of that time wrestling with the inevitable funding struggles that confine the output of small companies.As she assumes leadership from Mr. Gianopulos, she will face decisions about structure and personnel in an operation that has long dispersed power among the heads of individual units and brands like Fox 2000, Fox Searchlight Pictures and the 20th Century Fox film studio.An obvious problem for Mr. Gianopulos has been the repeated delay of Mr. Cameron’s plans for a set of sequels to his “Avatar,” a 2009 hit that is set to become a major film franchise if and when the next movie takes shape. Ms. Snider, who has not counted Mr. Cameron among her closest filmmaking allies, will very likely find herself still facing “Avatar” issues when she takes charge.On another front, Fox has been strong in the annual film awards race. This year, three of its films — “Brooklyn,” “The Martian” and “The Revenant” — were nominated for a best picture Oscar. “Bridge of Spies,” another best picture nominee, was distributed abroad by Fox.Advertisement