By MIKE ISAAC and LESLIE PICKERNOV. 19, 2015
The co-founder and chief executive of the mobile payments start-up discusses the company's much-anticipated market debut.If you know the story of Square, what may come to mind is a payments company that caters to sleepy Brooklyn cafes and distributes a square-shaped credit card reader for mom-and-pop outfits. Perhaps, you may think, it is a start-up for hipsters.That company now has to prove it is much, much more.Square began trading as a public company on the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday, at one point surging more than 64 percent above its initial public offering price of $9. It ended the day up 45 percent, closing at $13.07.The first-day pop followed a turbulent I.P.O. process for the six-year-old company, one that was marred by questions over pricing and valuation and that arrived in the face of a precarious public market for technology offerings. On Wednesday, when Square had priced its shares at $9, that was lower than the $11 to $13 range it had set, putting its valuation at $2.9 billion, well below the $6 billion price tag that private investors had valued the company at last year. As recently as Wednesday, advisers laid out options for Square, including pulling the deal, three people briefed on the discussions said, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, but for Square, that was not an option. “We have a great beginning,” said Jack Dorsey, Square’s chief, striking an upbeat note in an interview on Thursday, which was his 39th birthday. “I don’t see negativity as necessarily something that detracts from our work.”AdvertisementThe I.P.O. ordeal illustrates the difficulties — some might say guesswork — of accurately valuing companies, both when they are private and when they go public. And Square, which closed its first day trading with a market capitalization of $4.4 billion, now faces the challenge of moving on from the fund-raising event, solidifying its business and building itself up.Advertisement“I want to get back to a steady state and back to business,” Mr. Dorsey said. He added that Square’s strategy now was “to continue to save people trips to the bank. We’re not going out there to say we’re getting rid of the banks or card networks. We’ve just put a much cleaner face on that infrastructure.”About 10 percent of the deal was allocated to retail investors and 90 percent to institutional, said one of the people. A large portion of the volume that helped drive the stock up on Thursday was derived from an abundance of investors who did not get shares in the I.P.O., the person said. Square, founded in 2009 by Mr. Dorsey and a handful of friends, faces many questions. The company, based in San Francisco, made its name processing mobile payments for merchants.But while Square takes a cut of every transaction that it processes, it must split that among a number of financial intermediaries. Investors also worry about Square’s ability to grow, versus competitors like Verifone and PayPal, along with other financial incumbents.Square is building other businesses beyond payments, though it is unclear how well those may flourish. The company offers subscription services that handle a company’s payroll or scheduling for appointments. Caviar, a start-up Square acquired last year for roughly $100 million, delivers food for restaurants that do not otherwise offer that service. And Square Capital, the company’s merchant cash advance program, has extended more than $300 million to small businesses.Yet because of the variety in Square’s businesses, the biggest challenge investors had during the company’s I.P.O. road show was how to value the company, said one of the people. Some thought it looked more like a software company, while others believed it should be more in line with payments stocks, said the person. Mr. Dorsey himself is something of a question mark in terms of the time and attention he can devote to Square. In October, he was also named permanent chief executive of Twitter, the social media company he co-founded and that is trying to gain traction with more users.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many of those concerns weighed on Square’s I.P.O., resulting in the offering price of $9. That lower-than-expected price helped set off certain provisions that some of Square’s investors had put into place to protect themselves against a drop in the company’s value, prompting an additional 10.3 million shares for later investors. The extra shares came at the expense of earlier investors, whose stakes were diluted.AdvertisementThe I.P.O. price was lower than Square’s Series D round, which was sold to Rizvi Traverse and JPMorgan Chase in September 2012 for $11.01 a share. The Series E of $150 million was conducted in the middle of 2014, and then an addition of $30 million in October 2015, for $15.46 a share to the same investors.Square and the Silicon Valley Community Foundation, a nonprofit organization, sold $243 million worth of shares through the I.P.O., about 25 percent less than the $324 million they were aiming to raise.It is unclear how, or whether, Square’s I.P.O. will affect other Silicon Valley start-ups as investors question the high valuations of private companies and how they fare when subjected to the harsh reality of the public markets. Dropbox, Zenefits and other so-called unicorns — private companies valued at more than $1 billion — were recently marked down by their mutual fund investors.“I don’t think that there’s suddenly going to be a cliff where valuations are radically lower, but we’re already seeing an adjustment in terms of private deals,” said Sandy Miller, a general partner at Institutional Venture Partners.At Square, the company can still count on loyal merchants. When Mr. Dorsey was releasing the credit card reader in 2009, he passed a woman named Cheri Mims every morning while she sold flowers outdoors near his apartment. She became Square’s first merchant.“His vibe felt genuine,” Ms. Mims said in an interview.On Thursday in front of the New York Stock Exchange, Mr. Dorsey’s mother purchased a bouquet of flowers from Ms. Mims. To accept payment, Ms. Mims used a Square reader.Katie Benner contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Shares of Square Soar by 45% After Public Offering .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.