AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jeffrey GoldfarbA $10 billion American health care merger may not leave shareholders feeling better.The AmSurg Corporation and Envision Healthcare Holdings are combining in an all-stock deal that will leave each with about half of the merged company. They are keeping two headquarters and still promising $100 million of annual synergies. There is little obvious value being created on the financial operating table.AmSurg’s ambitions precede the announcement on Wednesday. Late last year, the company, which owns walk-in surgery centers and supplies emergency, anesthesiology and radiology services, embarked on an unsolicited $5.3 billion bid for its larger rival TeamHealth, a physician staffing provider. TeamHealth was already buying the national group physician practice IPC, an acquisition that AmSurg supported. TeamHealth was not persuaded by the logic, and AmSurg eventually backed off.The latest transaction effort is similarly confounding. For starters, the exchange ratio means Envision investors — who will end up with 53 percent of the combined company — are getting less than their closing stock price on Wednesday, though the shares already jumped this month when a possible deal was reported. Moreover, rather than being fully integrated, the newly named Envision Healthcare will be run from both Tennessee and Colorado.That is one reason cost savings will be limited. The total synergies expected amount to only just over 1 percent of combined sales of $8.5 billion. A “meaningful” amount is projected to come from new revenue, a dubious prospect in any merger but especially so in medical services. Even giving the companies full credit, though, $100 million of annual benefits translates into little more than $600 million of value today, once capitalized on a multiple of 10 and taxed at Envision’s 39 percent effective rate.Without much apparent reward in store, that leaves risk. Mergers of equals often devolve into battles for control. Envision’s chairman and chief executive will be chairman of the combined company, while AmSurg’s chief executive will keep that job, with an evenly divided board presiding over matters. The wide-eyed acquisition attempt last year revealed AmSurg’s zeal to expand its empire. It’s just not clear that this sort of dangerous elective procedure will bring shareholders the desired result.Advertisement