
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

OCT. 5, 2015
Twitter’s new chief executive is flapping with one wing tied behind his back.Jack Dorsey, a Twitter co-founder, is the microblogging site’s permanent chief executive, the company said on Monday — oddly after waiting five days to reveal its decision. The board has also gone back on its stipulation that it would only consider full-time candidates. Mr. Dorsey is to remain the boss at payments company Square.Twitter’s board has, at least, stripped Mr. Dorsey of the executive chairmanship that he held alongside his interim chief executive role. That will reduce his workload somewhat and implies there may be independent, and with luck rigorous, oversight of his performance. But the company has yet to name a chairman.Perhaps Mr. Dorsey has the stamina and multitasking capabilities to be chief executive of these two companies. Twitter’s directors say they ditched their full-time requirement after he helped Twitter introduce new products and recruit engineers while he was the interim boss.Both companies face significant challenges, though. Growth in the number of Twitter users continues to slow and the company is in the red. Square is considering going public this year, a full-time job in itself.AdvertisementHeading two organizations is not impossible. Steve Jobs did an outstanding job shepherding Apple and Pixar. Elon Musk runs Tesla and SpaceX, as well as being chairman of SolarCity. Carlos Ghosn has been in the driving seat of Nissan and Renault for a decade.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It’s hardly ideal, though. Mr. Dorsey cannot give his full attention to both all the time. Conflicts of interest might arise. And performance suffers when people multitask.One particularly prominent failure is Anthony O’Reilly. In the 1990s, he oversaw investments in a luxury glass maker and a newspaper chain while also running H.J. Heinz. Disenchanted ketchup investors rebelled, and he was booted as chief executive. The glass maker eventually went into receivership. Mr. O’Reilly lost control of the media group and was forced to sell assets, including the family estate where his parents were buried.AdvertisementSuch a confluence of misery is unlikely for Mr. Dorsey. But even those who run more than one business don’t advise it. “It’s quite difficult to be C.E.O. at two companies,” Mr. Musk told Fortune in 2014. Mr. Ghosn, in a recent meeting with Reuters, was even more direct: “If you can avoid it, you should avoid it.” Twitter’s board has been listening to the wrong little birdies.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »