AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaPhilippe P. Dauman, the chief executive of Viacom, may be on the verge of pulling a gilded ripcord.Sumner M. Redstone, the media mogul who controls Viacom, the owner of MTV and Paramount Pictures, says he has lost his trust in his chief executive and just threw him off the board to make the point. If cut loose altogether, Mr. Dauman would leave with a pay package worth an astonishing $84 million.Mr. Dauman’s tenure atop Viacom is probably coming to an ignominious end. The ailing Mr. Redstone fired off a terse missive on Wednesday, expressing wariness about Mr. Dauman, his handpicked steward of the company, but also those who support him. Being removed as a director makes Mr. Dauman a rare chief executive without a seat in the boardroom.Mr. Redstone, who controls 80 percent of Viacom through his National Amusements holding company, has been good to Mr. Dauman, who has received over $400 million in salary, bonuses, equity awards and other benefits in his nearly 10 years with the company, according to an analysis by Equilar, a compensation consultancy.Those are handsome sums for having done so little for investors. Since 2006, when Mr. Dauman was appointed chief executive, Viacom has generated a total shareholder return of about 40 percent. That pales in comparison to rivals. Over the same span, the comparable figure at CBS, which is also controlled by Mr. Redstone, was 132 percent; at Time Warner, it was 177 percent, and at the Walt Disney Company, 277 percent.What’s more, according to Viacom’s latest proxy, Mr. Dauman would be entitled to nearly $95 million if terminated without “cause” or resigning for “good reason.” That includes $12 million of salary, $60 million in bonus and $19 million in accelerated equity awards. After factoring in what Mr. Dauman had already been paid under his contract, the total package is about $84 million.It’s a golden parachute that would rival those of Michael Ovitz, who was fired as Disney’s president after just a year and walked off with $130 million, and Carly Fiorina, who departed a weakened Hewlett-Packard with a $40 million send-off. Rewards for failure are among the most troubling staples of executive suites. Mr. Dauman’s may be one of the more egregious examples given the results. Considering the corporate governance debacle at Viacom, however, it may be an oddly fitting coda to his story.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement