By BEN SISARIOJUNE 17, 2016
For Dweezil Zappa, one name change was not enough.In April, Mr. Zappa, a guitarist and one of the four children of the rock composer Frank Zappa, changed the name of his project Zappa Plays Zappa — a tribute to his father’s music — to Dweezil Zappa Plays Frank Zappa. Clunky, perhaps, but he said it was necessary to avoid legal conflict with his brother, Ahmet, who controls the Zappa intellectual property through a family trust.Now, after yet another legal tussle between the brothers, Dweezil is rechristening the show again. His next tour, starting July 1 in El Prado, N.M., will be called “50 Years of Frank: Dweezil Zappa Plays Whatever the Heck He Wants — The Cease and Desist Tour.” (Instead of “heck,” the tour uses a vulgarity.)“We are incorporating the absurdity,” Mr. Zappa said in an interview.The 50 years refers to the anniversary of “Freak Out!,” the debut album from his father’s band, the Mothers of Invention.The Zappa brothers, once musical partners, have clashed since the death of their mother, Gail, last year. The Zappa Family Trust now has two trustees, Ahmet and Diva Zappa; Dweezil and his sister Moon are beneficiaries. Frank Zappa died in 1993.After Dweezil revealed the first name change in April in an interview with The New York Times, Ahmet Zappa told his brother in an open letter that he could use the name Zappa Plays Zappa (a registered trademark) if he paid a nominal fee of $1 a year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dweezil responded with a long open letter of his own, and in a statement said that he could not accept that offer because the trust owes him $2.5 million in merchandise sales.This week, a lawyer for the trust informed Dweezil’s lawyer that the name Dweezil Zappa Plays Frank Zappa infringed on the trust’s trademarks of the terms “Zappa” and “Frank Zappa.” Dweezil’s lawyer responded that they qualified as fair use (“the use of ‘Frank Zappa’ merely serves to accurately describe the nature of the show and is in no way misleading or defamatory”), but that the tour was being renamed again to avoid further problems.“I’m not changing the name because I’ve done anything wrong,” Dweezil said. “I’m changing it because I don’t want to keep having to pay $30,000 every time they write me a letter,” he said, referring to his legal expenses.Ahmet Zappa could not be reached for comment.A version of this article appears in print on June 18, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: In Zappa vs. Zappa Spat, Another Name Change.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.