
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

JUNE 17, 2016
It’s all up to a Delaware court now.In the most telegraphed corporate move of the year, National Amusements, the company controlled by Sumner M. Redstone, moved on Thursday to remove five directors of Viacom, including Philippe P. Dauman, Viacom’s chief executive, who remains in his job for now.Litigation promptly ensued as National Amusements filed in a Delaware court to validate these actions and Viacom’s lead independent director, Frederic V. Salerno, countered with his own suit.We have the beginning of the end of a messy legal battle as a Delaware court will determine whether these five Viacom directors stay, and by implication, Mr. Dauman as chief executive.The question is, Who has the better case?National Amusements’ legal argument is relatively straightforward. The company will argue that it is the controlling shareholder of Viacom and has been since the mid-1980s. As a controlling shareholder, it has wide discretion to remove and replace directors. That was always the premise of Mr. Redstone’s Viacom. Mr. Redstone was thoroughly in control through National Amusements, having had five chief executives in the last two decades.AdvertisementThe idea that a majority shareholder can name the directors of a company is uncontested under Delaware law. The law even allows Mr. Redstone to remove directors without cause.AdvertisementNational Amusements will thus argue that it validly exercised its authority through a written consent to remove and replace these directors under Delaware law.This narrows the grounds on which Mr. Salerno can dispute his removal, but there is still one opening.
                Sumner Redstone moved to remove five directors of Viacom. A Delaware court will determine whether they stay.            I say Mr. Salerno because he is the only one who brought a countersuit, suing Mr. Redstone and his daughter, Shari Redstone, for good measure.I would like to read something into the fact that it is only Mr. Salerno who sued, but it’s hard to know whether this is a sign that the remaining Viacom directors are backing down. They certainly are not racing to resign, and two of them — George S. Abrams and Mr. Dauman — have filed lawsuits in Massachusetts.The gist of Mr. Salerno’s countersuit is that life is unfair. He asserts that Mr. Redstone always wanted independent governance at Viacom and did not want to have his daughter in charge. But things have changed, and Mr. Salerno and Mr. Dauman are on the outs. This change is attributed to Mr. Redstone’s poor health and his daughter’s influence. Included in court filings are titillating accusations like Mr. Redstone is suffering from severe dementia and cannot do “simple arithmetic.”But Mr. Dauman gave an affidavit in November 2015 stating that Mr. Redstone was “engaged and attentive.” Mr. Salerno countered that this statement was made “to help his longtime friend and colleague maintain his choice of health care agent.”This type of talk may be a manifesto of poor treatment, but it is not much of a legal basis for overturning National Amusements’ action. And a court is not likely to care that Mr. Salerno and Mr. Dauman are getting a poor deal.AdvertisementThe directors and officers of Viacom have profited handsomely from Viacom. Mr. Dauman alone has probably been paid over a half a billion dollars over the years. Yes, they had to curry favor with Mr. Redstone, but they knew his mercurial side and the bad corporate governance. As they bought into this arrangement when they benefited, it is hard to see a court sympathizing with them.But all is not lost for Mr. Salerno and his allies. Their legal case is more apparent in the motion filed by Mr. Salerno to expedite the case. In that motion, Mr. Salerno’s lawyers at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom state:The court cannot sanction Shari’s faithless conduct. Here, Shari has engaged in an unlawful scheme to take control of Viacom by either taking advantage of Mr. Redstone’s lack of capacity or by exercising undue influence over him, and as a result has caused NAI [National Amusements] to breach its fiduciary duties as Viacom’s controlling stockholder. This court has often recognized in the context of a Section 225 proceeding [which allows the challenge of an appointment or removal of a director] that improper conduct such as Shari’s provide an equitable basis to invalidate written consents.Mr. Salerno’s lawyers then cite three cases for this principle. These cases generally stand for the idea that a court will look to see whether the consent was properly authorized when it was delivered and that the court will invalidate them only if they were improperly obtained, typically with a wrongful act that arose to a breach of fiduciary duty. In a case involving the  pharmaceutical company Bigmar, for example, the company’s president was found to have lied and breached her fiduciary duties to obtain a delegation of authority to vote a controlling block of shares to remove the company’s directors. The court in that case invalidated the president’s actions, which had involved a breach of fiduciary duty by the president.In this case, though, it is hard to see how Mr. Salerno can argue that National Amusements did not have the corporate power to do what it is doing. Instead, the argument will devolve into whether National Amusements itself is under undue influence from Ms. Redstone and whether that is a breach of Ms. Redstone’s fiduciary duty to Viacom.National Amusements, however, has its own working board and is an operating company. So Mr. Salerno’s argument — that Mr. Redstone would normally act to stop this conduct but did not because of his daughter’s inappropriate conduct — is likely to be a hard one to make.To put this another way, Mr. Salerno will have to show that Ms. Redstone is in some way breaching her fiduciary duty to Viacom in procuring this action (if she is indeed the main actor here). But it may be hard to show that Ms. Redstone is acting inappropriately. She may have great influence over her father, but that is not a breach of fiduciary duty absent harmful action to Viacom itself.This is where the argument for the sale of Viacom’s Paramount movie studio is likely to come in. Mr. Salerno is arguing that Paramount’s sale is being blocked by National Amusements and that Mr. Dauman has asserted that the sale can add $10 a share to Viacom. Moreover, Mr. Salerno argues in his legal papers that Ms. Redstone’s conduct has destabilized the company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.National Amusements has anticipated this argument. It has appointed independent directors to replace the current ones. How can one argue that the courts need to resolve a corporate governance issue when the new directors can simply take up this issue? National Amusements will also argue that this is a simple business dispute and that Paramount should not be sold because Mr. Dauman is wrong and the projected benefits of the sale are a financial trick that highlights the lack of a business strategy at Viacom. In such a situation, there is no breach of fiduciary duty. The majority shareholder wins.There are other reasons that the Delaware court may be hesitant to act. First, the court would have to litigate the capability of Mr. Redstone, something it may be loath to do. Indeed, the crucial fight will be over whether Mr. Redstone can be deposed.Such a deposition is really the only chance Mr. Salerno has because it could establish Mr. Redstone’s incompetence and perhaps aid the litigation in Massachusetts. But even then, the other trustees of the Redstone trust, which would administer Mr. Redstone’s shares if he were declared incompetent, have endorsed Ms. Redstone’s actions.AdvertisementSo, this litigation truly depends on whether the court is willing to stop at National Amusements’ actions as properly authorized (the place where the case has seemed to stop in previous instances). This would certainly be the neatest way to deal with this dispute.And it would avoid some thorny questions: If National Amusements cannot act here, what about the next election of directors? And what about the fact that the court would be acting to entrench the current directors over National Amusements’ new slate of independent directors.If Mr. Salerno is going to win, he is going to have to give the Delaware court a clear path to a neat solution. But what that is, I have no idea.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »