
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
JUNE 17, 2016
This interview with Beth Comstock, vice chairwoman of G.E., was conducted and condensed by Adam BryantQ. What were your early years like?A. I grew up in Winchester, Va., which is a small town in the Shenandoah Valley. My father was a local dentist, and my mother was a teacher. So community was a big part of our upbringing. I mostly just hung around the neighborhood and did imaginative play with the kids. It was like a big team.My mother was always called the unofficial mayor of Winchester because she’s very outgoing, and everybody in town knows her, and she knows everybody. So it was the kind of upbringing where everybody looks out for everybody else. And that was good and bad. If you did something you weren’t supposed to be doing, your parents usually knew about it before you even finished it.How have your parents influenced your leadership style?My parents are very different. My father is very reserved, very creative, a quiet person. By nature, I’m probably more that way. My mother is very outgoing. If you sit next to my mother on a plane, she’ll know your life story. Whenever we wanted to know something, we went to my mother to do the reconnaissance.AdvertisementSo I feel more comfortable in the more introverted, reserved kinds of roles, but I also saw the ease with which my mother could make friends. I could not do that early in my career, but I see both of those things in myself now. I identify more as an introverted person, and I’ve had to really work through my career to not let that hold me back. And I’ve grown much more comfortable with that influence of my mother, of just really liking people and delighting in hearing their stories.How do you feel being introverted was potentially holding you back?There were times in a work setting that I wasn’t being heard. I’d leave a meeting, and I’d be thinking, ugh, I didn’t speak up. So I’d start to feel like I wasn’t able to contribute like I wanted, and I had to force myself out of it.What were some early leadership lessons for you?Early on, I wasn’t confident, and I’m sure that showed. I probably asked a lot of questions that started with, “Would you …? Could you …? Might you think about …?”There was probably a tentativeness about me. But I also remember being very impatient about wanting things to go faster in my career, and wanting people to move faster.I’ve also had to learn to ask for help, rather than waiting until everything is perfectly done. Sometimes you feel like you can’t put an idea out there until you’ve looked at it from every angle, as opposed to saying, “Here’s a seed of an idea, help me make it better.” In those early days, I was afraid to put something out there if it wasn’t totally baked and perfect.AdvertisementBeing part of collaborative teams, I’ve come to appreciate the power of them a lot more than I did early on. When you get the teamwork right, it’s like magic because everybody has a role. You’re different, but you come together and you have a mission.Those are the things I really love about work. When it hasn’t worked, it’s because the team hasn’t been right. The dynamics aren’t right.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other lessons?Leadership is about navigating tension. Tension is actually good. If everybody on the team thinks something is good, it’s probably not that good. Leadership is about understanding that things are never going to be perfectly balanced, and understanding how to use that tension to move forward.I’ve tried lately to try to incorporate more tension. As you get more senior in your career, people often don’t want to tell you the truth because they want to please, and they want to handle things so that they’re not bringing you just the problems.So a great question I’ve started using is, “Tell me one thing I don’t want to hear. It’s O.K. to give me some bad news. In fact, I want it.”A large part of your job is to drive innovation. What’s your best tip?It really comes down to this thought: Permission granted. Having seen so many change situations in my career, change often starts with ourselves. Every company has people who don’t want to change the way things have been done.But often people are looking for an alibi to not try something new. And maybe people themselves aren’t willing to do what’s required to make the change. So the message I try to convey is, you have the permission to try something new.Another way to think of it is don’t wait for the invitation. There are a lot of opportunities to grab. If you see a better way, you have an obligation to do it.How do you hire?I’m big these days on the quality of being able to figure things out. So if I’m interviewing someone, I like to understand their method for doing that. If I’m bringing them into a centralized role, they have to be able to navigate the company. There is no rule book for that, and they have to figure it out. They’ve got to connect with people inside the business, and with customers.So I’ll usually test people on that. Give me an example where you didn’t have any rules, and what did you do? I’ll ask people how they solve their toughest problems. What was the toughest situation they ever encountered, and how did they deal with it?AdvertisementWhat is your advice to new college grads?I usually tell them their first job doesn’t determine their life. People often put too much pressure on that first job. Just try things out. Sometimes the seemingly worst assignments can be your best. What are you going to bring to it? What are you going to learn from it?Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on June 19, 2016, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Granting Permission to Innovate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »