By ELLEN BARRYJUNE 18, 2016
NEW DELHI — The governor of India’s central bank, Raghuram G. Rajan, announced on Saturday that he would step down in September and return to academia, ending a three-year tenure that enhanced India’s standing in international markets but frustrated conservatives and small business owners eager for deep interest rate cuts.Mr. Rajan previously expressed interest in staying on for a second term, but he said in a letter to colleagues that he had reconsidered. The decision, his letter implied, was driven in part by the preferences of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government.“While I was open to seeing these developments through, on due reflection, and after consultation with the government, I want to share with you that I will be returning to academia when my term as governor ends on Sept. 4, 2016,” the letter read.“I will, of course, always be available to serve my country when needed,” the letter added.Mr. Rajan, a former chief economist at the International Monetary Fund, predicted the 2008 global financial crisis three years before it happened, to an incredulous audience of prominent bankers and economists.AdvertisementHe took over the Reserve Bank of India in 2013. At the time, India’s economy was considered one of the “fragile five” emerging markets, and the rupee was in free fall. The technocratic Mr. Rajan was credited with reining in double-digit inflation and winning back the confidence of international investors. Indian journalists called him a “rock star economist” and, in a reference to India’s benchmark index, said he had “put the sex back in Sensex.”But though India’s growth has been strong by international standards, many of those who backed Mr. Modi have expressed frustration that Mr. Rajan did not do more to stimulate growth.Mr. Rajan’s critics, led by the parliamentarian Subramanian Swamy of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, complained that he had focused too much on reducing inflation and had not acted to ease the heavy debt burdens of many Indian companies.Mr. Swamy, a former commerce minister and law minister, was jubilant on Saturday, saying a change in leadership would probably lead to swifter economic growth.“I certainly wanted him out, and I made it clear to the prime minister, as clear as possible,” he said, adding that he expected a positive reaction from India’s industrialists.Advertisement“His audience was essentially Western, and his audience in India was transplanted westernized society,” he said. “People used to come in delegations to my house to urge me to do something about it.”The public attacks on Mr. Rajan, analysts said, coincided with a growing conviction among Mr. Modi’s inner circle that with inflation under control, the time was ripe to loosen monetary policy and publicly celebrate India’s robust growth.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Rajan was not inclined to do so. In interviews, he continued to urge the government to undertake structural reforms to the banking industry and to warn against complacency.In April, when Mr. Rajan was asked to comment on India’s new status as a “bright spot” in the global economy, his response was notably sober.“We have this saying, ‘In the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king,’” he said. Shortly afterward, one of Mr. Modi’s top lieutenants rebuked Mr. Rajan for offending the visually impaired, and Mr. Rajan publicly apologized.He also raised hackles by warning in a speech against “anyone imposing a particular view or ideology because of their power,” a remark that was viewed as stepping outside his area of expertise and into the realm of politics.“They wanted him to be the purveyor of good news, rather than a sense of realism, and that did not go down well at all,” said Eswar S. Prasad, a professor of trade policy at Cornell University. “Now that there is a sense the economy has turned a corner, the view that he was dispensable had come to take hold.”Mr. Rajan is the first central bank governor since 1992 to opt not to seek a second term.The finance minister, Arun Jaitley, has said an announcement on a successor will come “shortly.” Markets were expected to open lower on Monday on the news, as investors wait to see who will replace Mr. Rajan.Deepak Parekh, the chairman of HDFC Bank, called it “a sad day for all of us.” He said he expected to spend Monday responding to calls from upset investors, but said, “We’ll have to convince them that the macroeconomic factors are extremely strong.”Advertisement“If this had happened when India was weak, it would be chaotic, it would be terrible, it would be catastrophe,” he said. “I think we can take it at this time. The hit will be minimal.”Among those who expressed regret at Mr. Rajan’s decision was Palaniappan Chidambaram, a senior leader of the opposition Congress Party, who said he was “disappointed and profoundly saddened,” but not surprised, by the news.“The government had invited this development through a craftily planned campaign of insinuations, baseless allegations and puerile attacks on a distinguished academic and economist,” he said. “This government did not deserve Mr. Rajan.”A version of this article appears in print on June 19, 2016, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: India’s Central Bank Chief, Object of Praise and Scorn, to Step Down.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.