By JULIE CRESWELL and LESLIE PICKERJUNE 19, 2016
A year ago, Kelcy L. Warren, the chief executive of the pipeline giant Energy Transfer Equity, cast a long shadow even among the Texas wildcatting elite, with a personal fortune estimated at more than $7 billion.He is $4 billion poorer today as he scrambles to find a way out of a merger with the Williams Companies, a $38 billion deal that has become so acrimonious that an analyst has called it “the Cuban missile crisis of mergers.”To date, Mr. Warren has nothing to show for his efforts but a significant decline in the value of the deal — now worth about $20 billion — as well as three lawsuits filed by Williams against his company and one filed by Williams against him personally. Now, time is running out.Williams shareholders will vote on the merger in a week. On Monday, the two sides will meet in a Georgetown, Del., courtroom, where lawyers from Wall Street’s top firms will go toe-to-toe analyzing the fine print in the 400-page merger agreement.AdvertisementWilliams and Energy Transfer accuse each other of breaching the agreement. Everything is riding on a decision by Vice Chancellor Sam Glasscock III of the Delaware Court of Chancery.AdvertisementEnergy Transfer hopes the judge will find that whatever violations of the agreement may have occurred are enough to kill the deal.If the judge rules for Williams, and Energy Transfer is held to its original offer, the only way out for Energy Transfer would be to write a large settlement check. The judge is expected to rule before the Williams shareholder vote.A slim chance remains that the sides will reach a settlement before the trial. Mr. Warren, 60, who declined to comment for this article, is not expected to testify.“You’re in the middle of what I call a typical Texas Hold ’em,” said David J. Mahmood, the founder of Allegiance Capital Corporation, an investment bank based in Dallas. “It’s a high-stakes poker game that’s like a shootout, and it’s tough to forecast who’s going to win or lose.”It would be easy to cast the troubles of the merger of Energy Transfer and Williams as yet another result of the collapse in energy prices that has sent many companies into bankruptcy court.But from its early days, the deal was also driven by hubris, the ambition of an empire builder who coveted his prize so much he left little or no room for anyone — including himself — to wiggle free.That is not to say Mr. Warren is not trying, fearing that the combination could, at this point, badly damage the empire he so carefully built.Advertisement“We can’t close this transaction,” he told Wall Street analysts in a conference call in May. “Absent a substantial restructuring of this transaction — which Energy Transfer has been very willing, and actually desiring, to do — absent that, we don’t have a deal.”Few benefited quite as much from the shale boom of the last decade as Mr. Warren. As his wealth grew, so did his profile in Dallas and beyond.Mr. Warren, a big Republican contributor, and his third wife, Amy, a former flight attendant who was an executive assistant at Energy Transfer, were named last year to Texas state boards by Gov. Greg Abbott. He donated millions of dollars to rename a Dallas park after his only child.And like any self-respecting billionaire, Mr. Warren bought property. In 2009, he spent $30 million on a 23,000-square-foot mansion in Dallas complete with a bowling alley, a baseball diamond and an indoor swimming pool. That is the small home.Exotic game roam free on his 8,000-acre ranch near Cherokee, Tex. In 2010, Mr. Warren paid $46.5 million for the 3,500-acre BootJack Ranch in southwest Colorado. He also owns an island off Honduras.His lifestyle is a far cry from that of his youth, in the small town of White Oak, Tex., about 120 miles east of Dallas. The son of an oil-field worker, Mr. Warren played football in high school and was the 1974 state pole vault champion. (He soared over 12 feet, 6 inches.)But when he arrived at the University of Texas at Arlington, he promptly flunked out. He returned home and worked during the day on a pipeline under construction nearby while attending night classes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He buckled down in his second try at college and earned a degree in engineering. He spent more than a decade at a natural gas processing company called Endevco, which went bankrupt. Mr. Warren and a partner bought the company and renamed it Cornerstone Natural Gas. Cornerstone was sold to El Paso Energy for a considerable profit.That money allowed the partners to start Energy Transfer Equity, a pipeline company.Pipeline companies are generally viewed as more stable than, say, drilling companies, because they make money by charging fees for moving natural gas and other products. Because contracts are typically long term, the business is generally insulated from sharp swings in energy prices.AdvertisementBut as the business grew, Energy Transfer, like other companies, expanded into other activities.“One cannot live on organic growth alone,” was a favorite phrase of Mr. Warren’s, signaling his desire for expansion through acquisitions.Energy Transfer bought pipelines that ran east to west across the state. Its acquisition of the Transwestern Pipeline in 2006 made it an interstate player. It started construction on huge pipelines to move natural gas from established basins and new shale formations.By early last year, Mr. Warren had cobbled together a 71,000-mile network of pipelines. But he had one more big deal on the horizon: Williams.After months of negotiations, Energy Transfer announced plans last September to acquire Williams in a cash-and-stock deal valued at $38 billion.But by Christmas, Mr. Warren had buyer’s remorse. The free fall in energy prices and concern among investors over how Energy Transfer would pay for the $6 billion cash portion of the deal caused his own company’s stock to collapse. Over the holidays, he ordered his advisers to find a way, any way, out of the deal.By then, however, the Williams board, which had voted 8 to 5 for the merger, unanimously wanted to proceed with it. The company was facing its own challenges. Chesapeake Energy, one of its biggest customers, was struggling. Moreover, Williams’s shareholders wanted the cash.The cash component of the deal was causing tension inside Energy Transfer. To pay for it, Energy Transfer would have to borrow billions, adding more debt on its already heavily leveraged balance sheet.While advisers debated which assets could be sold, the best option to reduce the company’s pain was the one that was off the table: Cut the distributions.AdvertisementEnergy Transfer distributes much of its profit to shareholders tax-free. The distributions are Mr. Warren’s primary source of income. Last year, he pocketed $200 million.Above all, Mr. Warren wanted the distribution to be preserved. In January, he developed a plan to secure his personal wealth. A special security was created that would protect distributions for him and a select group of investors in the event the company decided to cut distributions to remaining shareholders.The Williams board sued, arguing that the new distribution plan gave preferential treatment to certain shareholders and therefore breached their merger agreement.To some, it appeared that the new distribution plan was part of an effort by Mr. Warren and Energy Transfer to make the deal as unappetizing to Williams’s shareholders as possible, hoping they would vote against it.The $2 billion in expected synergies that were extolled when the deal was announced nine months ago have virtually disappeared from forecasts, as if the two companies were now in completely different industries.In April, one of Energy Transfer’s lawyers finally found a possible way out of the deal.Under the merger’s terms, lawyers for both sides must confirm that the transfer of assets from Williams to Energy Transfer is a tax-free event. Williams’s adviser, Cravath, Swaine & Moore, said it could do so. Energy Transfer’s legal counsel, Latham & Watkins, said it could not.The tax opinion, the distribution plan and other issues will be the battle lines in the Delaware court. The judge will decide whether Mr. Warren was within his legal limits — or went too far — in trying to preserve his empire.“Kelcy’s had one hell of a run,” Mr. Mahmood of Allegiance Capital said. “But this is going to leave a scar.”A version of this article appears in print on June 20, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Reckoning Nears for Merger of Energy Transfer and Williams.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.