
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

JUNE 19, 2016
Binod Chaudhary  is chairman and chief executive of CG Corp. Global, a Nepal-based conglomerate in hospitality, financial services, education, infrastructure and telecommunications.Q. When did you first start to show an entrepreneurial streak?A. I was maybe 14 years old and I was attending a vocational school in Nepal where we were being taught secretarial skills. I was a good student and one of my teachers encouraged me to set up a snack shop inside the school. I borrowed a few rupees and with some of my classmates we would go shopping, buy a few items and then set up a table and resell the items inside the school. Looking back, it was actually a great way of learning the dynamics of business — it really taught me the ABCs of buying, selling, stocking.My second very important experience was setting up a discothèque in Kathmandu with a friend. It was the first discothèque there — I still remember flying to Hong Kong to buy some psychedelic lights. I was 17 years old and it was a lot of fun; but it was also a serious business and not an easy one, because you had to collect money from people getting high or people who “forgot” to pay because they were drunk. In fact, you had to be more serious than in a normal business, given the nature of the business. Here my friends were dancing with the girls, getting drunk, but I had to maintain a certain discipline so that my staff would also behave themselves. As a leader it’s important to lead by example, whatever the business you’re in.Q. Did your parents support these early initiatives?A. I come from a very conservative family and running a nightclub was not an activity that was much appreciated. My father was not comfortable with the idea. He was apprehensive of my going down that alley and not returning to “serious” business.AdvertisementQ. What are some of the other early business experiences that shaped you?A. When I was 18, my father sent me to Japan to conduct some wholesale business, going around shops in Osaka to buy fabrics and bring back to sell — mainly to Indian tourists and to other wholesalers. It was a very small business, but the idea was innovative in Nepal in the 1970s, i.e., moving away from imported textiles from India.AdvertisementWhat I saw in Japan really opened my eyes. Even when it was a small business, a one-man business, the way the Japanese would go about being very systematic, their dedication to work, fewer words more action, great team work, great discipline, great time management — those observations got instilled in my mind and I started to apply those wherever possible in my life, which was not easy in the context of our work culture and organization, but to a large extent we did it.Q. You joined your father’s business very early on. Did you have a choice?A. It wasn’t what I had planned to do. I had planned to go to India to become a chartered accountant, but my father got an unexpected heart problem and I had to give up higher education. I had just set up the nightclub and people didn’t really take me seriously. They saw this young man and they thought, “What does he know about business?” Some people closely working with my father were actually trying to grab the business, and I had to fight back. That made me very tough from Day 1. There was no one really to guide me, and I had to build what did not exist.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. What has been the most difficult part of growing your business?A. I work in very difficult environments where there is perpetual political uncertainty — in Nepal, and in many parts of India, Sri Lanka and now part of Africa. The most unexpected things happen all the time, which no feasibility studies or bank reports or advisers can prepare you for. In my country, we’ve had 22 governments in 25 years and no government wishes to follow the previous government’s policies. So policies are always changing.Q. How do you steer through this constant unpredictability?A. That’s where good leadership comes in. So you need to pre-empt, and before the damage is done reshape whatever you are doing. Secondly, you need to be ready to act very swiftly and adapt, and thirdly, you really need to work on contingency plans to defend yourself.Q. What is the difference between good and great leadership?A. For me a good leader is someone who is able to maintain what has been done and continue with the traditions of that organization. Great leadership is someone who thinks 10 years ahead and completely transforms and reshapes things. It’s about being able to see the trends happening around you — not just what’s happening in your industry, but what’s happening in the business world in general, what’s happening politically. It’s about walking around, talking to people.I guess it’s a skill. You may not know what new technology is going to come out, but you do know the general direction the world is going. For example, I think we all know that the time is coming when everything will be controlled by our mobile phone: payment, medical support, your home; the whole world is becoming integrated. Are you prepared to change and embrace all this?Q. Your three sons are all working in your business. Did you give them a choice?A. I motivated them to join! [laughs] I didn’t have the luxury of having someone helping me, I just had to try and discover what worked and what didn’t. They have an example to follow and, at the same time, they are exposed to everything that is being done around the world.Q. How do you manage the relationships?A. You have to learn to keep business and personal separate. I think I have to be tougher with them when it comes down to the professional relationship because there is bound to be a tendency to think, “Well, he’s my Dad,” but they have to lead by example. If they don’t work harder, if they’re not more serious and careful, they won’t be taken seriously. It can create some friction, and that’s why few family businesses survive the third generations — so it’s definitely something you need to be aware of and manage.A version of this article appears in print on June 20, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »