AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.26 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.36 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.22 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Department of Transportation, $191.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Hallandale Beach, Fla., $56.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Palm Springs, Calif., Unified School District, $77.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Virginia Building Authority, $234.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Alaska, $128.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Chino Basin Desalter Authority, Calif., $67.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Utah, $50.1 million of school district general obligation bonds. Competitive.Hennepin County, Minn., $104.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New Mexico Financing Authority, $116.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Allegheny County, Pa., $276.1 million of general obligation bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Arlington, Tex., Independent School District, $184.5 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Raymond James.California Housing Finance Agency, $236 million of home mortgage revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Connecticut Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $500 million of revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Delaware, $86 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Florida, $165.1 million of improvement district tax bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Gilbert, Ariz., $110 million of utility system revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Hays County, Tex., School District, $54 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. William Blair.Idaho Housing and Finance Association, $63.8 million of single-family mortgage bonds. Barclays Capital.Imperial, Calif., Imperial Irrigation District, $223 million of electric system refinancing revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Iowa, $264 million of special obligation refinancing debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Michigan, $128 million of general obligation school loan refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Murrieta Valley, Calif., Unified School District, $55.5 million of public financing authority special tax revenue bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.New York Housing Finance Agency, $302.7 million of affordable housing revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority, $507.5 million of transportation revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Ohio Water Development Authority., $150 million of fresh water development revenue bonds. Jefferies.Ohio, $81.1 million of capital mental health facilities lease appropriation bonds. U. S. Bancorp Investments.Oregon, $120 million of port facilities revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Orlando, Fla., Aviation Authority, $79 million of priority subordinated airport facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Orlando, Fla., Utilities Commission, $144 million of utility system revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency, $234 million of single-family mortgage revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Pennsylvania Public School Building Authority, $130.6 million of school district debt securities. PNC Capital Markets.Pittsburg, Calif., Unified School District, $70 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Richardson, Tex., Independent School District, $77.3 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. BOSC.Tulare, Calif., $57.3 million of sewer revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.University of California, $514 million of revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.University of Vermont, $69 million of agricultural college general obligation bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Waxahachie, Tex., $85.7 million general obligation certificates of obligation. BOSC.Wayne County, Mich., $173 million of general obligation limited tax federally taxable obligations. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Wayne University, Mich., $101 million of general revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Advertisement