
Advertising By                     
MARTHA C. WHITE

JUNE 19, 2016
TRIBUNE Publishing’s recent rebranding of itself prompts the question: What’s in a name?On Monday, Tribune Publishing — the company behind The Chicago Tribune, Los Angeles Times and nine other major daily newspapers — will become tronc Inc. (with a lowercase “t”), an abbreviation of “Tribune online content.”The name change represents a strategic shift from being a newspaper publisher toward becoming a “content curation and monetization company,” Tribune Publishing said in a news release this month announcing the name change.“Our rebranding to ‘tronc’ represents the manner in which we will pool our technology and content resources to execute on our strategy,” the company’s chairman, Michael Ferro, said in a statement.The name change had some marketing experts and corporate renaming specialists scratching their heads, though.“I think they have some challenges with the name that they picked,” said Julie Cottineau, the founder and chief executive of BrandTwist and the author of “Twist: How Fresh Perspectives Build Breakthrough Brands.”Advertisement“I think it’s sort of truncated in a way, pun intended. It feels like a longer word that got cut off,” she said, although she added that renaming the company gives it a good platform to help publicize its new strategy — not to mention media attention.AdvertisementBob Killian, founder of Killian Branding, had a similar reaction. “‘Tronc’ has a few demerits,” he said. “It’s a strangled sound, and it creates an ugliness.” But it helps, he said, that the name is short and easy to say.Rob Frankel, a branding expert, was also negative. “The renaming thing blows up way more often than there’s any benefit,” he said, adding, “The wrong way is when people confuse brand for identity.”Ira Kalb, an assistant professor of clinical marketing at the Marshall School of Business at the University of Southern California, says many companies overlook the role a name plays in their identity. “In a brand platform, the three big items we have are the name, the logo and the slogan. Those three things work together to help create your brand in the mind of the buyer,” he said. “When you change that name, you’re changing the relationship, and most people don’t understand that.”Consumers can have similar negative responses when a company alters a classic logo. When PepsiCo overhauled the typeface and design of its Tropicana orange juice cartons in 2009, sales dropped, and the old design was back in supermarket refrigerators within a couple of months. The next year, when Gap Inc. changed the logo of its flagship brand, a negative outcry on social media prompted the company to backpedal after about a week.Experts say one of the most common mistakes that companies make is to let employees or customers make suggestions, or to make a contest out of picking a new name. “To create an effective name, it should not be a democracy,” Ms. Cottineau said. “Everybody feels they’re an expert in naming.”The reality is that most people are not, Mr. Killian said. “An internal contest is a disaster about 100 percent of the time. You’re asking people to do something that’s not in their skill set,” he said. A renaming contest also creates a dynamic with winners and losers, which can inject unnecessary tension into a company’s work force, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Cottineau says most companies make a lot of mistakes when it comes to rebranding. “Changing your corporate name is really difficult. This one little word has to overcome so many different hurdles,” she said.Not only should the ideal brand name be easy to pronounce and spell, but, Ms. Cottineau said, a newer concern is making sure that the word does not get automatically corrected — possibly to something embarrassing — when typed in an email or text message.Advertisement“Probably the biggest one is trademark and URL availability,” she said, adding that it’s not unheard-of for naming consultants to cycle through thousands of possibilities before settling on a short list of available ones.Different barriers to starting a business today, with the evolution of the tech start-up industry, and changes to trademark law mean that an entrepreneur can effectively take a name out of circulation even if the business plan never comes to fruition.Ms. Cottineau says another challenge is companies’ growing preference for real words — a trend driven by the perception that these words represent a more authentic experience — as opposed to “coined words,” or made-up monikers.“There’s definitely a trend towards real-word naming now,” she said. “They’re really hard to get, though. When you’re trying to secure a trademark for a real word, it has to be relevant but not descriptive of your category.”Starbucks, for instance, is a better name than something more generic that might include the word coffee, she said. Likewise, Apple stands out among its technological brethren with a name that evokes harvests rather than hard drives.Ms. Cottineau praised the name choices of the ride-hailing service Uber and the food delivery service Seamless. Both hint at what their companies aspire to be without pigeonholing them.Although it’s easier to err than to score a victory when renaming a brand, experts say, one effort that earned high marks was by Google, which changed its corporate name from Google, its flagship search engine, to Alphabet last year as it expanded into potentially risky ventures like high-speed broadband, smart-home devices and self-driving cars.“A lot of those things are innovative, and innovation comes with failure,” Mr. Kalb said. ”And when your brand fails, you don’t want it to spill over to other products.”Mr. Frankel, the branding expert, said, “BlackBerry made the same mistake. WordPerfect did in the ’80s, which is to confuse product with brand.” He added: “If the product missteps one time, it takes the whole brand down with it.”A version of this article appears in print on June 20, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Tribune Publishing’s New Name, ‘tronc,’ Puzzles Marketing Experts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »