By SAM ROBERTSJUNE 21, 2016
Jack Fuller, who joined the The Chicago Tribune as a 16-year-old copy boy, went on to win a Pulitzer Prize for editorial writing and ultimately presided over the Tribune Company’s $8 billion acquisition of Times Mirror in 2000, died on Tuesday in Chicago. He was 69.The cause was lung cancer, his son, Timothy, said.Mr. Fuller had been The Tribune’s editorial page editor, executive editor, publisher and chief executive. He was president of Tribune Publishing, the newspaper division of the Tribune Company, when he oversaw the purchase that brought The Los Angeles Times, Newsday, The Baltimore Sun, The Hartford Courant and other Times Mirror publications under the Tribune umbrella, in what was described as the largest acquisition in newspaper history.He retired and left the board in 2004 before the investor Sam Zell bought the company, took it private, imposed cost cuts and later filed for bankruptcy protection.Mr. Fuller was editorial page editor from 1981 to 1987. He won the Pulitzer Prize in 1986 for his commentary on constitutional and legal issues.AdvertisementIn one editorial, he wrote that “for a person who has been accused and cleared of a crime, Attorney Gen. Edwin Meese shows a remarkable disinterest in the law’s traditional presumption of innocence.” (Mr. Meese was investigated in the Iran-contra arms deal and a Mideast pipeline negotiation, but was never prosecuted.)Advertisement“There is plenty of room for disagreement about the legal rule requiring police to read a suspect his rights or lose the chance to use a confession against him,” the editorial continued. “A lot of people are uncomfortable with letting defendants go free simply because the police fouled up an interrogation or a search. On balance, this newspaper has not been persuaded that any other device can deter police misconduct; it has supported the so-called Miranda rule, despite misgivings about its consequences in certain cases.”Jack William Fuller was born on Oct. 12, 1946, in Chicago, the son of Ernest Fuller, a financial reporter and assistant editor at The Tribune, and the former Dorothy Voss Tegge. He worked at the paper as a copy boy while still in high school.“My father was a newspaperman, and so the fact is I had grown up with it,” he once explained.Jack Fuller earned a bachelor’s degree in journalism from the Medill School of Journalism at Northwestern University in 1968. After serving in the Army as a Vietnam correspondent for the newspaper Pacific Stars and Stripes, he attended Yale University Law School, graduating in 1973. (At Yale he was a classmate of Bill Clinton, Hillary Rodham and Robert Reich, who became the secretary of labor in President Clinton’s administration.)His marriage to the former Alyce Tuttle ended in divorce. In addition to his son, he is survived by a daughter, Katherine Ryan, and his second wife, Debra Moskovits.Mr. Fuller was hired as a general assignment reporter by The Tribune in 1973 and left in 1975 to become a special assistant to the United States attorney general, Edward H. Levi, a former president of the University of Chicago. Mr. Levi was credited with restoring the Justice Department’s credibility after Watergate.Mr. Fuller rejoined the newspaper in 1977 as a Washington correspondent. He was named executive editor in 1987, vice president and editor in 1989, publisher in 1994 and president in 1997.Ann Marie Lipinski, the curator of the Nieman Foundation at Harvard and a former editor of The Tribune under Mr. Fuller, praised him for “making the newspaper and later Tribune Company healthy environments for women.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Fuller published seven well-received novels on topics ranging from multigenerational tales of Middle America to computer hackers and jazz. Among them are his first, “Convergence” (1982), involving espionage and the C.I.A.; “Fragments” (1984), a Vietnam War novel (“a moving account of the war that purveys more than information — it gives the war a literary form,” The New York Times Book Review said); and “The Best of Jackson Payne” (2000), about a jazz musician with echoes of John Coltrane. (Beginning in the late 1980s, Mr. Fuller wrote frequently about jazz for The Tribune.)AdvertisementAnother novel, “One From Without,” published this month, is drawn from personal experience: It is about an executive trying to save a public company on the brink of disaster.He also wrote “News Values: Ideas for an Information Age” (1996) and “What Is Happening to News: The Information Explosion and the Crisis in Journalism” (2010).In 2005, Mr. Fuller was named to the board of the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, which is based in Chicago. Marjorie Scardino, the foundation’s chairwoman, said on Tuesday that he had driven its grantmaking agenda on global conservation, sustainable development and climate change.Mr. Fuller, she said, insisted that “there is not ‘traditional’ journalism and ‘new’ media, only good journalism and bad journalism.”In “What Is Happening to News,” Mr. Fuller wrote that the Times Mirror purchase was an attempt to compete with the internet on a national scale. He acknowledged that the effort to meld different news media cultures had been difficult, but added that the Tribune Company’s creation of a nationwide web-based classified business had been more successful.Still, competition with online news sites for advertisers and readers, coupled with a business downturn, prompted chief executives at the Tribune Company and other corporate parents to demand even more draconian economies. Rather than impose them, Mr. Fuller, among other editors and publishers, quit.“What has happened since I left haunts me,” he wrote. “Every newspaper company, even those led by people totally committed to striking a proper balance between the financial and social missions of journalism, has been beaten down.“Time and again,” he continued, “people arguing about the future of news have made the distinction between what people want to know and what they need to know. If concentrating on what people want to know means succumbing to direct democratic rule of the sort you can find on the internet, it is a retreat too far. It abandons the social mission in order to serve it.”He added, “Fulfilling the social purpose of journalism requires us to give people what they need to know.”A version of this article appears in print on June 22, 2016, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Jack Fuller, 69, Prizewinning Chicago Journalist, Dies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.