AdvertisementSupported byBy Landon Thomas Jr.Another downturn in the stock price of Credit Suisse has put Tidjane Thiam, the bank’s embattled chief executive, on the defensive — again.On Friday, Mr. Thiam sent employees a memorandum that said hedge funds were betting against shares of Credit Suisse — taking the view that Mr. Thiam would have to raise more capital from investors. Credit Suisse officials say the chief executive regularly sends updates to employees.Mr. Thiam called these concerns unfounded and said they were a reflection of how market conditions have become difficult for Credit Suisse and other European banks.Since he took over last summer as chief executive at Credit Suisse — which has large operations in New York and London — its stock has sunk by over 50 percent. Last week, it touched a new low of 11.8 Swiss francs, or about $12.25.Mr. Thiam has been forceful and blunt in describing how the bank’s previous model of relying on riskier, capital-intensive trading and banking businesses needed to be revised. Instead, he has said, the focus should be on providing a range of financial services to wealthy clients in fast-growing emerging markets.But the chief executive’s brusque manner and a perception among bankers that he is not subjecting himself to the same sacrifices that he is asking of them has created tension within the bank — made worse by the stock’s continuing slump.In his memo, Mr. Thiam said that in the next month he would be embarking on a trip that would include stops in New York, London and Singapore, to meet with clients and investors to talk about his plans for the bank.In that vein, he met last week in Zurich with one of his largest investors, David Herro of Harris Associates, which owns nearly 10 percent of Credit Suisse.Mr. Herro said in an interview that he saw Mr. Thiam as part of a broader tour of the other companies that his mutual fund owns in Europe, but added that they did have a discussion about the new strategy, which Mr. Herro endorsed.“I think he is absolutely right in what he is doing, and you don’t alter it just because people are wailing,” Mr. Herro said. “If a trader makes money, they get a bonus — if they lose, the shareholder bites it. These changes have been long overdue.”As he has done in meetings with investors and clients, Mr. Thiam has blamed upset investment bankers for a negative environment, and he has said repeatedly that he will not backtrack as a result of their complaints.In his memo, though, Mr. Thiam did strive to strike a positive tone in terms of the effort to turn around the global markets division. “Significant progress with the accelerated restructuring, not only in terms of de-risking and cost reduction but also in reinvigorating our client franchise,” he wrote.Nevertheless, Mr. Herro did say that it is important for Mr. Thiam to do better in terms of getting his message across internally. “If change is going to happen, it has to be done with good communication and empathy toward employees,” he said.Mr. Herro said in the interview that he saw no need for Credit Suisse to raise new funds. “With the cash generation they have now, their capital position is fine,” he said.More than most investment banks, Credit Suisse relies on company stock to compensate employees.There are few analysts or investors who think that Mr. Thiam is mistaken in his strategy, which is in line with what other banks in Europe are doing.But even his biggest supporters have started to express some concern that he could be doing a better job communicating his message — unpleasant as it may be — to his employees.And while the board has recently said that it supports Mr. Thiam, directors have also been asked numerous questions by shareholders about Mr. Thiam’s ability to push through difficult changes in light of his poor relationship with bankers in the global markets division.A recent report by Switzerland’s central bank found that Credit Suisse and its larger rival, UBS, would each need to raise another 10 billion Swiss francs in capital to meet stringent new bank safety rules being put in place in Switzerland.Mr. Thiam has rejected speculation that the bank’s losses are escalating and that the bank would need to go to investors once again for a fresh round of cash.Last fall, Mr. Thiam raised about $6 billion, or 6 billion Swiss francs, from the market at a price in the low $20s per share. Coming to investors again for cash, so soon after the first effort and with the stock trading at current levels, would be difficult for Mr. Thiam, analysts and investors say.Since hitting a low, the stock has recovered somewhat in recent days, and it closed trading on Monday at 12.83 Swiss francs.Advertisement