By IAN AUSTENNOV. 19, 2015
OTTAWA —  Bombardier is on steadier financial ground, as Quebec’s pension fund moved on Thursday to buy a nearly one-third stake in the company’s train and transit group for $1.5 billion.Just weeks ago, the provincial government of Quebec provided a $1 billion infusion into Bombardier.Together, the investments will help shore up Bombardier’s cash reserves, which have been squeezed by the company’s struggles with a new commercial jet.With a new single-aisle plane, the CSeries, the company is trying to move beyond the regional and business aircraft market. In doing so, it will go head-to-head with the aerospace giants Boeing and Airbus.But the project has been troubled by delays, cost overruns and a dearth of orders. In labor negotiations with its workers in Northern Ireland, Bombardier said recently that it was facing a “serious financial crisis.”AdvertisementThe latest deal with the pension fund, Caisse de Dépôt et Placement du Québec, focuses on the stronger side of the business. Bombardier is the largest maker of trains outside China. The company’s rail unit, called Bombardier Transportation, is consistently profitable and has $30 billion worth of outstanding orders.AdvertisementWith the extra infusion, the company said on Thursday, Bombardier will hold about $6.5 billion in cash at the end of the year. That amount is enough to introduce the CSeries and a new line of business jets while providing a “safety net” if market or economic conditions decline, Alain Bellemare, Bombardier’s chief executive, told analysts and reporters in a conference call.Even so, Mr. Bellemare confirmed that the company was still seeking assistance for the CSeries project from the new federal government led by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau. He did not, however, indicate why such aid was still necessary or what form it might take. The Canadian government has offered few details about Bombardier’s request apart from saying that it was reviewing the potential risk of financial support for the airliner project.Michael Sabia, the chief executive of the Caisse, said that the pension fund “did not at any time consider” taking a stake in the CSeries project. When asked why, Mr. Sabia avoided the question, instead praising the performance and potential of Bombardier’s train unit.“We like the company, the rail company,” Mr. Sabia said. “That’s why our focus has been here exclusively.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A newly created holding company, owned jointly by Bombardier and the Caisse, will assume the assets of the rail unit and will be based in Germany. It will be governed by a separate board of directors. The fund, which has long invested in Bombardier, is one of several investors that are critical of a special share structure at the company that gives control to the descendants of its founders.In exchange for its investment, the fund also negotiated a variety of guarantees, which Mr. Sabia said would provide “bondlike forms of protection.” They include a minimum guaranteed return of 9.5 percent.If the rail unit outperforms that over the next five years, the Caisse’s stake will drop 2.5 percentage points a year, to a minimum of 25 percent. If the operation does not meet that target, the fund’s stake will gradually increase, to a maximum of 42.5 percent.The investment, Russell Solomon of the credit rating agency Moody’s said in a statement, is “another shot in the arm for Bombardier.” But the added stability, he said, is somewhat offset by the potential that Bombardier will eventually have to borrow to repurchase the Caisse’s stake, adding to its already high debt load.A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Bombardier Secures $1.5 Billion Investment as Aircraft Unit Aims at Bigger Rivals .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.