By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJUNE 20, 2016
Walmart is selling its Chinese online business to that country’s No. 2 e-commerce site, JD.com, creating a strategic partnership that it hopes will bolster its presence there.The company said Monday that it was selling JD.com ownership of Yihaodian, its e-commerce site in China, including the brand and the app. Sam’s Club in China, also owned by Walmart, will open a flagship section on JD.com, and both companies will broaden the range of imported goods.Walmart, which will take a 5 percent stake in JD.com, stands to gain a tremendous amount of traffic from JD.com’s huge customer base and its same-day delivery network. JD.com has nearly 6,000 delivery and pickup stations in about 2,500 counties and districts across China. Yihaodian owns and operates only about 250 hubs.JD.com’s strength is in name-brand electronics, but it should be able to capitalize on Yihaodian’s strong brand and business in eastern and southern China, and in important categories like groceries and household goods. Last August, JD.com bought a 10 percent stake in Yonghui, a rival that specializes in fresh food.AdvertisementFood is among the growing number of products that people in China are shopping for online, a big reason traffic has declined at Walmart’s 400 stores there. Walmart has sought to establish itself as a source of high-quality food after a series of safety issues in China.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Walmart has less than 2 percent of China’s online market, ranking well behind the powerhouse Alibaba’s 46.9 percent and JD.com’s 20.1 percent, according to the research firm Euromonitor International.In a statement issued on Monday, Walmart’s chief executive, Doug McMillon, said JD.com had a “very complementary business and is an ideal partner.”AdvertisementSales growth has been slow over all for Walmart’s global online business. The retailer said recently that global e-commerce sales rose 7 percent in the first quarter, weaker than the 8 percent in the previous quarter and far below the 20 percent increases seen under two years ago.A version of this article appears in print on June 21, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: To Gain Ally, Walmart Sells Site in China.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.