By JULIE WEEDJUNE 20, 2016
The exclusive feel of domestic airline clubs has taken a hit over the last decade. They are more crowded, and the free premium cocktails have been disappearing. Free Wi-Fi is no longer even a draw because it is available in many airport terminals.But with bankruptcies and mergers in their rearview mirrors and low fuel prices helping profits, airline clubs in the United States are getting an upgrade. Domestic airlines are reinvesting in the customer experience, especially for their biggest spenders, who are willing to pay extra to escape terminals for their own power outlets and comfy chairs.Catering to high-end customers is a major goal for airlines, said Mike Oshins, a hospitality management professor at Boston University. He noted that airlines have already restructured rewards programs to benefit their biggest spenders and have improved the seating in the front of planes.On a plane with a fixed number of seats, airlines want to cater to the passengers who paid the most to be there because they offer the most profit, he said. The companies use their lounges to make the overall experience better, aiming to increase customer loyalty and attract fliers away from the competition.Advertisement“Airlines are flush with profits from continued low oil prices. Now is the time to reinvest in improvements,” Mr. Oshins said. “The ambience, service and amenities of the airport lounge is a tangible representation of the luxury service of the airline, and one area to focus on after some neglect.”AdvertisementJamie Larounis, who manages the travel blogging website TheForwardCabin.com, said that in the last 10 years, co-marketing partnerships brought more fliers into lounges. And as they became more crowded, he added, the quality of the free food and liquor declined.Fliers are looking forward to the improvements. Ben Brooks, chief executive of Pilot, a Manhattan coaching start-up, flies often and carries a variety of credit cards to be able to get into different airline clubs.“Many have gotten dumpy and overcrowded,” he said. Recently at a club at Newark Airport, “there was a long line for food and nowhere to sit,” he added. “The general terminal was more serene.”Clubs for American Airlines had not had significant upgrades in more than 10 years, said Casey Norton, the airline’s director of corporate communications. But beginning about a year ago, the company started improvements that will reach its more than 50 Admiral’s Clubs.Fifteen locations will have major renovations, and the rest will receive updates like new carpets, modern furniture and additional power outlets. All will feature better food selections like soups and salads, rather than just snacks and cookies. The airline’s more upscale Flagship clubs will also be expanded and redecorated.“We’re spending $3 billion to improve the customer experience, and clubs are an important part of that,” Mr. Norton said. He did not specify the amount going to refurbish clubs, but said competitive pressures had spurred the upgrades.Delta Air Lines started reinvesting two years ago to update its 50 Delta Sky Clubs around the world, 47 of which are in the United States. The changes include redesigned food displays, relaxing background music and a signature scent in the lobby, said Marc Ferguson, general manager of the Delta Sky Club Experience, who is helping reimagine the lounges.AdvertisementFood choices are a top customer concern, said Claude Roussel, managing director of Sky Club. He said Delta was moving toward hiring local food suppliers and adding kitchen facilities. New features like toppings bars for soups, yogurts and breads are being introduced. Menus will be rotated more frequently, recognizing that many customers visit a club multiple times in a month, he said.Delta is also trying to add some hometown flair, using local artists or themed art, as well as local craft beers to add individuality to the clubs. Renovated clubs reopened recently in Dallas and Nashville, and Newark and Raleigh, N.C., are next on the schedule. A new club opened in San Francisco last fall to be followed this year by Atlanta, Denver and Seattle.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’re in a place where we can reinvest in the customer experience from ticket purchase to arrival at the destination,” said Anthony Black, a Delta spokesman.United Airlines has also announced a multiyear improvement plan for its airport clubs, spending more than $200 million, with a focus on work spaces, said Rahsaan Johnson, a company spokesman. The increase in the use of mobile devices and cloud computing means that more travelers are using the club as an extension of their office, he said, and the airline’s upgrades are aimed at meeting those needs.In addition to more seats and better food, United is focusing on providing more workstations with power outlets and USB ports in its clubs. The company is also opening a new set of lounges called Polaris for business-class passengers flying internationally.Sheri Spero, a frequent vacation traveler from New York, has noticed changes in the clubs. She sometimes visits more than one while she waits for her plane.“I come a few extra hours early for my flights just to hang out there,” she said. Her current favorite is the Delta Sky Club at Kennedy International Airport in New York, which features an outdoor patio overlooking the runways and live music in the summer.Ms. Spero has also noted the competition. American Express recently opened six high-end Centurion Lounges that cater to its cardholders. Centurion members and Platinum card holders enter free, while other card holders pay $50. The lounges offer complimentary chef-prepared meals, soundproof rooms for children and, in some, free 15-minute massages and manicures.“Centurion is giving the airlines a run for their money,” Ms. Spero said. “Whenever I go to an airport that has one, I make sure to stop by.”AdvertisementMelanie Backs, an American Express spokeswoman, said that the company wanted to improve upon the traditional domestic airline lounge while also adding a personal touch for customers and increasing their loyalty.International competition is also spurring the recent investment in clubs, said Brian Kelly, who follows the travel industry on his website, ThePointsGuy.com.“Foreign carriers lead the pack when it comes to offering the premium experience in their lounges,” he said. High-end furnishings and shower facilities set them apart, he said, and the service, food and beverages are “on a whole different level.”Domestic airlines realize their customers spend time in those luxurious international lounges, Mr. Oshins said, and recognize that the quality and service levels are disparate, encouraging domestic carriers to step up.In the age of Instagram posts, online customer comments and websites dedicated to travel reviews, Mr. Larounis added, “Fliers will be examining and comparing every aspect of the clubs.”A version of this article appears in print on June 21, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Airlines Upgrade Clubs to Lure High-End Customers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.