AdvertisementSupported byBy Landon Thomas Jr.Robert F. Dall, an investment banker and a pioneer of the mortgage bond market on Wall Street, died on Sunday in Manhattan. He was 81.His son Matthew said the cause was complications of pneumonia.While at Salomon Brothers in the 1970s, Mr. Dall oversaw the first sale of bonds backed by American home mortgages to large private investors.This innovation created an entire industry, as other investment banks rushed to get into a profitable business, giving rise to a brash culture of big risks, big egos and big pay that would come to define Wall Street.It was Mr. Dall’s bond trading desk that the author (and onetime Salomon bond salesman) Michael Lewis memorialized in his book “Liar’s Poker” in 1989. Mr. Lewis, in describing Mr. Dall’s early efforts with these securities, wrote that Mr. Dall “began to think thoughts years into the future.”Nevertheless, it was Mr. Dall’s hard-charging deputy at Salomon, Lewis S. Ranieri, who assumed a central role in Mr. Lewis’s tale. Mr. Ranieri went on to unseat Mr. Dall as the head of the firm’s fast-growing mortgage securities department.“If I didn’t believe in the capitalist system, I could never accept what happened,” Mr. Dall said in an interview with The New York Times in 1987. “But I do believe in it: The fittest moved ahead.”Under Mr. Ranieri, Salomon came to be seen as the leading bank for these securities, which, with further innovations, became a core investment for institutional investors all over the world.The mortgage securities business generated a peak of about half of Salomon’s profits in the early 1980s.In interviews, Mr. Dall said he got the idea for issuing bonds backed by mortgages from the work he was doing at Salomon with the Government National Mortgage Association, better known as Ginnie Mae.While Mr. Dall started work at a different area in the bank, by the early 1970s he had begun to trade the mortgage-backed securities of Ginnie Mae. The market at the time was fairly small, and private investors were not big players in it because the securities were not seen as an attractive investment.But Mr. Dall and his superiors at Salomon were convinced that the housing market in the United States would grow rapidly because of demographic changes, and that there should be a role for Wall Street banks in securitizing these mortgages so that large institutional investors could buy them.In 1977, Mr. Dall oversaw what many say was the first sale of securitized mortgages to a private investor: a $100 million deal with Bank of America.“It was something that just came out of my head and happened,” he said in another interview with The Times.Mr. Dall retired from Salomon as a managing director in 1984 and went on to work briefly at Morgan Stanley and then Drexel Burnham Lambert in 1986. In the late 1980s, he formed an investment partnership with a former associate from Salomon Brothers that specialized in investing in real estate properties.Robert Fred Dall was born on Aug. 23, 1934, in Astoria, Queens. He graduated from Hofstra University and received a degree in business from New York University.After a two-year stint in the Army, he started working at a commercial bank in 1957. He also worked at Goldman Sachs before moving to Salomon Brothers in the late 1960s.In addition to his son Matthew, Mr. Dall, who lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, is survived by another son, Christopher. His wife, Rosalie, died in 2003.Advertisement