By NIRAJ CHOKSHIJUNE 21, 2016
 Join us for live updates and analysis.Hillary Clinton’s speech attacking Donald Trump’s economic proposals on Tuesday mentioned a new analysis that says his ideas — if enacted in full — would bring about a “lengthy recession” by the end of his first term.That report, released on Monday by Moody’s Analytics, a subsidiary of the credit rating and research agency Moody’s Corporation, explores the consequences of the policies Mr. Trump has proposed in speeches, interviews and on his website. Those policies would, under almost any scenario, result in an economy that is “more isolated and diminished,” the authors concluded.“If Mr. Trump gets precisely what he’s proposed, then the U.S. economy will suffer meaningfully,” said Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics. “It will result in a lot of lost jobs, higher unemployment, higher interest rates, lower stock prices.”Mr. Zandi, the report’s lead author, is a registered Democrat who has donated to Mrs. Clinton. But he has worked the other side of the political aisle, too: In 2008, he advised the presidential campaign of Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona.AdvertisementThe Trump campaign did not immediately respond to requests for comment on the report, titled “The Macroeconomic Consequences of Mr. Trump’s Economic Policies.” But an unnamed adviser cited by The Wall Street Journal on Monday disputed the report’s conclusions, noting that more detail on the policies is forthcoming and taking issue with the assumption that proposed tax cuts would hurt the economy.AdvertisementMr. Zandi defended the work, saying that such an analysis demands impartiality. “This is my job,” he said. “I have clients that ask, ‘What do these economic policies mean for me?’ — in all kinds of industries, in all walks of life.”What Mr. Trump’s policies on trade, taxes, spending and immigration would mean, he and three co-authors say, is slow growth for the nation, even if Mr. Trump’s proposals were significantly moderated by Congress.“The U.S. economy is able to avoid a recession in this scenario, but growth comes to a near standstill early in Mr. Trump’s term,” they say. The economy, they say, would add about half as many jobs under the compromise scenario as it would if current economic policy were unchanged. Long-term economic growth would slow. The trade deficit would rise.The Moody’s model has its critics. Kevin Hassett, director of research for domestic policy at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, argues that Mr. Zandi and his team underestimate the benefits of the tax cuts “by kind of a large margin.”“I think the bottom line is that the model that they’re using is not a very good model,” said Mr. Hassett, who advised the presidential campaigns of Mr. McCain, George W. Bush and Gov. Mitt Romney.Mr. Hassett, who said he neither supported nor opposed Mr. Trump, said he was more convinced by the Moody’s analysis on trade and immigration. Mr. Zandi, he said, is “really, really good” at such analyses.To conduct their analysis, the Moody’s team began by identifying the most economically consequential and detailed policies Mr. Trump has proposed. Moody’s said it had consulted two Trump advisers, who asked the firm not to publicize their identities.Hillary Clinton, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, spoke in Columbus, Ohio, on Tuesday, criticizing Donald J. Trump’s plans for the economy.Using a proprietary economic model, Moody’s considered three scenarios: one in which the proposals were adopted as Mr. Trump has laid them out; one in which they were adopted on a smaller scale; and one in which Mr. Trump was forced to compromise with a Congress similar in makeup to today’s.AdvertisementUnder any scenario, the proposals would have four negative consequences, the researchers say.First, unemployment would rise and the economy would weaken. Second, the United States would become increasingly isolated as Mr. Trump tightened rules on trade and immigration. Third, federal deficits would accumulate in the face of substantially reduced tax revenues paired with few spending cuts. Fourth, very high-income households would benefit most from the dramatic tax cuts and be least affected by job losses.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If all the policies were put into effect, the report said, the country would be plunged into a recession beginning in early 2018 and remain there into 2020.“This would be an unusually lengthy recession — even longer than the Great Recession,” the authors write.Trade would probably be the first area to be affected, Mr. Zandi said. Mr. Trump has proposed a 45 percent tariff on Chinese imports and a 35 percent tariff on imports from Mexico. This would drive the price of consumer goods higher, and both countries would probably impose in-kind tariffs, Moody’s predicted.“That would do a significant amount of damage pretty quickly — setting off something akin to a trade war,” Mr. Zandi said.Mr. Trump’s tax and spending proposals would have a longer-term effect. With few spending cuts, his planned tax cuts, which would reduce federal revenues by roughly $9.5 trillion over a decade, according to the nonpartisan Tax Policy Center, would produce substantial budget deficits.“That would be a pretty significant corrosive on investment, productivity and then G.D.P.,” Mr. Zandi said.The economy would also struggle to grow if Mr. Trump acted on his pledge to deport 11 million immigrants. An already-tight labor market would constrict even further, driving up labor costs. Positions would go unfilled, the Moody’s analysts said, with Americans unlikely to take the jobs once held by undocumented immigrants, such as those in agriculture — even at higher wages.AdvertisementAnalyses like the Moody’s report are, of course, imperfect exercises, Mr. Zandi and his colleagues acknowledge.Candidate policy proposals often lack specificity, are rarely comprehensive, change as time goes on and are often moderated by political and economic forces. Indeed, Mr. Trump himself has suggested that his stances on trade and tax, for example, are merely starting points.But statements made on the campaign trail offer insight into how a politician might govern and deserve examination, Mr. Zandi said. “It’s about vetting ideas, proposals and putting them in the crucible of the public debate,” he said.A similar report on Mrs. Clinton’s proposals is in the works.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »