AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra Stevenson and Matthew GoldsteinA high-flying hedge fund manager at Visium Asset Management, who was charged last week with insider trading, has died, apparently the victim of a suicide.The manager, Sanjay Valvani, was discovered on Monday by his wife in their brownstone in Brooklyn Heights, a New York police official said. Mr. Valvani was found face down on the bedroom floor with a cut to his neck, the official said. He left a note, and a knife was found near his body. He was 44.The death brought the government’s case against Mr. Valvani to a shocking end. Last week, he was accused of using confidential information from a former Food and Drug Administration official to reap $32 million in illegal gains.Days after the charges, Visium’s founder, Jacob Gottlieb, announced that he was shuttering the multibillion-dollar hedge fund and selling one of its funds to AllianceBernstein.In a statement, Barry H. Berke, a lawyer for Mr. Valvani, called his death “a horrible tragedy that is difficult to comprehend.”“We hope for the sake of his family and his memory that it will not be forgotten that the charges against him were only unproven accusations and he had always maintained his innocence,” Mr. Berke said.In addition to his wife, Mr. Valvani left behind two daughters.The death of Mr. Valvani is still being investigated, but another police official said that it appeared to be a suicide.It is not known whether other factors could have affected Mr. Valvani’s state of mind.Suicides by people touched by white-collar criminal cases are rare. But there have been a few prominent examples in recent years. Mark Madoff, the older son of Bernard L. Madoff, hanged himself in his Manhattan apartment on the second anniversary of his father’s arrest on charges of running a Ponzi scheme. And J. Clifford Baxter, a former Enron executive, shot himself in the head in 2002 after he was subpoenaed by Congress to testify about the accounting scandal at the company.“When you’re dealing with my world, there is everything to lose,” said Ira Lee Sorkin, a former lawyer for Mr. Madoff and a partner at Mintz & Gold, adding, “There’s reputation, family, business — you name it and some people just can’t take the pressure.”“Clients in the past, if they are under investigation or they have been charged, have said to me in moments of sweat and panic and fear: ‘I can’t go on like this. I just can’t deal with this anymore.’ They have threatened to kill themselves,” Mr. Sorkin added.Federal prosecutors in Manhattan had accused Mr. Valvani of pocketing tens of millions of dollars in illicit gains in Visium’s Balanced fund based on information about coming Food and Drug Administration approvals for a generic version of a drug that helps prevent blood clots. Authorities charged that he received inside information from a former F.D.A. official working as a consultant.In all, four individuals were charged in the investigation of Visium, including two former Visium colleagues. The former F.D.A. official, Gordon Johnston, and Christopher Plaford, once a colleague of Mr. Valvani who also traded on inside information, have pleaded guilty.A lawyer for Stefan Lumiere, the third employee named in the government’s case, declined to comment. Mr. Lumiere, a former brother-in-law to Mr. Gottlieb, was accused of mismarking securities with Mr. Plaford.During the government’s investigation of Mr. Lumiere, prosecutors in a criminal complaint said that one broker under scrutiny died last summer before charges were brought. The investigation of Visium harked back to a crackdown on insider trading in the nearly $3 trillion hedge fund industry that began with the arrest in 2009 of Raj Rajaratnam, the co-founder of the Galleon Group hedge fund.In the months and years that followed, prosecutors working for Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, racked up more than 80 convictions on insider trading charges. The convictions sent a wave of fear through the hedge fund industry and led some to call Mr. Bharara the new sheriff of Wall Street.But chinks in Mr. Bharara’s armor began to emerge in late 2014, when a federal appeals court threw out the convictions of two hedge fund managers and made it more difficult for prosecutors to bring insider trading cases when there was no clear benefit provided to the source of the inside information about a company. The appellate court ruled that prosecutors must show the source of an inside tip received a benefit “of some consequence,” although the court was vague as to what that must be.The appellate ruling, which the United States Supreme Court declined to review, later led Mr. Bharara to toss out nearly a dozen other convictions and guilty pleas.For a time, the court ruling appeared to have blunted the Manhattan office’s pursuit of insider trading cases.But the charges against Mr. Valvani and his former colleagues at Visium dispelled any thought that hedge funds would no longer be a focus of Mr. Bharara’s office.Legal specialists said on Tuesday that they did not expect the death to cause prosecutors and Mr. Bharara to back away if they believed wrongdoing had occurred.“I don’t think he’s going to lose sleep over it because it comes with the territory,” Thomas A. Sporkin, a lawyer at BuckleySandler and a former Securities and Exchange Commission enforcement lawyer, said of Mr. Bharara.Mr. Bharara’s office declined to comment on Mr. Valvani’s death.The son of Indian immigrants, Mr. Valvani grew up in Kalamazoo, Mich. After graduating from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, he spent four years working as a health care consultant before receiving an M.B.A. from Duke University, according to a profile on the school’s website recognizing his endowment of two scholarship funds at the Fuqua School of Business through a $250,000 commitment.Mr. Valvani got his start on Wall Street in 2001 as a pharmaceutical analyst working for Salomon Smith Barney. He then took a job as portfolio manager at the investment management firm Balyasny Asset Management.There, he met and worked closely with Mr. Gottlieb until the team spun out to start Visium. Mr. Valvani rose to the top ranks, becoming Mr. Gottlieb’s right-hand man and one of a few senior executives running the firm’s most important fund, called the Balanced fund, which focused on health care.“In the beginning, I really had to convince Jacob Gottlieb that I was hungry to join his hedge fund,” Mr. Valvani said in the Duke profile. “I work hard and try to be the best at what I do, which is why a hedge fund is so suitable for me — here I have a lot of control over my own destiny.”In April, Visium had placed Mr. Valvani on paid administrative leave.The news of Mr. Valvani’s death on Tuesday stunned those who had worked with him on Wall Street.In a statement, Mr. Gottlieb said: “We mourn the tragic loss of Sanjay, a devoted father, husband and friend. Our thoughts are with his family during this difficult time.”Susan Beachy contributed research.Advertisement