By BRUCE WEBERNOV. 20, 2015
Tom Buckley, a versatile reporter for The New York Times who covered the United Nations and the war in Vietnam, wrote columns about New York City and articles for the Sunday magazine, and as a television critic panned “Hill Street Blues,” died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan. He was 87.The cause was lung cancer, his sister, Faith Rose, said.Mr. Buckley had worked at The Times since 1953, starting as a copy boy, when he was named United Nations correspondent in 1962. He worked in The Times’s Saigon bureau from late 1966 to June 1968, covering the Tet offensive and writing analyses of the American military strategy; a profile from the carrier Constellation of Rear Adm. Ralph Wynne Cousins, commander of American warships in the Gulf of Tonkin; and an account of emergency surgery on a wounded soldier.He later returned to Vietnam as a staff writer for The New York Times Magazine.A brash personality both in the newsroom and on the page, Mr. Buckley wrote colorfully and sometimes controversially. In a 1970 profile of Whitney Young, the head of the National Urban League, he wrote about Mr. Young’s seeming ease in working with the white establishment and the suspicion with which some black leaders viewed him as a result.“Young is frequently derogated as Uncle Whitney or Whitey Young or ‘an Oreo cookie,’ ” Mr. Buckley wrote, a line that was the cue for the article’s headline: Whitney Young: Black Leader or ‘Oreo Cookie’? The article provoked an immediate backlash.AdvertisementObjecting to “white liberals arrogating unto themselves the right to decide which black man is a soul brother and which is an Uncle Tom,” the columnist Carl T. Rowan wrote, “Tom Buckley and The Times can pick their own heroes; we black people will pick the black ones.”AdvertisementThomas Floyd Schofield Buckley was born in Chatham, N.Y., near Albany, on Jan. 2, 1928. His mother, the former Juliet Sparks, was an 18-year-old dancer when she married a much older man, Floyd Buckley, an actor who died in 1956, the same year he performed on Broadway in “No Time for Sergeants” with Andy Griffith.Tom Buckley grew up mostly in the Beechhurst neighborhood of Queens, graduating from Bayside High School and going on to Columbia University. He served two stateside stints in the Army, one immediately after World War II and another during the Korean War.After joining The Times in 1953, Mr. Buckley progressed through the copy-editing and reporting ranks to become a general assignment reporter in New York.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the mid-1970s he wrote the column “About New York,” a landing spot for many of the paper’s best stylists. One of his columns, under the headline “The $7.85 Murder,” told of a bartender who was knifed to death by a customer in a skirmish over a tab.“More than 700 people attended Asher Miskel’s funeral last Tuesday,” Mr. Buckley began. “Many of them were the owners, managers, waiters, bartenders, cooks and customers at bars on the East Side and in Greenwich Village. They came from Bradley’s, the Lion’s Head, Salty Dog, J. G. Melon’s, Allen’s, Charlie Bates’ and scores of other outposts in that little world of men who go to bed too late, know too many women and drink and gamble too freely that Asher Miskel had been part of for 20 years.”Mr. Buckley married Barbara Seaman in 1959. She died in 2008. His sister is his only immediate survivor.Mr. Buckley wrote reviews of books, movies and television shows. His possibly premature dismissal of “Hill Street Blues” after its first episode did not keep the show from running for seven years and becoming one of the most admired police dramas in television history.“ ‘Ten-thirteen’ is the police-radio code for ‘assist patrolman,’ ” Mr. Buckley wrote. “Too bad there isn’t a signal for ‘assist writers,’ because ‘Hill Street Blues’ needs help badly.”Mr. Buckley also wrote for The New Yorker, Esquire and other magazines. He left The Times in 1982.His 1984 book about the relationship between the United States and Central America received serious consideration from serious publications, including The New York Review of Books, though Mr. Buckley was incensed by that publication’s characterization of it.Advertisement“It’s a !*#p9L0@*! outrage for Christopher Dickey, in his essay ‘The Saving of El Salvador’ to refer to my book ‘Violent Neighbors: El Salvador, Central America and the United States’ as ‘amiable,’ ” he wrote. “Other reviewers have described its tone as ‘ironic,’ ‘sardonic,’ ‘witty,’ ‘skeptical,’ ‘cynical’ and even ‘vitriolic,’ but not ‘amiable’ or anything like it.”A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Tom Buckley, 87, Colorful Times Reporter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.