By NELSON D. SCHWARTZJUNE 21, 2016
Janet L. Yellen told the Senate on Tuesday that global risks, including the possibility of Britain leaving the European Union, and a less-robust American economy may preclude raising interest rates.WASHINGTON — Weak economic growth in the United States could force the Federal Reserve to hold off on any imminent interest rate increases, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, told Congress on Tuesday.While Ms. Yellen said that the American economy’s long-term prospects remain favorable, she signaled that headwinds, including slower employment gains in recent months, weak productivity growth and the persistence of a sluggish pace of inflation have prompted the Fed to adopt a more cautious stance.“The latest readings on the labor market and the weak pace of investment illustrate one downside — that domestic demand might falter,” Ms. Yellen said in testimony before the Senate Banking Committee.Ms. Yellen’s overall message on Capitol Hill echoed her comments at a news  conference last week after the Fed’s decision to hold rates steady. But her tenor suggested that there was little chance of an increase in the benchmark federal funds rate at the central bank’s next meeting, in July, and that a move when policy makers meet again in September is hardly guaranteed.Advertisement“Proceeding cautiously in raising the federal funds rate will allow us to keep the monetary support to economic growth in place while we assess whether growth is returning to a moderate pace,” she said.AdvertisementMirroring the habit of Fed leaders going back decades, Ms. Yellen hedged her bets, emphasizing her positive outlook for the years ahead, if not the coming quarter or two.But she acknowledged influential voices in academia and elsewhere who have warned that long-term growth could be substantially below the pace achieved in the decades before the Great Recession.“Although I am optimistic about the longer-run prospects for the U.S. economy, we cannot rule out the possibility expressed by some prominent economists that the slow productivity growth seen in recent years will continue in the future,” she said.In the question-and-answer portion of the hearing, Ms. Yellen termed recent productivity growth “disappointing,” and pointed out that business investment had been similarly weak during the recovery. She added that the productivity issue was something Congress needed to address by improving polices for workplace training and other issues.Ms. Yellen’s appearance is part of two days of testimony before Congress that the Fed leader is required to present twice each year. Another session is scheduled on Wednesday before the House Financial Services Committee.Her previous testimony on monetary policy was in February, so this week’s appearance before Congress is Ms. Yellen’s last before the presidential election in November.As a result, Ms. Yellen received a barrage of questions on everything from the course of interest rates and banking regulation in the United States to the potential fallout if British voters decide in favor of leaving the European Union when they go to the polls on Thursday.AdvertisementResponding to opening questions from Senator Richard C. Shelby, the Alabama Republican who is chairman of the Senate Banking committee, Ms. Yellen emphasized that until recently, the job market had held up well despite “mixed developments in the economy.”Noting that the jobs data for May was disappointing, she nonetheless said that “it is important we don’t overblow the significance of single report.”“If the slowdown is a reflection of weak growth earlier in the year, I’m hopeful we will see stronger job gains going forward,” she added.Ms. Yellen called the possibility of a so-called Brexit “significant for the United Kingdom and Europe,” and said that if Britain left the European Union it could usher in a period of uncertainty and volatility “that could affect market conditions and the U.S. economic outlook.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Late in the hearing, Ms. Yellen said that while the Fed was closely monitoring the Brexit vote and the possible consequences of a vote to leave, she was not offering advice on how to vote.Although the decision “is a unique event that has no close parallel,” she said, the Fed “is not attempting to take a stand. I am not providing advice in that sense.”Under questioning from Senator Bob Menendez, a New Jersey Democrat, Ms. Yellen took aim at a recent suggestion from Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, that one option in managing the federal debt might be to force investors to accept less than the face value of what the government owed.So-called haircuts aren’t unusual for bondholders of troubled companies, or for businesses going through bankruptcy, like the ones Mr. Trump controlled as a businessman. But she made clear such a strategy could prove disastrous for the government and the economy alike.“I feel the consequences for the United States and the global economy for defaulting on Treasury debt would be very severe,” she said, avoiding mentioning Mr. Trump by name. “At a minimum, it could result in much higher borrowing costs for U.S. households and businesses.”AdvertisementDespite the Fed’s first move to tighten monetary policy in a decade in December, interest rates remain extremely low by historical standards and not too far above the so-called zero-bound.That kind of accommodation provides support for the economy, Ms. Yellen said, but it does rob the Fed of what she called a “tried and true” tool in the face of an economic shock: a rate cut to spur growth.For now, though, Ms. Yellen saw little reason to fear an impending crisis and she dismissed fears among some on Wall Street that the Fed has contributed to imbalances in the markets. “I don’t see any evidence,” she said, “of those broad-based financial stability concerns.”And for all her caution about the outlook for the economy, Ms. Yellen said she did not see a recession on the horizon.“The odds of a recession are low,” she said. Even as the Fed chairwoman listed headwinds like a weak manufacturing sector, lower commodity prices and job losses in the energy sector, she said, “I remain quite optimistic.”Recessions are usually preceded by the threat of rising inflation and tightening monetary policy, she said. “We don’t have any such conditions in play right now.”A version of this article appears in print on June 22, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Growth Weak, Fed Chairwoman Signals No Hurry to Raise Interest Rates.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.