AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — Hollywood product-placement deals are often wince-worthy. But the reason is usually not because of events beyond a studio’s control.This week, 20th Century Fox has found itself in the awkward position of publicly linking arms with the Jeep Grand Cherokee, even as that sport utility vehicle brand received negative attention after the death of the actor Anton Yelchin. Fox and Jeep have an extensive marketing and product-placement deal for “Independence Day: Resurgence,” which arrives in theaters this week.Early Sunday morning, a 2015 Jeep Grand Cherokee rolled backward down a steep driveway in Los Angeles and killed Mr. Yelchin, known for playing Chekov in Paramount’s recent “Star Trek” movies. The cause of the accident is still under investigation, but the model owned by Mr. Yelchin had been recalled by Fiat Chrysler for a gearshift issue that has sometimes resulted in dangerous rollaways.On Monday night, Jeep sponsored a premiere of “Independence Day: Resurgence” at the TCL Chinese Theater here. A white Grand Cherokee, albeit a newer model than the one owned by Mr. Yelchin, was parked on the red carpet. Stars like Vivica A. Fox were asked to pose in front of it. “This is a movie we knew we could have fun with,” Scott Brown, a Fiat Chrysler spokesman, said in a promotional interview with USA Today from the event.The premiere was part of an advertising agreement that Fox completed months ago with the carmaker. Specialized Grand Cherokees are driven in the film during a scene set in Africa and involving Earth Space Defense, an alien early-warning system. (Nobody is harmed in them in the movie.) Jeep has featured “Resurgence” on its official Twitter account. A television ad campaign tying Jeep to the film has been running since June 1.Cars have long been one of Hollywood’s favored product-placement items. Given the escalating number of auto recalls, studios may start to think twice before signing that next S.U.V. to a starring role.Fox declined to comment on the product placement. Jeep is one of several marketing partners for the film. Fox also signed deals with Twizzlers, Denny’s, Hamilton watches and the Army.Fox has one of Hollywood’s most highly regarded advertising departments, but the studio has recently had a run of difficult marketing moments. Early this month, Fox was criticized for “X-Men: Apocalypse” billboards that depicted a female supervillain being choked, an image some saw as misogynistic. The studio apologized and had them removed.Advertisement