AdvertisementSupported byNews AnalysisBy Nelson D. SchwartzWASHINGTON — Year after year of disappointing growth in the United States. Disappearing middle-class jobs. Turmoil overseas, including the looming possibility that British voters will decide on Thursday to part ways with Europe. Urgent economic issues all.But what did some lawmakers on the House Financial Services Committee want to talk about on Wednesday when the Federal Reserve chairwoman, Janet Yellen, was called before them for her semiannual testimony to Congress? Whether the Federal Reserve, which has the power to create money at will, is solvent.Ms. Yellen’s final appearance before the presidential election in November was a master class in how many members of Congress have allowed real debate about the country’s economic challenges to be subsumed in the broader political din.Wednesday’s hearing followed a more sober session on Tuesday before the Senate Banking Committee, where Ms. Yellen laid out a cautious view of the economy’s prospects, playing down the risk of recession while reiterating that near-term weakness may prompt the Fed to hold off on any imminent rate increases.With that message dominating the headlines, it was the turn of House members to pressure the central bank, which has become a bête noire for the right, just as it once was for the left in years past.For the most part, Ms. Yellen didn’t fall into any traps, echoing the academic, even remote tone adopted by predecessors like Ben Bernanke and Alan Greenspan in the face of congressional gadflies and firebrands.There were moments during the three-hour hearing when the Kabuki-type theater briefly abated and Ms. Yellen was asked to address the economic questions that many ordinary Americans are wrestling with, too.Representative Denny Heck, a Washington Democrat, noted that the government’s best-known yardstick for unemployment stands at a healthy 4.7 percent.But he pointed out that a broader measure of joblessness, which includes part-time workers who can’t find full-time work, is still more than twice as high, an unusually large gap by historical standards that underscores the paucity of gains in the current recovery for many workers.“I agree with you,” Ms. Yellen said, before acknowledging that the higher rate shows just how much slack remains as the economic recovery approaches its seventh anniversary.And Representative Ed Royce, a California Republican, queried Ms. Yellen on the impact of negative interest rates in Europe and Asia even as the Fed considers an interest rate increase in the coming months.That spread in rates could have major implications for the dollar, Ms. Yellen explained, noting how exchange rates are sensitive to monetary policy and affect things as varied as inflation and overall economic conditions.But the insights from Ms. Yellen, who taught economics at the University of California, Berkeley, for many years, were soon drowned by the dog whistles and dubious political point-scoring.Representative Scott Garrett, a senior Republican on the Financial Services Committee, accused Ms. Yellen of unfairly aiding Wall Street and worsening income inequality.That’s a serious issue, subject to intense debate among economists, but Mr. Garrett made it partisan by accusing Ms. Yellen of making statements that were “eerily similar to what the administration has said,” and then giving her little opportunity to explain her position.“Why do you see a need to benefit Goldman Sachs?” he asked.“I’m sorry, we are not trying to benefit the rich,” Ms. Yellen responded, before trying to interject that more than 14 million jobs had been created since the recession ended in 2009.“Excuse me, I have the floor,” said Mr. Garrett, not long before the chairman’s gavel brought the unenlightening exchange to an end.Representative Frank Guinta, a New Hampshire Republican, was more polite. But he noted that the Great Depression, stagflation of the 1970s and most recently the Great Recession had all taken place since the Fed’s creation more than a century ago, apparently confusing correlation with causation.He then wandered off on a tangent to inquire how often Ms. Yellen consults with Richard Cordray of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and what thoughts she had on the agency’s budget.An apparently puzzled Ms. Yellen pointed out that it is her staff that deals with Mr. Cordray, a longtime Republican target, before waving off how the new agency is funded as a matter for Congress, which holds the government’s purse strings, not the Fed.Using an unusual metaphor not found in economic textbooks, the committee’s chairman, Representative Jeb Hensarling, Republican of Texas, compared the central bank’s tradition of charging banks interest on reserves at the Fed to how his son chases his daughter around the house with a Louisville Slugger baseball bat.Then it was the turn of Representative Sean P. Duffy, a Wisconsin Republican, to cite the imposition of hundreds of thousands of pages of regulations in recent years. He wanted to know if that was among the “headwinds” Ms. Yellen has cited as hurting growth.“Are you referring to our regulations?” she asked.“I’m talking about government regulations,” he responded. “Why don’t you cite it as a headwind?”“It’s very hard to quantify the extent to which regulations is headwind,” she said. “Businesses certainly cite regulation as a factor.”After a fruitless attempt to get Ms. Yellen to call health insurance costs for Wisconsin manufacturers a headwind, Mr. Duffy gave up in a fit of pique.“I’ll accept that as a nonanswer,” he said.Representative Bill Huizenga, a Michigan Republican, and other members peppered Ms. Yellen with questions on whether the Fed itself is too big to fail, wondering aloud whether the central bank was a threat to global stability and needed to be subject to the kind of “stress tests” it forces commercial banks to go through.”Our balance sheet is very different,” she replied. “The Fed is very different from a commercial bank.”Still, at least one committee member, Representative Gwen Moore, a Wisconsin Democrat, stepped in to defend Ms. Yellen, turning attention back to her fellow lawmakers.“The failure is Congress’s failure, not the Fed’s,” she said. “Stop derailing us with nonsense.”OpinionBryce CovertAdvertisement