AdvertisementSupported byBy Annalyn Kurtz and Rachel AbramsMacy’s longtime chief executive, Terry J. Lundgren, will step down next year, the company announced on Thursday, as the retailer grapples with sagging sales and broader changes in the ways people shop.Jeff Gennette, 55, who is the company’s president, will take the top spot, while Mr. Lundgren will stay as executive chairman.“I have been honored to lead this enterprise through a period of unprecedented reinvention,” Mr. Lundgren said in a statement. “While our company is larger, stronger and more resourceful than we were 13 years ago, now is the time to reset our business model to thrive in a future that is being driven by rapid evolution in consumer preferences and shopping habits.”The company said the leadership transition was part of its board’s succession plan. But the moves come in the face of widespread turmoil at the nation’s department stores, including Macy’s, which have struggled to recover from the recession as quickly as the rest of the retail industry. Shoppers are spending more, but they are also hunting for bargains, online and at so-called off-price stores known foremost for their discounts.Amazon, the online shopping giant, as well as discount chains like T. J. Maxx and Marshalls, have added to the pressure. Macy’s and other department stores have offered aggressive promotions to entice shoppers, a move that some retail experts say has led to a race to the bottom.“We’re a promotional department store, and we will continue to be a promotional department store,” Mr. Gennette said in an interview. “We offer values every day to our customer.”Macy’s, J. C. Penney, Nordstrom and Kohl’s all reported surprisingly lackluster sales last quarter that sent their stocks tumbling. Macy’s was particularly hard-hit, reporting that sales at comparable stores, a measure often used by the industry, fell 5.6 percent over the previous year, the weakest showing since the recession.The new chief has a “very daunting task” ahead of him, said Craig Johnson, president of Customer Growth Partners, a retail consulting and research firm.“Macy’s is facing some very difficult challenges,” Mr. Johnson said. “I think it’s the right move at the right time.”Still, the selection of Mr. Gennette does not seem to suggest a swift resetting of strategy. He said he expected to continue several of the initiatives begun under his predecessor. To better compete with discount stores, Macy’s is opening outlet stores under the Macy’s Backstage name and plans to have 15 of those stores open by the end of the fourth quarter.Mr. Gennette said he also wanted to continue building collaborations with other brands. In some stores, Macy’s leases space to Men’s Wearhouse to run a tuxedo rental business. It also has similar arrangements with Finish Line, the athletic shoe brand, and Sunglass Hut. These brands lease the space and operate separate shops within Macy’s stores.He is also continuing what he calls Macy’s “I do” strategy, upgrading fine jewelry departments within the department stores.“We believe we can be the wedding destination,” he said. “It starts with the ring and goes all the way to your first house and kid. We believe we can be a one-stop shop for that.”What’s not clear is how Mr. Gennette will differ from his predecessor, said Neil Saunders, a retail analyst for Conlumino.Mr. Gennette began his career at Macy’s in 1983, starting as an executive trainee and working his way into management roles in the men’s and children’s divisions. Before his promotion to Macy’s president in 2014, he worked as the company’s chief merchandising officer since 2009.“He’s very much a Macy’s insider,” Mr. Saunders said. “He knows the business inside and out, and he’s worked very closely with Lundgren for many years. In a way, they’re just swapping seats.”Aside from its retail business, Macy’s is also exploring ways to raise money from its many real estate holdings. Last year, the company sold part of its building in Downtown Brooklyn to Tishman Speyer, a developer. The retailer will continue to occupy the first four floors of the nine-story building, while the upper floors will be reconfigured into office space for other tenants.Mr. Gennette said Macy’s was also pursuing other sales or joint ventures at its flagship stores in New York, Chicago and Minneapolis, as well as some of its mall properties.Mr. Lundgren, 64, who has led Macy’s since 2003, will step down as chief executive in the first quarter of 2017, the company said. He has transformed Macy’s during his tenure, including with a buyout of the May Department Stores Company in 2005. After the merger, he converted other local chains, like Marshall Field’s in Chicago and Filene’s in Boston, into Macy’s stores. He also changed the company’s corporate name to Macy’s from Federated Department Stores in 2007.Macy’s now operates 870 stores in 45 states, up from just 240 stores in 2005. Those stores include the upscale department store chain Bloomingdale’s and the makeup retailer Bluemercury. Macy’s shares rose about 2 percent in midday trading.“Under Lundgren, lots of different initiatives were going on. What Macy’s needs is a finisher of those things,” said Mr. Saunders, the retail analyst. “We have to see what Jeff Gennette can do.”Advertisement