By LESLIE PICKERJUNE 22, 2016
Twilio, which makes software that helps companies such as Uber and Nordstrom communicate with their customers, raised $150 million in an initial public offering that priced late Wednesday, the largest within the technology sector so far this year.The move is perhaps a brave one, given that the market has not been very receptive to new tech I.P.O.s. Only three have debuted so far in 2016. Additionally, Twilio’s first day of trading coincides with Britain’s vote to stay or leave the European Union, the so-called Brexit, which could roil the markets.Twilio’s new investors did not seem too fazed. The company said on Wednesday that it sold 10 million shares for $15 apiece, which was above the $12 to $14 range it had been marketing to investors. The I.P.O. price yields a market valuation of $1.2 billion, slightly higher than the $1.1 billion valuation Twilio received in a private funding round a year ago.Twilio, based in San Francisco, is being hailed as a trailblazer compared with the almost 170 unicorns — or companies with valuations above $1 billion — that have opted to stay private for now. Twilio was a test of investor receptivity to the software company’s finances, which show 88 percent revenue growth over last year but consistent net losses. As markets become more uncertain, investors have preferred companies doing I.P.O.s to turn a profit.AdvertisementTwilio generated $167 million in revenue last year from about 25,000 active customer accounts. WhatsApp, the messaging service owned by Facebook, represented 17 percent of that revenue.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bessemer Venture Partners first backed Twilio in 2009 and is its largest shareholder, owning about 25 percent of the company’s outstanding shares. Fidelity Investments and Union Square Ventures also hold significant stakes. These entities as well as select executives hold 98.6 percent of the voting power after the I.P.O., because of their ownership of supervoting stock.AdvertisementJeff Lawson, 38, founded the company eight years ago and currently serves as its chief executive. Before Twilio, he started Nine Star, a retailer of equipment and apparel for the skate, ski, surf and BMX sports crowd. He had also worked for Amazon as technical product manager and as chief technology officer of StubHub.The company plans to use the net proceeds to expand its engineering, sales and marketing and customer support teams, and potentially to acquire businesses or other assets.Goldman Sachs and J. P. Morgan Chase managed the offering. Twilio shares are expected to begin trading on Thursday on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol TWLO.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.