JUNE 23, 2016
By James E. RyanLearning technologies offer great potential to improve education, but whether that potential will be realized depends on three key factors, which have less to do with technology itself and more to do with the people using it.First, we need to ensure that we don’t lose sight of the “learning” in learning technologies. We need to keep in mind that students learn at different rates, that it is critical to master a topic before moving to the next, that students who are engaged are likely to learn more and learn more deeply, and that active learning is more likely to engage students than passive learning.It follows that technologies that tailor learning to the pace and interests of students are likely to have bigger payoffs than those that do not.Second, we need to recognize that this is an adaptive challenge, not a technical one. We have to be thinking about fundamental questions like how we organize classes and schools, how we use time, how we think of the role of the teacher and what we expect students to learn. These are not technical questions but questions about organizational behavior and the role of teachers and principals.AdvertisementFinally, we must be committed to impartial, third-party evaluations of learning technologies. We need to know what is working and for whom. But we cannot rush to judgment. We need to balance our sense of urgency with patience and deliberation, recognizing that fundamental change takes time.AdvertisementDean of faculty, Harvard Graduate School of EducationBy Jeffrey SelingoNearly 40 percent of American workers hold a bachelor’s degree. Fifteen percent of mail carriers have a four-year degree, as do one in five clerical and sales workers.Getting a bachelor’s degree is what going to college means to most Americans. Students who do not march along are often considered — or consider themselves — failures.Yet the decades-long march to college has actually closed off options for young people.As recently as the 1970s, a high school graduate had a number of options: get a good-paying job right away, enlist in the military, find a trade apprenticeship or go to college.Today, there are really only two options: the military or college. Yet only 52 percent of young people have either a two- or four-year degree or an industry certificate by the time they reach their mid-20s.In the course of researching my new book, “There Is Life After College,” what I heard most from employers is a worry about filling so-called middle-skill positions in advanced manufacturing, health care and information technology.Nearly half of the American work force has these jobs today, but many of them will soon be retiring. As many as 25 million of all new job openings in the next decade will be for middle-skill jobs.We need job-training institutions on par with academic institutions to attract students interested in pursuing these skilled jobs.AdvertisementAn example is the Apprentice School in Newport News, Va., where students choose from among more than 20 occupational areas and are guaranteed a job with the military contractor that operates Newport News Shipbuilding.The school receives more than 4,000 applications each year for 230 spots.We need more such pathways for students who don’t want to travel the one route we offer them now.Author, “There Is Life After College”By Nicholas ChristakisOne of the most difficult challenges I faced this year was answering a Native American student’s poignant question: Why should she put any faith in institutions in our society when those institutions had betrayed her people in generations past?“The same Constitution with its protection of the rights to free expression and assembly that you revere,” she said, “was previously of no use to people like me.”I wish I had told her that the way out of this conundrum is to make these institutions her own. These institutions could be hers, and I believe she should want them to be hers.Students of all kinds are joining traditions that revere free expression, wide engagement, open assembly, rational debate and civil discourse.But it is illiberal to use these traditions to censor others, to besmirch fellow students and to treat ideological claims as perforce facts. When students (and faculty) do this, they are burning the furniture to heat the house.Open, extended conversations among students are essential to the pursuit of truth, to moral learning and to social progress. The faculty must show students a way forward: to be harder on the problems society faces, but easier on each other. We cannot be a community of searchers and learners if we do not share the same principles at the core of our universities.AdvertisementDisagreement is not oppression. Argument is not assault. Words — even provocative or repugnant ones — are not violence. The answer to speech we do not like is more speech.If we fail to see this, we risk confirming for our students the old joke that we wouldn’t want to join a club that would have us.Professor of social and natural science, Yale UniversityBy Marybeth GasmanIn 2014, for the first time, the nation’s student body — from kindergartners to 12th graders — was majority-minority.Census data predicts that by 2050 the United States over all will be majority-minority as well. Are our college and university faculties ready to teach a diverse student body? I don’t think so. Faculty members receive little, if any, training on teaching, and even less on diversity issues.For nearly two decades, I have been studying strategies for student success used by the nation’s minority-serving institutions, which include historically black colleges and universities, Hispanic-serving institutions, tribal colleges and universities, and Asian-American, Native American and Pacific Islander-serving institutions. Most recently, along with Clifton Conrad, a professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, I wrote a book on this topic, “Educating a Diverse Nation” (Harvard University Press).First, these minority-serving institutions assume success on the part of their students rather than seeing them from a deficit perspective. Second, they focus on what the student needs to learn rather than what is convenient for the professor. Third, faculty members work together on classes and curriculums that empower students. Fourth, faculty members allow students to bring their full identities to the classroom. And last, the institutions give students the opportunity to participate in culturally relevant assignments.These approaches require a deeper understanding of teaching and a commitment to student learning.To meet the needs of a diverse group of students, Ph.D. programs must consider teaching in addition to research when training graduate students. Research is essential, but we also must ensure that our diverse nation truly learns.Professor of education, University of PennsylvaniaBy Harold LevyFor most of its history, America ignored the talents and potential of most Americans. We will never know what great progress might have been made in science, medicine, business and many other fields if we had taken advantage of the brainpower and abilities of all our people — regardless of gender, race, ethnicity or income level.AdvertisementBut people from low-income families continue to face enormous obstacles.A 2014 White House report, “Increasing College Opportunity for Low-Income Students,” states, “While half of all people from high-income families have a bachelor’s degree by age 25, just one in 10 people from low-income families do.”These low-income students lack money, don’t get adequate counseling in high school and face many other barriers that more affluent students never encounter. To enable more low-income students to get a higher education, colleges should make socioeconomic diversity a priority. They should encourage outstanding low-income students to apply, simplify the application process and make transparent the actual tuition price and financial aid possibilities for students from struggling families.In addition, colleges should devote more financial aid to those who need it and less to those who don’t, by reducing so-called merit scholarships. Colleges should also re-examine their policies of giving preferential admissions to the children of alumni.Current policies are resulting in an enormous waste of talent. We need to recommit ourselves to the American dream and being the land of opportunity for all.Executive director, Jack Kent Cooke FoundationBy Marvin KrislovWith student activism sweeping the country over issues like sexual assault, police brutality and racial inequality, American higher education is at a crossroads, as it was in the 1960s during the Vietnam War and the civil rights movement.How best to serve a new generation of students facing challenges from changing demographics, rising income inequality, political tumult and doubts about whether the nation can overcome its deepest divides?How can the value of liberal arts be demonstrated when public discourse increasingly defines educational value in terms of initial income?How will higher education create a truly inclusive environment for a diverse group of students who question traditional modes of teaching and learning?AdvertisementFirst, the faculty and staff must maintain high academic standards and rigor, empowering students with the intellectual tools they will need.Second, we must welcome diverse populations and teach our students to embrace multiple perspectives, while valuing their personal experiences.Third, our institutions must serve as laboratories for collaboration to create sustainable futures that balance idealism with financial realities.Fourth, we must help our students find meaning in their education by communicating options and opportunities to apply learning, and by embracing new possibilities created by technology.All parties should have a voice in these conversations: student activists who are demanding a more relevant education, parents who are making emotional and material investments in their children and faculty members who are protecting academic freedom. We all must learn from each other.President, Oberlin CollegeBy Annette Gordon-ReedOne of the most important issues that educators face is skepticism about liberal arts education in an era that seems to be pushing STEM — science, technology, engineering and math. This is not just happening in the United States. Calls to cut support for so-called soft disciplines are also made in Europe and Asia.But just recently, the governor of Connecticut used his line-item veto power to cut support for the humanities. We seem to be rejecting the idea that it is essential for society to have people who are broadly educated, who can investigate, analyze and present their findings logically and clearly, without the aid of numbers or code.I was a member of the Commission on the Humanities and Social Sciences, put together by the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Our report, “The Heart of the Matter,” outlined three goals for America’s educational institutions: educating Americans to thrive in a 21st-century democracy; fostering a society that is innovative, competitive and strong; and equipping the nation for leadership in an interconnected world.AdvertisementThe commission took the position that “these goals cannot be achieved by science alone.”We need more homegrown engineers, but not everyone wants to be an engineer, or can be. Innovation is spurred by people who are creative in different ways. Gathering ideas from seemingly disparate fields can bring new ways to think about problems, allowing creativity to flourish.We need K-12 systems that produce students able to take advantage of all that higher education has to offer. This suggests a need for greater cooperation between those schools and our institutions of higher learning.Professor of American legal history, Harvard UniversityBy John PalfreyIt is a mistake to say that diversity and free expression cannot coexist. And yet, on campus after campus, that has been the choice served up this year: You are either for diversity, equity and inclusion in our communities, or you are for free expression. The strength of our communities depends upon a commitment to upholding both, even — perhaps especially — when it is hardest to do so.The American experiment is about the coexistence of diversity and free expression. That coexistence has not been easy, nor has it been all that successful, especially for those who have less power. And free expression has been interpreted in ways that have tended to support those in authority, rather than all people equitably.That the American experiment has not yet been entirely successful, nor fairly carried out, does not mean that the principles are wrong.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Diversity and free expression ought to coexist on our campuses in particular. One purpose of education is to bring young people into contact with those of different backgrounds so that they might learn from one another.But free expression and its close cousin, the right to assemble peaceably, do not mean that anyone can say anything to anybody at any time. The First Amendment has been interpreted to permit certain restrictions of time, place and manner on speech. On our campuses, students and faculty need to act respectfully to one another to build community.The idea of diversity and free expression opposing one another may serve some immediate political purposes, but it will not serve our society in the long run.Head of school, Phillips Academy, AndoverBy Deborah TuerkheimerCampus rape is finally receiving the attention it merits. But efforts to address the problem are developing in a scattershot fashion, largely because of confusion about the university’s role in responding to sexual assault.AdvertisementEducational institutions cannot substitute for a functioning criminal justice system, nor should they try to replicate the civil justice model.Universities’ response to sexual assault demands a focus on their core mission: providing education in a manner that does not discriminate based on sex.Because colleges have an obligation to provide an environment in which all students are able to learn, preventing sexual assault — and gender-based misconduct of any kind — is critical. The burden of prevention cannot be placed on women by instructing them how to behave. Universities must instead commit to eradicating gender violence along with the racism and sexism that sustain it.Colleges can readily offer a range of support for victims of sexual violence, including academic accommodations, mental health services, changes in campus housing or dining locations and transportation services.And colleges must also hold accountable those found responsible for sexual assault. A formidable challenge is to create a set of fair procedures for adjudicating contested claims. Procedural justice fosters legitimacy, trust and citizenship, all vital to a thriving academic community.We should not ask college administrators to become prosecutors or plaintiffs’ attorneys. Nor should we expect academic institutions to compensate for deficits in the criminal justice system’s response to rape on and off campus. But we can demand that universities advance their mission to provide an education free of discrimination.Professor of law, Northwestern UniversityBy Carol DweckEvery fall I face my class of college freshmen and announce: “Your old job is over; your new job starts today.”Their old job was getting into a good college. Their new job is to become a person who will make a meaningful contribution to society.AdvertisementThis is the generation that will determine the future of our world. Will we succumb to climate change? Will we foster equality? Will we steward new technologies to serve rather than undermine human needs and values?The answers depend on whether we can help students look beyond their next test score to focus on longer-term learning and life goals.In a recent nationwide study, led by David Yeager of the University of Texas, 9,000 ninth graders were asked what kind of assignment they wanted (even if it didn’t affect their grade): 63 percent wanted an easy assignment over a challenging one.But a different group of 9,000 ninth graders in the same schools had earlier participated in an online workshop that taught them that they could expand their brains through hard work, good strategies and help from others. And it taught them why they might want to do this: to learn more and get ready for their future contribution. These students were one-third more likely to choose the challenging assignment.The most exciting schools in America today are predicated on the belief that intellectual abilities can be developed. They foster that belief in all of their students. And they reinforce it with rigorous, meaningful learning, allowing students to envision their future contributions. These schools understand that this can make all the difference in the world.Professor of psychology, Stanford UniversityBy Marc BrackettRegardless of all the honors classes they took in high school, or the science, technology and engineering classes they cram into their college curriculum, students today will not be fully prepared to compete in an increasingly global business environment.The problem — and the solution — is not intellectual. It’s emotional.A survey of more than 123,000 students at 153 colleges by the American College Health Association in 2013 found that more than half experienced overwhelming anxiety and about a third felt deep depression during the school year.This is, or should be, worrisome to educators and policy makers, not only because of the suffering that results but also because research demonstrates that the way people manage their emotions matters for personal growth and the success of the broader society and economy.AdvertisementThe Nobel laureate James J. Heckman has written that teaching “noncognitive” skills, including recognizing and regulating emotions, would be a cost-effective way to increase work force productivity and quality.Teaching emotional intelligence — or what’s more broadly referred to as social and emotional learning — to children and adults has proved to be effective and sorely needed.It’s frustrating that policies to mandate and finance evidence-based approaches to social and emotional learning are slow to come. A few states have acted on their own. Leaders in Washington and across the nation need to work to equip America’s youth to be competitive for the new global century. Our future — and our children’s future — depends on it.Director, Yale Center for Emotional IntelligenceBy Freeman HrabowskiRecently, I visited my hometown, Birmingham, Ala., to recognize high-achieving eighth graders from public schools. I found myself reflecting on my own experiences as a 12-year-old in that city, participating in the Children’s March of 1963 to fight for access to a better education, and I wondered: Just how far have we come?Only about half of students who begin college now will have earned a degree six years later; the completion rates are much lower for students of color. The gap is equally striking by income. More than 80 percent of Americans from families in the top income quartile have attained a bachelor’s degree by age 24; under 10 percent of those from families in the bottom income quartile have done so. It’s clear that increasing access to college is not enough.It is not acceptable for so many students to work hard to earn a college education, often going into debt, and not to succeed.We need communities that view student success as a collective responsibility. Young people need adults who set expectations and help them develop critical thinking skills and a sense of self. We need public policies that encourage all sectors to work together. There are no quick fixes. There weren’t any quick fixes 50 years ago either, but through decades of commitment and hard work, we have made progress.We must remain committed.President, University of Maryland, Baltimore CountyBy John B. King Jr.The $1.2 trillion that borrowers and their parents owe on student loans for college is an eye-popping number — one that some policy analysts, pundits and journalists often cite in declaring a student loan crisis.AdvertisementBut a related challenge that deserves greater attention is the college completion challenge. President Obama has called for America to again lead the world in college graduation. Far too many students start college but do not finish; students of color, first-generation and low-income students are dropping out at higher rates than their white or better-off peers. If students borrow, they may not earn enough money to repay their loans. The typical defaulter owes less than $9,000.The bottom line is this: Debt without a degree often leads to default.Colleges, states and the federal government can change this. The Obama administration has made college more affordable by adding tens of billions in student aid and creating tax credits for college tuition, made it easier for students to repay their loans, and encouraged graduating on time.Across the country, innovative leaders are showcasing strategies that work.The University of Hawaii’s graduation rate has improved significantly since the university began giving students incentives to attend class full time.At Georgia State University, the completion rate increased by 22 percentage points over a decade as the institution offered peer advising, provided microgrants for low-income students and used data analytics to help advisers identify students at risk of dropping out.Accelerated Study in Associate Programs, which operates at six of the City University of New York’s community colleges, has shown strong results, too.These promising examples offer hope, but colleges cannot tackle this challenge alone. Congress should support proposals such as structuring the Pell grant program to raise completion rates and providing incentives to scale up other innovative approaches. States need to share responsibility, starting by reversing the trend of disinvestment in higher education.Secretary of educationBy Joni FinneyCollege is becoming less and less affordable to more and more families higher and higher on the socioeconomic ladder.According to a recent report from researchers at the University of Pennsylvania and Vanderbilt University, families earning $48,001 to $75,000 a year had to pay a significant portion of their gross income to send a student to a public four-year nondoctoral institution. On average, it cost 16 percent (in Alaska) to 33 percent (in New Jersey) of their income in 2013.AdvertisementThe burden was higher at public research universities, according to the report, “2016 College Affordability Diagnosis.” Families would have had to pay, on average, 17 percent (Wyoming) to 31 percent (Alabama) of their income to enroll in such state-run institutions as the University of Wyoming and the University of Alabama.Private institutions offered no relief, requiring outlays of 16 percent (Idaho) to 45 percent (Rhode Island) of family income.Even the safety net of community colleges is fraying. Families earning $48,001 to $75,000 a year had to pay 11 percent (Mississippi) to 22 percent (Minnesota) of income to enroll in public two-year institutions.If state policy makers are serious about improving education attainment, as they often promise to do, they must make it a priority to lower the financial burden of higher education on students from low- and middle-income families to increase their chances of enrolling and graduating.Unless we make college affordable for people of all financial means, opportunity through higher education will be a false promise.Director, Institute for Research on Higher EducationBy Randi WeingartenFor people who choose educating others over enriching themselves, college debt can seem insurmountable.The American Federation of Teachers recently started a series of student debt clinics to help our members mitigate the crippling college debt incurred by millions of American students and their families. For some participants, the clinics have been life-changing.In October, a young adjunct professor from Miami attended a two-part A.F.T. debt clinic. Crushed by more than $168,000 in student loan debt and monthly payments exceeding $2,000, this professor, a single mother, was desperate. After one day of training, she applied for income-based repayment and was able to reduce her monthly payment to $700. On the second day, she told the group that it was the first good night’s sleep she’d had in three years.AdvertisementMany people simply can’t afford to seek higher education, or they pay dearly when they do. Forty-seven states are spending less per student than they did at the start of the recession, after adjusting for inflation. Tuition costs have skyrocketed, putting more of the burden on students and their families.When our country realized the value of educating all students through high school, we made high school universally free. The same should be done for college today.The men and women who teach in our public schools, colleges and universities have invested in their own education so that they can, in turn, invest in the students in their classrooms. They know they won’t be rewarded with huge paychecks, but neither should they be punished with crushing college debt.President, American Federation of TeachersA version of this article appears in print on June 23, 2016, on Page F2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Strategy Session With Some of Education’s Top Thinkers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.