AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinThe good news for HBO: “Game of Thrones,” still enormously popular after six seasons, will close out another successful season Sunday night.But elsewhere in its slate of dramas, HBO continues to confront headwinds, a problem underscored on Wednesday when the cable network threw in the towel on “Vinyl,” an expensive and highly promoted series that nonetheless fizzled in its first season.The cancellation of “Vinyl,” a 1970s rock ’n’ roll drama created by Mick Jagger and Martin Scorsese, represented a reversal for the cable network, which announced in February, shortly after the show’s premiere, that it would bring it back for a second season. But “Vinyl” was troubled from the outset by a series of problems.“Vinyl” had difficulty finding traction. Its two-hour debut episode drew a lackluster 1.1 million viewers, according to Nielsen data measuring live viewing and three days of delayed viewing. For the week, that viewership total put it in the neighborhood of Bravo’s “Girlfriends’ Guide to Divorce” and TV Land’s “Younger.”In the weeks after, the audience for “Vinyl” fell further. The show performed only marginally better than the network’s much cheaper comedy “Girls.”In addition to mixed reviews and low viewership, the show also suffered the loss of Terence Winter, its show runner, in early April. HBO executives hoped at the time that new leadership under Mr. Winter’s replacement, Scott Z. Burns, would help give new life to the series for its second season. But in the end it decided to shut it down.“Obviously, this was not an easy decision,” the network said in a statement. “We have enormous respect for the creative team and cast for their hard work and passion on this project.”HBO has struggled with its dramatic offerings. The second season of “True Detective” stumbled, and there are no current plans for a third season. The filmmaker David Fincher was working on two shows for the network, both of which stalled. The limited series “Lewis and Clark” is currently going through a rewrite after production shut down last year. HBO’s other expensive drama, “Westworld,” will begin this fall after several delays.The network has also shaken up its executive ranks. Early this year, HBO parted ways with its head of drama, Michael Ellenberg. Last month, Michael Lombardo, the president of programming, announced he was leaving the network. He was succeeded by HBO’s former head of comedy, Casey Bloys.All of this comes at a time when there is more scripted television than ever and HBO is facing stiff competition from streaming services like Netflix and Amazon.With little momentum on the drama front, HBO has moved its attention elsewhere, including to the Wednesday-night debut of Bill Simmons’s new show. The premium cable channel has also acquired programming ranging from “Sesame Street” to a new “Vice” daily newscast that is expected to have its premiere this fall.In an interview last year, Mr. Lombardo, the former president, spoke bluntly about the complexities and potential pitfalls of doing dramas.“Do we want to do another drama series? No,” he said. “Unless it has the potential to be great. What we’re looking to do is offer a variety of kinds of television entertainment engagement experiences.”Still, even as HBO finds itself without a recent drama hit, it does remain a go-to destination for some of the most talented filmmakers in Hollywood.It cleaned up at the Emmys last year, propelled by “Game of Thrones” and its mini-series “Olive Kitteridge.” Next month, HBO will air the hotly anticipated limited series starring John Turturro called “The Night Of.” And it also remains a vibrant home for comedies, with critically praised shows like “Veep,” “Silicon Valley,” “Girls’’ and “Last Week Tonight With John Oliver.” Just last week, HBO said that Larry David’s “Curb Your Enthusiasm” would return for a ninth season after an extended hiatus.Advertisement