AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaFacebook shareholders sent a curious message about the social network’s governance this week. More than half of Facebook owners not named Mark Zuckerberg clicked the corporate equivalent of a “Like” button for just three of the company’s directors.Weirdly, shareholders seemed to prefer the venture capitalist Peter Thiel over top executives like Sheryl Sandberg, the company’s chief operating officer, and Mr. Zuckerberg himself. It is a brainteaser that suggests institutional investors are more inclined to tick boxes than follow their heads.First, some background: In the weeks before Monday’s annual meeting, it was revealed that Mr. Thiel had bankrolled Hulk Hogan’s lawsuit against Gawker, the gossip website founded by Nick Denton. The wrester, whose real name is Terry Bollea, sued Gawker for posting a sex video that involved him. A Florida jury awarded Mr. Bollea $140 million, and Gawker has since filed for bankruptcy.Mr. Thiel’s personal vendetta against Gawker, which previously revealed that he is gay, raised important questions about his First Amendment bona fides. That matters because Facebook is diving headlong into the publishing business, where constitutional protections on free speech are critical. Indeed, The Wall Street Journal reported on Tuesday that Facebook is paying more than $50 million to media organizations, including The New York Times, to produce videos for its live-streaming feed.So it’s odd that Mr. Thiel, along with Netflix’s chief executive, Reed Hastings, received 70 percent approval from investors, after stripping out Mr. Zuckerberg’s 59 percent control over Facebook’s shareholders, according to a Breakingviews analysis. The only other director to receive a majority of non-Zuckerberg votes was Erskine Bowles, who was deputy chief of staff for President Bill Clinton, at 51 percent.Adjusting for Mr. Zuckerberg’s share, Ms. Sandberg and the founder of WhatsApp, Jan Koum, did not muster a majority of minority shareholders’ approval, nor did their boss. The venture capitalist Marc Andreessen received the least support among Facebook directors, with just 45 percent of those voting sanctioning his re-election to the board.It is impossible to know why shareholders voted this way. Big investment funds like BlackRock, Fidelity and Vanguard own 5 percent or more of Facebook apiece. Their votes are often determined by algorithms that take into account the recommendations of proxy advisory firms, which are themselves forged by qualitative factors like the independence of a director and time served on other boards. It shows that even the most disciplined of processes can produce oddball results.Advertisement