AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromLost in the news about the Food and Drug Administration’s approval of genetically engineered salmon on Thursday was its long-awaited guidelines on labeling food with or without genetically altered plant ingredients.While the F.D.A.’s stance on labeling — it is not mandating disclosure of genetically modified ingredients — has not changed despite intense pressure from both sides of the issue, it has added a bit of confusion to the mix for consumers and for those companies that are voluntarily including more information on their packaging.For starters, the F.D.A. does not favor the most commonly used term, non-G.M.O., which hundreds of companies plaster on tens of thousands of products on grocery store shelves.Short for “genetically modified organism,” G.M.O. conveys an overly broad and inaccurate meaning when applied to food products, the agency said. “Most foods do not contain entire organisms,” the F.D.A. noted.Rather, the agency would prefer labels that say something like “Not bioengineered” or “This oil is made from soybeans that were not genetically engineered.”Whether any food companies will adopt this language, or begin using nongenetically engineered foods rather than non-G.M.O., is unknown at this point.But major food companies have applauded the agency’s position to not require genetically engineered ingredients to be disclosed. The F.D.A. has determined that such products are not materially different from their nonengineered cousins.Many food corporations have lobbied heavily against mandatory labeling, fearing that customers will be scared off by foods known to contain genetically engineered ingredients.Claire Parker, spokeswoman for the Coalition for Safe and Affordable Food, a food industry group, said in a statement that the coalition applauded the F.D.A. “for standing up for sound science by opposing mandatory G.M.O. labeling that would mislead consumers and drive up food costs.”Many major food companies have already moved to voluntarily label products that do not contain genetically engineered ingredients, either simply stating that on their packaging or using a small butterfly seal to show that the Non-GMO Project, a nonprofit that provides certification for food producers, has certified the absence of genetic engineering.“All of the biggest food companies in the country are looking at how to source non-G.M.O. ingredients right now,” said Megan Westgate, executive director of the Non-GMO Project, adding that it seems that the government’s decision about the G.M.O. salmon was out of step with what the public is asking for.Ms. Westgate said that about 34,000 products were now labeled with the Non-GMO Project’s seal, representing about $13.5 billion in annual sales. That’s up from January, when 24,500 products bore the seal. (The Food Marketing Institute estimates that total supermarket sales were $638 billion last year.)Efforts at the state level over the last few years to mandate labeling of foods that do contain genetically engineered ingredients have largely failed by narrow margins, after heavy lobbying and campaign spending by the food and biotech industries.A labeling law was passed in Vermont and should take effect in July unless food industry groups succeed in getting it blocked by an appellate court. As that deadline approaches, lobbyists for the food and biotech businesses are scrambling to get federal legislation in place that would pre-empt such state-level requirements. The House of Representatives passed a bill that would do just that, and Senator Debbie Stabenow, a Democrat of Michigan, said she hoped to get legislation passed in the Senate by the end of the year. The Senate bill might require companies to reveal the presence of genetic engineering via a QR code, a pixelated square that can be scanned with a smartphone, on packaging.Joe Sparatta, a chef with two restaurants, Heritage and Southbound, in Richmond, Va., said he was especially concerned about the F.D.A.’s decision not to require labeling of the genetically engineered salmon because his customers were demanding more information about the food on his menus.“Guests ask about everything,” Mr. Sparatta said. “Is there dairy in this? Is this fish wild or farmed? What are your animals eating? We try to source as much as we can locally, which helps us know more about the products we use, but we can’t get everything from around here.”He said that customers had only recently begun to ask about whether things were genetically modified, but he expected to get the question more frequently. “With this now being debated in Congress, I think more people are hearing about it and starting to ask questions and want to know,” Mr. Sparatta said.Consumers are increasingly looking for information about the presence of genetically modified ingredients in their foods, according to research by the Hartman Group. “The G.M.O. issue is something that continues to be brought up in an unprompted way in our interviews with consumers,” said Laurie Demeritt, chief executive of Hartman. “And when we look at things like fat, sodium and sugar, G.M.O. is showing the strongest growth rate in terms of a characteristic that consumers are trying to avoid.”In research Hartman did for a report on perceptions about genetically modified foods, about 58 percent of consumers were looking for “non-G.M.O.” food.“It’s connected to this idea that a product is processed,” Ms. Demeritt said. “Consumers have a vision in their minds of people in lab coats taking syringes and injecting things into a product, a vision of food made in a lab — and that’s even worse in their minds than food coming off a factory line.”She added that consumers did not necessarily understand what genetic engineering is, or even which crops are genetically engineered. “While it’s difficult for some people in the food space to hear because they want to educate consumers and talk to them about it, in most cases, consumers don’t really want to hear a long explanation about the science behind it,” she said.But if anything, the F.D.A. further complicated the issue by distinguishing the term “genetic engineering” from “genetic modification.”“F.D.A. considers the term ‘genetic modification’ to be a much broader term that encompasses other means of altering the genome of an organism including selective breeding, and lab-based in vitro methods,” the agency said in its announcement.The F.D.A. said it had no plans to take action against labels using “G.M.O.” — so long as the food in question was not genetically engineered in any way and the label was not otherwise false or misleading.Nonetheless, given the agency’s definition of genetic modification, non-G.M.O labeling on thousands of products now in stores would technically be false because they contain plants genetically modified over centuries through hybridization and other conventional breeding techniques.For instance, under the F.D.A.’s definition, a corn chip made from conventional corn is genetically modified, but not genetically engineered — an argument that the biotech industry has been making for years.Thus, the F.D.A cautioned that terms like “G.M.O. free” and “non-G.M.O.” could face challenges and recommended that “manufacturers not use food labeling claims that indicate that a food is ‘free’ of ingredients derived through the use of biotechnology.”“They’re conflating what is a very new and novel technology with traditional types of breeding, which is simply crossing different varieties of, say, corn,” said Andrew Kimbrell, founder and executive director of the Center for Food Safety, which is lobbying for mandatory labeling. “It’s kind of like saying an abacus is very much like a computer.”Andrew Pollack contributed reporting.Advertisement