AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonThe market hates the idea of Tesla Motors acquiring SolarCity.After Tesla’s announcement on Tuesday of a $2.8 billion offer to acquire SolarCity, Tesla’s stock was down more than 8 percent early Wednesday morning, more than the total market capitalization of SolarCity itself. The market is ascribing a negative value to this possible acquisition.The reaction reflects two things.Solar City is a maker of solar energy products, basically home and business solar panels. Tesla is a maker of battery-powered cars, though some view the company’s battery-making component as its bigger future.To Elon Musk, the chairman of SolarCity and the chief executive of Tesla, putting together these two different businesses is “blindingly obvious” and a “no-brainer.” A blog post on the Tesla website explained the reasons:We would be the world’s only vertically integrated energy company offering end-to-end clean energy products to our customers. This would start with the car that you drive and the energy that you use to charge it, and would extend to how everything else in your home or business is powered.In other words, the deal makes sense because people who buy Tesla’s cars also want solar power. In a combined company, they can get it in the same place.The market is not buying it.To investors, it is as if the Walt Disney Company bought a birthing center business to offer “end-to-end” service for its parent customers. It’s not clear that Tesla owners will really want to buy solar panels, or that if they did, it would be in sufficient number.And SolarCity is hardly a growth business these days. Both companies are burning cash. SolarCity went through $2.6 billion last year, while Tesla spent $2.2 billion. SolarCity’s business model is struggling as cheap energy shakes up the solar market. So the acquisition is being viewed not so much as a “no-brainer” but as a bailout of SolarCity by Tesla, one that may sink both companies.The idea would be dismissed as yet another Silicon Valley lark (although who knows whether the visionary Mr. Musk is right), but there is a second problem with this deal. It’s a bit of a corporate governance nightmare.Mr. Musk owns 21 percent of Tesla and 22 percent of SolarCity, according to Standard & Poor’s Global Market Intelligence. His cousin, Lyndon Rive, is a founder and the chief executive of SolarCity.Given the troubles of SolarCity, the appearance is that Mr. Musk is bailing SolarCity out while profiting handsomely. He will be paid a premium by Tesla for a company in which he is the biggest shareholder, one that the market at least views as outside the business of Tesla.Today, companies are separated into makers of ball bearings and makers of steel because even they are viewed as being too different. Only in Silicon Valley could a cross-industry acquisition like this even possibly fly.Tesla did announce some procedures to deal with this conflict. Mr. Musk recused himself from the deliberations at Tesla and Mr. Rive said the same thing at SolarCity. In addition, Tesla said that any deal would be subject to approval by a majority of its disinterested shareholders.This is part of the standard procedure in conflict situations. The general idea is that each company forms a committee of independent directors with its own advisers and legal counsel. This would ensure approval of the disinterested directors. Then any deal itself would be subject to approval of the disinterested shareholders. The State of Delaware, where a majority of American companies are incorporated, technically requires only that either the disinterested directors or disinterested shareholders approve the deal, but the standard practice is to do both.Even so, Tesla is not following this standard procedure. It does not appear that Tesla or SolarCity truly formed an independent committee or hired independent counsel, but instead opted for a recusal. (Another director on both boards, Antonio J. Gracias, also recused himself.)That is sufficient for Delaware law, but the optics are not great.Indeed, one of the actions Tesla took on Tuesday was to amend its bylaws to require all shareholder litigation to be filed in Delaware. It knows the lawsuits are coming.So this deal suffers from some significant defects at the get-go. It should have been structured more formally and put through the stricter process of a formal special committee. This is particularly true after the recent ruling in the Dell appraisal proceedings, in which Dell did everything it could to structure the management buyout to the highest standards, and the Delaware court still found fault with the process.A bigger issue is the shareholder approval requirement. Because Mr. Musk has an interest in SolarCity, a vote is required under the stock exchange rules.Institutional shareholders, however, hold 63.57 percent of Tesla. It is hard to see them liking this deal. Tesla is also a darling of day traders. These short-term holders want the stock to go up, and voting no on the deal is a way to get the shares to rise.Given the reaction, it is hard to see how a deal like this can happen now.In the end, Tesla’s offer appears destined to die as quickly as a fruit fly, in part because it does not make sense to the market, but also because the announcement and the structuring show a poor understanding of public relations.Indeed, it almost seems as if this is an offer intended to horrify institutional investors.Chalk it up to the sometimes stifling exuberance of Silicon Valley, where founders think they can do anything until they can’t.Advertisement