By LESLIE PICKERJUNE 24, 2016
A Delaware judge ruled on Friday that the Dallas pipeline operator Energy Transfer Equity is entitled to terminate its $38 billion merger with the Williams Companies, culminating one of the most contentious cases of buyer’s remorse in recent memory.The ruling is a victory for Energy Transfer, which for months has been seeking to kill the deal. As the energy markets plummeted late last year, the cash-and-stock transaction it had to talk Williams into doing became nearly untenable.By March, with just months left to consummate the transaction, Energy Transfer and its outside counsel discovered a problem with the merger — that it may not ultimately be deemed tax-free, which was a condition for the deal to close.Williams did not convince the Delaware court that this discovery was influenced by Energy Transfer’s desire to get out of the deal, according to the ruling.Advertisement“Just as motive alone cannot establish criminal guilt, however, motive to avoid a deal does not demonstrate lack of a contractual right to do so,” Sam Glasscock III, the vice chancellor of the Court of Chancery, wrote in his ruling on Friday.AdvertisementIn a statement on the ruling, Williams said, “While we appreciate the court’s consideration of this matter, Williams does not believe E.T.E. has a right to terminate the merger agreement because E.T.E. has breached the merger agreement by failing to cooperate and use necessary efforts to satisfy the conditions to closing.”It added that it would “take appropriate actions” to enforce its rights under the merger agreement.While Williams’s options have dwindled, all is not lost.Williams has a special meeting on Monday, at which shareholders were expected to vote on the deal. Regardless of the outcome of that vote, Energy Transfer is expected to terminate the merger. After that, Williams will most likely choose to appeal the court’s decision, meaning it will go to the Delaware Supreme Court.On Friday, Williams said it continued to recommend that shareholders vote for the merger.Williams also said previously that it reserved the right to seek damages from Energy Transfer. It is unclear how much Williams might request.Either way, this decision could leave significant “litigation overhang” on Energy Transfer, according to a note by analysts at Evercore ISI. Because of that, Energy Transfer may choose to settle with a one-time payment to Williams, the analysts wrote.The pipeline companies’ path to court was a long, winding one. The deal became serious about a year ago, when Energy Transfer made an unsolicited, all-equity offer, and Williams rejected it. As an enticement, Energy Transfer threw in $6 billion worth of cash in another proposal — a decision that came back to haunt it.Williams’s board was divided, with a majority of directors rejecting the newer offer after several rounds of votes. Ultimately, two directors swung the other way, and a $38 billion cash-and-stock transaction was announced on Sept. 28.AdvertisementShortly afterward, the planned combination descended into utter chaos. Shares of both companies were dragged down with the slump in commodity prices last fall. While pipeline companies transport oil and gas — rather than dig it out of the ground — their plight worsened as their customers teetered on bankruptcy.By Christmas, Kelcy Warren, the chairman of Energy Transfer, was stewing. He fretted that the debt Energy Transfer would shoulder to pay for the $6 billion cash component of the deal would prompt the ratings agencies to downgrade his company to “junk status.”But there was no easy way out. Energy Transfer slashed its estimates for the revenue bump it could get by combining with Williams, based in Tulsa, Okla., and threatened to lay off thousands of Williams’s employees.Friday’s decision, however, concerned two other actions. Energy Transfer created a special class of stock that gave certain insiders, including Mr. Warren, priority if the company’s distributions (or tax-free payouts to shareholders) were cut. Williams saw that as a breach of their agreement and sought the court’s help in unwinding the private offering.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Perhaps more concerning to Williams, though, was the decision by Energy Transfer’s outside counsel, Latham & Watkins, not to render a certain tax opinion that was a necessary condition to close the deal. Latham said that it could not give such an opinion (which was supposed to conclude with reasonable certainty that the transfer of assets into the partnership would be tax-free) because of the substantial decline in Energy Transfer’s stock price.Williams sued again, seeking to prove that Latham was acting under the influence of its client to break up the deal, rather than engaging in its best efforts to close the transaction.Energy Transfer countersued, arguing that it was, in fact, Williams that was trying to derail the deal.All of these issues came together in the courtroom in Georgetown, Del., earlier this week. Energy Transfer and Latham witnesses focused on how they made an error in not spotting potential problems with the tax opinion when the deal was signed. Representatives of Williams pointed out how the issue with the tax opinion was something Energy Transfer discovered in March — conveniently at the same time that Mr. Warren wanted to get out of the deal.The judge hinted at his likely decision on Tuesday, when he said that he did not care if Latham was right or wrong in refusing to issue its tax opinion. He just needed to know whether it was acting in “good faith.”A version of this article appears in print on June 25, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Energy Transfer Wins Ruling on Escaping Williams Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.