By JESSICA SILVER-GREENBERG and MICHAEL CORKERYNOV. 20, 2015
Two senators have introduced a bill aimed at preserving the rights of military service members to go to court.The measure would allow service members to opt out of arbitration and challenge repossessions or foreclosures with a lawsuit.“Often service members sign contracts that include arbitration clauses buried in the fine print, and this eliminates their access to the courts, which can limit their ability to assert their rights and reach a fair resolution,” said one of the bill’s sponsors, Senator Jack Reed, Democrat of Rhode Island.Mr. Reed and Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, introduced the bill on Thursday.In addition to this legislative effort, regulators have been trying to prevent companies from inserting arbitration clauses in contracts to preclude Americans from joining in class-action lawsuits.Those efforts have gained momentum after a recent three-part series in The New York Times. The series of articles, based on thousands of court records and interviews with hundreds of lawyers, corporate executives, judges and arbitrators in 35 states, found that by using arbitration to ban class-action lawsuits, a Wall Street-led coalition had devised a way to circumvent the courts and disable challenges to predatory lending, wage theft, discrimination and other activities.AdvertisementThose who go through with arbitration, The Times found, often face a system stacked against them from the start. Arbitration gives companies so much latitude that in some cases they can require their employees and customers to go to Christian arbitration, where the Bible guides the process.AdvertisementThe bill — a rare bipartisan effort in the current Congress — faces an uphill battle. A similar measure never made it out of committee last year after lobbying by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and Wall Street’s major trade group, the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, according to federal records.In lobbying against the bill last year, the groups argued that arbitration was a more efficient and less costly way to handle disputes.The investigation by The Times, however, found that once people were prevented from joining together in a class, most dropped their claims altogether.The Reed-Graham bill, if successful, would ensure that service members could go to court if they believed that companies had violated the Servicemembers’ Civil Relief Act, known as the S.C.R.A.Under the law, active-duty service members and their families are shielded from losing their cars or homes to repossession without a court order. The law allows them to terminate any real estate or auto lease when on active duty. During that period, the law also requires that lenders reduce the interest rates on any loans to 6 percent.Violations of the law are widespread, court records and loan contracts show. In 2012, the Government Accountability Office, for example, found that financial institutions had violated the law more than 15,000 times.But when service members try to sue companies for such violations, they often find themselves shut out of the courts because of arbitration clauses in their loan contracts.The proposed bill, Mr. Reed said, “will better protect our military families while the men and women of our armed forces protect our nation.”A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Bill Would Help Troops to Avoid Arbitration.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.