AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerTo stem attrition, Goldman Sachs has given its young workers more time off, higher salaries and less busy work.Now the firm is focused on finding analysts better suited to the demands of banking.That requires updating some of its traditional recruiting methods. Goldman announced on Thursday that it would no longer conduct first-round, face-to-face interviews on elite college campuses, and instead would interview students remotely on video.The idea is to open up the recruiting process to a broader array of candidates with varying backgrounds. By using technology, Goldman is hoping that it can screen for young bankers who are a better fit for the firm and thus more likely to stay longer instead of defecting to a private equity fund or start-up after a few years, which has become the norm.“Leveraging technology will enable you to get to more places,” said Edith Cooper, the global head of human capital management at Goldman Sachs, during a conversation with reporters on Thursday. “It doesn’t limit us to the number of human beings we have in the recruiting organization.”The investment banking industry has come under fire in recent years for its grueling pace. Client demands often require analysts, who are usually in their early 20s, to work all-night stretches. Days off, even on weekends, are often seen as a luxury. The job is not for everyone, so banks have been trying to find ways to keep younger bankers happy.Until now, it has not been easy to find the talent best suited to the demands of banking. Sending recruiters to campuses to meet with candidates tended to create a bias toward certain schools, while ignoring candidates with the “grit” that Goldman has said it values in its workers.Goldman is using technology by HireVue, which allows candidates to record interviews and enables potential employers to screen and evaluate them. The firm said it would also standardize the interviews to provide more even comparisons between candidates. It is also using technology to scan résumés for certain traits and experiences, and may adopt a “personality questionnaire” to evaluate a candidate’s potential fit at the firm.In 2015, more than 313,000 candidates applied for 9,700 positions at Goldman, including summer internships, the firm said. That yields an acceptance rate of about 3 percent – even lower than Stanford University’s 5.1 percent admission acceptance rate, which U.S. News and World Report deemed to be the lowest among United States colleges in 2014.The new recruiting program begins July 1, and Goldman will accept applications through the fall.Advertisement