By STACY COWLEYJUNE 23, 2016
The banner at the top of Costco’s Facebook page reads “Costco + Visa = ♥,” but for many customers, the first few days of the retailer’s new charge-card alliance have been anything but heartwarming.On Monday, Costco took the final step in severing its 17-year relationship with American Express and began exclusively accepting Visa for credit card purchases at its stores. For more than 11 million customers, the switch meant cutting up their Costco-branded American Express cards and swapping them for a new Visa card issued by Citigroup.A transition that executives promised would be seamless has turned into a customer service fiasco.Citigroup has logged more than 1.5 million customer service calls, according to Jennifer Bombardier, a spokeswoman for Citigroup.Costco’s social media pages are filled with thousands of scathing complaints. Many customers say their new cards have not yet arrived, and some report problems activating or using their cards or getting access to their accounts online.AdvertisementThe deluge of complaints swamped Citigroup’s call center, leaving some people waiting for more than an hour or unable to connect at all. A note on Citigroup’s website warns of high call volume and apologizes for “the long wait time that you may encounter.”AdvertisementThe service issues have confounded regular customers. Derek Gamble, a Costco shopper who called Citigroup on Thursday to ask why he hadn’t yet received his new card, reached a service representative but says he came away from the call feeling more puzzled than when he started.“The rep talked in circles for a while and said they’re doing all they can and that I should have a card in five to seven business days,” said Mr. Gamble, a lawyer in Temecula, Calif., in an interview. His request for a faster shipment was rebuffed. Until the card arrives, he says he’s holding off on his weekly Costco shopping trip.Many retailers offer branded credit cards, but Costco’s is uniquely powerful. The company made sales of nearly $114 billion last year to its 81 million members. For nearly two decades, it accepted no cards other than American Express at its retail stores.But last year, the companies said they would sever their relationship after a disagreement about renewal terms. “The numbers didn’t add up,” Kenneth I. Chenault, American Express’s chief executive, said in a presentation to investors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Costco stopped accepting new card applications in November and has been working on its card transition plan for more than a year. But for customers, the switch came with an unusually abrupt deadline: As of Monday, their Costco-branded American Express cards stopped working for all new purchases, and customer information and account balances were transferred to Citigroup.Citigroup spent last weekend feverishly working to convert the millions of new cardholders it inherited onto its system.“Citi completed one of the single largest portfolio conversions in history,” Ms. Bombardier said. “We sincerely apologize to those who have been inconvenienced.”Costco representatives did not return calls seeking comment.The last major store-branded card switch, when Walmart moved its cards from Discover to MasterCard in 2014, was done in phases, and customers were able to continue using their existing cards until they received and activated their new ones.AdvertisementThat helped reduce the customer service load and avoid the deluge Citigroup is experiencing, said Matt Schulz, an analyst for CreditCards.com.“There’s always going to be friction in these sorts of things, but the hubbub surrounding Costco is the biggest outcry that I can remember,” he said.He expects the storm to subside in a few days as Citigroup smooths out its problems, but customers are also facing other irritations at the cash register, namely chip cards.“We’re also seeing a lot of discussion involving E.M.V. cards,” he said, referring to chip-based cards many card-issuers and merchants have begun to use. “You have to look at the Costco thing in that greater context: There’s a lot of people who are frustrated and confused with other things going on with credit cards as well.”A version of this article appears in print on June 24, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Transition  to Visa  at Costco Is Chaotic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.