AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerShares of Twilio, a maker of software that helps companies like Uber and Nordstrom communicate with their customers, soared 92 percent on Thursday, their first day of trading after becoming the largest technology initial public offering of stock so far this year.Twilio began trading in a market that has not been receptive to tech initial offerings. Only three technology companies have made their debuts so far in 2016. Additionally, Thursday was Britain’s day to vote to stay or leave the European Union, the so-called Brexit, which some feared would shake up the markets. But the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index gained 1.3 percent.The company said on Wednesday that it had raised $150 million, pricing 10 million shares at $15 each, above the range it marketed to investors. The I.P.O. price yielded a market valuation of $1.2 billion, slightly higher than the $1.1 billion valuation Twilio received in a private funding round a year ago.Twilio, based in San Francisco, has been hailed as a trailblazer compared with the almost 170 unicorns — companies with valuations above $1 billion — that have chosen to stay private for now. Twilio was a test of investor receptivity to the software company’s finances, which show 88 percent revenue growth over last year but consistent net losses. As markets became more uncertain, investors preferred that companies going public turn a profit.Twilio had $167 million in revenue last year from about 25,000 active customer accounts. WhatsApp, the messaging service owned by Facebook, represented 17 percent of that revenue.Bessemer Venture Partners first backed Twilio in 2009 and is its largest shareholder, owning about 25 percent of the company’s outstanding shares. Fidelity Investments and Union Square Ventures also hold significant stakes. These entities, as well as certain executives, hold 98.6 percent of the voting power after the public offering because of their ownership of supervoting stock.Jeff Lawson, 38, founded the company eight years ago and is its chief executive. Before Twilio, he started Nine Star, a retailer of equipment and apparel for the skate, ski, surf and BMX sports crowd. He also worked for Amazon as technical product manager and was chief technology officer at StubHub.The company plans to use the net proceeds to expand its engineering, sales and marketing and customer support teams, and potentially to acquire businesses or other assets.Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase managed the offering. Twilio shares are listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol TWLO.Advertisement