AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanWall Street’s efforts to overhaul its culture since the 2008 financial crisis that nearly bankrupted the world’s economy have not been a resounding success, despite calls by prominent regulators to stop rewarding bad behavior.William C. Dudley, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and one of Wall Street’s most important overseers, has twice held closed-door sessions at the bank, located in downtown Manhattan, to urge top banking executives to overhaul the behavior inside their companies. His goal has been to get bankers to think about what they should do instead of what they can do and get away with.Some banks just don’t get the message. Take Credit Suisse, the large Swiss bank that over the years has swallowed up two of Wall Street’s premiere investment banks, First Boston and Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, to form the core of its investment-banking practice. It has been a rough 2016 for the bank and its new chief executive, Tidjane Thiam, who is facing a revolt from some of his employees after he suggested that Credit Suisse would start de-emphasizing investment banking after an unexpected $1 billion or so of trading losses in the last two quarters.In March, in an effort to right the ship on the credit side of the investment bank, Credit Suisse named Brian Chin, the chief of structured finance, and David Miller, the chief of credit products, to be co-chiefs of Credit Suisse’s global markets credit division. This is yet another big job for Mr. Miller, with lots of responsibility and high pay, but his appointment sends exactly the wrong message about the values and behavior that a Wall Street bank should be rewarding.Mr. Miller, you may recall, was the bank’s architect, starting in 2004, of a new syndicated loan product – called a dividend recapitalization loan – that allowed big-time real estate developers in the Western half of the United States to borrow based on the inflated valuation of their projects, pocket hundreds of millions of dollars in the form of dividends and lay the risk at the doorstep of new investors whom Mr. Miller and his team had lined up.From 2004 to 2006, Mr. Miller and Credit Suisse arranged for $5 billion of these kinds of loans, which were then sold to investors. The deals produced hundreds of millions of dollars in fees for the bank, a high percentage of which, of course, went into the pockets of Mr. Miller and his team. From 2004 to 2008, Mr. Miller received compensation of $23.1 million, including $7.2 million in 2006.In the end, all of the loans blew up, and investors lost billions. Soured deals include $375 million in loans to the Yellowstone Club, an hour outside of Bozeman, Mont.; $250 million to the Tamarack Resort in Idaho; $540 million to Lake Las Vegas, a 3,592-acre golf community in Nevada; $275 million to Promontory, a 10-square-mile second-home resort outside Park City, Utah; $400 million to the Turtle Bay Resort in Hawaii; and $675 million to the Ginn resorts in Port St. Lucie, Fla.; Naples, Fla.; Boone, N.C.; and the Bahamas.After each of the developments ended up in Bankruptcy Court, a federal bankruptcy judge admonished the Credit Suisse bankers by calling the loans “doomed to failure” from the outset.An affiliate of Highland Capital Management, a hedge fund based in Dallas, argued in a lawsuit that “Credit Suisse was motivated by naked greed in perpetrating its fraudulent scheme.” (In September, Highland Capital won a $287.5 million judgment against Credit Suisse related to losses stemming from its participation in a refinancing of Lake Las Vegas before it went into bankruptcy; Credit Suisse is appealing the ruling, and the judgment has not yet been paid pending the appeal. Highland Capital affiliates are also suing Credit Suisse in New York State over additional losses related to other deals.)Emails released as part of the litigation give a glimpse of the type of culture that Mr. Miller fostered in his group and its seeming lack of accountability.In a Sept. 22, 2004, in an internal email to other Credit Suisse executives, Mr. Miller promoted the soon-to-close Lake Las Vegas deal — the bank’s first “dividend recapitalization loan.” He bragged about how the development’s half-owners, the wealthy Bass brothers of Texas, were going to get what turned out to be a $469 million dividend.Fellow Credit Suisse bankers marveled at the deal’s ingenuity for creating new business seemingly out of nowhere. “You must have the biggest and deepest dredge known to mankind,” Grant Pothast, then head of the bank’s distressed loan group, wrote to Mr. Miller. Responded Mr. Miller, “I go wherever I can find a fee,” while noting that the bank would be making $9 million on the deal. He added that he took comfort in knowing that his colleagues were willing “to work in the deep dredges of life with me.”After the deal closed in November 2004, it was hailed internally as “a tremendous success.” According to emails disclosed as part of the lawsuits, Mr. Miller was singled out for bringing “creativity on structure,” “thoughtful advice on positioning,” “calm, assuring feedback to the client” and for “pushing the real estate bankers to roll this out to other homebuilders.”As the machine got cranking in August 2005, and after one of Mr. Miller’s colleagues questioned an aspect of the creative structure, Mr. Miller replied, “These are aggressive deals and it is in all of our best interests that the investors are protected, because if one of them blows up, you will see these investors pull out of this land development mkt [market] and our gravy train will stop.”After the Lake Las Vegas deal was refinanced in June 2007, based on what turned out to be overinflated appraisals of the value of the property, a news article about the deal was circulated internally at Credit Suisse.“This reads like we operate some sort of gene splicing lab – or a bell and whistle factory,” Tom Newberry, the chief of the bank’s syndicated loan group, wrote to Mr. Miller and others, according to an email contained in the court filings. “Congratulations.”“We are going to start recruiting Physics PHD’s from MIT,” Mr. Miller replied.“We don’t need them,” wrote Mr. Newberry. “Dr. Frankenstein is apparently already an employee.”Credit Suisse stands by its man. The bank “has a zero-tolerance policy which we take very seriously,” Nicole Sharp, a company spokeswoman, said in an email. “Our conduct and integrity is of utmost importance to how we operate. These are old matters which continue to be litigated and we do not wish to comment.”The unanswered question, though, is whether Mr. Miller’s employment at Credit Suisse sends the right message to the troops.Advertisement