By EMILY STEELNOV. 20, 2015
Fox became the first broadcast network to declare that it no longer would acknowledge or release ratings for its shows that measure only live or same-day viewing, calling the figures irrelevant as viewers increasingly stream shows or watch on DVRs or on demand.While those ratings — called overnight figures — still will be available through the measurement firm Nielsen, the move signals broader dissatisfaction across the television industry about a ratings system that many have called antiquated in today’s digital landscape. It also could spur other broadcasters to make similar announcements and encourage advertisers to come to the table to negotiate a new system for buying television ads.“The connections between viewers and our shows today are more complex and, in many ways, deeper than ever – but they no longer only happen overnight,” Gary Newman and Dana Walden, co-chief executives of Fox Television Group, said on Friday in a memo to staff members.“So why do we, as an industry, wake up every morning and talk about those Live + Same Day numbers?” they added. “This has to stop. It’s time for us to ‘walk the walk’ and change the conversation.”AdvertisementOne exception is live events, such as sports, for which they said they would continue to acknowledge the overnight ratings.AdvertisementToday, Nielsen’s ratings are the currency upon which some $70 billion in advertising spending is traded in the United States each year. Television executives have criticized Nielsen for failing to keep pace with changes in viewing habits. Nielsen, in turn, has said that it can measure television watching across traditional and digital screens but that TV networks and advertisers need to agree on new metrics to buy and sell ads.Fox’s announcement followed similar declarations from a series of cable networks, including AMC, FX and those under the NBCUniversal umbrella. The industry has been hard hit by persistent ratings declines.More than a third of the audience of 18- to 49-year-olds watching Fox shows do so within seven days after the show is televised, Mr. Newman and Ms. Walden said. About half of TV ad inventory at Fox is sold on the commercial ratings based on a seven-day period after the initial broadcast.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.