By CHAD BRAYJUNE 23, 2016
LONDON — General Electric said on Thursday that it had received a binding offer from an affiliate of the private equity firm Cerberus Capital Management for its French consumer finance business.The sale of GE Money Bank in France, as well as operations in certain French overseas territories, would be the latest exit by G.E. as it seeks to focus on its industrial roots after years of expansion into finance.The deal is subject to regulatory approval and is expected to close in the fourth quarter.“The business is well established in consumer finance and has made a substantial contribution to GE Capital’s European operations,” Keith S. Sherin, the GE Capital chairman and chief executive, said in a news release.Last year, G.E. said it would sell the bulk of its finance arm, GE Capital. Since then, GE Capital has entered into agreements for asset sales worth about $177 billion.AdvertisementThe sale of GE Money Bank would represent an ending net investment — a measure of the total capital invested in the business — of about $4.6 billion as of the end of the first quarter and would exclude its $2 billion prime mortgage portfolio, which is being sold separately, G.E. said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.G.E. has sold or exited from a number of finance businesses in Europe as part of its reshaping. The most recent came in May, when GE Capital sold 51 percent of Moneta Money Bank, its banking business of in the Czech Republic, in an initial public offering.G.E. is focusing on its industrial businesses, but retaining some financing operations that relate directly to those businesses.AdvertisementIn March, G.E. asked that regulators remove the “too big to fail” label from GE Capital, reflecting the decrease in the size of its financing operations.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @ChadbrayWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.