By REED ABELSONNOV. 20, 2015
Consumer advocates and antitrust experts are urging state regulators to closely examine the proposed mergers of major health insurance companies, saying they threaten to leave consumers with fewer choices and higher prices.On Friday, David A. Balto, an antitrust lawyer and former federal regulator, asked the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, composed of state officials, to create a working group to help regulators conduct their reviews.“It is critical that the insurance commissioners act within their powers to carefully scrutinize these mergers,” Mr. Balto said. He is also working with some consumer groups that are concerned over merger proposals among the nation’s largest health insurers that would result in three behemoths: Anthem with Cigna, Aetna with Humana and the unpartnered UnitedHealth Group.These companies would control nearly half of the United States commercial health insurance market, according to Decision Resources Group, and each would have tens of millions of people enrolled in its plans, offered largely through employers or government programs like Medicare.AdvertisementWhile the association does not have the authority to block a deal, a working group could discuss similar issues that arise within the individual states and advise commissioners.AdvertisementThe remedies available to the state regulators are much broader than they are to federal regulators, Mr. Balto said. “We could see a whole variety of things,” he said. Regulators could seek limits on rate increases, investments in rural care improvements or funding for people who cannot afford coverage.The commissioners have “a tremendous amount of authority,” said Jay Angoff, a former regulator from Missouri.State officials may be feeling even more pressure because of the recent failures of some of the insurance co-ops created to foster competition, especially to ensure there is enough choice for people buying coverage on the state exchanges. “That’s a big deal,” he said.The news on Thursday that UnitedHealth is contemplating pulling out of the state exchanges for 2017 also raises the stakes.The Justice Department, which is the federal agency responsible for approving the proposed mergers, is expected to weigh in with its verdict next year. The state regulators conduct an independent analysis.“If the Justice Department approves it, it in no way obligates a state to approve it,” said John Oxendine, a former insurance commissioner in Georgia.“If I were a sitting insurance commissioner, it would be a very uphill battle to convince me,” he said. “It’s fewer choices for the consumer, fewer people fighting over the price.”AdvertisementConsumer advocates say they plan to work closely with their state officials on the reviews. We “have concerns about the trend toward consolidation and the wave of mergers as well as about specific deals,” said Anthony Wright, the executive director of Health Access California. It recently held extensive discussions with state regulators over Blue Shield of California’s acquisition of Care1st, another plan in California.In addition to examining the potential antitrust concerns, Mr. Wright said the state regulators could also impose a variety of conditions that the merged entity must meet. “We firmly believe if insurers want to get bigger, especially given their track record,” he said, “they must commit to getting better.”In the case of Blue Shield and Care1st, for example, he said the plans agreed to improve their performance on certain quality criteria.Besides the worry that the mergers will result in higher prices, some consumer advocates also want regulators to make sure individuals will have sufficient access to doctors and hospitals as the insurers negotiate with providers to create networks. “We’ll certainly express some of our concerns to the department,” said Cindy Zeldin, the executive director for Georgians for a Healthy Future.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Both Anthem and Aetna say they are confident that the deals will go through, contending that the mergers will help contain costs. They argue there is little overlap in their respective areas of business.“We are committed to engaging in constructive and transparent dialogue as both the federal and state processes move forward, and will continue to work cooperatively with all relevant policy makers and regulatory entities to complete this transaction,” Anthem said in a statement.Aetna said it had filed all material state regulatory filings and had received approval from one state.Some state insurance commissioners have already voiced their concerns. “California’s health insurance market already suffers from consolidation,” Dave Jones, one of two state regulators, said when the mergers were announced last summer. “Further consolidation will result in even less competition among health insurers and will leave consumers and employers with fewer choices and the potential for greater premium increases.”While Mr. Jones said he could not comment on the specific mergers that regulators in California are reviewing, he said they would also be scrutinizing the proposed acquisition of Health Net, which is based in the state, by Centene, another for-profit company.AdvertisementIn Kentucky, where Humana is based, Sharon P. Clark, the insurance commissioner, said she planned to do a thorough review and would consult with economists about the likely impact of the mergers.“We do not think we are going to have a competitive problem in Kentucky,” she said, adding that she had not heard much in the way of consumer complaints. But she said she also planned to assess whether sufficient competition would still exist.Ms. Clark said that the insurance mergers could serve as a counterbalance to the frenzy of deals taking place among hospitals and with doctors’ groups to form larger collections of providers. “We’re going to have the battle of the titans,” she said.The impact of the mergers will depend on the state, said Mr. Angoff, who noted that in states where there is a powerful nonprofit Blue Cross plan, regulators may not worry as much about the merging of two smaller for-profit rivals. The regulators will also look at the market share of the combined companies in different lines of business, including private plans offered under Medicare and commercial coverage.State regulators were particularly active during the wave of acquisitions that took place when some of the nonprofit Blue Cross plans were acquired by what is now Anthem and converted into for-profit companies. In Maryland, for example, the state insurance commissioner blocked a plan by Anthem to add CareFirst to its collection in 2003.And there have been other instances when regulators have rejected mergers. In Pennsylvania, state regulators blocked the combination of Highmark and Independence Blue Cross in 2009.But Mr. Balto also said that a vigorous state review could cause the Justice Department to hesitate. Many of the states will opt to have public hearings, which “will be a venue for everybody to raise concerns,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: States Urged to Review Big Health Insurers’ Merger Proposals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.