
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

JUNE 24, 2016
Wednesday’s Delaware court hearing on whether Sumner M. Redstone’s National Amusements appropriately removed five Viacom directors highlights that not only will this matter drag on, but that investors still know very little about the arrangements governing Viacom and CBS.The hearing in Delaware was a scheduling conference, a typically mundane step in the litigation process designed to set a schedule for deciding whether the removal of the directors, including Viacom’s chief executive, Philippe P. Dauman, was valid.Lawyers for both sides joked it was probably the best-attended scheduling conference ever in Delaware. The full house included Viacom’s general counsel, Michael D. Fricklas (who along with the remaining Viacom executives has taken the side of Mr. Dauman), the separate lawyers for Mr. Sumner and his daughter, Shari Redstone, and lawyers for National Amusements and Frederic Salerno, the Viacom director challenging this matter.The intense interest in the case demonstrates the outcome’s importance to Viacom. It was also the first time direct control of Viacom was at issue.AdvertisementMr. Redstone has been shaking up his media holdings, including CBS and Viacom. The removal of directors sparked another legal dispute over whether Mr. Redstone, who is 93 and in poor health, has the mental capacity to make decisions on his companies. Through National Amusements, he owns about 80 percent of the voting stock of CBS and Viacom, and as the holder of the majority of shares can act by written consent at any time. Mr. Salerno asked the Delaware court to block the director changes, while National Amusements petitioned to have them validated.AdvertisementOn Wednesday, Edward B. Micheletti, the lawyer for Mr. Salerno, argued for delay in the court’s decision, saying a hearing in the fall on the matter was appropriate. Mr. Micheletti, a Delaware-based partner at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, also argued that during this time period the Delaware courts should allow discovery concerning Mr. Redstone’s competency and medical condition.The National Amusements’ lawyer, Donald J. Wolfe Jr. of the Delaware firm Potter Anderson & Corroon, argued for a stay of discovery and a quick decision on a summary judgment motion.National Amusements, and implicitly Mr. Redstone and his daughter, are adopting a go-slow approach, which allows for their side to be seen as reasoned and deliberate. The approach has also created this litigation mess.Mr. Wolfe also argued that this matter could be resolved on a summary motion since the Delaware court need only look at the validity of the consents to vote Viacom shares. If they were appropriately authorized and delivered, no further inquiry is necessary.As for a stay in discovery, National Amusements and the Redstone camp want to avoid a medical examination of Mr. Redstone. The reason is apparent. Even if he is “competent,” it does not appear that Mr. Redstone is in good shape. And an examination might show he is incompetent.There was some new information that came out during the hearing. In my previous writings I had assumed that the Viacom shares were voted by National Amusements. In that case, the competency of Mr. Redstone would seem irrelevant. A court should simply look at the National Amusements board and whether it validly voted. And it did. So, this would seem to be the end of the story.But according to the transcript of the hearing, the lawyers disclosed that until Mr. Redstone is declared incompetent or dies, the Viacom shares held by National Amusements are actually directly voted by him. This is different from what I assumed. In this situation, there is no inquiry into National Amusements, but into Mr. Redstone himself.AdvertisementThis is a different matter. And it is why the judge, Chancellor Andre G. Bouchard, was skeptical of National Amusements’ arguments that he could resolve this matter without looking past the consent and Mr. Redstone’s competency.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As Mr. Bouchard put it, “what if a 5-year-old” had executed the consent? At the hearing he stated it was doubtful that he could decide this case without considering Mr. Redstone’s status.This seems right to me.It also highlights how bad things are at Viacom (and CBS) in terms of disclosure. The trust instrument, which governs the trust, dictates who controls Viacom and CBS upon Mr. Redstone’s death or incompetency. Yet we still don’t know exactly what the trust instrument states.That this has occurred is a failure of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the New York Stock Exchange, where both companies are listed. They should move to force this disclosure and to do so for all companies with dual-class stock so as to prevent another mess like this. (Chancellor Bouchard actually noted he wasn’t a “fan” of these dual-class stock structures.)All is not lost for National Amusements, though.In the hearing Mr. Wolfe said that if Mr. Redstone were declared incompetent, then National Amusements votes the shares. In connection with the Viacom director removal, National Amusements’ board ratified the removal. The trustees of the trust itself, who would control National Amusements if Mr. Redstone were declared incompetent, have also ratified the selection of the National Amusements directors.So National Amusements has a fallback argument. It goes like this: Even if you want to look at Mr. Redstone’s competency, you don’t need to. If he is incompetent, National Amusements votes the Viacom shares directly, and it has ratified Mr. Redstone’s actions.Unfortunately, National Amusements was not very clear on this point at the hearing, so it will have to do a good job explaining it again to the judge.Indeed, National Amusements won one point, getting the judge to hear a motion on this issue in July. That will be the next step in this matter. Otherwise, Chancellor Bouchard stayed discovery on the matter, refusing to allow an investigation into Mr. Redstone’s competency.Mr. Bouchard seems to prefer to let this issue be fleshed out in the two other cases on this matter in Massachusetts and California. Why were Mr. Salerno’s lawyers so keen, though, to look at competency in both Massachusetts and Delaware? One reason may be that they may not be able to go forward in Massachusetts. Another may be that the more they can investigate, the more likely they might be able to highlight Mr. Redstone’s decline.AdvertisementAgain though, this raises interesting issues about a way out of this mess. The ousted Viacom directors didn’t complain in March when Mr. Redstone executed the consent to vote for them for their seats. How can they protest now when they are being removed? And does this mean the Viacom directors get to stay in their seats forever if Mr. Redstone is declared incompetent?And then there is the issue of competency itself. Is the standard a general one about his competency to engage in business decisions? Or does it just focus on Mr. Redstone’s understanding that he is removing the directors here? These are thorny issues that the chancellor seemed unwilling to jump into.And so, as we head into July, the question now is whether National Amusements can convince the Delaware judge that since all of the parties here – the Redstones, National Amusements, and the trust — are in agreement, Mr. Redstone’s competency is irrelevant. Litigation in Massachusetts might reveal more. Indeed, there is a June 30 hearing in Massachusetts on Mr. Redstone’s motion to dismiss, while Mr. Dauman and fellow ousted director George Abrams have moved for a medical examination of Mr. Redstone.In other words, this case still has a long way to go before resolution, to Viacom’s detriment.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »