
Another View By                     
JORDAN THOMAS

NOV. 20, 2015
Jordan Thomas is chairman of the whistle-blower representation practice at Labaton Sucharow and was a former assistant director in the enforcement division of the Securities and Exchange Commission.Many of the biggest cases of wrongdoing against Wall Street firms and other companies, from interest rate manipulation to private equity fee abuses, have involved anonymous whistle-blowers. The Securities and Exchange Commission’s five-year-old  whistle-blower program has been a sobering tonic against the seemingly endless series of corporate scandals. The agency recently announced it had received a record number of tips (3,929) from whistle-blowers and paid out record sums (more than $37 million) in fiscal 2015.But it’s no secret that being a corporate whistle-blower isn’t always easy or glamorous, even though the program allows people to report anonymously, offers robust employment protections and pays significant monetary awards. As we documented in a recent survey of the financial services industry, some employers are deploying countermeasures to discourage employees from reporting wrongdoing, such as the abuse of highly restrictive confidentiality agreements to silence corporate whistle-blowers. Potential whistle-blowers often are afraid that their anonymity will be compromised and they will be the subject of retaliation, blacklisting or other unwanted scrutiny. Others are uncertain whether a significant violation has occurred or whether they will be believed by law enforcement and regulatory authorities.So how should a corporate whistle-blower navigate the potential pitfalls? Here are five things to know.AdvertisementThink about what, how and when to report. What: So you’ve seen something that doesn’t seem right — should you report it? This is a difficult question, especially in the financial services industry, which is overseen by numerous state and federal regulators including the Federal Reserve, Financial Industry Regulatory Authority and the S.E.C. Figuring out whether a violation of the law may have occurred — and whether you may also have potential liability for the wrongdoing — is critical. We are sometimes contacted by potential whistle-blowers who were involved in misconduct and worry the regulators will come after them. Although that’s rarely the case, especially in situations where someone was following a superior’s direction and had a limited role, this risk should be carefully considered before reporting.AdvertisementHow: Will you go to your boss, the authorities or both simultaneously? There are many factors to consider: Does the company offer you a trustworthy way to report internally, while remaining anonymous? If not, does your organization genuinely encourage employees to speak up and how have other whistle-blowers been treated? Many of my clients have reported internally first — some more formally than others. That can increase your eventual award, but you need to carefully weigh the potential risk of retaliation against the need to protect investors and opportunity to receive a larger whistle-blower award. Ultimately, you do not need to report internally first to receive the incentives and protections of the S.E.C.‘s whistle-blower program.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When: If you plan to report to the S.E.C., don’t delay. Sometimes there are multiple whistle-blowers and the first to report may be given greater weight when it comes time for an award. It might even make sense to make a cursory submission and provide a more detailed supplemental submission later. The bottom line is that timing matters and the program is intended to reward early reporting. Mum’s the word. Remaining anonymous is extremely important to most corporate whistle-blowers.Whether you want to be anonymous or not, you should avoid actions that could reveal your intentions or status as a whistle-blower such as conspicuously downloading documents or telling co-workers, even trusted ones. Be particularly careful with electronic communications, do not Google “whistle-blower award” or “whistle-blower attorney” from your work computer or mobile device (Believe me, it happens.) Also, you don’t have to be Sherlock Holmes, interrogating suspected wrongdoers and taking photos of everything in the office. Let the S.E.C. do its job once it gets the tip from you. Keep careful records and gather evidence. Legally.Whether you report internally or externally, it is important that you keep accurate and detailed records. Organizing and maintaining information such as a reliable timeline and the whereabouts of crucial evidence, and detailing your assistance to the S.E.C., can assist regulators greatly and form the basis for your future application for award. Reporting possible violations without direct evidence is permissible. However, providing more corroborating evidence with your initial tip will increase the likelihood that the S.E.C. will investigate your tip and the probability the agency will bring a successful enforcement action based upon it. That being said, there are limits as to what evidence you can collect and how you can collect such evidence. For instance, employees in New York have a greater ability to record potentially incriminating conversations than some other states. So, if you are not sure about the law in this area, you are encouraged to consult with a lawyer. Play it cool.While the whistle-blower’s workplace can feel like a pressure cooker, before and after reporting to the S.E.C., it’s important to behave professionally from start to finish. Try to adopt a Zen-like attitude. Smart whistle-blowers avoid making threats or ultimatums, sending panicked emails, speaking out publicly through traditional or social media or engaging in other actions that can needlessly put an employer on the defensive or out themselves. Remember investigations can take time, and it’s important not to get frustrated or impatient. The good guys generally win in the end. Know that you are not alone.While those who stand up against wrongdoing can feel isolated, whistle-blowers are most certainly not alone. With the strong employment protections and financial incentives offered by many whistle-blower programs, individuals from all walks of life are coming forward — including those occupying senior positions at the most prestigious financial institutions around the globe.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »