

      By DANIELLE IVORY, 
    
BEN PROTESS and 
    
JENNIFER DANIEL

JUNE 25, 2016

TransCare, an ambulance company controlled by private equity, recently went out of business. We obtained internal emails and minutes of executive meetings that lay bare the company’s final year and its ultimate demise.
Related Article
Jan. 7, 2015Subject: TransCare AccountHappy New Year. We appreciate very much you working with us regarding past due invoices. Note that we'll always pay your bills, sometimes takes a little (or a lot) longer than others.Jan. 17, 2015Subject: Question about suppliesSorry to send you an email on a Saturday evening. Do you have any albuterol and ipratropium that we could have? We have reached a critically low stock.[Redacted] unable to make it through the weekend with current medical supplies.March 27, 2015Subject: PayrollWe are investigating the issue with the delay of payroll. Some employees have been paid while the majority have not as soon as we know the exact issue I will let you all know. This is definitely a technical issue and not a financial one.March 30, 2015Subject: A Message from our C.E.O.There should be no concern about current and future work also being paid.July 7, 2015Subject: A Message from Jeff PitonzaUnfortunately the payroll issue was not resolved this afternoon as we had hoped. We do not have a definite time that this will be rectified and will update everyone when. Payroll will be paid no matter what. We are just waiting to find out when.July 8, 2015Subject: Please do not fuel any unit that at [sic] has over half a tank.Nov. 8, 2015Subject: Fly car 807807 has now joined the ranks along with 001 and 005. It's dead in the bay in WP. [Redacted] is attempting to get it jumped but given the condition of it, I will guarantee it's not going to last long. Please, all three of these vehicles respond to calls for contracted 911 services. They are first line response vehicles, they are not for admin purposes. We need them in service desperately.Jan. 5, 2016Subject: 357It was 6 degrees and they tried for hours to get the bus started. 932 took a couple hours as well.
I will have evening supervisors run trucks not in use for a while every few hours.Jan. 6, 2016Subject: A message from Jeff PitonzaIt is with an unbelievable heaviness that I announce the transition of emergency medical services for the city of New Rochelle to Empress ambulance service.Jan. 8, 2016Subject: TransCare LeadershipAs many of you know, today we said goodbye to our friend and C.E.O., Glenn Leland. I know you all join me in wishing him nothing but the greatest success in his future endeavors. Recent events have been a wake-up call for all of us, including our ownership, and I am happy to announce that on Monday we will welcome a new financial management group (Carl Marks Advisors) to help us reinvigorate this company and augment Patriarch Partners’ efforts to recapitalize TransCare. … Here's to a great future together!”Jan. 22, 2016Subject: Company UpdateI am hopeful the plan for further cash investments by Patriarch Partners will be reached by the end of next week, but please know there is a commitment from our ownership to bring TransCare back to the high-quality, respected company it has been in the past in both the ambulance and the paratransit business.* Key vendors with issues:* Quality — takes care of the lifepacks, vents, pumps* Medpro — stretchers. Currently there are no bariatric stretchers in service. TCHV sometimes takes from Mount Vernon in TCNY Core* Ever Dixie — need approximately $450 for critical supplies … * No updates on medical directors being paid and they are considering not working for us due to nonpayment.…* Tomorrow’s meeting with Lynn will allow an update on the critical vendor issues* Yesterday, Carl Marks Advisors met with Lynn Tilton and Northwell consultants. Northwell had great things to say about TransCare. At this time, Patriarch will not employ Northwell consultants on a full-time basis to help with the turnaround.* Lynn asked what the biggest issue facing TransCare is. [Redacted] and group said fleet/aging ambulances. Lynn said she will commit cash tomorrow to buy ambulances.Sherriff posted an eviction notice over weekend at TCMD Base. Ernie the landlord is not returning calls.Feb. 1, 2016Subject: Medication restockPlease be sure to try and restock medications used for a patient that has been transported to the hospital, from the E.R. Usually if the E.R. opened a crash cart or if you ask for a one-for-one exchange for the medications used, they are willing to restock us. The same goes for lancets and electrodes.The team brought up the mounting frustrations that nothing is really turning around yet and not a lot of communication from outside of TransCare.Feb. 24, 2016, 8 p.m.Subject: URGENT: Announcement from TransCare Management for New York City and Westchester County OperationWe believe that through these restructuring efforts we have been able to save 700 jobs. Sadly, as a result of a decision by our senior lender to cease providing additional funding, the remaining operations (NYC 911, Core, Westchester and Maryland), which have continued to face significant challenges throughout the restructuring process, are being forced into liquidation under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code.Feb. 24, 2016, 11:10 p.m.Subject: URGENT Update: Announcement for TransCare employees in New York CityThese businesses have NOT been immediately shut down.
Tomorrow certain assets of TransCare will be in the hands of a court-appointed trustee who we expect will have the needed runway to effect an orderly wind down.Feb. 26, 2016, 12:06 a.m.Subject: EOW 2/26/2016I am here now, at the MV base and with deep regret am announcing that doors are closing shortly. I am told that the last nail in the coffin is that tomorrow's payroll is NOT funded.
I am at a loss for words. There is nothing to say.Emails condensed for space. Certain identifying info has been removed.Produced by Josh WilliamsAdvertisement