
Another View By                     
JENNIFER TAUB

NOV. 20, 2015
Jennifer Taub is a professor at Vermont Law School. Her financial crisis book “Other People’s Houses” was published in 2014 by Yale University Press.On Wednesday, the House Judiciary Committee passed a measure that would severely weaken laws intended to punish – and deter – white-collar crime. Tucked into the bipartisan criminal justice overhaul package, the language could hamper federal prosecutors’ deployment of statutes that have been used for more than a century against fraudsters from Charles Ponzi to Bernard L. Madoff.The provision was rushed through before legal experts could provide meaningful insight on the impact these changes could have. Vocal opponents have already asserted that, if enacted, the law would undermine public health and safety and encourage business executives to remain willfully blind to criminal conduct and deliberately ignorant of the law.Protecting elite offenders seems incongruous with efforts to strengthen the criminal justice system that have drawn attention to staggering racial inequalities in our system and focused on addressing mass incarceration of those with the least societal power, an overhaul that includes reducing penalties for low-level, nonviolent drug offenses and expunging criminal records for juvenile offenders.AdvertisementThe move also seems at odds with the prevailing excuse – the difficulty in proving intentional conduct – for not holding any high-level bankers criminally accountable in connection with the financial crisis.AdvertisementSo who helped transform an honorable fight against structural racism into a “me too” moment for managerial miscreants?Apparently, the proponents include the right-leaning Heritage Foundation and other allies who are trying to leverage “sentencing reform” to achieve what they call “mens rea” reform. They have argued that droves of “morally blameless” individuals are imprisoned when they “unwittingly” commit acts that later turn out to be criminal.Rena I. Steinzor, a law professor and Center for Progressive Reform scholar, disputes this premise. In a paper published this week, she contended: “We don’t have a white-collar over-criminalization problem in this country. We have an under-criminalization problem.”As a result, “people die for preventable reasons every day in America and the vast majority of corporate managers responsible for such episodes escape even a hint of criminal charges,” she said. “Federal and state prosecutors are overly hesitant to bring white-collar cases.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.President Obama appears poised to veto the mens rea reform, should it pass the full House and Senate. In a statement issued to The Huffington Post, a White House official warned: “If the bill became law, a terrorist could only be found guilty for using a weapon of mass destruction if he specifically knew his victims were going to be U.S. nationals, a killer could only be found guilty of certain firearm crimes if he knew the gun traveled in interstate commerce, and a white-collar criminal could only be found guilty of bank fraud if he knew he was robbing a bank that was F.D.I.C.-insured.”Peter Carr, a spokesman for the Justice Department, has also raised concerns, explaining that it “would create confusion and needless litigation, and significantly weaken” laws such as “those that play an important role in protecting the public welfare.”The warnings are dire, as the impact of this technocratic tinkering is difficult to discern. The language approved by the congressional committee lacks sufficient clarity. The bill seeks more difficult levels of prosecutorial proof for every “federal criminal offense” for which “no state of mind is required by law.” Yet there is no definition of what is meant either by “state of mind” or “law.”The devil’s in the details. Several key federal white-collar criminal statutes do not include a mental state in their text. However, the federal courts have required proof of some level of intent. Thus, the bill would not be as soft on crime if the words “by law” are read broadly enough to include both the federal statutes as well as case law that has interpreted them.AdvertisementThis ambiguity is tremendously important. For those federal offenses that do not have a state of mind required “by law,” the government could have to prove the defendant “knew, or had reason to believe that the conduct was unlawful.” It is also unclear when and how this would work. The bill states that this high proof would be required “if the offense consists of conduct that a reasonable person in the same or similar circumstances would not know or would not have reason to believe, was unlawful.”Such loose language will invite litigation and drive up costs, in addition to having yet untold consequences for internal corporate compliance efforts. Moreover, this could harm the majority of businesses that operate honestly and fairly as it will amplify the incentives for dishonest competitors to cut corners by harming customers, shareholders, employees and the general public, as there will be less chance of downside risk.Measuring the impact quantitatively and qualitatively should be a necessary precondition for the introduction and passage of this sweeping decriminalization plan that could enable business leaders to dodge accountability for dangerously lethal, fraudulent and predatory practices.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »