JUNE 26, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.27 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.38 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.24 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: Florida Board of Education, $240 million of debt securities. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $91.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Washington County, Tenn., $113.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Washington State, $1.3 billion of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementSachem, N.Y., Central School District, $73.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAdvertisementArkansas, $83.2 million of higher education general obligation bonds. Raymond James.California, $178 million of school cash reserve debt securities. Piper Jaffray.California Central Coast Water Authority, $50 million of water project regional facilities refinancing debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Cleburne Independent School District, Johnson County, Tex., $115.2 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Colton, Calif., Joint Unified School District, $53 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Colton, Calif., Joint Unified School District, $58 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Connecticut Housing Finance Authority, $62.5 million of mortgage finance program bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Eastern Maine Healthcare Systems, $79.9 million in taxable bonds. Raymond James.Illinois Finance Authority, $64 million of university revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.AdvertisementIowa, $80 million of prison infrastructure special obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Maine Health and Higher Education Facilities, $174 million of health care system revenue bonds. Raymond James.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Massachusetts Development Finance Authority, $63.5 million of college revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Massachusetts, $200 million of general obligation bonds. Barclays Capital.Massachusetts, $691 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Melissa Independent School District, Tex., $52.4 million of unlimited tax school building refinancing bonds. Raymond James.New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $215 million of university revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Ohlone, Calif., Community College District, $70 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Palm Beach County, Fla., $57.9 million of airport system revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.San Antonio, Tex., Electric and Gas Systems, $564 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.San Dieguito Union High School District, Calif., $61.2 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Sartell-St. Stephen, Minn., School District, $105.4 million of general obligation school building bonds. Robert W. Baird.AdvertisementSimi Valley, Calif., Unified School District, $68 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.South Carolina Public Service Authority, $750 million of revenue obligation bonds. Barclays Capital.South Carolina State Housing Finance & Development Authority, $67 million of mortgage revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Texas, $149.6 million of general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Texas A&M Board of Regents, $175.9 million of revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Texas A&M Board of Regents, $205.9 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.University of South Carolina, $66.9 million in higher education revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Utah County, Utah, $185 million in hospital revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Vermont, $91 million of municipal bond bank refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.A version of this schedule appears in print on June 27, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.