AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaThe deal to acquire Cable & Wireless Communications undercuts one of John C. Malone’s favorite and most fiendish pieces of financial engineering.Liberty Global, the European cable and wireless operator controlled by Mr. Malone, is offering three forms of payment to shareholders of Cable & Wireless, a British company with cable operations in Latin America and the Caribbean. Cable & Wireless, however, is recommending the one that does not include a tracking stock, a form of security that Mr. Malone increasingly champions.Independent directors at Cable & Wireless have backed a simpler option of 86.82 pence per share that includes mostly Liberty Global stock along with a three pence per share special dividend. The other two include a mix of Liberty Global stock and special shadow stock that tracks the company’s Chilean and Puerto Rican businesses that trade under the LiLAC group.It is mainly Mr. Malone, and two other shareholders, who want the tracking stock. Together, they own about 35 percent of Cable & Wireless after the $1.9 billion sale of the cable operator Columbus International to Cable & Wireless this year. The upfront payout is notably lower, at 78.14 pence and 68.22 pence, but there may be greater potential reward – along with greater risk – by taking a punt on LiLAC.The transaction is comically complex, even by Mr. Malone’s standards of craftiness. The news release and the accompanying 88-page appendix that follows are jammed with footnotes and formulas. Liberty Global even plans to take the unusual step of offering Cable & Wireless investors worksheets to help them with the puzzle and which of the three bids to accept.Nevertheless, the firm recommendation by Cable & Wireless’s board is telling. One of the reasons for Liberty Global, or any other company, to create a tracking stock in the first place is to use it as a currency for acquisitions. Though they are rare, Mr. Malone is somewhat obsessed with them. Just last week, he created a basket of nine notional shares – three new shadow stocks each with three classes – for his United States-based Liberty Media.Shadow shares already present all sorts of valuation challenges. Cable & Wireless looked past Mr. Malone’s financial fog and advocated the simpler solution, as well as the more immediately valuable one. It’s an admirable vote for clarity that should help beat back any notions elsewhere of creating more trackers.Advertisement