AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel E. SlotnikJerome Fisher, who helped found Nine West, a women’s shoe company that imitated designer styles at affordable prices, and turned it into an industry juggernaut, died on June 23 in West Palm Beach, Fla. He was 85.His son Marc, who confirmed the death, said Mr. Fisher had had a brain hemorrhage.Mr. Fisher and Vince Camuto began building the company that became Nine West in the 1970s. Globalization was the company’s raison d’être; on a trip to Brazil, Mr. Fisher realized that he could produce shoes inexpensively there, then ship them to the United States, where they could be sold for considerably less than competitors’ shoes. Their first office in Manhattan was at 9 West 57th Street, from which they derived the company’s name in 1977.Providing fashionable shoes at reasonable prices proved profitable, and Nine West expanded considerably over the next decade. It released shoes under brand names like Enzo Angiolini and Easy Spirit as well as its own, opened stores around the world and began selling accessories.Nine West went public in 1993. Later in the 1990s, it paid nearly $600 million to buy the shoe division of the United States Shoe Corporation, its main competitor. Forbes reported in 1995 that in the previous year, Nine West sold more than $630 million worth of women’s shoes and earned $60 million. It said that footwear made for the company accounted for 25 percent of Brazil’s shoe exports.“The company, now known as Nine West Group, says that one of every five pairs of shoes that American women buy comes from Nine West,” The New York Times reported in 1997.The shoe business flagged in the late 1990s, and Nine West was investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission for accounting irregularities, though no further action was evidently taken. In 1999, the Jones Apparel Group, a women’s clothing company, bought Nine West for nearly $900 million. Mr. Fisher was named chairman emeritus and devoted much of his time from then on to yachting and philanthropy, giving in particular to the University of Pennsylvania, his alma mater.“I miss the people, I miss the industry, but I don’t miss the day-to-day at all,” he told the trade publication Footwear News in 2007.Mr. Fisher was born in Boston on Oct. 20, 1930. The shoe business was a family affair: His father, Sam, ran the Fisher Shoe Company, and as a boy, Mr. Fisher shined shoes to earn pocket money.He graduated from Brookline High School and received a degree in industrial engineering from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in 1953. His thesis was about importing footwear.Seeking to start his own shoe business, Mr. Fisher founded the Jodi Shoe Company in New Hampshire, naming it after his daughter. (Jodi Fisher Horowitz died in 2009.) The company failed, and in 1968 Mr. Fisher began a partnership with Sumitomo Shoji Kaisha, a Japanese company now called the Sumitomo Corporation, to open a women’s shoe manufacturing division in Brazil. He met Mr. Camuto while working for Sumitomo.He married Anne Pozatek, who survives him, in the 1960s. At his death he lived in Palm Beach, Fla. In addition to his wife and their son Marc, he is survived by another son, Jeffrey; nine grandchildren; and six great-grandchildren.Mr. Fisher’s descendants have remained in the shoe business. His son Marc now runs Marc Fisher Footwear, which also employs some of the elder Mr. Fisher’s grandchildren, including his grandson Adam.“Adam represents the fourth generation,” Mr. Fisher told Footwear News in 2007. “In a short time, our family will have been in the business for 100 years, dating back to 1919, my father’s time. We’re all very proud of that.”Advertisement