
Book Entry By                     
JONATHAN A. KNEE

JUNE 28, 2016
There is plenty not to like in Antonio García Martinez’s Silicon Valley tell-all, “Chaos Monkeys: Obscene Fortune and Random Failure in Silicon Valley” (Harper). An author whose biography boasts that he “lives on a 40-foot sailboat on the San Francisco Bay” is not well positioned to lampoon the social mores of the West Coast tech culture.The book’s dedication “to all my enemies” who made the oeuvre possible confirms the impression that the blizzard of score-settling that follows is less than balanced. The aphorisms are sometimes lazy, the facts can be sloppy, and the studied cool – all the while insisting that “I am the uncoolest person you will ever meet” – can be grating. I also could definitely have done without learning about Mr. García’s weakness for “strenuous fornication” and drunken romps in the Facebook broom closet.And yet, somehow, “Chaos Monkeys” manages to be an irresistible and indispensable 360-degree guide to the new technology establishment.Hiding underneath the braggadocio and evisceration of professional nemeses lies the beating heart of a formidable teacher. “Chaos Monkeys” is likely to attract headlines and interest because of the prominent names and institutions mercilessly described. This is unfortunate. Mr. García may apologize for his pedagogical asides, but these actually form the true core of what is a remarkably learned book.AdvertisementHe schools us in three domains worthy of close study.The first half of “Chaos Monkeys” takes us inside the world of venture capital. After leaving – and litigating with – one early-stage tech company to start another, Mr. García sells out to Twitter, only to immediately abandon his co-founders for Facebook. Along the way, we meet the lawyers, angel investors, venture firms and associated institutions – notably the Y Combinator, which plays an outsize role in securing financing from the most prestigious investors – that drive this ecosystem.The second half of “Chaos Monkeys” takes place at Facebook, and it concerns the handful of dominant companies that have emerged from this start-up culture. These companies (in addition to Facebook, notably Google and Amazon), whose market values start at more than $300 billion, are approaching (or in the case of Apple and Microsoft, managing) middle age. In addition to contrasting their collective ethos with that of the start-up world, “Chaos Monkeys” touches on the also-rans like Twitter who failed to break into this rarefied plane.Beyond the author’s personal story, what connects the two distinct halves of the book is his area of actual domain expertise: advertising. Mr. García was a Ph.D. student in physics at Berkeley before joining Goldman Sachs to model prices for credit derivatives. He moved to Silicon Valley to perform the same magic in valuing the attention of internet users. And it is the explosion of digital advertising that has fed the emergence of the most recent crop of internet giants. In the course of describing his path from ad-tech start-ups to ad-targeting product manager at Facebook, Mr. García provides fascinating insights into the nature of the online and offline advertising worlds – both regarding what has changed and what has stayed stubbornly the same.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two aspects in these central lessons make “Chaos Monkeys” a particularly compelling read, despite its faults. First, Mr. García is not just a keen observer of corporate and social culture, but a thoughtful business and policy analyst armed with a highly refined detector for pretentious nonsense. Well before the investor Peter Thiel was revealed as the secret backer of the lawsuit that put Gawker into bankruptcy, Mr. García was writing that “the tech start-up scene, for all its pretensions of transparency, principled innovation, and a counterculture renouncement of pressed shirts and staid social convention, is actually a surprisingly reactionary crowd.”AdvertisementEven where Mr. García completely mangles the facts – as he does for instance in describing the mechanics of the Facebook initial public offering – he manages to draw multiple fresh insights that somehow feel directionally correct. And in contrast to the self-serving verdicts rendered on his allies and enemies, his broader conclusions seem well balanced. The world he inhabited, Mr. García reflects, “is no worse than traditional industry and politics, but certainly no better either.”Which brings us to the second reason “Chaos Monkeys” is a must-read. It matters. Mr. García is providing tools to honestly deconstruct a corner of the world that has amassed breathtaking cultural, economic and political influence, and not always for the good. Fully 60 percent of Harvard Business School graduates now go to work at companies with fewer than 500 employees. A fuller conversation is required before we rejoice that the invidious hegemony of Goldman Sachs, McKinsey & Company and hedge funds as the resting place for our best and brightest graduates has been replaced with early-stage tech companies.At the least, readers of “Chaos Monkeys” will think twice before taking at face value tech leaders’ high-minded arguments for refusing to assist our national security apparatus in fighting terrorist threats. Even in the area of advertising, important social and public policy questions are implicated.The greatest danger of “Chaos Monkeys” is that it could suffer the same fate as many equally prescient cautionary tales: It is appreciated less as trenchant social criticism and more as a how-to manual. Such is the irresistible pull of Silicon Valley that I fear the manuscript will be pored over mainly for clues to getting a job at Facebook or having a venture selected by the Y Combinator. If that is the case, we all may want to join Mr. García on his boat and just sail away.Jonathan A. Knee is professor of professional practice at Columbia Business School and a senior adviser at Evercore Partners. His book, “Class Clowns: How the Smartest Investors Lost Billions in Education,” will be released by Columbia University Press in November.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »