By STACY COWLEYJUNE 28, 2016
As regulators prepare to strengthen rules for prepaid cards, lawmakers are pressing Walmart, MasterCard and Green Dot to explain what went wrong last month when shoppers using Walmart prepaid debit cards were unable to get access to their accounts.For several days in May, some users of the Walmart MoneyCard were not able to view their account balances or activate new cards. Customers also reported that their cards had been declined for purchases. The cards use MasterCard’s network and are issued by Green Dot, one of the largest prepaid card providers in the United States.The failure echoed a technical breakdown last year that cut off thousands of customers  from funds they had loaded on RushCard, another popular prepaid card. Last month, RushCard agreed to pay $19 million to settle a lawsuit with cardholders over the problems.Prepaid cards can be a financial lifeline for their users, many of whom are lower-income workers or, for a variety of reasons, do not have bank accounts. Some cardholders have their paychecks automatically deposited to their cards and use the accounts to pay rent, utilities and other essential expenses. When the cards fail, financially vulnerable customers can be left stranded.AdvertisementIn letters sent Tuesday to the chief executives of Green Dot, Walmart and MasterCard, two senators who are members of the Senate Banking Committee asked how many people were affected by the problems last month, how long the problems lasted and whether the companies planned to compensate those who incurred late fees or other charges.Advertisement“These service interruptions are a clear indication that more oversight and consumer protection is needed in the prepaid card market,” said the letters, signed by Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio and Senator Robert Menendez of New Jersey, both Democrats.More stringent rules for the market are in the works. Prepaid cards currently lack some of the consumer protections that apply to bank accounts and credit cards, but the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau released a set of proposed rules in November 2014 that would help to close this gap.The new rules would require card issuers to standardized their fee disclosures, limit customers’ financial responsibility for fraudulent charges, and investigate errors and resolve them quickly. The consumer bureau has broad power to issues such rules, which do not require congressional approval. A final version of the regulations is expected within the next few months.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In their letter, the senators also asked what information the companies had reported to the consumer bureau about the malfunctions, urging the watchdog agency to take a closer look at the prepaid card market.MasterCard has acknowledged a “slowdown” last month that created problems for some Walmart cardholders.“We caught it right away and worked closely with Green Dot to address the issues,” the company said.Green Dot said that, during the affected period, it had “maintained ongoing and real-time communication with our regulators and will provide any information related to this inquiry as appropriate.”Walmart did not immediately respond to requests for comment.After last month’s problems, Green Dot executives acknowledged “technical issues” and apologized to those affected. “We are taking steps to make sure this never happens again,” they wrote in a statement.The consumer bureau began accepting consumer complaints about prepaid cards in July 2014. It has received more than 5,000 so far, averaging around 215 a month, according to the agency’s latest complaint report.A version of this article appears in print on June 29, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Senators Press Three Companies for Answers After Loss of Access to Prepaid Debit Cards.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.