AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Gina ChonBank stress exams may test investor patience.On Wednesday, the Federal Reserve is scheduled to report how 33 financial institutions fared in a simulated bad economic downturn. Countercyclical factors included this year could mean that even those banks that ace the tests will have to hang on to additional profit rather than return more money to shareholders.The Federal Reserve has emphasized the improving resilience of the financial sector. In the first round of results released last week, all banks proved tough enough from a capital perspective to keep lending despite a situation in which gross domestic product fell 7.5 percent. That’s because banks have added more than $700 billion of common equity cushioning since 2009.As lenders have become better at passing the exams, their payouts have improved. In 2015, for example, every American bank was cleared to declare a dividend. After failing twice, Citigroup last year was able to increase its own to 5 cents a share from a penny.The national economy is also healthier. Unemployment has halved since May 2009, when the first exam results were released. Then, the jobless figure was 9.4 percent. When stress-test outcomes were reported last year, unemployment was at 5.5 percent. It is now 4.7 percent.Even as conditions improve, however, the Fed is raising the bar. This year included situations worse than what the United States experienced during the 2008 crisis. That includes an even faster rise in unemployment, to 10 percent, and negative interest rates for short-term Treasury bonds.That might require more capital for a passing grade. As a group, banks had a common equity capital ratio of 8.4 percent, the Fed reported last week, exceeding the minimum requirement of 4.5 percent and last year’s level of 7.6 percent. In this year’s dire imagined situations, Citigroup’s common Tier 1 equity ratio would fall to 9.2 percent and Goldman Sachs’s to 8.4 percent. Considered another way, if JPMorgan Chase’s capital ratio tumbled to the 6.5 percent of last year’s stress test, it would still have $90 billion.Most banks probably will be able to make payouts again this year, but not as much as might be suggested by the improved economic conditions. Britain’s looming exit from the European Union adds another layer of caution. Bank shareholders may be expected to wait longer.Advertisement