AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningJustice Robert H. Jackson once wrote that “procedural fairness and regularity are of the indispensable essence of liberty.” As is often the case, just figuring out who decides can be as important as what is decided.That is the question confronting federal appeals courts trying to sort out whether constitutional challenges to the Securities and Exchange Commission’s administrative proceedings should be decided by the agency first, or whether a party can leap to a federal district court to have its claim heard.For most violations of the securities laws, the S.E.C. can file civil charges in a federal district court or as an administrative proceeding, where it will be heard first by an in-house judge. Congress has given the agency almost unfettered discretion to choose the particular forum by authorizing it to seek the same penalties for a violation regardless of the venue it chooses.That authority has proved quite irksome to a number of defendants, who have seen cases routed to the administrative process rather than being filed in a federal district court where they would have much greater rights to obtain evidence along with having a jury decide the case. In response, a number of lawsuits have been filed in federal district courts, asserting that the administrative proceedings are unconstitutional for a variety of reasons, asking that the administrative proceeding be halted until the constitutional issue can be decided.Only one such challenge has succeeded thus far. Two federal district judges found that the process by which the agency hires its in-house judges violates the appointments clause of the Constitution, putting a stop to those administrative proceedings until the problem can be fixed.The challenges filed in other cases have not even reached the point of having the constitutional issue considered because the courts found that the defendants could circumvent the administrative procedures in place. Under this approach, to pursue an appeal of a decision in an administrative proceeding, the defendant must first go before the five commissioners before taking the case to a federal appeals court.So far, the S.E.C. has been winning the battle in the appeals courts over how a case should proceed. Last week, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit issued a decision in Jarkesy v. S.E.C., finding that the challenge about the unconstitutionality of the administrative proceedings must go through the administrative review process. This comes on the heels of a decision in August by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, in Chicago, in Bebo v. S.E.C. that reached the same result.But an ambiguous statement in a dissenting opinion issued on Friday by two S.E.C. commissioners, Daniel M. Gallagher and Michael S. Piwowar, casts at least some doubt on who should get the first crack at reviewing a constitutional challenge to the administrative procedures.A majority of the commissioners upheld the findings of an administrative judge against Raymond J. Lucia Companies and its owner, Raymond J. Lucia, for violations of the Investment Advisers Act for making misleading statements to prospective clients about its program called “buckets of money.” Along the way, the S.E.C. rejected the argument that the appointment of its administrative law judges violated the Constitution, finding that they function as a “mere employee” and not as an “inferior officer” who must be appointed by the president or other high-level government official.Mr. Gallagher and Mr. Piwowar dissented, arguing that the statements about the “buckets of money” investment strategy were not misleading. On the propriety of the appointment of the in-house judge, they said that “even though the commission is free to express its views on constitutional issues, we recognize and believe it is appropriate that Article III federal judges ultimately resolve this issue.”It is unclear whether they are saying that the issue should be decided by an appeals court as part of the administrative process, or whether a party should be able to go directly to a federal court to raise a constitutional challenge, bypassing the S.E.C. altogether. If it is the former, then their position would be consistent with the decisions in the Jarkesy and Bebo cases that the procedures in place should be followed, which channel cases to administrative judges first.But if they mean that the S.E.C. has only an advisory role and does not have the authority to decide the issue, then going to a federal district court first would be the proper means to resolve the constitutional challenge.The agency’s victories in appeals courts have come in cases in which the constitutionality of the appointments of its administrative law judges was never considered because the district judges found they did not have jurisdiction to decide the question. Whether the appeals courts will continue to defer to the administrative process remains to be seen, especially once they reach the constitutional challenges.The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit is considering the appeal of Lynn Tilton over whether the S.E.C. can proceed with administrative securities fraud charges. Immediately after the oral argument in the case on Sept. 16, the appeals court issued an order to block the S.E.C. from proceeding with the hearing in her case. That indicates her argument about the constitutionality of the appointment of the in-house judges has at least enough merit to maintain the status quo until the court can decide whether it will reach the issue or require her to raise it in the administrative proceeding.Another case working its way through the appellate process involves Charles L. Hill Jr., who was accused of insider trading in an administrative proceeding. The United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, in Atlanta, found the S.E.C.’s procedure for selecting administrative judges was unconstitutional, prompting an appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit. The Justice Department filed its final brief in the case on Friday, and the court agreed to an expedited review of the lower court’s decision once all the papers were filed.Interestingly, the same lawyers from the Justice Department are handling the appeals in Ms. Tilton and Mr. Hill’s cases, an indication of how seriously the issue of the proper appointment of administrative judges has become for the government.So much of this battle has been focused on what is the proper procedure for raising constitutional questions about the S.E.C.’s administrative process, and far less on the substance of the claims. Until the appeals courts finally reach the constitutional questions, the uncertainty surrounding the S.E.C.’s administrative proceedings will persist.Advertisement