AdvertisementSupported byBy Diane CardwellSungevity, one of the leading national providers of rooftop solar panels, plans to merge with an asset management firm to become a publicly traded company, executives said Wednesday.The merger with Easterly Acquisition, which is expected to be approved later this year, would give Sungevity easier access to financing to help expand its business, with a goal of bringing solar panels to every house, said Andrew Birch, the solar company’s co-founder and chief executive.Since its founding in 2007, the company has rapidly expanded, but its market share has lagged behind publicly traded competitors like SolarCity and Sunrun, according to data compiled by GTM Research, which tracks the solar industry. The deal with Easterly, which is putting about $200 million into Sungevity, is intended to bring more mutual funds and global institutional investors into the mix.“Solar’s now an economic proposition for tens of millions of homes across the markets that we serve, so the challenge for the industry now is, how do we scale?” Mr. Birch said. The Easterly plan, he added, “gives us access to the public market, and it gives us access to investors who are looking for exposure to that adoption curve.”Executives from both companies expressed optimism about the deal, despite turmoil for renewable energy companies and Wall Street skepticism about the financial viability of similar rooftop solar ventures. At SunEdison, now in bankruptcy, the company’s plan to spend $2.2 billion to buy the rooftop system provider Vivint Solar shattered investor confidence and sent its stock price on a steep, downward path from which it never returned. Both SolarCity and Sunrun’s stocks are trading at less than half of their peak values, and investors and analysts have expressed doubts over Elon Musk’s plan to absorb SolarCity into Tesla, sending the carmaker’s stock price down more than 10 percent the day after the announcement.But Sungevity’s business model is simpler, requires less capital and should prove more appealing, said Darrell Crate, chairman of Easterly, which, in a similar transaction, created a publicly traded real estate investment trust that acquires, develops and manages government-leased properties.Sungevity — which operates in 13 states, Washington D.C. and Europe — focuses on using software to assess sites for solar and then to design, monitor and manage the systems and customer relationships. It relies on a network of partners to handle financing and installation, rather than using its own employees and equipment.“Public shareholders appreciate simplicity, transparency and clarity,” Mr. Crate said. “The wisdom of making this a software-based, technology-enabled company allows them to scale and capture the revenue growth without having to grow head count at an equal rate.”Executives said they expected the merger to go through by the end of the year, when Mr. Birch said he anticipated his company would break even. On approval, Sungevity’s outstanding equity and convertible debt will become shares of Easterly common stock, and Easterly will change its name to Sungevity Holdings.Advertisement