AdvertisementSupported byBy Robert PearWASHINGTON — For decades, brand-name and generic drug companies have fought each other in Congress, at international trade negotiations and in court. So when the world’s largest generic drug company moved this year to join the powerful trade association for producers of brand-name medicines, pharmaceutical lobbyists were in a swivet.The trade group, the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, known as PhRMA, is plunging into battles over drug prices here and in many state capitols. And the request from the generic company, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, is raising eyebrows in PhRMA’s secretive councils.Some brand-name drug companies have expressed alarm at the prospect that Teva will join their ranks, a move some see as tantamount to allowing a spy into the fold.If PhRMA “broadens its membership to include the world’s largest generic company, the association’s emphasis on innovation will be diluted,” Carlos Alban, an executive vice president of the brand-name drug maker AbbVie, wrote in late May in a letter to the board of the trade association.Teva and some of PhRMA’s longtime members, like Eli Lilly, are on opposite sides of court cases involving patents and other important issues for the future of brand-name drug companies. Brand and generic companies have also squared off over trade deals like the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership, which can expedite or impede the access of generic drug companies to lucrative foreign markets.PhRMA describes itself as the principal voice of the innovative pharmaceutical industry, and Teva does sell substantial amounts of brand-name drugs, including Copaxone for multiple sclerosis. But the huge size of Teva’s generics business and its plan to acquire the worldwide generic operations of Allergan for $40.5 billion “raise serious questions about Teva’s commitment to innovation,” said Mr. Alban, whose company makes brand-name drugs to treat rheumatoid arthritis, hepatitis C and H.I.V. infection.He noted that Teva had taken positions “directly opposed to PhRMA views” on patents, the lifeblood of the brand-name pharmaceutical industry, and biosimilars, which are copycat versions of costly biologic drugs made from living organisms.“By our research,” Mr. Alban wrote, “Teva has sought to invalidate patents in 29 cases since 2011.” How, he asked, will PhRMA resolve the “differences of opinion” and “internal conflicts” likely to arise between Teva and brand-name manufacturers?The dispute illustrates how the lines between brand-name and generic companies are starting to blur.“The walls between what’s generic and what’s brand are breaking down,” said John C. Rother, executive director of the Campaign for Sustainable Rx Pricing, a coalition of consumer, labor and physician groups concerned about high drug prices.Teva, based in Israel, sees itself as a sort of hybrid and wants a place at PhRMA’s table based on the fact that its brand-name drugs generated more than $6 billion in revenue in the United States last year — more than the comparable figure for some PhRMA member companies.If Teva becomes a member of PhRMA, it could increase the resources and strength of the brand-name trade association, which already has formidable influence on Capitol Hill.And leaders of the association have good reason to accept Teva as a member. It would mean millions of dollars in additional revenue for PhRMA at a time when the trade group faces significant challenges over drug prices and other issues.At the same time, Teva’s membership could enhance the credibility of PhRMA lobbyists as they try to beat back accusations of price gouging. Teva has long emphasized the need for consumers to have access to affordable medicines.PhRMA’s board is expected to consider Teva’s application at a meeting this month. Several drug lobbyists predicted that it would be approved.A leadership committee of the board has endorsed the application, and PhRMA’s new chief executive, Stephen J. Ubl, has said he wants to see the organization grow. He has already brought in a few smaller companies.Teva’s supporters say the old battle lines between brand and generic companies are obsolete. Generic companies cannot prosper without branded products to copy, they say, and brand-name companies need generics to make drugs more affordable. Together, they can argue that the pharmaceutical marketplace is working and competition is thriving, so the government should not impose price controls.Skyrocketing drug prices have outraged consumers, politicians of both parties, insurance companies, employers, labor unions, doctors and hospital executives. Democrats have traditionally worked closely with generic drug companies, while Republicans have been more aligned with brand companies. But Ronny Gal, a securities analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Company, said “a spectrum or continuum” of drug companies and products is blurring such lines.Brand-name drug makers are moving into the generic space. Pfizer sells generics through a wholly owned subsidiary, Greenstone. Last year, Pfizer acquired Hospira, a leading provider of generic injectable drugs. Novartis has a generic division, known as Sandoz; Novartis is a member of PhRMA, but its generic business is much smaller than its brand-name business.Some brand-name companies are now trying to develop biosimilars to capture a share of what could be a big new market. Amgen and several other companies have said they are developing less expensive biosimilar versions of Humira, AbbVie’s blockbuster drug for rheumatoid arthritis.On some issues, generic and brand-name companies do agree. They have, for example, defended agreements in which brand-name companies paid generic manufacturers to delay marketing of certain generic products. The Federal Trade Commission has attacked a number of these deals, saying they stifle competition and violate federal antitrust law. In those cases, the commission said, brand and generic companies ganged up against consumers and blocked access to lower-cost generic medicines.Teva is known mainly as a generic company, though it has patent-protected specialty drugs as well.In January, Teva reported that it marketed more than 315 new generic medicines in more than 60 countries last year. It expects to offer more than a thousand new generic medicines this year and nearly 1,500 in 2017, as well as 27 new specialty products by 2019.The company is poised to acquire the generic business of Allergan, another big drug maker. After that transaction, Teva said in its annual report, “we will be dependent to a much larger extent than previously on our generic pharmaceutical business.”At the same time, Teva said, it will vigorously defend patents on its specialty medicines. “Patented brand products generally realize a significantly higher profit margin than generic pharmaceutical products,” it said.Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.Advertisement