By MICHAEL CIEPLYJULY 1, 2016
LOS ANGELES — To be (almost) clear: Members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences can still eat the free hors d’oeuvres at filmmaker receptions — as long as they don’t enjoy them too much.On Thursday, the Academy created a minor panic among Oscar voters and those who court them when it announced new campaign rules for the coming Academy Awards season. One sternly worded rule said:“Academy members may not be invited to or attend any nonscreening event, party or dinner that is reasonably perceived to unduly influence members or undermine the integrity of the vote. Members who fail to comply with this regulation will be subject to a one-year suspension of membership for first-time violations and expulsion for subsequent violations, as well as all other available remedies.”What constitutes undue influence in a glamour culture, where the Dom Pérignon flows like sparkling water, became an instant head-scratcher.Those promoting the Oscar prospects of ESPN’s documentary, “OJ: Made in America,” for instance, were about to send invitations to a filmmaker lunch at the not unfancy Craft restaurant next week in Century City. But they were suddenly left to wonder: Might a decent Viognier lead to suspensions or expulsions for all involved?AdvertisementAccording to people briefed on the matter, who spoke on condition of anonymity, academy officials were privately consulted, and approved the Craft luncheon, because it was deemed not to be “over the top.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An academy spokeswoman declined to comment.But those people briefed on the matter said the guidelines were in flux, and the only way for campaigners and members to be sure they are safe is to request advance approval for receptions.AdvertisementCheese balls or a flaming pupu platter are probably O.K. But two-pound lobsters might be a bridge too far.A celebrity host who is not affiliated with the film being promoted is probably a red flag. And it helps to have a screening attached to the appetizers. But it’s not necessary: ESPN has no intention of showing its 450-minute O. J. Simpson documentary to the crowd at Craft.In any case, the people briefed said, the academy plans to focus its enforcement efforts on campaigners, producers and distributors, at least for the next year, while going easy on members who may dine a bit too well on the saumon mariné.A version of this article appears in print on July 4, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Academy Announces New Rules for Oscars.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.