By JOHN KOBLINJULY 1, 2016
In the increasingly competitive space of children’s television, Amazon Prime reached a deal to become the exclusive premium streaming service for most of PBS’s shows for children, the company said on Friday.The deal means that much of PBS Kids programming — including shows like “Daniel Tiger’s Neighborhood,” “Wild Kratts” and “Odd Squad” — will be removed from rival streaming sites like Netflix and Hulu, and will be available only on Amazon Prime. The shows became available on Friday. Terms of the deal were not disclosed.For Amazon, it is the latest move in a battle among the streaming giants, along with HBO, to acquire or create as many children’s television shows as possible.Last year, HBO acquired the rights to broadcast first-run episodes of “Sesame Street,” and by the end of this year Netflix will have 35 original series for children.AdvertisementAs children’s viewing habits have changed, content providers have ferociously competed in this arena in an attempt to lure parents into buying subscriptions for their online services. According to a study released by Nielsen this week, children between the ages of 2 and 11 watched two fewer hours of live television per week this year compared with last year, as the amount of time they spent watching digital platforms jumped.All of the titles moving to Amazon will still be broadcast on local PBS stations, on PBS’s website and the PBS Kids Video app. Amazon Prime will have the streaming rights to shows approximately six months after their premiere date on PBS stations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Amazon-PBS deal means that Netflix will lose streaming rights to a dozen PBS shows, and Hulu will lose six shows. Netflix had previously streamed shows like “Caillou,” “Reading Rainbow,” “Daniel Tiger’s Neighborhood” and “Zoboomafoo,” and Hulu will lose the rights to shows like “Wild Kratts” and “Arthur.” Many of PBS’s titles were previously available on both of those services, as well as Amazon.In a statement, Amazon’s vice president of television acquisition, Brad Beale, said that the company was “committed to making Prime Video the best destination for kids and family programming that will both educate and entertain.”Lesli Rotenberg, PBS’s general manager of children’s programming, said the broadcaster was “very pleased to be continuing our relationship with Amazon.”A few titles are not covered by the deal: “Super Why!” will remain on Netflix; “Sesame Street” is broadcast on HBO and streams at HBO Go and HBO Now; “Curious George” is exclusive to Hulu; and “Thomas and Friends” will remain available on Amazon, Netflix and Hulu.PBS is also in the process of creating a free 24-hour TV channel for its children’s programming, which is expected to debut early next year.A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Amazon Prime in Deal for PBS Children’s Shows.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.