AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberA throng of lawyers for Sumner M. Redstone and the two longtime confidants who have brought suits against him resumed arguments at a Massachusetts courthouse on Thursday, continuing a heated legal battle that could decide the fate of Mr. Redstone’s media empire.Mr. Redstone’s side argued that their client had the mental capacity to make decisions regarding his entertainment conglomerate, which includes Viacom and CBS. They said that the lawsuit should be dismissed or, should it proceed, be moved to California, where Mr. Redstone lives.But lawyers for the plaintiffs, Philippe P. Dauman and George S. Abrams, argued that Mr. Redstone, 93 and in failing health, was mentally incapacitated and had been unduly influenced by Shari Redstone, his daughter, who recently reconciled with him after a long estrangement.After hearing arguments from both sides for over five hours, Judge George F. Phelan of Norfolk County Probate Court said he “had a lot of information to digest” before he could make any rulings, including whether to dismiss the case. He requested documents from a California case brought by Manuela Herzer, a former companion and one-time romantic partner of Mr. Redstone, that challenged Mr. Redstone’s mental competency. A judge dismissed the case in May. (Ms. Herzer has filed an appeal.)He also asked to see the divorce agreement between Mr. Redstone and his ex-wife, Phyllis Redstone, because it was relevant to the creation of the trust.At the center of the lawsuit is Mr. Redstone’s abrupt decision in May to oust Mr. Dauman, the chief executive of Viacom, and Mr. Abrams from the trust that will control Mr. Redstone’s companies after he dies or is found mentally incapacitated. Mr. Redstone also removed them from the board of National Amusements, the theater chain company through which Mr. Redstone owns roughly 80 percent of the voting stock in Viacom and CBS.In the lawsuit, Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams sought to block the moves, saying the mogul lacked the capacity to make such decisions. “He can’t speak,” Les Fagen, a lawyer for Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams, argued Thursday. “He can’t read.”War has spread across the empire of Sumner Redstone, one of the entertainment industry’s most tenacious titans. At stake are the fortunes of his family and confidants, as well as the fate of Viacom and CBS.During the hearing, which included the appearance of over 40 lawyers, Judge Phelan repeatedly asked both sides detailed questions about Mr. Redstone’s mental state and how he communicated with people. He asked, for instance, who Mr. Redstone’s speech therapist was, how information got to Mr. Redstone and who provided it.Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams have also filed a motion demanding an immediate mental examination of Mr. Redstone, which Mr. Redstone’s lawyers opposed in a filing on Wednesday. The judge did not hear arguments on that motion.At stake is the future of Mr. Redstone’s $40 billion media empire, which he built after wresting control of Viacom in 1987. The trust’s seven voting members, for instance, could make plans to merge Viacom and CBS again, or sell CBS.The lawsuit, and others that the two sides are fighting in courtrooms on both sides of the country, have also laid bare a bitter dispute involving family ties and personal rivalries. The lawsuits have, at times, devolved into a war of words, with both sides releasing caustic statements.On Tuesday, National Amusements sent a letter to Viacom’s board criticizing it for supporting what it called “highly personal and vicious attacks on Sumner’s capacity and Shari’s honesty and integrity.” Mr. Redstone’s signature on the letter resembled a wavy line. (During the hearing, Pierce O’Donnell, a lawyer for Keryn Redstone, Mr. Redstone’s granddaughter who is siding with the Viacom directors, said the “flatline signature is a tragic, apt metaphor for Sumner Redstone’s mental capacity.”)In response, Viacom, which owns MTV, Nickelodeon and Comedy Central, released a harshly worded statement challenging the letter’s claims.Besides the issue of mental competence, lawyers for both sides argued about whether the lawsuit should be heard in Massachusetts or in California.Robert N. Klieger, a lawyer for Mr. Redstone, pushed for the case to be moved. “The lion’s share of evidence and witnesses would be in California,” he said, including physicians and health care aides.Mr. Fagen countered that the trust had an office in Massachusetts and that co-trustees were Massachusetts residents. “This is a Massachusetts trust through and through,” he said.Valerie Vande Panne contributed reporting from Canton, Mass.Advertisement