By LESLIE PICKERJUNE 30, 2016
About half of the directors at the Williams Companies resigned on Thursday over disagreements about the future of the pipeline operator, three people with direct knowledge of the matter said. The moves followed the dismantling of its $38 billion merger with Energy Transfer Equity earlier in the week over a tax issue.The board took a vote on Thursday over whether to oust the chief executive, Alan Armstrong, said the people, who asked not to be named because the resignations were not yet public. The vote came out 6 to 6, the people said. Those directors who voted against Mr. Armstrong remaining on the board were the ones who resigned, they said.The board members who stepped down included the two activists on the board: Keith Meister of Corvex Management and Eric Mandelblatt of Soroban Capital Partners. Frank MacInnis, the independent director chairman of Williams, also stepped down, but largely because of personal reasons, the people said. They were joined by Steven Nance, president of Steele Creek Energy, and Laura Sugg, a former senior executive at ConocoPhillips, they said. Ralph Izzo, chairman of Public Service Enterprise Group, also resigned, said the people.News of the board resignations was first reported by The Wall Street Journal.The moves call into question the future of Williams, where directors had been divided over whether to accept Energy Transfer’s initial approaches a year ago. Ultimately, they decided to accept the $38 billion offer in September, which turned into mayhem as the slump in energy prices inflicted pain on the companies that deliver the commodities. Energy Transfer wanted out, and discovered in late March an issue with the offer’s tax-free status, which enabled it to terminate the deal.A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: At Williams, Six Directors Target Chief, Then Resign.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.