AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie Picker, Stephanie Strom and Michael J. de la MercedFor the better part of the last century, there has been one major hurdle whenever Hershey Company was on the verge of a major deal: a charitable trust that controls about 81 percent of the voting power.When Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company wanted to buy the company at a 42 percent premium in 2002, the trust called off the sale at the last minute.When the trust became unhappy with Hershey’s performance and its deal talks with Cadbury in 2007, it asked for the resignation of six directors.When Hershey wanted to buy Cadbury in 2010, a rift between the American company and the trust allowed a rival, Kraft Foods, to prevail in the $19 billion acquisition of the British candy maker.Now, all eyes will be on the Hershey Trust Company again after Mondelez International (which was spun off from Kraft in 2012) made a $23 billion takeover offer for Hershey. On Thursday, Hershey rejected the $107-per-share offer — representing a 10 percent premium — saying in a statement that it “provided no basis for further discussion.”The question many observers are asking is whether this time will be different if Mondelez comes back with a higher price. The Pennsylvania Attorney General’s Office, which has raised concerns over the trust’s deployment of funds, is seeking an overhaul of its board. If that were to happen, some believe Hershey’s largest shareholder would more apt to sell.In some ways, the trust is clinging to a storied history. Milton S. Hershey and his wife, Catherine Sweeney, known as Kitty, never had children. So in 1909, they set up a boarding school for needy boys and deeded 486 acres of land to an entity called the Hershey Trust Company, which was created to fund the school.There are two other charitable entities associated with Hershey, one of which is the nonprofit Milton Hershey School and the other a more plain-vanilla foundation, the M. S. Hershey Foundation, which supports the local museum and park.In 1918, Mr. Hershey gave all of his Hershey company stock to the trust. At the end of March, the Hershey Trust held 12.7 million common shares of the company.The Hershey Trust exerts control over the company because of its control of B shares, each one of which has votes equaling 10 shares of common stock. It thus controls roughly 80 percent of the total votes of all classes of the company’s stock. Eric Henry has been chief executive and chief investment officer of the trust since 2012.Mondelez has pledged to keep jobs and the company’s headquarters in Pennsylvania, and retain the Hershey name. Those details — and concern for the public benefit — may be critical as the largest shareholder, which arguably has never acted like a typical shareholder, mulls over this latest potential tie-up.Advertisement