By CHAD BRAYJUNE 30, 2016
LONDON — The Bank of England may be forced to cut a key interest rate this summer as it grapples with economic uncertainty created by Britain’s vote to leave the European Union, Mark Carney, the bank’s governor, said in a speech on Thursday.The referendum result last week has led to sharp declines in the value of the pound against the dollar and has shaken the British political establishment. Separately, Standard & Poor’s lowered its rating on long-term European Union debt to AA, from AA+, citing the uncertainty after the British referendum results.The process to leave the European Union is expected to take years of negotiations and, in the short term, could put further pressure on the British economy, Mr. Carney said.“It now seems plausible that uncertainty could remain elevated for some time, with a greater drag on activity than we had previously projected,” Mr. Carney said. “Moreover, its effects will be reinforced by tighter financial conditions and possible negative spillovers to growth in the U.K.’s major trading partners.”Mr. Carney said he believed that “the economic outlook has deteriorated and some monetary policy easing will likely be required over the summer.”AdvertisementHe said he was not prejudging what other members of the bank’s Monetary Policy Committee might decide at their next meeting in July or at their meeting in August, when the bank is to announce a new forecast for inflation.AdvertisementThe central bank has kept its benchmark interest rate at 0.5 percent since March 2009.Mr. Carney also sought to reassure investors, saying the central bank had several tools available to stabilize the market. He noted that Britain’s banks were much better capitalized than they were during the financial crisis and the bank had 250 billion pounds, or about $335 billion, available as a backstop to keep the market functioning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He also shrugged off a suggestion by a reporter that he might be forced to resign after a new prime minister was chosen.Some members of the campaign that backed a British exit from the European Union have accused Mr. Carney of politicizing the central bank before the referendum. The bank’s Financial Policy Committee said that the risks associated with the referendum were “the most significant near-term domestic risks to financial stability.”“What we said in terms of the risk to the economic outlook, in terms of the risk to financial stability, does anyone in this room not think those risks have begun to manifest?” he said. “Does anyone in the country think those risks have not begun to manifest? So, we did our job. We identified the risk.”A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Caution From Bank of England.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »