
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA and


RICHARD BEALES

JUNE 30, 2016
The movie studio Lionsgate’s $4.4 billion deal to acquire the pay-TV company Starz has media mogul John C. Malone’s fingerprints all over it. A complex structure? Check. New governance-skewing nonvoting stock? Yup. More influence for the man known as the Cable Cowboy? You bet. Starz shareholders should not be surprised at the modest premium on the offer.Speculation about a merger began in February 2015 when Mr. Malone, best known for Liberty Global and similarly named enterprises, swapped 4.5 percent of Starz stock for 3.4 percent of Lionsgate shares. In the process he gained a seat on the “Hunger Games” studio’s board.Against the backdrop of cable consolidation, the tie-up makes industrial sense. And if Lionsgate could find synergies worth a seemingly reasonable 2.5 percent of combined revenue, or $100 million a year, once taxed and capitalized, their value would easily cover the $400 million or so of premium on offer – and more.However, that is partly because the price is not generous. Mr. Malone controls Starz with 48 percent of the votes, thanks to Class B stock that has 10 times the voting power of regular shares. That makes it hard for other shareholders to argue. They will get cash and Lionsgate stock, worth just over $32 a share, will get a 14 percent premium to where Starz A shares closed on Wednesday.AdvertisementLionsgate plans to create a new class of nonvoting shares. That is what the regular owners of Starz will get along with their cash. Holders of supervoting Starz shares, like Mr. Malone, will receive less cash, but half of their Lionsgate shares will carry voting rights.This helps to explain why Mr. Malone and other central figures look set to land on their feet. Lionsgate’s chairman, Mark Rachesky, owns just over 20 percent of the company. His shareholding will be diluted by the acquisition, but his voting interest will decline only slightly because nonvoting shares will go disproportionately to others.AdvertisementBy Breakingviews’s reckoning, if you combine Mr. Rachesky’s interest in Lionsgate with Mr. Malone’s and those of Liberty Global and Discovery Communications, there will be a near-controlling block wielding more than one-third of the votes with barely more than one-quarter of all shares. It is classic for Mr. Malone to wrap a smart deal in a complicated structure that is good for him.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »