By RACHEL ABRAMSJUNE 30, 2016
A federal appeals court on Thursday overturned a historic antitrust settlement between retailers and Visa and MasterCard, reviving more than a decade of legal battles over processing fees.The United States Court of Appeals in Manhattan said that the lawyers represented retailers with competing interests in the settlement, which was once valued at $7.25 billion, one of the largest in antitrust history. The judges pushed the suit back to a lower court.The settlement stemmed from a 2005 lawsuit in which retailers accused credit card providers of scheming to fix the price of processing fees, the money the card companies charge retailers for each transaction. The sides reached the settlement in 2012.Under the deal, merchants would give up their rights to sue in the future, regardless of whether they received a piece of the money. Merchants would also be allowed to charge higher prices when consumers paid with credit cards, which are typically more expensive for them to process than debit cards.AdvertisementBut on Thursday, the United States Court of Appeals in Manhattan said that the merchants had been “inadequately” represented when the settlement was reached.AdvertisementThe court said that both groups should not have been represented by the same lawyers, who stood to earn more than a half-billion dollars in fees, because the two groups of merchants’ interests conflicted with one another. Some merchants would want to maximize their cash payments, while others would want to “maximize restraints on network rules to prevent harm in the future,” the court wrote.“Class counsel stood to gain enormously if they got the deal done,” the court said in one of the opinions from the three-judge panel.K. Craig Wildfang, a lawyer with Robins Kaplan, who had represented the merchants in the original case, declined to comment on the lawyer fees. Conflict-of-interest issues among groups of plaintiffs is “not uncommon” for these types of cases, according to Scott Wagner, a partner at Bilzin Sumberg who focuses on antitrust and price-fixing issues.The National Retail Federation, a trade group representing some of the country’s largest retailers, said it welcomed the ruling.“This ‘settlement’ was never a settlement on behalf of the retail industry but rather a back-room deal that failed to represent the interests of retailers,” said Mallory Duncan, the senior vice president and general counsel for the retail group, which joined in the appeal of the 2012 settlement.The National Retail Federation was not one of the plaintiffs in the original 2005 lawsuit. But the group grew concerned about how the settlement could affect millions of other merchants, some of whom are its members.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In an interview, Mr. Duncan said that individual merchants would ultimately end up with an insignificant amount of money from the deal. The ban on surcharging customers for credit card payments had not really been lifted for the industry either, he said. Instead, the card networks just “rewrote the rules.”“Ninety percent of merchants still can’t surcharge, even if they wanted to,” he said.Processing fees, also known as swipe fees, have long been a point of contention in the retail industry. Merchants say these fees are too high, a result of price-fixing among credit card networks like Visa and MasterCard, which act as electronic information highways between merchants and the banks.AdvertisementThe banks and the card networks have defended themselves for years, saying that the fees, in part, help to cover the costs of fraud.MasterCard and Mr. Wildfang both said they were “disappointed” by Thursday’s decision.“We believe we presented a clear case to the court that the settlement was fair and appropriate based on more than four years of negotiation and the close involvement of the district court,” MasterCard said in a statement, adding that it was reviewing the decision to determine its next steps.A lower court will now have to decide the terms of a new settlement, or whether to push the case to trial.Representatives for Visa did not respond to a request for comment.A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Credit Card  Settlement Overturned on Appeal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.