AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonThe Wiliams Companies is in Delaware court, appealing the termination of a contentious deal to merge with the pipeline operator Energy Transfer Equity. But if you want to understand the chances the Williams Companies has in winning its appeal, you need to understand merger agreements.When a publicly traded company is acquired, the buyer and the target will enter into an agreement to accomplish this takeover. It is called a merger agreement because this is the structure used to acquire the company. A merger, for those who are wondering, is a legal way to combine two companies into one and eliminate all of the shareholders of the target company.The merger agreement specifies the transaction structure, but it also sets forth a road map. A merger of two public companies can almost never be completed right away. Shareholders and regulators must approve it. Financing may need to be obtained, and other consents may be warranted. Because of this, there is typically a lag of at least two to three months between the signing and announcement the merger agreement and the completion of the deal. The lag can be longer if there is a more searching antitrust inquiry.The “road map” dictates how the two companies will get from signing to closing. It specifies how the deal will be done and what the parties need to do to complete the transaction.As part of this, the target and the buyer will each agree to obtain regulatory approvals and do anything else needed to complete the transaction. The requirement is not a complete one. Instead, the parties will agree to some level of effort to complete the transaction. In the case of Williams and Energy Transfer, the parties agreed to take all “commercially reasonable efforts” to complete the transaction.This is just one formulation. Others are “best efforts,” “reasonable best efforts,” and “reasonable efforts.” These are supposed to specify varying levels of effort required of a company to complete the transaction. “Best” efforts is the most stringent standard. In reality, courts generally interpret these formulations as meaning the same thing. Delaware’s Court of Chancery noted in this case there was no “coherence” to the interpretation of these standards. Thus, in his opinion clearing the way for Energy Transfer to terminate this merger agreement, Sam Glasscock III, a Chancery Court vice chancellor, followed form, stating that the merger agreement’s efforts clause required that Energy Transfer use “objectively reasonable” efforts.This is where the conditions in a merger agreement come in. The parties are required to use some level of effort to complete the transaction. Neither party is required to close unless the specified conditions in the merger agreement are fulfilled. In other words, there are conditions to closing and each party must use “efforts” to fulfill them. For example, where shareholder approval is required, the merger agreement will specify that the parties have to hold a shareholder meeting and file documents with the Securities and Exchange Commission. And there is the catchall of requiring that the parties use “efforts” to obtain this approval.This is the issue in the Williams case. The agreement with Energy Transfer was very favorable to Williams. It required Energy Transfer to specifically perform the agreement and complete the transaction. There was no right, as was more common in the days leading up to the financial crisis, for Energy Transfer to simply terminate the deal and pay a so-called reverse-termination fee.Indeed, Energy Transfer had few outs. Another possible escape hatch — a claim that there was a material adverse effect — was not likely to be fruitful because the merger agreement specifically stated that changes to the economy, the energy product industry and even the stock price of the two companies were not grounds to terminate the merger agreement. (If you want to know more about material adverse effect clauses and walking away from deals, I wrote about the issue in a previous column and in a book, “Gods at War: Shotgun Takeovers, Government by Deal, and the Private Equity Implosion.”But if there is one lesson we learned from failed deals involving companies like Huntsman, Penn National Gaming, Clear Channel and BCE, if a deal looks like it should break, it will, no matter the legal issues.Energy Transfer’s chance to escape this transaction arose out of an obscure condition in merger agreements where the consideration paid includes stock. In those situations, the stock payment is typically tax-free. The shareholders of the target company receive stock in the acquirer and do not need to pay taxes at the time of the merger because it is deemed to be a reorganization. Instead, taxes are deferred until they sell the stock they receive.To ensure the deal is indeed tax-free, there is a condition that the lawyers on both sides will give an opinion that the transaction is a tax-free reorganization. In this case, the condition required Energy Transfer’s lawyers, Latham & Watkins, to give the opinion that the transaction “‘should’ be treated by the tax authorities as a tax-free exchange under Section 721(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.” In the taxonomy of legal opinions, by the way, “should” instead of “will” is a lower standard that gives the law firm wiggle room to stick to its opinion.In May, Latham concluded that it could not provide this opinion.This is where things went awry and Williams sued. The trial court found that Latham & Watkins legitimately decided that it could no longer give this opinion. The reasons are buried in the minutiae of tax law and an unbelievably complex transaction. But the basic idea is that to be a tax-free deal in this circumstance, there had to be a certain ratio of cash to stock. This ratio is traditionally set at the time a deal is signed under I.R.S. rulings. After additional scrutiny of its client’s deal at Energy Transfer’s request, Latham found problems.It is suspicious of course that Latham would suddenly find this out months after the deal was signed, potentially saving its client billions of dollars. And indeed, Judge Glasscock said as much, though he justified his findings on the idea that just because things look suspicious does not mean that there is wrongdoing.The judge based his opinion on two findings. First, he read into the condition in the merger agreement a need for good faith on the part of Latham. He concluded that Latham fulfilled this requirement.Second, Latham was not a party to the merger agreement. It is really Energy Transfer’s behavior that is in question here. Judge Glasscock still had to find that Energy Transfer had not breached its obligation to use “commercially reasonable efforts” to close the transaction. He found that it did not, reasoning that once Latham said it could not give the opinion, Energy Transfer was off the hook.The beauty of this reasoning is that it spares the judge the headache of determining who is right on the tax point, probably an impossibility for a judge.With the tax opinion condition unfulfilled, the so-called drop-dead date occurred. This is the date that every merger agreement has, ensuring that the deal does not go on forever. But a party cannot be in breach of their agreement to invoke this right. Because the judge found that Energy Transfer was acting appropriately, it was able to terminate the deal on June 28, 2016, the agreement’s drop-dead date.Williams has announced that it is appealing the Delaware court’s ruling to the state’s Supreme Court. It is likely to also reserve the right to argue before the higher court that Energy Transfer is still obligated to close the transaction instead of paying damages.In Delaware, the conventional wisdom is that appeals normally lose. The Delaware Supreme Court defers to the Chancery Court, particularly in a case like this in which the sides are arguing over facts.Williams’ only real chance is to argue some legal error. From the briefs in the case, its most likely route is to argue that Energy Transfer could not just sit there once Latham gave its report. Instead, Energy Transfer was obligated to look for an alternative way to close the deal. And here, there is some odd inferential behavior, like the fact that Energy Transfer did not extensively consult with its transactional counsel, Wachtell Lipton Rosen & Katz, on the tax issues.Williams has nothing to lose by appealing. Even so, it all comes down to whether the Delaware Supreme Court wants to intervene and, if so, whether it agrees that reasonable efforts as a standard required more in this situation. These are valid questions, but it is going to be an uphill battle for Williams to show that this fine legal point matters given the fact-finding of the lower court judge and the penchant of the state’s Supreme Court to defer to the lower court on these issues.Advertisement