AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichNancy Grace, the polarizing television personality who for more than a decade used her platform on the HLN network to aggressively cover tabloid crime stories, will leave the network in October.A spokeswoman at Turner Broadcasting, which runs HLN, confirmed Ms. Grace’s departure on Thursday.“Nancy has worked tirelessly on behalf of the missing and exploited for more than a decade on HLN,” Ken Jautz, an executive vice president at CNN, HLN’s sister network, said in an internal memo. “She gave a voice to the voiceless, and we are extremely grateful for her contributions.”In her own statement, Ms. Grace said she would “continue my fight for justice across a variety of traditional and new media, where victims’ voices can reach an entirely engaged audience.”Ms. Grace, 56, a former prosecutor based in Atlanta who became interested in criminal justice after her fiancé was murdered when she was 19, has said she became drawn to stories that centered on women and children.Since her show debuted in 2005, she aggressively covered cases, including those of Casey Anthony, the Florida woman who was found not guilty of killing her 2-year-old daughter; Elizabeth Smart, who was kidnapped in 2002 in Utah when she was 14; and the three members of the Duke University lacrosse team who were accused of sexual assault and cleared of all charges.The news of her departure was reported earlier by The Hollywood Reporter.Ms. Grace had consistently characterized herself as a champion of victim’s rights. But she has been criticized frequently as promoting a one-sided view of the stories she covers, castigating those she perceives to be guilty without waiting for rulings from jury or judge.In 2011, Jonathan Turley, a law professor at George Washington University, told The Times’s media critic, David Carr, that Ms. Grace had done a disservice to journalism and the law.“I think she has managed to demean both professions with her hype, rabid persona and sensational analysis,” he said. “Some part of the public takes her seriously, and her show erodes the respect for basic rights.”The online reaction to news of Ms. Grace’s departure echoed that criticism, with some commenters mocking her prosecutorial manner.But others thanked Ms. Grace for her work on behalf of victims.Her ferocious style was parodied in the Hollywood blockbuster “Gone Girl” in 2014. The role of a tabloid cable host obsessed with domestic crime stories was explicitly based on Ms. Grace, down to the costume and accent, according to Missi Pyle, the actress who played the role.Ms. Grace said she enjoyed the depiction.“Well, I guess they kinda got the hair right,” she told NPR last year. “I imagine the black leather jacket was right. The Southern accent was a little over the top, but it was pretty good.”Ms. Grace’s ratings had declined in recent years, though she still had the ability to scrape together a viral hit. Her debate with the rapper 2 Chainz on the subject of marijuana last year has been viewed more than two million times on YouTube.In an interview with Larry King in 2005, Ms. Grace explained her passion for crime stories.“I love what I do,” she said. “People, I think, are fascinated by trials because you look at a person, and you suddenly see the evil side of human nature, the side that nobody talks about.”Advertisement