By LIZ MOYERJULY 1, 2016
Two activist investors who have prodded the Williams Companies for nearly three years to improve shareholder returns sent letters to the pipeline company’s board on Friday explaining why they had quit the board and vowing to continue their dissident battle from the outside.The investors, Eric Mandelblatt of Soroban Capital Partners and Keith Meister of Corvex Management, disclosed in a securities filing on Friday that together they hold 8.4 percent of Williams’ shares. Their letters to the board were attached to the filing.“I cannot serve on a board that continues to empower a C.E.O. with an abysmal operational and financial track record, and who in my opinion lacks the necessary judgment and character to lead the company forward,” Mr. Mandelblatt said in his letter, referring to Williams’ chief executive, Alan S. Armstrong. “I retain all options going forward to protect shareholders from further value destruction.”In a separate letter, Mr. Meister said, “I have resigned because I can no longer in good conscience serve on a board where a majority of that board was unwilling to make a change that I felt was critical to the future direction of the company.” He added, “I believe I will be more effective from outside the company than within.”AdvertisementThe two had pressed for the removal of Mr. Armstrong, but in a separate statement released on Friday, Williams said that Mr. Armstrong would remain in that role. Also on Friday, Williams named Kathleen B. Cooper chairman of its board.AdvertisementThe moves come a day after nearly half the pipeline operator’s directors quit over disagreements about its strategic direction following the termination of its $38 billion merger with Energy Transfer Equity.Shares of Williams were down nearly 5 percent in early afternoon trading on Friday.Ms. Cooper has been a board member since 2006. She succeeds Frank T. MacInnis, who stepped down Thursday “for personal reasons,” the company said in a statement on Friday. It did confirm that Mr. MacInnis was among the six directors who disagreed with the strategic direction of the board and who quit on Thursday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. MacInnis is also chairman of the ITT Corporation. In addition to him, Mr. Mandelblatt and Mr. Meister, the others who stepped down from the Williams board include Ralph Izzo, Steven Nance and Laura Sugg.Mr. Mandelblatt and Mr. Meister are activist investors whose funds took stakes in Williams in late 2013. Together, Mr. Mandelblatt, a former energy trader at Goldman Sachs, and Mr. Meister own 62.7 million shares through their funds.Williams’ board was divided last year over whether to accept the takeover offer from its rival pipeline operator Energy Transfer, but eventually it agreed to the deal. Then a plunge in energy prices last fall sent shock waves through the industry. Energy Transfer, after identifying a tax issue with the transaction that gave it a way out, canceled the deal this week after a Delaware judge sided with it, though Williams is appealing that decision.The boardroom drama extended through this week, according to the letters by the activist investors. Williams held a board meeting on Thursday during which the directors talked about the “substantial business and operational failures” over the last five years under Mr. Armstrong’s watch, said the letter from Mr. Meister.“I did not hear a credible defense of Mr. Armstrong’s track record of business performance,” the letter said. All six directors who quit Thursday supported a change of chief executive, he said.In its own statement on Friday, Williams’ remaining board said it had “thoroughly evaluated the company’s leadership structure and determined that Alan Armstrong is the right chief executive officer for Williams as the company works to continue enhancing shareholder value.”An earlier version of this article misstated how many shares that two activist investors, Eric Mandelblatt and Keith Meister, own in the Williams Companies. Through their investment companies, they own 62.7 million shares of the company together, not apiece, which is 8.4 percent of the company, not 16.8 percent.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.