AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesHellmann’s mayonnaise is known for many things — making egg salad delicious, being loaded with fat, that old “bring out the best” jingle. To date, however, it hasn’t been associated with sustainability. Mayo is a processed food made by huge conglomerates, not a symbol of environmentalism.Paul Polman would like that to change. As chief executive of Unilever, Mr. Polman has made sustainable production — of Hellmann’s, Lipton tea, Dove soap, Axe body spray and all the other products Unilever makes — the company’s top priority. Detergents are being reformulated to use less water. Packaging is becoming more efficient. And Unilever is taking preliminary steps to make soybean oil, a main ingredient in mayonnaise, more eco-friendly.Mr. Polman, 59, is hardly the only chief executive claiming his corporation will become a better steward of the planet and an outstanding global citizen. The chief of Walmart is buying clean energy, PepsiCo’s leader is promoting healthier snacks, and Apple’s boss is into recycling. But Mr. Polman’s plan is unique in its audacious ambition. Not only does the Unilever sustainable living plan pledge to cut the company’s environmental impact in half by 2020, it also vows to improve the health of one billion people and enhance livelihoods for millions, all while doubling Unilever’s sales.None of this is easy to achieve. In broad terms, sustainability means meeting the needs of today while preserving resources for tomorrow. But selling more products means consuming more energy and more natural resources — not exactly the way to shrink an environmental footprint.Six years into his tenure, however, Mr. Polman is starting to make good on some of his promises. Unilever’s factories are emitting 37 percent less emissions than in 2008, even while producing more goods. Waste going to landfills is down 85 percent. Those things please environmentalists, while shareholders are happy that revenue is up 22 percent since Mr. Polman took over, though profits are up less.Mr. Polman also has become something of a roving sustainability evangelist, calling for stricter environmental regulations and speaking out against a fixation on short-term profits. He worked with the United Nations to shape the recently adopted sustainable development goals and will help rally business leaders at the scheduled United Nations climate change conference in Paris at the end of this month. This year the United Nations bestowed upon Mr. Polman its Champions of the Earth Award.“If there is a standout company in sustainability, it is Unilever,” said Mindy Lubber, president of Ceres, a nonprofit that advocates social and environmental responsibility in the business world. “That doesn’t make them perfect. That doesn’t mean they don’t have a long way to go. That doesn’t mean they don’t have a lot to accomplish. But Paul Polman sees these issues in a very comprehensive and visionary way.”Born in the Netherlands, Mr. Polman spent 27 years climbing through the ranks of Procter & Gamble and was chief financial officer at Nestlé before going to Unilever, which is based in London. While a cynic might question any chief executive’s embrace of sustainability, Mr. Polman, who considered becoming a priest before going into business, brings a moral fire to his case. He argues that corporations have the capacity — and the obligation — to combat climate change and “irreversibly eradicate poverty in a more sustainable and equitable way.” Failing to confront these challenges, he says, will lead to ever more catastrophic natural disasters and spiraling social disruption.But translating this vision into action is another matter. Unilever is, after all, a multinational corporation worth more than $126 billion. Cutting carbon emissions grows harder after doing the obvious things, like buying more clean power and upgrading energy efficiency in buildings. Some of the goals, Mr. Polman acknowledges, will be nearly impossible to achieve.And even as Unilever rushes headlong into this brave new world, a big question remains: What is sustainability, anyway? Despite its righteous timbre, it’s a fuzzy term that means different things to different people. When applied to the ingredients and processes in the 1,000 different mass-market brands Unilever makes, the complications multiply endlessly. Scores of issues arise in just one jar of Hellmann’s mayonnaise, starting with the soybean oil. Dig into the specifics of that one ingredient, and it becomes clear that what Unilever calls sustainable sometimes doesn’t mean all that much.On a humid day in late September, as the skies unleashed an occasional downpour, Kenny Sutter navigated his red Ford F-350 along gravel roads near Pleasantville, Iowa, assessing the coming harvest. His soybean fields were golden, almost ready for the combines.Mr. Sutter, who grows soy, corn and alfalfa on 4,000 acres spread across an area homesteaded by his family in the mid-1800s, is not a Unilever employee. Yet Mr. Polman is counting on him, and other farmers around the globe, to help carry out the sustainable living plan.Unilever buys more soy in the United States than any other crop, and among Mr. Polman’s many goals is ensuring that all its soy oil — used in Hellmann’s mayonnaise and I Can’t Believe It’s Not Butter spread — is sourced from sustainable farms by 2017. But when Unilever began looking into the matter in 2012, it hit a roadblock: No one was really certifying sustainable soybeans in the United States.Elsewhere in the world, third-party groups like the Rainforest Alliance certify sustainable cocoa and coffee. And in South America, soybeans are certified by the Round Table on Sustainable Soy. If Unilever wanted certified sustainable soybeans in the United States, however, it was going to have to create a system for certifying them.The first step was contacting Archer Daniels Midland, a huge commodities trader. ADM buys soybeans from hundreds of farms, including Mr. Sutter’s, and turns the beans into soy oil at a plant in Des Moines. ADM then sells the soy oil to Unilever. Aiming to promote sustainability (and keep Unilever’s gargantuan business), ADM agreed to help, and the Iowa sustainable soy program was born.Unilever brought on the United Soybean Board and the Iowa Soybean Association, two trade groups, to give the program bona fides. The World Wildlife Fund signed up as a scientific consultant. Practical Farmers of Iowa, a nonprofit that focuses on farm ecology, joined in, as did Field to Market, an alliance of agricultural companies that has developed software to measure farming practices. This ad hoc coalition then began reaching out to Iowa farmers.The pitch to soybean growers is simple. By participating in the program, they receive an extra 10 cents a bushel of soybeans from ADM, have access to additional state subsidies for certain eco-friendly farming techniques and receive education about sustainability. Three years into the program, 250 farmers responsible for 285,000 acres have signed up.Mr. Sutter was initially reluctant to participate in the program, worried that data about his farm he was required to share might be obtained by big seed suppliers like Monsanto. But he ultimately joined.As he surveyed his fields, he saw that heavy rains and stiff winds had recently flattened a few acres of his soybeans. That would mean a loss of several thousand dollars. But Mr. Sutter said that changes he made to improve sustainability would mitigate the damage.During the winter months when soy won’t grow, Mr. Sutter has begun planting cover crops, like cereal rye, that can improve soil health, prevent erosion and keep nutrients near the surface for the next season’s soy crop. Around his soybeans, Mr. Sutter had also installed contour strips — grassy barriers that improve irrigation and water quality. Between the cover crops and the contour strips, Mr. Sutter said his soy was stronger and more resilient, and that his overall harvest would be fuller this year, helping make up for the lost acres.He has made other changes, too. To cut down on fuel for his trucks, he now stores his harvested soybeans in a silo on the north end of his farm, closer to their ultimate destination in Des Moines, rather than in their usual silo to the southeast.“Without sustainability we’re not going to be here,” Mr. Sutter said. “We as a people.”For his efforts, Mr. Sutter has become the face of the sustainable soy program, opening his farm up to curious executives and reporters, and appearing in television ads for Hellmann’s. But he’s not really representative of farmers in the program.In fact, Unilever doesn’t ask the farmers to change much at all. All that the program requires is that farmers pledge to become more ecologically sound and use the Field to Market software to share voluminous data about how they run their farms. The software then calculates things like the efficiency of water use, greenhouse gas emissions and soil carbon levels. These metrics are compared with benchmarks set by the United Soybean Board and endorsed by Unilever. As long as the farmer’s total practices meet some minimum thresholds, the crops are certified sustainable.So far, Unilever and ADM aren’t even enforcing these rules. Even though little has changed on most of the soy farms in the Iowa program, Unilever counts their crops toward the 28 percent of soy it says is now “sustainable.”Unilever says it is instead focused on enrolling farmers in the program, rather than holding them to high standards that they might not be able to meet.“We aren’t telling them they’re not sustainable or kicking them out of the program,” said Clint Piper, the general manager for North American soybean processing at ADM. “Right now it’s about getting people in the program and sharing knowledge.”While Unilever performs random audits on participating farms, the loose criteria and absence of enforcement have left even some of those who created the program dissatisfied. Sarah Carlson, a researcher with Practical Farmers of Iowa, said that while things like fuel conservation and better irrigation were well and good, the real key to sustainable soy was the use of cover crops. Without cover crops, she said, “those soybeans are no more sustainable than anyone else’s soybeans.”Not many of the farms meet Ms. Carlson’s definition of sustainability. Fewer than 75 farmers have received state subsidies to use cover crops, which amounts to less than a quarter of 1 percent of all the 40,000 soybean growers in Iowa.The conflicting views about the soy program’s worthiness underscore one of the fundamental challenges of Unilever’s sustainable living plan: the word “sustainable.” Like “natural,” the word “sustainable” is sufficiently vague to mean quite a lot or nothing at all.“The challenge in setting standards and measuring progress is that there is no universally agreed definition for sustainability,” said Aron Cramer, chief executive of BSR, a consulting firm. “And the standards that do apply vary by industry, commodity and even product line.”According to the Environmental Protection Agency, sustainability means “the conditions under which humans and nature can exist in productive harmony to support present and future generations.” To the Rainforest Alliance, which Unilever uses to certify its tea, cocoa and vanilla, sustainability means “environmental protection, social equity and economic viability.” To the Round Table on Sustainable Soy, which certifies the crop in South America, sustainability means avoiding deforestation, protecting indigenous people’s land and not using child labor — important issues, but not ones that resonate in Iowa. For Unilever, it’s about “continuous improvement.”“There is no absolute measure of farm sustainability. It’s a moving target,” the company said in a statement, responding to questions about the soy program. “We take the long view. This means continuous improvement over time.”As Jeff Malcolm, the director of private sector engagement at the World Wildlife Fund, who is helping with the sustainable soy program, put it, “It’s better to think about sustainability as a journey rather than a destination.”Even if Unilever could get every farmer in Iowa to plant cover crops, that wouldn’t make its mayonnaise sustainable. Soy is just one ingredient. There are eggs (goal: 100 percent from cage-free hens by 2020, certified by the American Humane Association). There is the container (Unilever introduced new eco-friendly plastic jars and encourages recycling). There is the energy needed for production (Unilever is buying carbon offsets, but it has not installed wind or solar power at the factory in Chicago).And Hellmann’s is just one brand in Unilever’s vast portfolio. Cover crops on Iowa farms don’t help Unilever make Dove soap sustainable, reduce its carbon footprint, improve livelihoods or meet any of the sustainable living plan’s other goals. Mr. Polman himself acknowledges that change in the heartland is incremental at best.“We recognize that with our U.S. sustainable soybean program, it is still early days,” Mr. Polman said. “Over the coming years we expect to be able to report more confidently on some of the improvements on the ground.”Unilever’s work in Iowa is a microcosm of the monumental challenges it faces as it tries to overhaul the manufacturing and distribution of 1,000 soaps, ice creams and spreads that it sells in 190 countries.In Vietnam, Unilever introduced Comfort One Rinse, a fabric softener meant to use much less water. In Nigeria, it’s testing Sunlight dishwashing detergent in a powder that requires less energy to distribute and less water to work. In Brazil, it’s selling more efficient Omo laundry detergent.Selling products that use less water is necessary if Unilever is to achieve Mr. Polman’s goals. As part of the sustainable living plan, Unilever has pledged to take responsibility for the behavior of its consumers, who account for 70 percent of its environmental impact. There simply is no easy way to heat a gallon of water with half as much fuel, or to wash a load of clothes with drastically less water.This, as Mr. Polman sees it, is the hardest part. “A lot of the water usage in our value chain comes from cooking and showering, from heating up water,” Mr. Polman said. “How do you halve that? It’s very difficult.”Indeed, consumer habits aren’t changing. Unilever estimates that the greenhouse gas impact from people using its products has actually increased by about 4 percent since 2010 and that their water use has gone down just 2 percent. In other words, Unilever’s goal of halving its environmental impact by 2020 is impossible.But Mr. Polman hasn’t pulled back on his pledges. As he tells it, they are part of Unilever’s DNA.When he became chief executive in 2009, Mr. Polman drew inspiration from William Lever, the founder of the company that eventually became Unilever. Lever began making soap in 1884 near Liverpool, England. The soap, called Sunlight, was a hit, and with the profits, he bought cheap land on the marshy banks of the River Mersey. There, he built Port Sunlight, a company town where soap factory workers lived in pleasant houses near the improving influences of libraries and museums.By the paternalistic standards of Victorian England, Lever’s business practices were exceptionally enlightened. The son of a grocer, he was made a lord. Today, Mr. Polman is trying recapture Lord Lever’s business spirit, updated for 21st-century challenges.“The sustainable living plan is much broader than the sustainable sourcing of agricultural materials,” Mr. Polman said. “It’s really using your business model to address big issues in society and make a positive contribution.”Mr. Polman says the sustainable living plan is profitable as well as ethical. The company claims that efficiency upgrades to Unilever factories have created savings of 400 million euros, or $430 million, since 2008. It is also aggressively marketing sustainable brands in the hope of increasing sales (including a paid post from Ben & Jerry’s on the website of The New York Times).Unilever’s sustainability measures can have ripple effects. The Rainforest Alliance, which has been certifying farmers in the developing world for decades, now certifies the chocolate for Magnum ice cream bars, the vanilla in Breyers ice cream, and the leaves in Lipton tea bags. After Unilever began using certified tea, other big tea producers including Twinings and Tata followed suit.“It’s more effective than anything else going on out there,” said Ana Paula Taveres, interim president of the Rainforest Alliance. “In a capitalist world, Unilever is using the global market to drive sustainability.”When it comes to improving health and well-being and creating jobs, Unilever also claims to be making gains. Nearly 400 million people have benefited from Unilever’s efforts to promote health and hygiene, the company says. More than a quarter-million women have received job training through Unilever-backed programs. Big claims like this, of course, are hard to verify.Like any company of its size, Unilever has its troubles and critics. Inefficiencies and waste are still rampant. Human rights advocates have assailed poor conditions at Unilever tea estates in Kenya. In India, the company is under fire, accused of failing to clean up a contaminated factory. It recently sued a vegan mayonnaise competitor to Hellmann’s, attracting widespread ridicule, before dropping the case.But these issues (along with the fact that Lord Lever used forced labor in the Belgian Congo to supply palm oil for Sunlight soap) go largely unmentioned as Mr. Polman spreads his gospel of conscientious capitalism.If Unilever can actually double revenue and simultaneously cut its environmental impact in half, it will have made progress toward one of the most important sustainability milestones. It would have unlinked economic growth from resource consumption, reconciling the expanding needs of a growing population with the fact that natural resources are finite.“It is essential that economic growth and natural resource use be decoupled,” Mr. Cramer of BSR said. “Simply replicating Western consumption patterns as they are today would require more natural resources than are available.”Mr. Polman knows he is aiming high, and contemplating these existential conundrums has led him to the frontiers of environmental thinking. He speaks of “planetary boundaries,” a concept developed by European academics that describes a set of tipping points that, if hit, could cause “abrupt or irreversible environmental changes.” And he promotes the “circular economy,” a version of radical sustainability that imagines a world without waste.Before Mr. Polman can transform the world, however, he must focus on more modest changes at his own company. To even come close to delivering on the sustainable living plan, he will need suppliers to become vastly more efficient. He will need governments to incentivize conservation efforts and set stringent new regulations. He will need consumers to change deeply ingrained habits. And as he is discovering, even modest goals, like sourcing sustainable soy, are inordinately complicated tasks.“We still have a ways to go, honestly,” Mr. Polman said.It is a vastly different set of challenges from those Lord Lever faced a century ago in Victorian Britain. But Mr. Polman is betting that sustainability — whatever that means — is as essential for Unilever as it is for the planet.Advertisement