
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

JULY 3, 2016
William Lewis is the chief executive of Dow Jones and the publisher of The Wall Street Journal.Q. What were your first leadership experiences?A. I think I got used to some elements of leadership in my teens when I was a captain of the football team, and then when I was at university I was also the president of the football club. It sounds absurd, but actually thinking back, a lot of the leadership lessons I try to remember to this day come from those very first experiences. I learned that genuine leadership is about enabling others to perform better — it’s not just about you, or very rarely about you leading practically, but actually, you bringing out the best in others.I’m a real believer in the facilitation model of leadership. I believe in being brave and surrounding yourself with people who are infinitely better than you, technically and more professional, and that actually leadership is about coordinating those people so that they work better together. It always surprises me when leaders are afraid of having real talent around them, because the benefits of being surrounded and working with very talented people always, in my experience, surpass any threat to your [professional] existence. And I always stress that [to my staff].Q. What other lessons did you learn early on?A. That leadership genuinely is about being authentic, being yourself. Most people start in leadership [roles], trying to pretend to be something they’ve seen on TV or read in a book or studied; and this is me at work, this is me at home. There is no difference. I try to be myself and I try to have people around me who are definitely better than me, and I don’t think anything of that. I’m hugely proud when I move on from a job, for my deputy gets to get my job; that gives me an enormous sense of satisfaction, and that has happened quite a few times in my career.AdvertisementQ. So how have you groomed your successors?A. By providing genuine support. It’s not about 360s and 180s [performance reviews], it’s by day-to-day nurturing, giving people the confidence to outperform. And often it’s the case of talking with them, hearing their problems. Often you can be of practical help. More often than not, people can self-diagnose; they just need someone to talk to. So when I’m on my game, even when I think I know the answer, I will probably try to hold back from saying what that answer is, because I think if they work it out themselves they’re much more likely to benefit from that. So often it’s about letting someone talk, showing empathy, which is incredibly important.I’m not a “Rah-rah, look at me” leader, which can be frustrating for some people sometimes. That’s just not me. I get a great sense of pride about other people performing and me at best providing some kind of conductor’s role.I think that the chief executive or leader should often be the agitator in chief as well. I see it as my duty to agitate on behalf of other people at the company when they are frustrated.Q. How do you structure the organization so that you can devote so much time to hands-on management?A. I have very few direct reports. I try, when I can, to keep it to six; I have nine now, which is one of those things. But it works, because it is a strong team. The premise is that if you’re working with very smart people that are fundamentally smarter than you, your job is to empower them, equip them with enough resources, and then say, “Well-done.” Sounds oversimple, but that’s truly what I believe.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.My job is then, I think, to work with people deeper into the company who are on the front line and who really need my help to get stuff done. This is a real sense of pride for me when we find these groups who, for example, have been trying for six months to get some things done, and that’s when the leadership role is at its most fulfilling.At Dow Jones we have things called “rages,” where we will bring small groups of people from different parts of the company to fix a problem that everyone agrees should be fixed. The best example is probably the customer acquisition journey. People are now coming to us on their mobile phones and it was taking too long to get the payment details, and consequently people were dropping off halfway through. We brought together four or five key players, we “raged” together for two weeks, and they fixed it. We now have the best-in-class mobile sign-on subscription offering in the U.S.AdvertisementMe and my team in the office of the C.E.O., we will hunt for issues, things that people would like to hide under the rocks; we deliberately hunt these down. For example, we have a big diversity debate going on at the moment where it would appear obvious to some people that in some parts of the world and in some departments things are not as they should be. This has been an issue for years, but we are now brave enough as a company to lift up that boulder and look at it and not just put it down.Q. How else do you agitate?A. You constantly think about the next iteration of the model and structure. I need to antagonize the organization to gain some points by saying, “I can’t help thinking we’re not set up the right way for this next journey we need to go on. I need you to do X, help get us to that.” I try to get the balance right between providing stability and certainty, while continuing to privately angst and query if we have it right. As it’s working out, probably about every 12 months we have a conversation about how we’re set up, and if we’re set up correctly for the next phase of consumer change.As an agitator-in-chief I also think you’ve got to set somewhat challenging targets for the organization. So, for example, we set a three million-subscribers-in-three-years goal about two years ago. At the time we had about around 1.8 million. So it was a big ask for the organization. People thought I’d lost the plot and I’d gone nuts. But we were recovering from a kerfuffle in one of our businesses, where we had stuffed it up and the company was not in the best of forms from a morale point of view. We wanted to find an objective that would galvanize the company and get its mojo back, and although it was greeted slightly with an “Are you crazy?” kind of response, over time it has helped really galvanize the organization and get people working in a much more joined up way.That stretched visionary goal, I think, is very important. Sometimes I think you also do need to lead from the front, and so we’re talking about me probably antagonizing the organization by moving to simply working on my mobile phone so that when people send me something that’s not set up for mobile phone, I will not open or read it. It’s quite a big step, but I think it’s this type of device, not gimmicks, that enable me to agitate the organization and effect changes.A version of this article appears in print on July 4, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »