AdvertisementSupported byInside WealthBy Robert FrankWealth in America has never looked so young — at least on its face.In its most recent World’s Youngest Billionaires list, Forbes tallied a record 46 under 40, part of a “youth revolution” in the three-comma club. CNN Money reported this year that a growing share of today’s rich are under 65. “America’s über-rich are getting younger and younger,” the report said. “Call it the Mark Zuckerberg trend.”From Silicon Valley, with its parade of 20-something and 30-something billionaire whiz kids, to farther east, where Gen X hedge fund titans like William A. Ackman and Kenneth C. Griffin are paying record prices for real estate, portraits of American wealth today are often wrinkle-free.Yet new research shows that despite their high profile, the young rich are a minority and the wealthy as a group are actually getting older. A study by Edward Wolff, a wealth expert and economics professor at New York University, found that the median age of the wealthiest 1 percent of Americans increased to 63 in 2013 (the latest year available) from 58 in 1992.People 65 to 74 accounted for almost a third of the wealthiest 1 percent in 2013 — up from 19 percent in 2001.“The data is clear — it’s a pretty old crowd, and it’s getting grayer,” said Professor Wolff, whose study will appear in a book he is writing about wealth.Granted, the American population is also aging, and the rich along with it. And as CNN reported, billionaires and the superrich (the top 0.1 percent) may be younger than the 1 percenters. But over the last 20 years, the wealthy have broadly been getting older at a faster rate than the rest of the population, suggesting a hardening of the elite and the emergence of an age gap that may also be contributing to the wealth gap.The difference between the average age of the 1 percent and that of the wider population increased to 10 years in 2013 from eight in 1992, Professor Wolff found. While the share of 1 percenters under 35 has remained about the same since 1992, the proportion from 45 to 54 has fallen by almost half.A study released this summer by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis found that the median wealth of old families (those with heads of household over the age of 62) rose 40 percent from 1989 to 2013, to $210,000. The median wealth of middle-age families (40 to 61) and young families (under 40) both fell by over 25 percent.“The gap has widened considerably over the past quarter-century — in favor of old people,” the report said.Theories differ on why more of the rich are older. Some say the normal pattern of families accumulating more wealth as they age has been supercharged by better health care for the wealthy and the boom in stock markets, which has rewarded investors with large retirement accounts and stock holdings. At the same time, many millennials (those born from 1981 to 1997) are dealing with student debt and a weak job market. And workers in their 40s and 50s are unable to advance with so many baby boomers still holding top jobs.Professor Wolff said that while the median age of the 1 percent dipped briefly in the late 1990s during the dot-com boom, it is now moving higher. The main driver, he said, is the surge in top incomes, which are going mainly to executives, business owners, bankers, lawyers and other professionals who are more senior. He said the median age of the top 1 percent of income earners has jumped to 53 in 2013 from 45 in 1992.“Top incomes are going to older people,” he said. “So it’s not as common for younger people to jump the ladder of success.”The aging of the elite has not only changed the demographics of wealth; it is also changing the places where the rich live.Take Aspen, Colo. The Rocky Mountain resort has long been popular among the rich and famous for its skiing and night life. But with the average price of a home in Aspen topping $4.5 million in the most recent quarter, many of today’s buyers are entrepreneurs or business titans in their 60s and 70s rather than younger families.The median age in Aspen as of 2010 was 40.9, up from 36.7 in 2000, according to the census. But officials say Aspen’s real median age — when accounting for all the vacation homes owned by older nonresidents — is far higher. Mick Ireland, a 66-year-old former mayor of the town, said that when he went to school fund-raisers or art events, “Everyone is old.”Bars and nightclubs have been replaced by wealth-management firms, luxury chains like Prada and Gucci, and real estate offices. Mr. Ireland said people over 65 used to get free ski passes but there were so many older skiers that the Aspen Skiing Company raised the age to 70. Now even people over 70 have to pay for a seasonal pass, he said, though it is still discounted. Local ski instructors, who used to be 20- or 30-something college grads and aspiring pros, are now sometimes in their 60s or 70s.“Sixty is the new 40 in Aspen,” he said.The older, richer Aspen crowd is also tilting local politics in its favor. A proposal to build a new hotel with more affordable rooms, supported by many younger voters, was rejected in a recent election. Mr. Ireland said the average age of the voter was 56 — thought to be the oldest ever.“Older voters drive the agenda now,” Mr. Ireland said. “The younger voters have been locked out.”Palm Beach, Fla., has always been a refuge for the retired rich, but it is getting even older. The average age in town is now 68, up from 64 in 1990.Jeff Greene, a billionaire real estate investor who lives in Palm Beach and has two young children, said that the winter scene of charity events was now divided between the “old guard” balls and the younger, family-oriented charities like the Palm Beach Zoo and local schools.“There are a lot of younger families like us who are doing their own thing,” Mr. Greene said. “But I’m 60. So maybe some people would call me old, too.”Robert Frank is CNBC wealth editor and the author of “Richistan.”Advertisement