
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

JULY 5, 2016
The success of Mondelez International’s $23 billion bid for the Hershey Company will depend on the charitable trust that controls the chocolate bar maker. After the Viacom imbroglio, this is yet another example of how a controlling interest can see to it that economics are secondary to politics and relationships.Founded by Milton S. Hershey in 1894, the candy company is controlled by the Hershey Trust Company, which was created in 1905 and funds a tuition-free boarding school that is still in operation. The trust owns about one-third of the Hershey shares and about 80 percent of the voting rights of Hershey shares for the benefit of the school.The Hershey Trust itself is also unique. Milton Hershey and his wife died childless, and the Milton Hershey School is a big part of their legacy. It provides intensive care and education for children from low-income families. By all accounts, the school is a wonderful place.But the Hershey Trust does more. It is basically the town of Hershey, controlling not just the company, but the cemetery where Mr. Hershey is buried, an amusement park, residential and commercial real estate and a garden. The cemetery, by the way, hosts candy royalty — Harry Burnett Reese, who invented the peanut butter cup and sold it to Hershey in 1963 for $23.5 million, is buried there along with Mr. Hershey and his wife.AdvertisementThe trust mints money — collecting $160 million in dividends a year from Hershey, and it regularly takes in far more than it can spend on the school and its other charitable endeavors. According to public filings from 2014, it had assets of about $12 billion.
            Archival coverage of Milton Hershey’s chocolate empire and his company town.        As you might expect with a trust that controls an entire town and has billions of dollars of assets, there have been repeated controversies.The biggest battle in recent years has been about the fate of the Hershey Company itself. Back in 2002, the trust tried to diversify its assets, something that would seem to be a prudent step. The trust held an auction of Hershey, and was close to declaring the Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company the winner when the Pennsylvania state attorney general sued in local court to block the sale on the grounds that it would violate the trust’s mandate to protect the Pennsylvania community where it is based. The potential sale was halted.AdvertisementAfter that, another rival candy company, Cadbury, as well as others made a series of attempts to buy Hershey. Those deals also went nowhere as the Pennsylvania attorney general loomed large. The state had enacted a law requiring the trust to get the attorney general’s approval before it could sell its Hershey stake.Since 2002, the value of the Hershey stake has almost tripled, outperforming the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index by a multiple of about 4.5.At the same time, the attorney general has been at war with the trust, which has never been particularly well run. The attorney general has forced out numerous sets of trustees and accused it of malfeasance by overpaying trustees and buying a golf course. Only last week the trust’s general counsel resigned.This all complicates the fact that the fate of Hershey and its candy empire depends on a triple approval process. The company must approve the deal. The trust must approve the deal. And the attorney general must approve the deal. If any one of them balks, Hershey will almost certainly remain under its current structure.Trouble is, all of their interests differ. The company’s board has a fiduciary duty to maximize profits for the trust and other shareholders. The trust’s interests should be aligned with the company — after all, the trust wants to make money to fund its school. However, given that the trust has all the money it needs, it may prefer to bask in the power and prestige that goes with being the lord of Hershey. At least one Pennsylvania court has said that the trust has responsibilities for “the larger interests of the community in which it operates.”And then there is the attorney general’s office, which wants to preserve the jobs and economic benefits of having Hershey located in the state. This gives the attorney general a powerful incentive to block any takeover.So why would Mondelez even bid?The turmoil at the trust may provide an opening. The trust may be more willing to contemplate becoming more of a passive financial administrator. And, the Pennsylvania attorney general, Kathleen Kane, has been indicted in a scandal; her law license has been suspended. It may be that she has bigger things to battle than this takeover right now.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mondelez, which is incorporated in Virginia, knows that community interests are paramount in any Hershey acquisition. It does not want be seen as a foreigner taking over. So, it reportedly has offered to keep the headquarters of the new company in Hershey and take on the Hershey name. No doubt — if Mondelez hopes to move this forward — it will make lots of other commitments about keeping jobs and making the town of Hershey a priority.The irony, of course, is that the more it makes these commitments, the less it can pay Hershey shareholders. And the Hershey board has already rejected the initial offer. If Mondelez wants to win, it will need to bring more to Hershey’s shareholders.AdvertisementMondelez will have to convince the Hershey Trust and the state’s attorney general that it is a good buyer for the Hershey community.Should anyone be in this situation in the first place? It is easy to compare Hershey with Viacom — another company that is consumed by a toxic mix of self-interested players, including its controlling shareholder, Sumner M. Redstone.But despite its own messes, Hershey is different in some major ways from other controlled companies. While Hershey’s stock price performance in the last three years has not been great, over the decades it has delivered outsize growth and profits while benefiting the local community and preserving an important way of life. And except for the takeover attempts, the attorney general and the trust largely stay out of the company’s operations.It is hard to know what to make of it. While I wouldn’t want many companies to be in Hershey’s predicament, perhaps it is a jewel to be treasured, one that should be exempt from the laws of economics and today’s hyper market efficiency. And perhaps it should stay that way.An article on the DealBook page on Wednesday about Mondelez International’s $23 billion bid for the Hershey Company misidentified the location of the headquarters of Mondelez. The company is based in Deerfield, Ill., not Virginia, which is where it is incorporated.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.A version of this article appears in print on July 6, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Another Hershey Deal May Come Unwrapped. Maybe It Should.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »