By THE NEW YORK TIMESJULY 3, 2016
Here’s a look at the week ahead.ECONOMYMark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, will hold a news conference on Tuesday morning in London to present the central bank’s semiannual Financial Stability Report. With Mr. Carney and his colleagues on the Monetary Policy Committee expected to take near-term action to ease the stress of Britain’s exit from the European Union on the British financial system, investors will be watching carefully. David JollyINVESTMENTSThis week, some of the biggest moguls in media and technology — traditionally including the likes of Rupert Murdoch, Tim Cook of Apple and Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook — will gather in Sun Valley, Idaho, for the annual conference held by the boutique investment bank Allen & Company. Gossip in recent weeks has centered on the potential awkward run-ins between two invitees: Philippe P. Dauman, chief executive of Viacom, and Shari Redstone, Sumner M. Redstone’s daughter, who has publicly opposed Mr. Dauman’s leadership and recently sided with her father on his decision to remove Mr. Dauman from the trust that will control CBS and Viacom upon Mr. Redstone’s death. Michael J. de la MercedECONOMYThe economic landscape rarely changes so sharply in the three weeks between a Federal Reserve policy meeting and the release of the official account of the meeting. Shortly after the Fed’s June meeting, however, the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union, sending shock waves through global financial markets. The account that the Fed will release on Wednesday is, therefore, something of a time capsule. The agency decided not to raise interest rates, in part, because it was worried about the outcome of the referendum. Now, it must adjust to the reality. The Fed signaled that it still planned to raise rates this year, but the markets expect the central bank to wait until 2017. Binyamin AppelbaumThe Governing Council of the European Central Bank will hold a regularly scheduled meeting in Frankfurt on Wednesday, its first since Britain voted to leave the European Union. Officially, monetary policy is not on the agenda, and there will be no news conference afterward. But the meeting will be an opportunity for the council to discuss what response, if any, is needed to address the economic and financial fallout from the so-called Brexit. On Thursday, the central bank will publish an account of the discussion at its last monetary policy meeting, on June 2. The heavily sanitized minutes have not typically revealed much about central bank decision-making, but could offer clues of how members of the Governing Council anticipated that a British exit might affect the eurozone. Jack EwingOn Wednesday, the Commerce Department will report the data on the nation’s trade balance in May. Economists expect to see a widening in the gap between exports and imports, with imports outpacing exports by $40 billion. That compares with a net trade deficit of $37.4 billion in April, with the increase caused by a surge in imports. If the consensus is correct, the increase in imports could weigh on economic growth in the second quarter. Nelson D. SchwartzOn Friday, at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department is scheduled to release its report on the nation’s hiring and unemployment for June. After a disappointing initial showing of just 38,000 new jobs in May, everyone is hoping for a bounce back. Improvement is a good bet given that the previous count did not include the more than 35,000 Verizon workers who had been on strike. They are now back on the job and should nudge June’s figures. Wall Street analysts are predicting that employers hired 175,000 workers last month, with a slight uptick in the jobless rate to 4.8 percent. Recent declines in the rate can be traced to an increase in the number of Americans who have stopped looking for work. Since this will be the last jobs report before Republicans and Democrats gather to officially declare their presidential nominees at their conventions, the totals will help set the stage for each party’s economic pitch. Patricia CohenA version of this article appears in print on July 4, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Bank of England May Act as U.S. Shares Job Data.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »