AdvertisementSupported byAdvertisingBy Zach SchonbrunSome called it a gag rule impinging on freedom of speech. Others bristled at the requirement to abandon longtime sponsors at the very moment they would be entering the international spotlight.For years, Olympic athletes have found reasons to gripe about the advertising restrictions written into the 40th rule of the Olympic Charter, which essentially dictates what can be seen and said in the days before and during the world’s largest international athletic showcase.But now, thanks to a small amendment to the rule, the advertising floodgates for the Summer Games in Rio de Janeiro have swung open, and the competition over brand positioning has already transformed the once predictable and hermetically regulated Olympics into a crowded race for attention among dozens of brands, big and small.“Not everyone can be an N.B.A. athlete,” said Kerri Walsh Jennings, a three-time gold medalist in beach volleyball for the United States. “Our partnerships are absolutely essential to what we do.”That was the sentiment among many athletes whose sponsors helped support them over four years of training — only for those brands to be nudged aside by others that paid millions to secure Olympic advertising and sponsorship privileges. Such blackout periods are not unusual for major sporting events, like the Super Bowl and the World Cup, and the International Olympic Committee considers its official partnerships essential to its funding model.But in an effort to improve its relationship with athletes, the I.O.C. began allowing any nonofficial sponsors an opportunity to compose advertising campaigns tailored to Olympic athletes — so long as they did not include any Olympic symbols or overtly mention certain terms. Those can include “Rio”, “gold” or even “summer” in some contexts. Companies needed to apply for a waiver by January, and their campaigns, which were subject to approval, had to begin in March.Brands like Under Armour, Red Bull, Gatorade and General Mills were quick to take advantage, generating campaigns that amounted to what John Grady, associate professor of sports law at the University of South Carolina, called “sanctioned ambush marketing.”“Exclusive sponsors will keep hyping the logos to signify that there is a sponsorship relationship that they paid for,” Mr. Grady said. “But as the space gets cluttered with more and more brands, consumers are less able to identify who is who.”Mr. Grady said the I.O.C. was still dealing with “too many stakeholders with divergent priorities.” Official sponsors could have reason to worry that their expensive partnerships with the I.O.C. are being devalued. And critics of the waiver process say it is unreasonable to dream up an Olympics ad campaign in January. For example, Brooks, a running shoe company, withdrew its waiver request after the United States Olympic Committee asked for additional details the company was unwilling to share.But others have been more opportunistic. Under Armour, for instance, is already well into a campaign featuring the swimmer Michael Phelps, and GoPro has been heavily promoting its relationship with the swimmer Missy Franklin.“Essentially they’ve received the same benefit that they didn’t pay for,” Mr. Grady said. “There are definite fairness issues here.”Tina R. Davis, the head of sponsorships and marketing at Citigroup, an official Olympic sponsor, said her company would need to wait and see how the Rio Games played out before judging the impact of the Rule 40 revisions.“We believe in the power of the Olympic rings, and we believe in our exclusive buy with NBC, which is where the majority of the eyeballs will be,” Ms. Davis said. “So we’re not concerned with any other brand being able to co-opt us.”A brand like Visa, which has been an Olympic partner since 1986, was not yet overly concerned, said Chris Curtin, the chief brand and innovation marketing officer. But the company did significantly move up its advertising schedule, releasing ads in June. The Games run from Aug. 5 to Aug. 21.Jon Mason, a spokesman for the U.S.O.C., said he had reassured top sponsors that the organization would be vigilant about protecting their investments during the blackout period, which runs from July 27 through Aug. 24, and from Aug. 30 through Sept. 21 for the Paralympics.“They’re running their own campaigns, and they’re doing so with the freedom to use the marks and the athletes however they want,” Mr. Mason said. “I don’t think they’re feeling threatened.”But policing social media activity is a daunting challenge.Nick Symmonds is in a unique position. As a two-time Olympic middle distance runner and the co-founder of a growing business that produces an energy chewing gum, he would seem to have a platform anytime an NBC camera swings in his direction.But his own company, Run Gum, cannot so much as wish him good luck on Twitter without potentially violating Rule 40. Mr. Symmonds said he would not be able to still compete at age 32 without the income that Run Gum provided him.“At the one point when I could actually get some eyes on my fledgling business, they say I cannot even mention my own name,” Mr. Symmonds said. “It’s so wrong.”Sally Bergesen, the founder and chief executive of Oiselle, a women’s athletic apparel company, likewise said she struggled to see how the rule change helped a small company like hers, even though it sponsors Olympic runners like Kara Goucher and Lauren Fleshman.“I think it’s a penalty,” she said of the waiver process, which her company went through, “because of the amount of money you’re going to spend for zero connection.”She added that a company like Louis Vuitton could get away with an unadorned image of Mr. Phelps, as it did during the 2012 Summer Olympics. But Ms. Bergesen contends that for every Michael Phelps, there are dozens of less recognized athletes still waiting to capitalize on the benefits the rule change was supposed to provide.Mr. Grady, the professor of sports law, said he was unsure how the conflicting interests might be resolved after the Olympics.Still, he said, “relaxing Rule 40 actually lengthened the interest in the Olympics this year.”“In that regard, any interest in the Olympics should benefit the top sponsors,” he said. “They shouldn’t be so upset.”Advertisement