AdvertisementSupported byBy Ian AustenOTTAWA — Apparently looking to exploit the collapse of oil prices, Suncor, the largest integrated energy company in Canada, announced a hostile takeover bid for Canadian Oil Sands on Monday that it valued at 6.6 billion Canadian dollars.If successful, the transaction will give Suncor control of Syncrude, Canada’s largest oil sands operation, in addition to its own oil sands holdings. Canadian Oil Sands’ only asset is a 36.7 percent stake in Syncrude; Suncor currently owns about 12 percent of Syncrude.Canada’s oil sands industry has been hit more severely by falling prices than conventional oil producers because of substantial costs related to creating crude oil from its deposits of tarlike bitumen.During a conference call, Steve Williams, Suncor’s president and chief executive, said Canadian Oil Sands rebuffed a proposal by his company for a friendly takeover earlier this year. On Monday, he emphasized that the transaction offered a 35 percent premium over Canadian Oil Sands’ average weighted price over the last 30 days.By accepting the deal, Mr. Williams said that Canadian Oil Sands will “gain ownership in an industry leader with a strong balance sheet, profitable operations and a clear path to future growth.” He added that the proposal’s share swap structure will also give them a way to profit when oil prices recover.“We believe this is a financially compelling opportunity for C.O.S. shareholders,” Mr. Williams said in a statement.Canadian Oil Sands had no immediate comment.Suncor is offering to exchange one-quarter of its shares for each Canadian Oil Sands share, a bid it valued at 4.3 billion Canadian dollars. It will also assume 2.3 billion Canadian dollars in debt.In a statement, Canadian Oil Sands said that its board is reviewing the offer. The company added that it had previously hired the Royal Bank of Canada for legal advice as well as the law firm of Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt and Kingsdale Shareholder Services.In a note to investors, Michael Dunn, an analyst at FirstEnergy Capital in Calgary, Alberta, where Suncor is based, noted that the two companies’ oil sands operations “are more or less located right across the road from each other.”Because of that, he said, “multiple billions of future costs could likely be saved” by integrating the two projects.Mr. Dunn added that it was unlikely that Imperial Oil, Exxon-Mobil’s Canadian subsidiary which owns 25 percent of Syncrude, would make a competing bid given Suncor’s unique potential cost advantage.The hostile bid is the second recent move by Suncor, which has a wide range of assets, including the refining and retailing assets of Petro-Canada, which it acquired during the oil price downturn in 2009. Last month, it paid Total 310 million Canadian dollars for most of its holdings in the Fort Hills oil sands operation. That transaction gave Suncor a stake of just over 50 percent.Last month, Mr. Williams said in an investor call that Suncor was carrying too much cash on its books.Advertisement