AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — British authorities said on Wednesday that they would seek a retrial of two former Barclays traders after a jury was unable to reach a verdict this week on charges that they plotted to manipulate a benchmark interest rate known as Libor.The jury, which began deliberations on June 20, was unable to reach a verdict regarding the former traders, Stylianos Contogoulas and Ryan Michael Reich, and was discharged on Monday.The trial was the third in Britain to focus on a scandal involving the London interbank offered rate. It followed a half-decade investigation that led to billions of dollars in fines and shook the reputations of some of the world’s biggest banks, including Deutsche Bank, the Royal Bank of Scotland and UBS, as well as Barclays.On Wednesday, the Serious Fraud Office said it would seek a second trial for Mr. Contogoulas and Mr. Reich on a charge of conspiracy to defraud. A date for their new trial will be announced later.Both men have denied wrongdoing.“It is hard to understand how the S.F.O. can have formed the view that a different jury would find it any easier to convict our client,” Antony Brown, a lawyer for Mr. Contogoulas, said.“Our client will strenuously contest these proceedings and continues to assert his innocence of any criminality.”Charles Kuhn, a lawyer representing Mr. Reich, said he had asked the Serious Fraud Office to “think again” about the need for a second trial.“A second trial would be taking place 10 years after the event,” Mr. Kuhn said. “The public interest does not require the delay, expense, uncertainty and personal agony of a retrial in this case. Honor has been satisfied.”To set Libor and other benchmark rates, banks submit the rates at which they would be prepared to lend money to one another, on an unsecured basis, in various currencies and at varying maturities. Libor is used to price more than $300 trillion in securities.Two former Barclays traders, Vijay Merchant and Alex Pabon, as well as Jonathan J. Mathew, a former rate submitter at the bank, were convicted on a charge of conspiracy to defraud last week, and their convictions were announced on Monday.They are set to be sentenced this week, along with Peter Johnson, a former Barclays trader who pleaded guilty to a criminal conspiracy charge in October 2014.Barclays, the first bank to reach a settlement in the Libor investigation, paid $450 million in penalties. The ensuing scandal cost Robert E. Diamond Jr., then the bank’s chief executive, his job.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.Advertisement