By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONJULY 6, 2016
Andrew Caspersen, a former Wall Street executive and scion of a wealthy family, pleaded guilty on Wednesday to federal charges that he defrauded friends, relatives and a hedge fund billionaire’s foundation of nearly $40 million.Accompanied by his lawyer, Mr. Caspersen, 39, arrived at a federal courthouse in Manhattan to a small crowd of family and friends. Dressed in a dark suit with a bright orange tie, Mr. Caspersen pleaded guilty to one charge of security fraud and one charge of wire fraud, charges that each carry a maximum penalty of 20 years in prison.It represents a steep fall for Mr. Caspersen, an Ivy League-educated financier whose lawyer has argued that a “compulsive gambling addiction and mental illness” prompted him to mastermind a Ponzi-like scheme earlier this year.“The people I harmed were people I cared for the most,” Mr. Caspersen said, reading from a statement. His voice wavered as he stumbled over the last words, “I could not be more sorry or ashamed for my crimes.”AdvertisementMr. Caspersen’s decision to plead guilty does not come as a surprise, because his lawyer said last month he would not contest the charges. It is unclear, however, whether Judge Jed S. Rakoff of Federal District Court will use leniency in sentencing Mr. Caspersen by viewing his mental health affliction as a mitigating circumstance.AdvertisementIn a plea agreement, federal prosecutors and Mr. Caspersen agreed on a sentencing range of 12 to 16 years in prison, subject to judicial approval. He could also be required to pay a fine of more than $5 million and restitution to victims. In court on Wednesday, Judge Rakoff described the federal sentencing guidelines as “irrational.”The case has riveted Wall Street ever since Mr. Caspersen was arrested at La Guardia Airport in New York on March 26 as he stepped off a plane returning from a vacation with his two young children, his wife and his in-laws. His victims included close friends and acquaintances. Among those he defrauded were his mother and the family of a former girlfriend, Catherine F. MacRae, who died in the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center. His mother was in court on Wednesday and spent time talking with him and Christina, his wife.Others entangled in Mr. Caspersen’s fraud included the foundation of Louis Bacon, the hedge fund manager, and Paul J. Taubman’s firm, PJT Partners, where Mr. Caspersen worked while carrying out the scheme. As part of the ruse, Mr. Caspersen created fake email addresses and a fictitious colleague.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With a pedigree that included Groton School, Princeton and Harvard Law School, Mr. Caspersen used his network to tap new sources of money for his scheme, which promised investors annual returns of 15 percent through a private-equitylike investment vehicle, prosecutors have said.“I did all this knowing it was wrong,” Mr. Caspersen said on Wednesday in court.In reality, much of the money Mr. Caspersen raised from friends was squandered on wrong-footed bets in the market, Paul Shechtman, Mr. Caspersen’s lawyer, said in a recent interview.Mr. Caspersen traded one-week put options that allowed him to bet on a decline in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index. Mr. Caspersen was bold in his bets, telling his broker to trade all the cash in his account each week, his lawyer said.That account held $112.8 million as recently as Feb. 1, which would have been enough for Mr. Caspersen to easily pay back the $38.5 million that he owed to his family and friends. Instead, he continued to gamble the money through all-in bets against the market.The recent attention on Mr. Caspersen recalled the sudden death of his father, Finn M. W. Caspersen, who committed suicide in 2009 at the age of 67. The elder Mr. Caspersen was a noted philanthropist and financier who left behind family trusts and businesses. He had also pledged $30 million to Harvard Law School, where a student center was named in the family’s honor.Over the last decade, the younger Mr. Caspersen squandered more than $20 million of his own money and family inheritance, lured into making trading bets after starting with casino gambling and sports betting, his lawyer said. He added that Mr. Caspersen and his wife recently sold their multimillion-dollar home in Bronxville, N.Y.A version of this article appears in print on July 7, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Wall St. Scion Pleads Guilty in $40 Million Security Fraud.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.