
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
NOV. 19, 2015
Cindy Holland is the person at Netflix responsible for supplying the world with addictive entertainment.This interview with Cindy Holland, vice president for original content at Netflix, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant. Q. Tell me about your early years.A. I grew up outside a small town near Omaha. Both of my parents were pretty accomplished by the time I came around. My dad was a lawyer, but he had been an Army helicopter pilot and a Rhodes Scholar. My mother stopped her career to raise kids, but she had the higher I.Q. My motto as a kid was that I had to think fast and move faster.Any favorite family expressions that would get repeated around the kitchen table?I remember my father said to me, on more than one occasion when I was upset about something or depressed, “Well, if you live long enough, you’ll feel better.” It was completely logical. It didn’t necessarily salve my wounds in the moment, but it gave me perspective.My sister and I were also raised to believe that we could accomplish anything we set our minds to and that there were no rules about gender. It was all sort of irrelevant. If you set your mind to something, you could achieve it, and I take that with me wherever I go.AdvertisementDid you know what you wanted to do for a career when you went to college?I was always interested in technology but I majored in political science. And for a year after college, I was a competitive water skier full-time. I worked at a ski school, teaching students and driving a boat when I wasn’t competing myself.AdvertisementAnd what lessons do you still draw on from that experience?It’s such an all-consuming sport. You have to be completely focused on your body mechanics and what you’re doing. It’s almost like the outside world doesn’t exist for those moments. It also teaches you not to panic if things are going wrong — either personally or professionally — and to really just take stock of the situation and act pretty quickly.What were some early insights about managing people?My experience was probably similar to what a lot of Type A individuals go through when they become managers, and you shift from doing to delegating and enabling the doing.You figure out that dictating the answer or micromanaging not only is not welcome, it’s just not helpful. You can’t scale yourself and grow your organization, and you might as well have no employees if that’s the approach you’re going to take. It took a couple of fits and starts to really understand that.Once I did, I was able to use what I learned from coaching water skiers — you have to figure out how to best help someone do something because you can’t go out to the end of the rope and do it for them.It’s a little bit of psychology. How do they need to hear the input to get the best results out of them? In management, it’s about understanding how the person thinks and even figuring out the right choice of words that will help unlock their creativity and desire to do something. I didn’t know that I would enjoy that part of the job so much, but I do.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other thoughts on your approach to leadership?I always try to have diversity of thought and diversity of experience in the team, and I make sure that I’m hiring to my weaknesses and the weaknesses of the group. There’s nothing I enjoy more than folks having a better idea and being able to really stand on their own.If people come to me to ask about a choice they have to make, I always say, “If I weren’t here, what would you do?” Then we talk through the pros and cons of that and what the right solution might be.More often than not, their initial instinct is right because they’re in the day-to-day of the problem. I can be helpful as kind of a third-party observer, but I don’t know as much about what’s actually going on. The solution usually lies within the team that’s on the front lines every day.AdvertisementAny feedback over the years about your leadership style that led you to make some adjustments?I like to think of myself as pretty self-aware. What’s interesting is that I don’t think my personality has changed much at all since I was a teenager. But what I have noticed is that as I’ve moved into more senior positions, people change the way they perceive your personality.So when I was a kid, people took some delight in how they saw me, as a go-getter — she won’t stop at anything, she can be a little intense. But once you get to a certain level, people can be a little intimidated by that, which is not my intention at all. So I’ve worked pretty hard to modulate that, and be conscious of what I say and how I say it.I’ve gotten feedback recently that I’m a kinder and gentler Cindy than I was a few years ago, so hopefully it’s working.How do you hire? What qualities do you look for?You need to be a really curious, passionate person who’s willing to have a point of view and articulate it. I’m less interested in what school somebody went to or what fancy company they may have worked at. I want to know what they’re interested in and where they come from and what they’re seeking to do.I will often start an interview with, “What questions do you have for me?” I want to know what they’re curious about. Some people respond well to that first question and some people are so thrown that they say they don’t have any questions. It doesn’t disqualify them automatically, but it definitely tells me something about them.What advice do you give to new college grads?I tell people what my parents told me: Follow what you’re interested in and things will work out. And don’t be afraid to make sideways or backwards moves in order to follow those interests.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on November 22, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Learning to Lead on a Pair of Water Skis.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »