
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

JULY 5, 2016
The Securities and Exchange Commission has successfully fended off recent challenges to its use of administrative proceedings to hear cases about potential violations. Yet the victories are a bit like winning the coin toss at the start of a football game because the courts did not resolve the underlying constitutional issues regarding the use of administrative courts to decide cases.That issue is one part of a larger debate over the S.E.C.’s increased use of administrative proceedings to impose penalties, which some have claimed gives the agency an improper “home court” advantage.The commission will have to continue to defend how it channels cases into administrative proceedings from congressional efforts to push enforcement actions into federal court. A broad financial overhaul proposal offered by Representative Jeb Hensarling, the Texas Republican who is chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, includes provisions that would effectively gut the use of in-house courts for cases.The roots of the dispute can be traced to when Congress, in the Dodd-Frank Act, gave the agency almost unfettered discretion to choose to seek penalties in court or in an administrative proceeding. The change raised the ire of defense lawyers, who saw cases routed to the administrative process rather than being filed in a court, where the lawyers would have greater rights to obtain evidence and have a jury decide the case.AdvertisementIn response, defendants filed a number of lawsuits, claiming that the administrative proceedings are unconstitutional because of the way in which the in-house judges are appointed, asking that the cases be halted until the constitutional issue can be decided.AdvertisementA few judges agreed with that argument, putting a stop to the administrative cases. But in June, the federal appeals courts in New York and Atlanta adopted the S.E.C.’s position that any constitutional challenge must first follow the procedures in the securities laws that provide for consideration by the agency’s in-house judge and then the five commissioners before ever reaching a federal court.These opinions followed decisions issued by the federal appeals courts in Chicago and Washington that reached the same conclusion. One remaining challenge to the S.E.C.’s appointment of its administrative judges is before the appeals court in Richmond, Va., with oral argument on the case expected later this year.Those decisions all found that the procedures in the securities laws for reviewing a case were sufficient to protect the rights of a defendant caught up in an administrative proceeding. But none reached the underlying constitutional issue of the propriety of the appointment of the in-house judges, simply postponing that issue for a later challenge if the S.E.C. rules against a defendant who can then take the case back to the appeals court for further review.The cases so far have been about when the issue can be raised, not whether the agency has acted properly.One such case is before the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, which heard arguments in May addressing whether the appointment of the in-house judges was proper. That court is the leader in the field of administrative law, so its decision will be influential on how other courts might decide challenges to the status of administrative judges at the S.E.C. and other agencies.The S.E.C.’s victories in the appeals courts has done little to damp the criticism leveled at its use of administrative proceedings. The commission tried to address the issue last September by proposing changes to grant slightly broader discovery rights to defendants, but that drew a tepid response and nothing has been put into effect yet.On Capitol Hill, Mr. Hensarling’s proposal to roll back much of the Dodd-Frank Act, called the Financial Choice Act, has almost no chance of being passed this year. But as The New York Times noted, “the proposal remains a messaging tool for House Republicans” and may be a guide to how Congress will act in the future.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One argument for making administrative proceedings a less-appealing avenue for enforcement has been the perception of an unfair advantage when the case is heard by an in-house judge. But that is not always the case, as an initial decision last week in an administrative proceeding rejected charges against Equity Trust, a custodian of individual retirement accounts, for violating the securities laws. So at least the S.E.C. does not win them all, despite the perception of a home court advantage.AdvertisementThe proposal would put up enough roadblocks to pursuing a case before an in-house judge that it would direct most S.E.C. enforcement actions to the federal district courts.Following the approach of a bill introduced last October by Representative Scott Garrett, Republican of New Jersey, a defendant in an administrative proceeding would have the right to remove a case from the administrative judge to a federal court, ensuring broader discovery and a right to a jury. If a defendant allows the case to remain in the administrative court, then the S.E.C. would have to prove a violation by clear and convincing evidence, a higher standard than the usual one applied in federal court of a preponderance of the evidence.This would force the S.E.C. to decide whether its evidence is strong enough to win before the in-house judge or take the case into federal court with its more lenient standard of proof but then face a jury.To further discourage pursuing cases in an administrative proceeding, the proposal would prohibit the S.E.C. from imposing a bar on a defendant found to have violated the securities laws from serving as a director or officer of a public company.If adopted, the only way to get such a remedy would be by filing the case in a federal court, which would still have the authority to issue the bar.It is unclear why this provision is included in Mr. Hensarling’s draft. There has not been any significant complaints about the S.E.C.’s use of the bar authority, and it is generally lauded as a means to protect investors from so-called bad apples who engage in misconduct in a company.An analysis provided by the House Financial Services Committee states that “Republicans support the vigorous enforcement of the federal securities laws and believe that the S.E.C. must have the tools it needs to deter and punish wrongdoing.”But there is no mention about why the agency would be stripped of this authority, and it appears to be intended to make administrative proceedings a less fruitful avenue for enforcement rather than any dispute about the benefits of the director and officer bar.The legislative proposal goes further in changing how enforcement actions are brought by giving any potential defendant who has been notified that the S.E.C. plans to file charges a right to appear before the commissioners in advance of the filing “to make an in-person presentation.” This will serve to create a type of preliminary hearing at which the issues in the case could be argued to the commissioners, making the process of filing an action more time consuming by adding a layer of review even before the case is filed.AdvertisementIt is clear that the agency’s enforcement program, especially the use of administrative proceedings, has provoked a strong reaction. Even as it wins in court, the agency may have to face a day when most cases are channeled into federal court.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »