AdvertisementSupported byBy Janet MorrisseyThe world of cosmetic surgery — whether it is wrinkle-zapping Botox shots, breast implants or a full-blown face-lift — is hardly an industry that seems to be a natural candidate for disruption by start-up entrepreneurs.But the industry is no longer limited to celebrities and wealthy socialites. It has become mainstream in recent years, thanks to TV shows like “Botched” and “Extreme Makeover,” as well as infomercial ads promoting the latest age-defying cosmetic products.As a result, more prospective patients are traveling from doctor to doctor to get information through consultations, which can cost up to $500 a visit.So Dr. Gary Breslow, a plastic surgeon in Paramus, N.J., and his longtime friend, Dr. Craig Abramowitz, created Zwivel, an online site that offers an easier and more efficient way to connect doctors with new patients seeking plastic surgery.Zwivel goes further than “find a doctor” search platforms or telemedicine sites like HealthTap, in which doctors give patients medical advice through online chats.Just as Match.com allows strangers to scroll through and evaluate potential dates, Zwivel allows patients and doctors to size up each other and ask questions before committing to surgery.The site allows patients to check out doctors’ credentials, send photos or videos of themselves to preferred doctors, and get those doctors to answer questions about cosmetic procedures and prices, all free.There are now about 1,400 doctors and more than 28,000 patients registered on Zwivel, up from 800 doctors and 6,100 patients at the end of its first year in 2015, said Scott Kera, chief operating officer at Zwivel.The company makes money by charging doctors a monthly subscription fee of $495. The site is free for patients. It also gets a small cut from the lending companies CareCredit and Prosper Healthcare when patients use either one to finance their cosmetic procedures.Born in New Hyde Park, N.Y., Dr. Breslow, 45, earned degrees from Brown University in 1993 and the New York University School of Medicine in 1998. He finished his residency in plastic surgery at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in 2004 and a fellowship in microvascular reconstructive surgery from N.Y.U. before starting his own practice in 2005. But he soon became frustrated with the consultation process.Only about 36 percent of people who come in for cosmetic consultations end up getting a procedure, Dr. Breslow said. He attributes the low conversion rate to patients having insufficient information about pricing and procedures before the consultation.“Patients who are severely overweight sometimes think liposuction is the answer, and I tell them, ‘You don’t need liposuction; you need to lose weight,’” Dr. Breslow said. “Or a patient may want $20,000 worth of surgery and thinks the whole thing is going to cost $200,” he said.He created Zwivel with the idea that if patients had a faster and easier way to see doctors’ credentials and get doctors to answer questions about surgical procedures and prices in advance, they would be better informed and more likely to sign up when they went for the in-office consultation.Still, it was a lengthy process to get Zwivel off the ground. In 2012, with $250,000 of their own money, Dr. Breslow and Dr. Abramowitz, who is a dentist, hired two teams of programmers and site designers over two years. None could build the site.Two years later, in 2014, Mr. Kera, who previously founded and sold another technology start-up, came on board and assembled a team that built the site in six months.The company waived the doctors’ subscription fees in 2015 as it built up the site. Since introducing the fee in February, the company has signed on 70 new doctors. Zwivel’s revenue, which has totaled $427,000 since February, is expected to top $1 million this year, $4 million in 2018 and $15 million in 2020, Dr. Breslow said.Dr. Breslow and Dr. Abramowitz raised $3 million in financing from family and friends in 2015 and another $2 million in 2016.Zwivel has been marketing the site through trade conventions and national TV spots on Bravo, Lifetime and E, as well as ads on iHeartRadio. But many patients are finding it through web searches.When Amber Ingerman decided to have breast enlargement surgery in 2015, she contacted 12 doctors and had five formal office consultations. She accumulated fees of about $500 — and still hadn’t found a surgeon she liked.“I was feeling frustrated,” said Ms. Ingerman, 29, who lives in Fort Worth. “I had wanted the surgery for about 10 years, but I didn’t want just anyone touching me.” Then, in early 2016, she discovered Zwivel while surfing the web for information on doctors.Ms. Ingerman was impressed with the response and credentials of Dr. Rod Rohrich, a prominent plastic surgeon in Dallas who was on Zwivel. She immediately booked a formal consultation with him, and had the surgery a month later.Demand for cosmetic surgery is “about 20 percent to 30 percent higher than before the recession,” Dr. Rohrich said. There were 15.9 million cosmetic procedures done in the United States in 2015, up from 12.1 million in 2008, according to the American Society of Plastic Surgeons.Initially, some doctors questioned the need for a virtual consultation, saying that the face-to-face consultation was their strength and the best way to get a customer to sign on.“Initially, I was a doubting Thomas,” conceded Dr. Neil Zemmel, a plastic surgeon in the Richmond, Va., area, who was one of the first doctors to sign up for Zwivel in 2015. But once he tried the site, he was sold.More than 80 percent of his patients who come through Zwivel for a formal consultation wind up getting a cosmetic procedure, compared with 40 to 50 percent for other patients, he said. “It’s been an invaluable tool,” he said.An advantage of Zwivel is that it allows doctors to clear up misconceptions early in the process.“I get patients who say they want Kim Kardashian’s tush or Brad Pitt’s chin,” Dr. Zemmel said. “I can’t cut and paste Kim Kardashian’s butt on you; that’s not realistic.”As more new patients discover the site, the company sees significant growth potential.Susan Delaney, 49, of Haskell, N.J., had been looking for a doctor periodically for about two years for a tummy-tuck procedure before she came across Zwivel in 2016 through a link on a doctor’s website. Once on the site, she quickly narrowed down her choices, was impressed with Dr. Breslow’s same-day reply, and scheduled her surgery with him.Getting pricing ahead of the formal consultation was particularly helpful. “The first thing you need to know is if you can afford it so that you’re not wasting your time and the doctor’s time,” she said.Still, not everyone in the industry is convinced that the virtual consultation is particularly useful or accurate.“It’s hard to give pricing because the photos aren’t necessarily indicative of everything. A surgeon is going to want to feel their skin, and assess the skin tone and it’s hard to do that over photos and video,” said Dr. David H. Song, president of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons.Dr. Breslow, however, dismisses this concern. “Of course you need to see the patient,” he said. “Zwivel is like Match.com. You still have to go on the date; you just want to know if the date is worth going out on.”Ms. Ingerman of Fort Worth was so impressed with her experience with Zwivel that she is already considering another procedure with Dr. Rohrich, this time, rhinoplasty. She has even introduced her mother, Angel, to the site.“As people find out they can do these consults online to find out prices and doctors’ experience,” she said, “I think Zwivel will completely take over cosmetic surgery and how you shop for it.”Advertisement