By ELIZABETH OLSONJULY 6, 2016
Law firm mergers are keeping pace with last year’s record, with a total of 48 deals announced through the end of June, according to figures from Altman Weil MergerLine.Most of the activity involved smaller firms, which are increasingly stressed as they compete with others for less work. New York and Florida were notably busy markets for law firm combinations.Over all last year, there were 91 law firm mergers, a number that could be exceeded this year as firms continue to look for ways to flourish, or just to keep afloat.“Small firms are increasingly vulnerable in the current market,” said Eric A. Seeger, a principal at Altman Weil, a legal consulting firm in Newtown Square, Pa. “There’s more competition for less work, and small firms need a strategy to avoid being squeezed out. That may mean building a bigger platform or being acquired by a firm that already has a broader foundation.”AdvertisementIn the second quarter of 2016, 93 percent of the combinations involved firms with fewer than 25 lawyers. Almost half of the acquirers had 50 or fewer lawyers and focused on absorbing firms in the same city or state.AdvertisementBigger deals combined firms in different geographic areas. The largest deal in the last three months was the merger of Husch Blackwell, which is based in Kansas City, Mo., and has 560 lawyers, with Whyte Hirschboeck Dudek, based in Milwaukee and with 144 lawyers, for an overall head count of more than 700 lawyers.New York City proved to be a deal breeding ground. Greenspoon Marder, a 172-lawyer firm with headquarters in Florida, acquired Jacob Medinger & Finnegan, a nine-person firm in Manhattan. Boies Schiller, a New York litigation powerhouse, added a specialist in white-collar litigation, O’Shea Partners. Wilson Elser combined with Jankoff & Gabe, a three-lawyer firm in the city.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Philadelphia-based law firms also were busy on the acquisition front. Cozen O’Connor added Feldman Gale, a 15-lawyer intellectual property litigation firm in Miami. Fox Rothschild picked up Rothenberg Hyett Eisen & Lang, a three-lawyer firm in Boca Raton, Fla., and a second three-lawyer firm, Myers Kenney, in San Francisco.Also, in late June, Blank Rome, a large Philadelphia firm that this year acquired the former Washington firm Dickstein Shapiro, said it was adding Phillips Lerner, a four-lawyer family law firm in Los Angeles.In addition, four international deals were made in recent months. Three were unions of American and British firms. Holland & Knight expanded to London, acquiring Clark Ricketts, a six-lawyer transportation finance firm. Haynes & Boone planned to add its first European office by combining with Curtis Davis Garrard, a 20-lawyer London firm.Clyde & Company, an 1,800-lawyer London-based law firm, will open its sixth office in the United States when it acquires Thornton Davis & Fein, an 18-lawyer Miami insurance defense firm.And just as the second quarter was ending, legal giant DLA Piper announced it would acquire Gronberg Advokatbyra, a 21-lawyer Swedish law firm.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.