AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinStanley C. Gault, a tough, sales-minded executive who helped revive two emblematic Ohio companies, Rubbermaid and Goodyear, after working for three decades at General Electric, died on June 29 in Cleveland. He was 90.He died at the Cleveland Clinic, according to a representative of the McIntire Bradham & Sleek Funeral Home in Wooster, Ohio, where Mr. Gault lived.Mr. Gault’s long career began in Wooster, his hometown, 50 miles south of Cleveland, when he was attending classes at the College of Wooster and got a job working nights at the Wooster Rubber Company, which his father, Clyde, had co-founded.The company eventually became Rubbermaid, a major consumer goods manufacturer, and four decades later, Mr. Gault was its chairman and chief executive.At Rubbermaid, he was credited with more than quadrupling annual sales. He started a broad reorganization and introduced hundreds of products that diversified the company beyond sink mats and trash cans. He also led a number of significant acquisitions, including Little Tikes, the manufacturer of popular children’s toys.Mr. Gault left Rubbermaid in 1991, after about a decade, but his retirement did not last long. A few months later he was tapped to lead another large Ohio manufacturer, the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company of Akron. As chairman and chief executive from 1991 to 1996, he led another turnaround.The company, now commonly known as Goodyear, was burdened with billions in debt, and employee morale was sinking. Mr. Gault paid down the company’s obligations and increased revenue by selling tires through Sears stores rather than relying on Goodyear’s retail outlets. Over time, he reduced costs by eliminating about 10,000 jobs.Mr. Gault influenced the company beyond the bottom line. He changed the color scheme of the company’s well-known blimps to blue and gold, to match the colors in Goodyear’s corporate logo and make the blimps easier to see.Stanley Carleton Gault was born in Wooster on Jan. 6, 1926, to Clyde and Asenath Gault. In 1920, his father was one of several founders of the Wooster Rubber Company, which initially made toy balloons and small household items. The company was sold six years later, and his father was no longer involved with it by the time Stanley Gault went to work there as a college student.He interrupted his studies at the College of Wooster to serve in the Army Air Corps. He was B-29 gunner in the South Pacific during World War II.After graduating in 1948, Mr. Gault sold General Electric appliances in Cleveland. Over the next 31 years, he rose through the company’s ranks, becoming head of G.E.’s consumer products division and later its industrial products division.He left General Electric in 1980 and returned to his hometown after he lost a bid to become the company’s chairman to John F. Welch Jr. At the time, Mr. Gault was one of seven executives said to be in the running for that job.At Rubbermaid (which is now part of Newell Brands), one of the first things he did was to fire or force out all but two of the 172 managers in an effort to shake up the company.Mr. Gault made no excuses for his tough approach and, in an interview with The New York Times in 1983, contrasted it with what Mr. Welch had done at his old company. “I’ve changed half of this company, and Jack Welch hasn’t changed half of G.E.,” he said.Mr. Gault’s wife, the former Flo Kurtz, died in 2013. He is survived by two sons, Stephen and Christopher; a daughter, Jennifer Marsh; and six grandchildren.President Ronald Reagan and President George H. W. Bush appointed Mr. Gault to trade policy advisory committees.He was known for his philanthropy, particularly to the city of Wooster and his alma mater. He was chairman of the College of Wooster’s board of trustees from 1984 to 2000 and led fund-raising campaigns. A number of buildings on the campus, including the alumni center and the admissions center, bear the Gault family name.Advertisement