
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

JULY 6, 2016
The chief executive of Netflix, Reed Hastings, and his counterpart at Comcast, Brian L. Roberts, are putting their desire for growth ahead of their history of mutual gripes. Netflix, the video-streaming service, helped kill the bid of Comcast, the cable provider, for Time Warner Cable. But now Comcast is adding its nemesis to its set-top box.The reason for the détente is pretty simple: Nothing brings out the olive branch like a business opportunity.The relationship between the two companies has often been rocky. It got downright nasty, though, not long ago. Just as Comcast was trying to push through its $45 billion takeover of Time Warner Cable, Netflix accused it of throttling its service. United States regulators were listening, and Comcast abandoned the deal last year.Such scrapes can cause lasting enmity. But the two companies’ interests are becoming more aligned. Mr. Roberts wants to make Comcast a major content aggregator, with a menu that includes on-demand TV shows, videos from Buzzfeed and other digital media companies and music from Pandora. Its X1 cable box has become a chief lure for attracting new customers and persuading current ones to stay. The strategy appears to be working: Comcast added 53,000 video subscribers last quarter, and customer turnover has improved for 26 consecutive months. Adding Netflix should broaden its appeal.As part of the deal, Mr. Hastings gets access to new subscribers who could potentially help stem his company’s slowing growth. Netflix has already benefited from a similar deal in Britain. According to Morgan Stanley, Netflix doubled its share of Virgin Media subscribers using its service to 28 percent within two years of being integrated into the company’s TiVo box in late 2013.Netflix could use a similar lift back home. If its own forecast is correct, it ended the second quarter with 47 million memberships in the United States. That, though, would be just 1 percent higher than the three months to March, the slowest quarterly growth in more than a year. Tapping into Comcast will give it immediate potential access to the 40 percent of Comcast video customers who already have the X1 – or some nine million homes – with the rest following in the next few years. That’s more than enough reason to patch things up.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »