AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesElizabeth Holmes dropped out of Stanford to start Theranos in 2003, when she was 19. The company rose to prominence on the promise that it could detect health ailments at a low cost by testing blood drawn by the mere prick of a finger. Until a few years ago, the company had kept a relatively low profile. Here is a look at some milestones in the company’s development:Theranos says in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing that it has raised $45 million by selling equity and options, warrants or other securities.Theranos adds Richard M. Kovacevich, the former chief executive of Wells Fargo, and Gen. James Mattis, a retired top military commander, to its board. The directors already include luminaries like Henry A. Kissinger; the former Senator Samuel Nunn; and the former secretary of state George P. Shultz. Until then, the company had been largely secretive.Theranos announces a partnership with Walgreens to allow consumers to test their blood at the pharmacy’s stores.Theranos and its founder, Ms. Holmes, are profiled in national magazines and other news outlets. Fortune says the company has raised $400 million from equity sales to investors who have effectively valued the company at more than $9 billion.Dr. Delos M. Cosgrove, the chief executive and president of the Cleveland Clinic, tells The New Yorker that Theranos is “potentially a breakthrough company.”In an editorial in The Journal of the American Medical Association, a Stanford School of Medicine professor criticizes the company for operating in “stealth mode for more than a decade” in order to “change the entire health system” without publishing anything in peer-reviewed biomedical journals.The Food and Drug Administration approves Theranos’s test to detect if someone has been infected by herpes simplex virus 1. The company has not received approval for any additional tests since then.An investigation by The Wall Street Journal raises questions about whether the company’s technology actually works.After concerns are raised by the Food and Drug Administration, Theranos temporarily halts its trademark practice of collecting tiny blood samples from finger pricks.The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services issues a letter saying that the company violated several clinical standards.An inspection report released by federal regulators says Theranos was plagued by quality control problems.The company says that the Justice Department has requested documents and that the S.E.C. is investigating.Walgreens terminates its relationship with the company and moves to immediately close all 40 of the Theranos testing centers in its Arizona drugstores, the source of most of Theranos’s customers.Theranos announces that regulators have imposed sanctions, including banning Ms. Holmes from owning or operating a medical laboratory for at least two years. Regulators also revoke the certification of its Newark, Calif., laboratory and prohibit it from taking Medicare and Medicaid payments for its services.Advertisement