By LESLIE PICKER and MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 7, 2016
An investment banker’s job is to identify companies that have a strong potential to be bought or sold in the near future, and get in on the ground floor of the action.Two JPMorgan veterans, Douglas L. Braunstein and James C. Woolery, started the activist investment firm Hudson Executive Capital about 18 months ago with a plan to collaborate with company management teams rather than threaten proxy fights. Recently, their deal expertise seems to be paying off.The latest example is WhiteWave Foods Company. Hudson Executive took a position in shares of the organic food company late last year and continued to build on that investment, reaching a $32 million stake as of the end of March, according to data from S&P Capital IQ. On Thursday, WhiteWave, the maker of Horizons Organic products and Silk almond milk, said it agreed to be acquired for $10 billion by the French food company Danone. For the activist firm, the deal yielded an estimated 45 percent gain compared to where the average shares traded when it first invested last fall.For the last few months behind the scenes, Hudson Executive bankers urged WhiteWave’s chairman and chief executive, Gregg L. Engles, to solicit potential buyers, believing that WhiteWave would make a natural acquisition target for food giants like Coca-Cola or PepsiCo, according to a person briefed on the matter who asked not to be identified. WhiteWave’s faster growth and higher multiple could have been tempting to the likes of General Mills as well.AdvertisementIn the meantime, Hudson Executive – which was familiar with many of the potential bidders – sought to chum the waters on its own, trying to stir up interest from potential buyers, said the person. Danone bid.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That extends Hudson Executive’s winning streak. Just last week, a similar situation happened when Medtronic agreed to acquire HeartWare for $1.1 billion, sending the target’s stock surging. Hudson Executive started acquiring shares of HeartWare – which makes devices that mimic the heart’s pumping function — at an average of $44 apiece, also beginning in the fourth quarter of last year. They are now trading closer to $58, a jump of about 32 percent.Hudson Executive Capital opened its doors in January 2015, raising about $250 million in capital. Mr. Braunstein and Mr. Woolery appointed a group of 14 current and former corporate chief executives to be members of its advisory board.AdvertisementMr. Braunstein had spent his career at JPMorgan, ultimately assuming the role of vice chairman of the firm, while Mr. Woolery made his mark as a partner at the prominent law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore before becoming co-head of North American mergers at JPMorgan. He was chairman-elect of Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft before leaving for Hudson Executive last year. The two men have worked on deals worth more than $1.75 trillion combined, according to the firm’s website.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.