By SYDNEY EMBERJULY 7, 2016
Newsday barely had time to get used to a new owner.Just two weeks after the Dolan family handed over Newsday to Altice as part of the European telecom giant’s $17.7 billion deal for Cablevision, the Dolans have regained control of the Long Island newspaper.In a memo sent Thursday morning to Newsday Media Group employees, Patrick Dolan, whose father, Charles Dolan, founded Cablevision in 1973, said that he had agreed to buy 75 percent of Newsday Media Group from Altice, which will still hold 25 percent of the company. Charles Dolan has also agreed to “hold a small financial interest” in the Newsday Media Group, which also owns the free daily newspaper amNewYork, and will serve on the company’s board, according to the memo.Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.The Dolan family has owned Newsday since 2008, when it beat out the owners of The New York Post and The Daily News to purchase the newspaper from Tribune Company. At the time, analysts questioned why Cablevision, which had no experience running newspapers, would want to buy Newsday.But in Thursday’s memo, Patrick Dolan said his family had “been thrilled to be associated with this incredible newspaper.”Advertisement“I have to say, I’m a little overwhelmed by all of this,” he added. “After all, this is Newsday! A paper with seven decades of history, numerous Pulitzers, and a home to legends in our profession.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Dolan, who is the president of News 12 Networks, also said that he and his father, along with Altice, were “deeply committed to preserving the state-of-the-art journalism that Newsday has consistently provided and that has served our community so well.”AdvertisementIn a statement, Dexter Goei, the chairman and chief executive of Altice USA, said, “We are thrilled to be their partner as we drive the continued development of Newsday Media Group to the benefit of our customers and the local communities that we serve.”During negotiations with Altice, the Dolan family had fought to keep Newsday and News 12 Networks, a local news station, but Altice wanted them included in the deal. Altice executives insisted at the time that they would not sell the money-losing properties.“They are a core part of the local community that we will continue to invest in,” Mr. Goei said at the time.A version of this article appears in print on July 8, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Ink Hardly Dry on a Newsday Sale, Dolans Buy It Back.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.