AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Gina ChonThere’s a harmful flip side to the push against tax-inversion deals in the United States. The Treasury Department’s latest plan to curb tax-motivated overseas mergers takes aim at inter-company loans. It is a good idea to curb this so-called earnings stripping. The proposed rule is broad, however, and could hurt normal funding practices.The Obama administration developed the rule as a wave of corporate emigration by way of acquisition surged, including Pfizer’s $150 billion attempt last year to buy Allergan. The Treasury’s proposal, for which public comments are due on Thursday, specifically aims at the practice of American companies borrowing from their foreign parents in a lower tax region, leaving interest payments to be deducted when calculating their annual tab to Uncle Sam.The practice is called earnings stripping because it essentially ships the profit overseas. Often, an American company does not even actually borrow the money. It just makes interest payments to its corporate overlord. Sometimes subsidiaries are created exclusively for this purpose. The Treasury Department is long overdue in focusing on such schemes.The trouble is that, as written, the new rule also might capture legitimate cash-management activities. Companies often take a surplus from one division to finance activities at another carrying a deficit. This might be prohibited under the proposal, forcing companies to borrow more from banks.In other cases, companies could in a way wind up facing a double tax bill. Consider the example of a German company that has its British financing arm lend money to an American operation to, say, build a new plant. The interest expense would no longer be deductible in the United States while the interest income would be taxed in Britain.The Treasury Department has asked whether exceptions should be made for such activities, but it is also eager to proceed with measures to block inversions. The Internal Revenue Service, a bureau of the Treasury Department, has said it hopes to complete a plan by September. The plan was just put forward in April, there will be thousands of pages of suggestions to review and a hearing on the matter next week. It is rare for such a complex tax proposal to be finished in a year, much less six months.The government is to be applauded for trying to advance swiftly a sharp piece of useful policy. It just would be wise to pause, however briefly, to avoid any detrimental unintended consequences.Gina Chon is a Washington columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement