By ANDREW POLLACKJULY 7, 2016
Three patients in a study testing the use of genetically engineered cells as a treatment for cancer have died from swelling in the brain, dealing a setback to one of the most exciting pursuits in oncology.Juno Therapeutics, the company conducting the clinical trial, said on Thursday that the Food and Drug Administration had temporarily halted the study.The deaths were “difficult and humbling for everyone involved,” Hans Bishop, the company’s chief executive, said in a conference call with securities analysts.Shares of Juno stock plunged 27 percent in after-hours trading.Mr. Bishop and other Juno executives said they believed that the problems resulted from a combination of the particular cells being used and a chemotherapy drug. The company proposed to the F.D.A. that the trial continue without the drug.AdvertisementIt is not clear whether the agency will agree, or when it will make a decision, though Juno executives said it could be within 30 days.AdvertisementJuno is working on what is known as CAR-T therapy. This involves taking blood from a patient to extract immune cells, genetically engineering them to make them kill cancer cells, and then putting them back into the bloodstream to go to work.Early studies have shown some striking results in treating certain types of leukemia and lymphoma, generating excitement among oncologists, patients and investors.But the therapy can provoke severe side effects, particularly immune system overreactions and neurological toxicity, including swelling in the brain, known as cerebral edema. There have been several deaths from these side effects.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Juno, which is based in Seattle, is in a three-way race to bring the first of these treatments to market, competing against Kite Pharma and Novartis. Juno executives said the setback would probably mean that its initial treatment would not get to market by the end of 2017, as it had hoped.That could clear the way for Kite to be the first, but the company’s shares fell about 10 percent after-hours Thursday. Investors were apparently concerned that Juno’s problems could portend more regulatory scrutiny or other difficulties for the entire field.Chemotherapy is used as part of the treatment to kill some of the patient’s immune system, making room for the genetically engineered cells that are put back into the body.Juno initially used only one chemotherapy drug for this, cyclophosphamide. But it more recently added a second drug, fludarabine, saying the dual chemotherapy could make the treatment more effective.All three of the deaths, two of them occurring last week, were among the six or seven patients so far who had received both chemotherapy drugs. There have been no such deaths among the 13 or 14 patients in the study who received cyclophosphamide alone, the company said.Juno executives said they had proposed to the F.D.A. that the trial, which was treating adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, continue using only cyclophosphamide. In an earlier study, about 80 percent of adults with that cancer had at least temporary complete remissions using cyclophosphamide alone. That would still represent a big advance for those patients, they said.AdvertisementExecutives said Juno would continue to use fludarabine in other trials that have different genetically engineered cells.A version of this article appears in print on July 8, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Juno Halts Cancer Treatment Trial Using Gene-Altered Cells After 3 Deaths.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.