AdvertisementSupported byCommon SenseBy James B. StewartWhen the Ralph Lauren Corporation recently unveiled a turnaround plan, calling it “The Way Forward,” it unwittingly invoked another all-American icon fallen on hard times: Ford Motor, whose “Way Forward” plan in 2006 saved the automaker from bankruptcy.Ford’s success has become a staple of business school case studies. And much of the current Ralph Lauren strategy seems inspired by the Ford playbook — enhancing a venerable but financially challenged brand by slashing costs, reducing the work force, closing stores and improving quality.At first blush, a cyclical automaker and a retail fashion designer would seem to have little in common. But like Ford before its recent renaissance, Ralph Lauren is a globally recognized symbol of American style and expertise that, in recent years, has faced growing competition, changing consumer tastes, steep discounting and slumping sales and profits.Ralph Lauren’s still-new chief executive, Stefan Larsson, told me this week that he didn’t consciously name his plan after Ford’s, “Although I’m a fan of Alan Mulally,” Ford’s former chief executive, he said. But he seems to have reached a similar place on his own.“I spent the first three months at Ralph Lauren assessing the strength of the brand and business,’’ said Mr. Larsson, 41, who was part of the team that built H&M into a fast-fashion powerhouse and then led a widely admired turnaround at Gap’s Old Navy division.“I realized quite soon the brand is much stronger than the business,’’ Mr. Larsson said. “That excites me. The brand is one of the few global iconic brands. We’re going to build the business by going back to the core of what made the brand unique and original.”That Ralph Lauren, the company, would need a turnaround surely comes as a surprise to many, given its long cultivation of an image of effortless affluence and confident style.Ralph Lauren himself, a still-youthful 76, remains the company’s chief creative officer and executive chairman. He built the company by evoking an idyllic past from which hard times were banished, taking inspiration from Ivy League college students, prewar British aristocrats and frontier cowboys. Mr. Lauren, in essence, made an upper-class aura accessible to everyone, from Hollywood starlets and hip-hop artists to countless people of humble origins and means. Few, if any designers have had so much impact on American style and taste.His designs and marketing captured a singularly American faith in upward mobility and assimilation. No wonder he put a version of the American flag on his sweaters and, with his initials where the stars would be, made it the company logo. America’s athletes will be wearing his designs in August at the Olympics in Rio, as they did in London four years ago and in Beijing in 2008.“I don’t think there will ever be another Ralph Lauren,” said the fashion journalist Teri Agins, author of the books “The End of Fashion” and “Hijacking the Runway.” “There isn’t any question that he’s a genius.”Still, she added, “What goes up must come down.”Lately, the descent has been steep. Since hitting a peak of $188 almost exactly three years ago, the company’s shares have plunged by more than half, to less than $90 this week. After beating Wall Street earnings and revenue estimates for 14 consecutive quarters, in February 2015 Ralph Lauren stock had its biggest one-day plunge ever when it missed estimates and lowered forecasts. Since then it’s gotten worse.Revenue growth went from a healthy 7 percent in 2014, to 2.2 percent in 2015, to a negative 2.8 percent in fiscal 2016, which ended in April.Can Ford’s shrink-to-grow approach work for a fashion brand?Investors have been skeptical, apparently unnerved by the prospect of imminent losses and worse-than-expected forecasts. Ralph Lauren shares, which closed at $96.33 on June 6, the day before the company announced its “Way Forward” plan, were trading around $91 on Thursday.But turnarounds take time. Ford slashed its work force by 30,000 and closed 14 manufacturing plants while spending heavily to introduce new products and improve quality. It used the entire company, even the Ford logo, as collateral to borrow $25 billion.There was no immediate payoff for Ford shareholders. Ford lost more than $30 billion over the next three years, as the financial crisis and ensuing recession slammed auto sales. Ford stock went from over $8 a share in 2006 to less than $2 in 2009, a far worse decline than Ralph Lauren. But Ford returned to profitability in 2010. Last year it had $8.7 billion in profit, and shares traded this week at $12.40, a more than sixfold gain.Ralph Lauren is starting its turnaround effort from a much stronger position than Ford. The company is still making a profit — $582 million last year. Its reputation for quality remains high, unlike that of the American automakers before the financial crisis. It doesn’t have a heavily unionized work force.But Ralph Lauren’s profit was over $1 billion just two years ago. The company has been buffeted by forces beyond its control, including declining department store sales, the rise of fast-fashion chains, the shift to online retailing, and greater price consciousness among consumers. In trying to adapt while still pursuing growth, Ralph Lauren seems to have lost its focus.“I’d say the Ralph Lauren brand has become a little confused,” said Neil Saunders, an analyst and managing director at Conlumino, a retail research and consulting firm. “The design credentials are still very strong, but the brand has become a little staid. Brands that have seen growth, like Burberry and Ted Baker, have something Ralph Lauren doesn’t, which is a bit of quirk. Ralph is still carving out his traditional aesthetic. It’s consistent, but younger consumers aren’t as interested as they used to be.”Mr. Lauren has transformed his company into a quintessential American label with its ubiquitous logo of a mounted polo player holding a raised mallet.Ms. Agins agreed that millennials, in particular, were causing problems for traditional fashion brands. “They look at these fast-fashion brands, like Zara and Uniqlo, with good fashion and good prices, and ask, ‘Why pay more?’” she said. “They don’t feel they need the cachet of a Ralph Lauren. They’ll cherry-pick, buy a little of this and that, rather than stay with the high-end brand.”Mr. Larsson is fully aware of the problems. “We had diluted our focus with too many brands and too many initiatives,” he acknowledged. As part of the “Way Forward,” he said the company would close 50 underperforming locations, lay off 1,000 employees, eliminate three layers of management, streamline the supply chain and concentrate on just three core brands.Mr. Larsson said his aim was to make the company even more of a reflection of Mr. Lauren by taking it closer to Mr. Lauren’s original vision.“It fascinated me, in going through the archives, that Ralph’s early work is the closest to the core,” Mr. Larsson said. “I looked at the imagery of Ralph and his family in Montauk. That resonates with what consumers dream of today. In interviews with young people and influencers, it struck me that they admire what Ralph stands for, and that he has remained true to his creative idea. We’re as relevant to a new creative generation as we were to an older generation. We just have to make it current and evolve the product, marketing and shopping experience.”That can be a delicate balancing act. Two years ago, Coach, the venerable American leather goods concern that shares many of Ralph Lauren’s problems and opportunities, embarked on a similar turnaround aimed at slashing costs and lifting profitability. Under the direction of a new chief executive, the Coach veteran Victor Luis, it said it would close numerous stand-alone stores in malls, improve its department store locations, open a new flagship in New York City, revamp its product line to re-emphasize its classic roots and curb discounting.Investors were skeptical then, too, sending Coach shares plunging from $50 to just over $34.Two years later, it’s too soon for Coach to declare victory, but signs are encouraging. In April, Coach beat analysts’ estimates and said third-quarter profit jumped 22 percent and revenue increased 11 percent. Shares were over $40 this week, up 23 percent this year. (Last month, Ralph Lauren poached Jane Nielsen, Coach’s chief financial officer, to help oversee the “Way Forward.”)Ralph Lauren is a stronger brand than Coach.“I only took this job because I believe in the brand and I believe that Ralph’s original vision can be more relevant than ever,” Mr. Larsson said. “We just need to execute in a way that brings that to life for the consumer.”“There are a lot of headwinds beyond their control, and they have their work cut out for them,” Ms. Agins said. “But Ralph Lauren has the brand, the quality, and the American cool factor. They can fix it.”Advertisement