AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonJeffrey Katzenberg, the chief executive and controlling shareholder of DreamWorks Animation, cut himself a nice side deal at the expense of DreamWorks shareholders, according to a recent lawsuit filed in Delaware Chancery Court over the company’s $3.8 billion sale to Comcast’s NBCUniversal.The lawsuit, filed on behalf of the City of Ann Arbor Employees’ Retirement System in Michigan, looks at Mr. Katzenberg’s ownership of DreamWorks, which has dual-class stock. The Class B shares have 15 votes a piece, and the Class A shares each have one vote. Mr. Katzenberg owns all of the Class B stock. Together with his Class A shares, he has 60 percent of the vote for DreamWorks despite owning only 11.5 percent of the total outstanding shares.This became an important fact in the negotiations over the sale of DreamWorks. According to the company’s Securities and Exchange Commission filings, DreamWorks had been in talks to sell itself to a private equity firm at $35 per share. Mr. Katzenberg would have maintained a management role and retained ownership of the newly private company. The deal was close to being completed, with the crucial terms agreed on, when Comcast popped into the scene in April with a higher offer.Mr. Katzenberg, through his voting control, has the ability to singularly approve or reject any transaction. Comcast agreed to pay $42 per share, but only if Mr. Katzenberg provided his written consent to the deal immediately after the signing of the agreement. This would mean that Comcast would get a locked up transaction, but it would be at the expense of precluding all other bidders from making an offer. In contrast, the private equity firm was paying less but would have allowed for other shareholders to vote on the transaction and would have set aside a period where others could bid. But Comcast specifically and repeatedly stated in the negotiations that it would only pay this higher amount if Mr. Katzenberg immediately approved the transaction.This type of consent, which prevents all other competing bids, is valid under Delaware law. (I wrote about the reasons in 2008.)On announcement of the sale of DreamWorks, Mr. Katzenberg approved the transaction. The deal is awaiting regulatory approvals before completion, but it is a fait accompli.There was a second arrangement, though. Unlike the private equity deal, Mr. Katzenberg will part ways with Comcast except for one area. He agreed to provide consulting services for two years to a new subsidiary of Comcast that will house two DreamWorks divisions, AwesomenessTV, a web-based entertainment company, and DWA Nova, which provides the 3-D animation technology.In exchange for this two-year consulting gig, Mr. Katzenberg will receive 7 percent of the profits from the venture in perpetuity.This appears to be a pretty sweet deal. It is reminiscent of one of the greatest ever cut in entertainment. In 1987, Universal Studios granted Steven Spielberg a right to receive 2 percent of the revenue from Universal Studios in Florida and Japan in perpetuity in exchange for consulting services. It is estimated that the payouts from this amazing deal are approaching $50 million a year and that Mr. Spielberg has received more than $1 billion.The likely payout for Mr. Katzenberg would not be as rich, but still, AwesomenessTV was valued at $650 million in a recent funding round.This is the subject of the lawsuit. Under Delaware law, a controlling shareholder is permitted to receive a higher amount for selling shares than the other shareholders. DreamWorks, anticipating this issue, has in its certificate of incorporation the following language that in the event of a sale:Each share of Common Stock shall be entitled to receive Equivalent Consideration (as defined herein) on a per share basis. As used herein, the term “Equivalent Consideration” shall mean consideration in the same form, in the same amount and with the same voting rights on a per share basis.The lawsuit claims that the consulting arrangement violates the requirement that all shareholders must get the equivalent amount in a sale.But the person who drafted this provision in DreamWorks’ certificate of incorporation also anticipated this argument. It specifically states that any consideration to be paid or received in a sale for employment, consulting, severance or other arrangement shall not be included in the determination of “equivalent consideration.”This would seem to end the matter as Mr. Katzenberg is, after all, receiving compensation pursuant to an employment contract. The requirement of equal payment exempts consulting and employment arrangements. However, it may not be so simple. The plaintiff will argue that the lawyers are simply trying to sidestep the requirements and that the “consulting arrangement” is disguised compensation for the shares themselves. Mr. Katzenberg was to receive ownership of the private company and the upside in the private equity deal. This is another way to pay him that amount.As evidence for this claim, the plaintiff will look to the potentially high fee Mr. Katzenberg could receive and the short length of the consulting job, and the fact that the arrangement has attributes of equity. For example if Mr. Katzenberg dies, the interest immediately vests. In addition, there are provisions for Mr. Katzenberg to liquidate the amount and receive a lump-sum payment for its future value.No doubt, the lawyers carefully drafted this to make the consulting arrangement as independent as possible. The outcome of this lawsuit will depend on whether the plaintiff can document that this is indeed backdoor compensation. And no doubt, Mr. Katzenberg will argue that the price – well above what the private equity firm would have offered — shows that money was not left on the table.More generally, we once again highlight issues with dual-class stock that benefits a single shareholder (the topic could be a column series). When DreamWorks first sold shares to the public in 2004, this provision was put in specifically to prevent a controller like Mr. Katzenberg from profiting at the expense of other shareholders. Mr. Katzenberg controls the vote but only about 11.5 percent of the equity, a motivation for him to try to gain from this differential.The consulting deal looks rather rich and just the thing this provision was trying to avoid. It may not violate the charter, but Mr. Katzenberg appears to be on his back foot to show that it does not violate the spirit of this arrangement. It is yet another black mark on dual-class voting shares.Advertisement