AdvertisementSupported byIn DebtBy Stephen J. LubbenIt does not seem quite fair: The scattered remains of the prior financial crisis are still hanging around, and yet there are already stirrings of another.That Britain, the land of Sherlock Holmes, would somehow reject the rational choice and decide to leave the European Union seems to have never occurred to investors worldwide, and now we see the consequences.Italian banks, already on thin ice, are now in obvious need of new capital. The European Union will permit an Italian TARP only if pain is imposed on junior investors. Some of those junior investors are Italian retail bondholders – shades of Lincoln Savings and Loan there – which makes that politically unpalatable.At the same time investors in British real estate have finally realized that relocation of myriad financial jobs, combined with a general Brexit inspired recession, will not do wonders for property values. The rush to the doors threatened a classic asset price spiral, so instead the property funds have cut off the investor’s liquidity.It is entirely predictable that this blocking of investors’ withdrawals will extend to the remaining funds in the sector. The question is whether it spreads beyond the real estate sector to other illiquid British assets.The real problem is that Brexit became something like Mary Poppins’ handbag – fitting the dreams and aspirations of all of its followers, no matter how inconsistent. As one blogger has aptly noted, Boris Johnson promised “continued free trade and outward U.K. travel freedoms while restricting inward freedom of movement; he stopped just short, however, of offering rainbows, pony rides and lemonade for everyone free of charge.”That, of course, means there was not an actual plan for Brexit, as such a plan was impossible. Now Conservative leaders are stalling for time, and the Labour party has decided it is time to stop pretending to be a coherent party.The overall effect is to simply freeze investment decisions until that uncertainty is resolved. All at the expense of the British, and even larger European, economy.In the long run, perhaps the Brexit proponents will nonetheless think it was all worth it. But in the short term, we are facing several months of eerie familiarity.Advertisement