AdvertisementSupported byWorkspaceAs told to Patricia R. OlsenGeneral Assembly and gyroscopesWe’re in a complex originally constructed in 1941 for what was then the Sperry Gyroscope Company, a defense plant. It also housed the United Nations before it relocated to Manhattan. In 2013, we leased about 94,000 feet on four floors and had an architectural firm gut the traditional office interior and design a modern space.When we decided to move from Melville, Long Island, three years ago, I considered Manhattan, but this location was close to the city and great for attracting employees from New York, Connecticut and New Jersey.The traffic reportMy office overlooks the Northern State and Grand Central parkways, and on a Friday in the summer I can tell you what the traffic to the Hamptons looks like. It also has a cool terrace where I can hold meetings or just go outside and think.Pieces of the pastI love sitting at my desk. I’m very superstitious, so when my original desk from 23 years ago wouldn’t fit through the door, I had the designer cut it up and use bits and pieces in a new, modern desk. This one is cleaner-looking and has more room to store my papers.1. Bankruptcy-sale bargainMy green marble conference table, which I bought at a bankruptcy sale for $200, is good for large meetings. It’s another piece of furniture I’ve had since starting the company in 1993. We’ve displayed some of our food and personal care products on shelves near the table, such as Celestial Seasonings tea, Terra chips, Ella’s Kitchen baby food and Tilda rice.Classroom chicI have three areas in my office for meetings. In one, four modern school desks designed by Ideo in California are lined up in front of my desk, and yes, people sit in them for meetings. I sit in them, too. It feels like I’m back in school, always learning. I misbehaved in school, and I can misbehave here, too. The desks have wheels and are very comfortable. Several colleagues and visiting executives have asked me where they can order them and purchased their own.2. Sesame Street smartsThere’s a black leather couch where I can hold meetings, but we have to move Elmo and Grover. We’re an official sponsor and licensee of Sesame Workshop and use their characters on a lot of our food products. It’s lonely at the top, and these two give good advice.3. Skate from a sports greatI’m from Canada and love to watch and play hockey any chance I get. The ice skate was a personal gift from a hockey great and fellow Canadian, Mike Bossy of the New York Islanders.4. Jabs, hooks and uppercutsThe glove stands for being mentally and physically fit. I often work out at Punch Fitness Center. I try to box almost every morning. Madison Square Garden, with whom Hain Celestial has a partnership, gave me the glove.5. Goal sessionsI bought a Super Chexx Bubble Hockey Game for the office, which is a conversation piece, but it’s also good if I want to get up and walk around. I like to be active when I’m brainstorming, or if two people play, it gets the competitive juices flowing.Headlines, hoops and hockeyThe TV is on every day. I usually watch CNBC or Bloomberg Television. If a few of us are here late at night we’re usually watching a basketball game or maybe a hockey game.6. An elephant for luck My late mother-in-law gave me the clock at the start of my career at Hain. She was a smart and successful businesswoman in Asia, and she was also very lucky. She imparted a lot of wisdom and cultural tradition, like this elephant, which came from India. Elephants bring good luck. She often gave me items with an elephant theme that I continue to display around my office.Balancing work and playWork has to be fun. An office has to have energy. There’s good light, good color and a good vibe here. We work hard, too.Interview conducted and condensed by Patricia R. Olsen.Advertisement