AdvertisementSupported byAdvertisingBy Alina TugendCould an eye emoji become as beloved — and recognizable — as Smokey Bear?The Advertising Council certainly hopes so. The emoji is part of its antibullying campaign “I Am a Witness” and is one way that the council, which was founded more than 70 years ago as a vehicle to pump up patriotism during World War II, is trying to evolve in the social media age.The first creator of public service announcements in the United States — its slogans like “Loose Lips Sink Ships,” “Only You Can Prevent Forest Fires,” “A Mind Is a Terrible Thing to Waste” and “Friends Don’t Let Friends Drive Drunk” have become part of the American lexicon — the Ad Council now competes with often-sophisticated social media campaigns from many special-interest groups.“Clearly, there is much more noise out there,” said Lisa Sherman, president of the Ad Council, which is based in New York. “But good storytelling breaks through.”Storytelling was a focus of the “Love Has No Labels” campaign, released this year. In a video made for the campaign, passers-by approach a screen in a public square. They sequentially see pairs of skeletons dancing, kissing, playing or hugging. Pairs of people, whose movements were coordinated to the skeletons via sensors, then emerge from behind the screen — couples and friends of every color, age and gender.“The idea is to raise attention to people’s unconscious bias,” Ms. Sherman said. The ad demonstrates not only the changing nature of topics the Ad Council addresses, but also the different modes in which its work is presented.The roughly three-minute video for “Love Has No Labels” was the first ad released by the Ad Council on the Facebook page for the popular website Upworthy. The video was shared about 1.4 million times and liked 3.3 million times, “far more than any other video on Upworthy,” according to Jennifer Lindenauer, a spokeswoman for the website. The ad was then released on the Ad Council’s YouTube channel and other online outlets. Shorter versions appeared on cable and network TV.Those interested in learning more about the message were directed to lovehasnolabels.com, where they could take a quiz evaluating their unconscious biases. About 80,000 people had taken the quiz as of October, said Ellyn Fisher, senior vice president for public relations and social media at the Ad Council.The Ad Council also recently announced “Creators for Good,” a partnership with, among others, 15 of the top YouTube “influencers” — each one has nearly 1.5 million followers on YouTube and other platforms. Each of the influencers, including iJustine and Meghan Rienks, will adopt one of the council’s campaigns.But even as the Ad Council is facing more competition, it remains the dominant player in the arena.Currently, it has about 120 employees and has, since its inception, helped develop thousands of public service announcements, maintaining 35 to 40 active campaigns at one time, Ms. Sherman said. It receives its funding mostly from corporations and individuals, and time is donated by top ad agencies and media outlets; its revenue has increased over the last 15 years, to $44.3 million in 2015 from $17.8 million in 2000, Ms. Fisher said.The additional revenue, she said, is needed because the costs associated with multiplatform campaigns have gone up. The council also receives the equivalent of $1.6 billion each year in donated media time and space, she said, making it a leading advertiser in the United States.Each campaign is sponsored by a national nonprofit organization or federal government agency, and costs per campaign range from $500,000 to more than $1 million to cover production and other expenses. That price tag puts the council out of reach for many nonprofits, said Vicky Rideout, whose company, VJR Consulting, does media-related research for nonprofits and academic organizations.While any organization can create a social-action video, the vast majority fail to grab the public’s attention. “There’s a large amount of inventory competing for space,” Ms. Rideout said.The Ad Council’s well-known name and reputation, as well as the time and talent it receives via donations, give its campaigns a significant advantage.Still, while some of the mascots the Ad Council has helped develop are beloved — Smokey Bear and McGruff the Crime Dog — the organization’s focus on individual action rather than systemic change has its critics.Take the memorable ad from 1971 that showed a Native American shedding a single tear when he saw people litter.Its tag line: “People start pollution. People can stop it.”The campaign, which was sponsored by the nonprofit Keep American Beautiful, has long troubled some environmental groups.“The Keep America Beautiful campaign and the Ad Council keeps people from looking at the institutional players that cause social problems,” said Mike Ewall, founder and director of Energy Justice Network. “People are satisfied if they put litter in a trash can or fasten their seatbelts.”Some of the same objections have been leveled at other campaigns, like Michelle Obama’s “Let’s Move” initiatives, which the Ad Council has done some work for. Critics say that it tells people that exercise is the main component of health, and that it does not examine the food industry’s role in promoting fat- and sugar-laden food.“I admire the work the Ad Council does,” said Wendy Melillo, an associate professor of communication at American University and the author of “How McGruff and the Crying Indian Changed America.” “I just think it could be better. It has a very large megaphone and is the nation’s premier organization for public-service advertising. Networks will take the Ad Council’s ads over another organization, but these campaigns are far more complicated and nuanced than the public understand, and far more affected by special interests than people realize.”Ms. Sherman countered that by funding these ads through the Ad Council, the corporations are investing in social good. “If it helps corporations, that’s O.K. with us,” she said.And, she said, the role of “each ad is a specific call to action, a communications message that can really move the needle.”With issues that are particularly complex, moving the needle has its obstacles.For example, regarding the topic of gun control, Ms. Sherman said, “The way we threaded the needle was, if you’re going to have guns, keep them safe and locked up.” The ad, which began airing about two years ago, has the slogan “They Are Counting on You.”Remaining both apolitical and memorable, in an advertising market that becomes seemingly more trendy and crowded by the day, is no easy feat. But the Smokey Bear character has managed the transition to the social media age pretty well. He has more than 300,000 likes on his Facebook page and 31,000 Twitter followers.Advertisement