AdvertisementSupported byBy Reed AbelsonDan Price, the chief executive of a small Seattle company who promised last year to pay every one of his workers at least $70,000 a year, has won a court battle with his brother.On Friday, Judge Theresa B. Doyle of Superior Court in King County, in Washington State, ruled that Dan’s brother, Lucas, had failed to prove his claims that Dan had overpaid himself and inappropriately used a corporate credit card for personal expenses. The judge also ordered Lucas to pay Dan’s legal fees.Mr. Price had come to symbolize one executive’s stand against the widening gap between workers’ pay and executive compensation. “The market rate for me as a C.E.O. compared to a regular person is ridiculous, it’s absurd,” Mr. Price said then. He described himself as a man with simple tastes and whose extravagances ran to snowboarding and picking up the occasional bar bill.The lawsuit offered a glimpse into what the judge called “the volatility and downward spiraling” of the brothers’ relationship. The two founded Gravity Payments, a fast-growing privately held credit card payment processing company, in 2004. By 2008, the brothers had agreed to restructure the company so that Dan would have a majority 60 percent share and serve as its chief executive. Lucas would no longer be involved in the day-to-day management but would retain a 40 percent interest in Gravity Payments as a minority shareholder.In recent years, the brothers have sparred over how to compensate Dan and how to pay dividends to shareholders. When Dan announced his plan to pay everyone at Gravity Payments a minimum salary of $70,000, Lucas objected, saying he was not informed of the decision until shortly before it was made public. A company spokesman said the lawsuit was filed two weeks after Dan announced the salary plan, which brought the company an unexpected crush of attention.Lucas’s lawyer, Gregory J. Hollon, had argued that Dan had failed to meet the terms of the agreement reached when the brothers decided to restructure the company. “This is an unfortunate and troubling story of ego, resentment and an unwillingness of Dan Price to live with a deal he and his brother struck in 2008,” Mr. Hollon said, according to an article in The Seattle Times.In a statement on Sunday, Lucas Price said: “I am shocked and disappointed with the decision and I will be considering my options.”Dan Price praised the ruling in a statement posted to his Facebook page but also emphasized his ties to his brother. “My love for my brother is unconditional,” he said, noting Lucas’s “incredibly valuable role” in creating Gravity Payments.“I’m thankful for the opportunity to put this challenging time behind us,” he said.Advertisement