AdvertisementSupported byBy Neal E. BoudetteDETROIT — A second federal agency is investigating a fatal May 7 crash in Florida involving a Tesla automobile operating in Autopilot mode that failed to stop when a tractor-trailer turned in front of it.The National Transportation Safety Board, which more typically looks into accidents involving trains, planes, buses and ships, confirmed on Sunday that it had sent a team to investigate the crash, which killed Joshua Brown, an entrepreneur from Ohio.The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and the Florida Highway Patrol are already investigating the accident. The traffic safety agency, the nation’s main auto safety regulator, is trying to determine whether the car’s Autopilot system was at fault.Mr. Brown, 40, was driving his 2015 Tesla Model S in Williston, Fla., when it hit a truck that had turned left and was crossing in front of the car. Tesla, whose vehicles have the ability to send the company data about their operating conditions, has said that the Autopilot was engaged at the time, and that neither Mr. Brown nor the system activated the brakes before impact.The involvement of the transportation safety board signals even greater scrutiny of the accident and Tesla’s Autopilot technology. The agency specializes in determining the causes of crashes and is familiar with the self-driving technology used in trains and airplanes.“I think it’s very appropriate that N.T.S.B. is doing this, and I welcome it,” said Joan Claybrook, a former National Highway Traffic Safety Administration administrator who continues to advocate improved auto safety. “I think there’s an urgency to find out if these autonomous systems are at fault because companies continue to push hard to get the technology onto the road.”The traffic safety agency has also sent investigators to Pennsylvania to examine a July 1 crash that involved a Tesla Model X sport utility vehicle that scraped a guardrail and a concrete barrier before rolling over. The driver, Albert Scaglione, an art gallery owner from Michigan, told the Pennsylvania State Police that the vehicle had Autopilot engaged at the time of the crash. Tesla has said it has no evidence that Autopilot was in use in that accident.Tesla cars equipped with Autopilot can use a camera and radar to steer themselves for short periods of time, and can detect other moving vehicles and slow or even stop in traffic under certain conditions. But drivers are warned when they turn it on to keep their hands on the steering wheel and remain alert.The National Transportation Safety Board and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration have some overlap in their responsibilities, but the safety board is primarily an investigative agency that determines the causes of accidents. The traffic safety agency regulates motor vehicle safety and investigates for defects that pose safety risks.The agencies will share information about the fatal Florida crash, but “each will do its own investigation,” Christopher O’Neil, a safety board spokesman, said.Neither the traffic safety agency nor Tesla responded to requests for comment.Christopher A. Hart, chairman of the transportation safety board, said recently that self-driving cars had great potential to reduce highway fatalities, but had also raised concerns about the risks of systems that require drivers to intervene as dangerous situations develop.Doing so may be “challenging” for drivers who are not highly trained and may be fatigued or distracted, he said in a speech in Washington before news of the fatal Florida crash.“I think people are wildly underestimating the complexity of bringing automation into the system involving Joe Public,” Mr. Hart added.Advertisement