JULY 10, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.28 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.38 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.26 percent.The following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Hillsborough County, Fla., $213.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Clark County, Nev., $285.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Muncie Sanitation District, Ind., $64 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.New York Transitional Finance Authority, $250 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementPalm Springs Unified School District, Calif., $100 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission, N.J., $78.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementWisconsin, $84.9 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Wichita Water and Sewer Utility, Kan., $103.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.American Municipal Power, $100 million of Meldahl Hydroelectric Project revenue bonds. Bank of America.Texas A&M University System. $130.7 million of revenue financing system bonds. Estrada Hinojosa.California Infrastructure and Economic Development Bank, $50 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Chabot-Las Positas, Calif., Community College District, $250 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Bend, Ore., $60 million of water revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Bryan, Tex., $82.8 million of electrical system revenue refinancing and improvement bonds. Barclays Capital.Del Mar College District, Tex., $64.8 million of limited tax bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.El Dorado Irrigation District, Calif., $62 million of revenue refinancing bonds and certificates of participation. Citigroup Global Markets.Freddie Mac, $145 million of multifamily variable rate certificates. Citigroup Global Markets.Independent School District No. 748 Sartell-St. Stephen Public Schools, Minn., $105.4 million of general obligation school building bonds. Robert W. Baird.AdvertisementIndiana University, $68.4 million of student fee bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Issaquah School District No. 411, Wash., $150 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Los Angeles Community College District, $300 million of general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Louisville/Jefferson County Metro Government, Ky., $538.1 million of health system revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Massachusetts Port Authority, $223 million of revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Miami-Dade County, Fla., $300 million of subordinate special obligation refinancing bonds. Ramirez.Michigan Department of Transportation, $613.9 million of grant anticipation refinancing bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Missouri Housing Development Commission, $70 million of single family mortgage revenue bonds. George K. Baum.Montgomery Independent School District, Tex., $64.7 million of school building and refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Municipal Authority of Westmoreland County, Pa., $225 million of municipal service revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.New York City Transitional Finance Authority, $800 million of future tax secured subordinate bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.AdvertisementPort of Morrow, Ore., $325 million of transmission facilities revenue bonds. Bank of America.Public Finance Authority, Nev. $134 million of Renown Regional Medical Center Project hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.South Carolina Jobs-Economic Development Authority, $60.2 million of tax-exempt lease revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.State of New York Mortgage Agency, $123.4 million of mortgage revenue bonds. Ramirez.Successor Agency to the Westminster Redevelopment Agency, Calif., $73.4 million of bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.George Washington University, $250 million of debt securities. Barclays Capital.University of Vermont Educational and Health Buildings Finance Agency, $89 million of green bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Village of Freeport, N.Y., $160 million of tax-exempt and taxable bonds. Roosevelt & Cross.West Virginia Economic Development Authority, $51.7 million of energy revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.A version of this article appears in print on July 11, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Auctions of Treasury Securities Set for the Week of July 11.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.