By THE NEW YORK TIMESNOV. 22, 2015
With a host of contentious issues to discuss, American and Chinese trade officials are scheduled to conclude three days of top-level talks on Monday. The talks, known as the United States-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade, are being held in the southern Chinese city of Guangzhou and are being led by Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker and Wang Yang, the vice premier of China in charge of trade. Against the backdrop of the recently unveiled Trans-Pacific Partnership, which has been championed by the Obama administration but excludes China, the annual bilateral talks are expected to address issues like market access, particularly for agricultural companies. —Neil GoughOn Tuesday, at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department will offer its updated estimate of economic growth in the third quarter. The initial estimate, released in late October, showed the economy growing at an annual rate of 1.5 percent over July, August and September. Wall Street economists say they expect that number may be revised upward to 2 percent, helped mostly by inventory adjustments and slightly better data for residential investment.Also out Tuesday morning is the Standard & Poor’s/Case-Shiller home price index for September, which is expected to show a 0.6 percent increase, bringing the 12-month rise to just over 5 percent. Home prices started 2015 strongly, and have done well in recent years, but appreciation has slowed recently. Still, the real estate market remains healthy. —Nelson D. SchwartzTiffany reports earnings on Tuesday, and investors are bracing for more signs of weakness as the jeweler struggles with the strong American dollar and sluggish tourist spending in the United States. A luxury slowdown has also weighed on Tiffany’s top line. Shares in Tiffany are down 30 percent this year, amid a general slump in retail stocks, and investors expect the pain to continue. —Hiroko TabuchiAdvertisementHewlett-Packard will release its earnings for the fourth quarter of 2015 on Tuesday. It will be something of a valedictory moment: On Nov. 1 the entity became two companies. One, HP Inc., primarily sells personal computers and printers. HP Enterprise, or HPE, sells computer hardware and software for business.AdvertisementWall Street, which is sometimes less than sentimental, will focus on factors affecting the two companies, like the Christmas outlook for PCs, and the speed with which Meg Whitman, the chief executive of HP who is now running HPE, can get her company into the era of cloud and mobile computing. —Quentin HardyWhile a $1.5 billion cash infusion from Quebec’s public pension management fund last week stabilized the financial situation at Bombardier, the Canadian plane and train maker will still have much to explain at an investor day in New York on Tuesday.The new cash came on top of $1 billion from the Quebec government and both were made necessary by the company’s struggling plan to move up from business and regional jets to compete directly with Boeing and Airbus in the airliner market. Among other things, investors will be looking for signs that Bombardier can find a substantial number of buyers for its overdue and overcost C Series jets. —Ian AustenPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A cave toddler and his pal, Arlo, an 11-year-old Apatosaurus, will bring a test for Pixar over the Thanksgiving holiday. For the first time in its 29-year history, the Disney-owned animation studio will release two films in the same calendar year: “The Good Dinosaur” arrives on Wednesday, just five months after “Inside Out” collected $851.3 million worldwide.Dinosaurs are a safe box office bet — just look at “Jurassic World” — and every movie Pixar has ever released has been a blockbuster. But whether “The Good Dinosaur” continues that streak will depend on how audiences (and critics) respond to an expensive reworking of the film. As it grappled with creative troubles, Pixar fired a director, replaced most of the voice cast and repeatedly pushed back the movie’s release date. —Brooks BarnesDometic Group, a Swedish maker of appliances for boats and recreational vehicles, is expected to begin trading on the Nasdaq stock exchange in Stockholm on Wednesday after pricing its initial public offering. The company, which is owned by the Swedish private equity firm EQT Partners, could be valued at as much as 15 billion Swedish kronor, or about $1.7 billion, in its offering. —Chad BrayOn Wednesday, at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department will release the latest figures on personal income and spending in October. Economists are looking for a solid 0.4 percentage point increase in income, with spending up 0.3 percent. If that is correct, it suggests growth in the final quarter of the year may be reasonably strong and also provides another piece of evidence for policy makers at the Federal Reserve who believe the economy is strong enough to withstand an increase in interest rates. —Nelson D. SchwartzBlack Friday, the day after Thanksgiving that has long been the start of year-end sales, now starts on Thanksgiving evening, when many of the nation’s largest retailers open for business with aggressive deals in top categories like electronics, appliances and apparel. But going against the grain this year are retailers like REI, which garnered kudos among an increasingly sale-fatigued public for announcing that its stores would remain closed on Black Friday. (The outdoor-clothing brand urged shoppers to spend the day doing outdoor activities or with friends and family instead.)Still, Black Friday remains one of the biggest shopping days of the year, and analysts see sales and traffic as a barometer for the health of the wider economy. The National Retail Federation, an industry trade group, expects sales in November and December to rise 3.7 percent to $630 billion, less than last year’s 4.1 percent gain. —Hiroko TabuchiA version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Black Friday, a Test for Pixar and HP Earnings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.