By THE NEW YORK TIMESJULY 10, 2016
Here’s a look at the week ahead.ECONOMYNegotiators from the United States and the European Union will increase their efforts to agree on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership this week in Brussels. The two sides have held 13 previous rounds of trade talks since President Obama announced the initiative in early 2013, but they have struggled to reach agreement in a number of crucial areas like agriculture and financial services. There is strong opposition to an agreement in Germany and Austria, among other nations, where critics warn that a deal would hand more power to corporations and hobble health and environmental protections. Proponents say a deal would strengthen trans-Atlantic economies and help Europe and the United States set standards the rest of the world could follow. James KanterPLANE MANUFACTURINGThe Farnborough International Airshow, which begins on Monday in Farnborough, England, and runs through Sunday, will showcase planes from various manufacturers, including Boeing’s new 737 Max. Boeing is also hosting a special pavilion commemorating its centennial. The much-delayed F-35 fighter jet, America’s cutting-edge warplane, is also expected to make an appearance. The public show takes place on Saturday and Sunday, and will feature drone races and flight displays that include many generations of aircraft — like World War I fighters and the Airbus A380 passenger plane — and even wing walkers. A full schedule of events and exhibits is available on the show’s website. Zach WichterBUDGETSThe European Union’s determination to enforce its budget rules is expected to be the focus of a meeting of finance ministers on Tuesday. Spain and Portugal have repeatedly failed to rein in their deficits, according to European regulators. If ministers support that finding on Tuesday, the regulators would have leeway to take the step of imposing fines as high as 0.2 percent of gross domestic product. Spain and Portugal could still wriggle off the hook or receive only a symbolic fine. France has won leniency in the past, and regulators are wary of imposing punishments on austerity-weary countries, like Spain and Portugal, because that could add to the unpopularity of the European Union. James KanterECONOMYThe Bank of England on Thursday will announce its monthly decision on a crucial interest rate. The Monetary Policy Committee has left its benchmark rate steady at 0.5 percent since March 2009, but Mark Carney, the bank’s governor, said recently that the bank may be forced to cut the rate this summer as it grapples with economic uncertainty created by Britain’s vote to leave the European Union. Without prejudging what the committee might do, Mr. Carney said on June 30 that he believed that “the economic outlook has deteriorated and some monetary policy easing will likely be required over the summer.” As the pound has fallen to its lowest level against the dollar in three decades, some analysts have said the committee could move as soon as this coming week to cut rates to 0.25 percent. But a rate cut is seen as more likely in August, when the central bank is expected to announce its updated forecast for inflation. Chad BrayAdvertisementEARNINGSJPMorgan Chase will kick off bank earnings season when it reports second-quarter results on Thursday morning. Wells Fargo and Citigroup report on Friday. Investors will be listening for what top bank executives say about the impact of Britain’s decision to leave the European Union on their businesses. Bank shares have been hit hard since Britain’s referendum vote last month, and investors fear that market turmoil and prospects for a deeper economic slowdown in Europe will affect American banks. Michael CorkeryECONOMYChina is expected on Friday to report that its economic growth has continued to slow in the most recent quarter. China’s increase in gross domestic product probably slowed further from the first quarter, when it expanded 6.7 percent compared with a year earlier. The country’s economy is being bogged down by weak global demand for its exports and a deep industrial slowdown at home. The government has tried to stem the decline by pumping huge amounts of new credit into the economy and directing the equivalent of hundreds of billions of dollars in new lending to projects like rails, roads and other infrastructure, but growth continues to slow despite this spending increase. Neil GoughAdvertisementRETAIL INDUSTRYExcluding automobiles, retail sales data, which will be reported on Friday, is expected to have risen slightly in June, after a robust climb in May. Rachel AbramsA version of this article appears in print on July 11, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. and E.U. Trade Talks, and China’s G.D.P. Report.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.