AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberIt has been a year of fundamental change for Politico.Already dealt one of the most chaotic election years in history, the news organization has also had to confront a series of prominent departures, including that of one of its co-founders. Its signature early-morning newsletter, Politico Playbook, long under the purview of the star reporter Mike Allen, is for the first time in new hands.But in a sign of perhaps less turbulent times ahead, the company has selected one of its own to lead its Washington newsroom.On Monday, Politico said Carrie Budoff Brown, one of the organization’s first reporters, who now oversees its European newsroom, would be its next editor, succeeding Susan B. Glasser.Ms. Glasser will lead the newsroom through the presidential election. Ms. Brown, currently working in Brussels, will return to Washington in late summer and is expected to take over the newsroom after the election.“There have been moments in Politico’s history when we really benefited from an outside perspective,” John Harris, Politico’s editor in chief, said in a conference call with reporters. “In this instance, I’ve thought we’ve never had more talent residing in our newsroom right now, and I thought it was a wonderful thing to be able to find someone within our newsroom.”Ms. Brown’s appointment most likely comes as a relief to a newsroom that has been buffeted recently by change. Jim VandeHei, a co-founder of Politico, stepped down as chief executive in April, and Mr. Allen, one of the site’s best-known journalists, plans to leave after the presidential election. Other senior executives, including Roy Schwartz, Politico’s chief revenue officer, have also departed.Mr. Allen has also ended his run on his newsletter, Playbook, which he has handed over to the reporters Anna Palmer and Jake Sherman. Daniel Lippman, who has helped Mr. Allen write the newsletter since 2014, is also involved.During the conference call, Ms. Brown, who served as Politico’s White House correspondent from 2009 to 2014 before becoming managing editor of the organization’s European newsroom, said she thought Politico was uniquely positioned to cover the changeover of power in Washington.“I think we are poised to dominate the next chapter in American politics,” she said. “That’s going to be my obsession, starting now.”In selecting Politico’s next editor, Mr. Harris said in a memo to employees that he was looking for someone who understood the organization’s values and who, above all, thought journalism should be a “joyfully collaborative enterprise.”He called Ms. Brown, who previously worked at The Hartford Courant and The Philadelphia Inquirer, “a star reporter turned accomplished editor” who deserved much of the credit for successfully starting Politico Europe over the last year and who had a “vision for the next chapter” of Politico’s journalism.“Carrie has Politico in her blood, and her passion and protectiveness is like that of a parent for a child,” he said.Ms. Glasser, a founding editor of Politico Magazine, has been the editor of Politico since 2014. During her tenure, the company expanded in the United States and also into Europe, redesigned its website and expanded its coverage with profiles and investigations.Ms. Glasser will take on a strategic role with the company from Jerusalem, where she is moving with her husband, Peter Baker, a New York Times reporter who was recently named Jerusalem bureau chief. She will also become Politico’s chief foreign affairs columnist.Advertisement