AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinMONTCLAIR, N.J. — When Gretchen Carlson was asked how her last week had been, she looked down at her wrist.“These are the bracelets I wear on my arm,” Ms. Carlson, the former Fox News anchor, said in an interview on Tuesday.She stood up from her seat at the dining room table here in the home of her lawyer, Nancy Erika Smith, and pointed to three silver bracelets, each emblazoned with text.“Carpe diem,” she said, reading the words. “Brave. Fearless.”Speaking publicly for the first time since she filed a sexual harassment lawsuit against her former boss, Roger Ailes, the Fox News chairman, Ms. Carlson repeated the allegations she made in the suit, saying Mr. Ailes made sexual advances toward her and later fired her because she complained about sexual harassment at the network.The suit, filed last Wednesday, has transfixed the world of television news, in which Fox News stands as the most successful cable news network and Mr. Ailes, 76, reigns as one of the most powerful men in media.In the interview, Ms. Carlson, 50, said that by filing the suit, she “finally felt it was time” to speak up, she said.“I just wanted to stand up for myself, first and foremost,” she said. “And I wanted to stand up for other women who maybe faced similar circumstances.”Mr. Ailes has denied all the charges, and said that because of poor ratings her contract was not renewed.In a statement, a Fox News spokeswoman, Irena Briganti, said: “Between chasing ambulances and headlines, the truth seems to have been run over by Nancy Erika Smith.”Dressed in a black shirt and black pants, Ms. Carlson was guarded, and choked up several times during the interview. She was sitting between her two lawyers, Ms. Smith and Martin Hyman, and often deferred to them, looking at them before responding and asking at one point, “Do I answer the question?”In the interview, Ms. Carlson said she complained of harassment as early as 2009, when Steve Doocy, then her co-host on “Fox and Friends,” pulled her arm down while on the air to “quiet” her, Ms. Carlson said.She said in her complaint, and repeated on Tuesday, that she had several meetings with Mr. Ailes over the years in which her complaints of harassment went nowhere, and that he said demeaning things to her himself.“I think you and I should have had a sexual relationship a long time ago, and then you’d be good and better and I’d be good and better,” Mr. Ailes told her, according to the lawsuit.Likewise, according to the suit, Mr. Ailes labeled her a “man hater,” and instructed her to “learn to ‘get along with the boys.’”That sort of language from Mr. Ailes, she said on Tuesday, was “continuous,” adding that she had “between six and 10” meetings with him in which he talked about her body and heard her complaints of harassment.When asked if there was a problem within the Fox News culture, she said: “Everyone knew how powerful Roger Ailes was. I certainly felt intimidated by that.”She added, “The culture of ‘Fox and Friends’ was intimidating to me.”Ms. Briganti, the Fox News spokeswoman, said that Ms. Carlson “never filed a formal complaint about sexual harassment to the H.R. department or to the legal department.”When asked whom Ms. Carlson complained to about sexual harassment other than Mr. Ailes, Ms. Smith said: “We are not going to try the case here. Yes, she made a complaint, and to whom and in what format, that’s something that will come out at trial.”Ms. Carlson was a host of Fox’s morning show from 2006 to 2013, when she was moved into an afternoon time slot, which she viewed as a demotion though Fox contends it was not.Though Ms. Carlson regularly prevailed in the ratings for her time slot, she did lose the 2 p.m. hour in the 25- to 54-year-old bracket important to advertisers in the month of June. Fox said on Tuesday that ratings for her old time slot had risen in the weeks since her last day in June.Ms. Carlson said any ratings weakness was not brought up to her, nor was she told about it when she was let go.“It was cold and calculating,” she said of the meeting in June when she was informed her contract would not be renewed. “It took 30 seconds, there was no ‘Thank you for your service of 11 years,’ and there was absolutely no discussion of ratings.”In a series of handwritten notes that Ms. Carlson sent Mr. Ailes late last year (which Fox has shared with several news organizations), she told him that she would love to stay at Fox and asked for additional opportunities at the network.Asked why she was seeking better assignments if she felt she was a victim of harassment, she said: “I think it’s hard when you’ve been a victim — you keep thinking things are going to get better.”In recent days, more than a dozen prominent Fox News personalities — Greta Van Susteren, Sean Hannity, Neil Cavuto and Kimberly Guilfoyle, among others — have spoken out to defend Mr. Ailes.Some, like Ms. Guilfoyle, a host of “The Five,” questioned Ms. Carlson’s motivations, wondering why Ms. Carlson waited until she was forced out to file a harassment lawsuit.Of her former colleagues supporting Mr. Ailes, Ms. Carlson said, “They’re still being paid by Fox.”Last week, Mr. Ailes’s lawyers filed a motion for the suit to be moved from a New Jersey Superior Court to a federal court and to be submitted to arbitration, claiming Ms. Carlson breached her contract by trying to bypass the arbitration process that is stipulated in her employment contract.Ms. Smith said they will file a response to Mr. Ailes’s motion next week.Meanwhile, Fox News’s parent company, 21st Century Fox, has tapped the law firm Paul, Weiss to conduct an internal investigation of the matter, according to two people with knowledge of the inquiry.Last weekend, New York Magazine published a story featuring six women — two of whom were named — who said that Mr. Ailes had sexually harassed them between the mid-1960s and 1989 (Fox News was founded in 1996). In interviews with The New York Times, two of the women, Kellie M. Boyle and Marsha Callahan, both said they were victims of improper behavior.Ms. Carlson, the Fox anchor, says that Roger Ailes, the chairman of Fox News, fired her from the network after she refused his sexual advances.Ms. Callahan, 73, said she met in 1968 with Mr. Ailes, who was then a producer on “The Mike Douglas Show,” and while auditioning to be a model on the show, Mr. Ailes said that if she wanted a chance to be cast, she would have to “go to bed” with him. She did not, she said.Ms. Boyle, 54, said that Mr. Ailes propositioned her after a 1989 dinner in Washington, where they talked about her career in political communications.“He said, ‘Well, when you want to play with the big boys, you have to lay with the big boys,’” she said in an interview.In response, Mr. Ailes’s lawyer, Barry Asen, said in a statement: “It has become obvious that Ms. Carlson and her lawyer are desperately attempting to litigate this in the press because they have no legal case to argue. The latest allegations, all 30 to 50 years old, are false.”Since Ms. Carlson filed her lawsuit, videos have circulated online of how she made occasionally uncomfortable expressions when her male co-hosts on “Fox and Friends’’ talked about women on the air.In 2012, after a disparaging comment about women made by her co-host Brian Kilmeade, Ms. Carlson walked off the set in apparent protest. She later said she was joking.Ms. Carlson said on Tuesday that she was called by “management” to find out if she was joking. She suggested it was less of a question, and more of an instruction.“A lot has been said that I’ve been sending signals and signs on occasion,” she said. “That’s true. I was sending a signal about how I felt.”Asked why she filed the lawsuit and what she hoped to achieve from it — money, vindication, punishment for Mr. Ailes? — she responded without consulting her lawyers.“To stand up for what happened to me and what was the truth,” she said.Advertisement