AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedOne of the biggest deal makers at Cravath, Swaine & Moore, a pre-eminent law firm on Wall Street, is poised to take over its top spot — and become the first woman to do so.Cravath plans to announce on Thursday that Faiza J. Saeed, one of the two leaders of its mergers practice, will become the 16th presiding partner in the nearly two-century history of the law firm. Ms. Saeed’s 25 years at the firm have been punctuated by some of the most prominent corporate deals in recent history.“I’m very honored to take the role,” she said in a telephone interview. “I think it’s going to be a great opportunity to focus more on Cravath, both on our strategy and maintaining our excellence.”She is scheduled to assume the post, the highest at Cravath, on Jan. 1, though she will first serve as deputy presiding partner through the end of the year. Ms. Saeed will take over from fellow corporate partner C. Allen Parker, who will return to advising clients full time after spending three years in the top role.And she will be in very rarefied company.Among the nation’s 200 largest law firms in 2015, only three had women as managing partners, according to a study by the National Association of Women Lawyers.The move is being made as Cravath — which traces its lineage to William H. Seward, the secretary of state under Abraham Lincoln — has continued to ride high among Wall Street’s cadre of deal makers. It has never been one of the biggest law firms in the country, with just 471 lawyers in Midtown Manhattan and London.But it has long been involved in some of the biggest transactions, and is considered a leader in the legal field in matters like compensation. When Cravath raised its pay for first-year lawyers to $180,000, several of its peers followed suit, as is the norm in the American law industry.The firm placed second in Thomson Reuters’ ranking of legal advisers on mergers last year, after Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, with 97 announced transactions worth $926.5 billion under its belt.For the first half of this year, Cravath ranked seventh, with 40 transactions worth $166.6 billion.The elevation of Ms. Saeed signals in part the continued centrality of mergers work at Cravath, after another prominent deal adviser, Scott Barshay, decamped for Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison in April. Still, about 43 partners work out of Cravath’s corporate department, which is responsible for deals.Ms. Saeed has been one of Cravath’s top rainmakers for years. She helped defend Time Warner against an unwanted takeover bid by Rupert Murdoch and advised on DreamWorks Animation’s nearly $4 billion sale to Comcast. Almost two decades ago, she helped advise Vivendi in its $34 billion takeover of Seagram.She advised Precision Castparts as it negotiated its $37 billion sale to Berkshire Hathaway, the biggest takeover by Warren E. Buffett. She is working on Yahoo’s efforts to sell itself, a process that may end in a multibillion-dollar sale as soon as next week.“I’ve always found Faiza to be a confident and trusted adviser in the best and toughest of times,” said Kurt N. Simon, the global chairman of mergers and acquisitions at JPMorgan Chase.Blair Effron, the co-founder of the independent investment bank Centerview Partners, said, “She’s a legal therapist in that she understands clients very well, and she guides them to the answer that is best for them in a businesslike and practical manner.”Several of Ms. Saeed’s clients also offered praise.Jeffrey Katzenberg, the chief executive of DreamWorks Animation, said: “For more than 20 years, Faiza has been one of my most trusted advisers. I’ve leaned on her steady and strategic counsel throughout the entire history of our company, from our founding all the way through to our recent deal with Comcast.”A native of Northern California, Ms. Saeed graduated from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1987 with degrees in economics and molecular biology and from Harvard Law School in 1991. She joined Cravath, was made partner in 1998 and became co-head of the mergers team, with Robert I. Townsend III, three years ago.Though she will be presiding partner, she will not need to oversee day-to-day management of the firm. Cravath has an executive director, Donna Rosenwasser.But Ms. Saeed will be responsible for shepherding the firm’s overall strategy as law firms are grappling with changes in the industry, including clients seeking to clamp down on legal fees. Yet Cravath is better positioned than most of its peers, Ms. Saeed argued. “There are a lot of things changing in the profession, but we’ve always been very nimble,” she said. “I’m hoping I can help in that regard.”She acknowledged she would be joining the small club of women who lead major law firms, one that includes Jami Wintz McKeon, the chairwoman of Morgan Lewis, and Kathryn J. Fritz, the managing partner of Fenwick & West.Women accounted for about 18 percent of the equity partners at American law firms, according to the study by the National Association of Women Lawyers.“It would be great to see more,” Ms. Saeed said of female leaders in the legal industry.Elizabeth Olson contributed reporting.Advertisement