
UPDATED July 19, 2016

Investors will be listening for what top bank executives say about the impact of Britain’s decision to leave the European Union on their businesses. Bank shares have been hit hard since Britain’s referendum vote last month, and investors fear that market turmoil and prospects for a deeper economic slowdown in Europe will affect American banks. – Michael CorkerySECOND-QUARTER RECAP: The Wall Street bank earned more from bond trading and its expenses fell. Net income rose to $1.63 billion, or $3.72 per share, from $916 million, or $1.98 per share, a year earlier, when Goldman set aside $1.45 billion for regulatory and mortgage-related legal settlements. – ReutersSECOND-QUARTER RECAP: The second-largest U.S. bank by assets set aside more money to cover potential bad loans and earned less on its loans. It had been expected to be one of the worst-performing banks in the quarter, in part due to its large exposure to the energy sector. – ReutersSECOND-QUARTER RECAP: The bank reported a 14 percent fall in quarterly profit, much smaller than the 25 percent drop Michael Corbat had warned of early in June. – ReutersSECOND-QUARTER RECAP: The No. 1 U.S. bank by market value set aside more money to cover potential loan losses. – ReutersSECOND-QUARTER RECAP: The nation’s largest bank reported better-than-expected financial results and gave credit to improvement in the American economy. JPMorgan said that it was seeing broad demand for loans from consumers and businesses in the United States.  “That speaks well for the U.S. economy and the consumer in particular,” said Marianne Lake. “We’re expecting continuing moderate growth and demand in the U.S.” — Nathaniel Popper SECOND-QUARTER RECAP: The world’s largest publicly traded money manager reported a small decrease in its profit, as volatile market conditions and political uncertainty kept many investors on the sidelines. Still, even in a fraught investment environment, the company’s assets under management — its most telling financial indicator — grew by 4 percent, ending the quarter at $4.9 trillion. – Landon Thomas Jr. Advertisement