AdvertisementSupported byIn DebtBy Stephen J. LubbenThe Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit has broadly agreed with the federal bankruptcy court in New York that a certain type of bankruptcy asset sale can bar successor liability claims, but disagreed with the bankruptcy judge’s “no harm, no foul” analysis in the specific case of General Motors and its failure to give proper notice to some potential creditors. Most people will focus on the second point of Wednesday’s decision, but the first has much more significance in the long run for Chapter 11 practice.The case involves General Motors’ notorious and lamentable decision to hide from the public a flaw in its ignition switches  that could unexpectedly shut off engine power, with potentially lethal consequences, until several years after its bankruptcy case had concluded.In the G.M. bankruptcy case, perhaps the most prominent example of the collateral damage caused by the 2008 crisis in the banking sector, the assets of “old G.M.” were sold to “new G.M.,” which was a newly created company supported by the American and Canadian governments.The sale order that the New York bankruptcy judge Robert Gerber approved in 2009 provided that all of old G.M.’s creditors were prohibited from going after the new G.M. for claims, save for certain express exceptions. But nobody knew about the ignition switch problem then.When Judge Gerber did learn about the ignition switch problem a few years later, he was frustrated. Ultimately, though, he concluded that he would have largely barred tort creditors from asserting claims against G.M. anyhow. That’s where the Second Circuit disagreed with the lower court.The appellate court ruled in a decision released Wednesday that the would-be G.M. plaintiffs should be given every benefit of the doubt. That is, because G.M. hid the problem with the ignition switches, the sale order would not bar their tort claims in this case, as the potential plaintiffs had never been told they might have defective cars.But the appellate court’s broader point makes quite clear that sale orders can normally bar most categories of “successor liability” claims. That is, bankruptcy sale orders can protect the buyer from claims arising out of the bad acts of the seller.This is an important point, since it stands in direct contrast with certain state court decisions, particularly a 1999 decision by the New Jersey Supreme Court. It means that in cases where the selling company is not hiding anything, the bankruptcy process will be able to maximize the value of the debtor’s assets, as those assets will be sold free from the anchor of state law tort claims.The decision will provide further impetus for using the federal bankruptcy process to sell assets. In short, bankruptcy has become, and will remain, a kind of “super” foreclosure system for large corporations.Advertisement