By DAVID JOLLYJULY 13, 2016
When it comes to bond yields in Europe, it seems there is no such thing as too low.Germany on Wednesday became the first country in the eurozone to sell 10-year debt with a negative yield at an auction, effectively ensuring that investors lose money over the life of the bond.It is the latest twist in the upside-down world of bonds, in which global investors are increasingly willing to pay governments for the privilege of holding their debt. The trend reflects the rising uncertainty over global growth, which is prompting concerned investors to pile into all types of safe havens.In the case of German bonds, the negative rates reflect the worries over the potential repercussions from Britain’s vote to leave the European Union, which analysts have warned will lead to slowing growth across the region. With Europe barely having recovered from a financial crisis, fears have risen over the impact “Brexit,” as Britain’s exit is known, will have on economic expansion in the region.As it looks to bolster growth, the European Central Bank has also slashed interest rates into negative territory. And it is printing money to buy bonds.AdvertisementSuch pressures are pushing bond rates down around the world. Across the globe, $11.7 trillion of government debt — generally considered to be among the safest of assets — is trading at negative yields, according to Fitch Ratings.AdvertisementThe impacts of negative yields are still not fully understood by analysts or policy makers. The global financial system is largely predicated on above-zero rates, with banks, investment houses and pension funds all depending to some extent on what has traditionally been a given.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Investors are now willing to buy bonds at levels that were unimaginable not so long ago,” said Philippe Gijsels, chief investment officer at BNP Paribas Fortis in Brussels.“It’s a new reality,” Mr. Gijsels said, “and I think it will be like this for quite a while.”In a sign of that new reality, Germany sold 4.8 billion euros, or $5.3 billion, of 10-year notes at an auction on Wednesday, with a yield of minus 0.05 percent. That was the first time the securities were priced at a negative yield at auction. Yields on existing German 10-year debt — the benchmark for the eurozone — fell into negative territory in June.Switzerland on Wednesday sold 42-year bonds priced to yield minus 0.02 percent. Elsewhere, bond yields — even when in positive territory — are historically low. British 10-year notes now yield around 0.7 percent, close to a new low, compared with around 2.1 percent a year ago.A version of this article appears in print on July 14, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Germany Sells Bonds That Yield Under Zero.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.