
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

JULY 13, 2016
America’s banks require more creativity. That conjures up fears of accounting tricks or overly complex products with zero economic or social benefit. The truth is simpler: Return on equity at the nation’s lenders and investment banks remains too low, and banks need to try something new.At least income statements for the second quarter ought to look better than they did for the first three months of the year. JPMorgan Chase, which kicks off earnings season on Thursday, Goldman Sachs and Bank of America look ready to beat their first-quarter showings, according to Thomson Reuters estimates. Stock deals, the trading environment and mortgage refinancing have all picked up.The trouble is, earnings are set to be worse than in last year’s second quarter, meaning few banks are likely to earn enough to beat their cost of capital — which is usually pegged at around 10 percent. Of the larger banks, only Wells Fargo and U.S. Bancorp are likely to do so. That has often been the case for several years now. Executives everywhere have been trying to improve matters by dumping unprofitable businesses, crimping expenses or laying off staff.That can do only so much when top-line growth is stagnant. Citigroup and JPMorgan have pushed their efficiency ratios — which measure how much per dollar of revenue is spent on operations — below 60 percent. That is impressive; the average of banks tracked by Credit Suisse analysts is around 63 percent. But it is not enough to breach the cost-of-capital threshold. And few are likely to manage to do so in the next couple of years, according to Thomson Reuters estimates.Creating, or more likely adapting, new technology is therefore becoming all the more crucial. It is already happening, in part thanks to so-called fintech start-ups in payments and lending, highlighting how inefficient many traditional processes are. Technology can help speed up decisions, improve customer service and eliminate swaths of attendant costs.But it is slow going thanks to regulation or institutional inertia. Those banks that manage to speed up modernizing their businesses are likely to earn the enduring respect of their shareholders. They should get cracking.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »