AdvertisementSupported by The Associated PressDETROIT — A federal appeals court has decided that people injured in crashes caused by faulty General Motors ignition switches can sue the company even if they were hurt before G.M.’s 2009 bankruptcy filing.Under terms of the bankruptcy, the company that emerged, referred to as New G.M., was indemnified against most claims against the prebankruptcy company, or Old G.M. Last year, Judge Robert E. Gerber of United States Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan ruled that most ignition-switch claimants could not sue the new company for damages.But the ruling on Wednesday by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit overturns most of that decision and allows prebankruptcy claims to proceed, including some lawsuits that say G.M.’s actions caused the value of its cars to drop.“This takes G.M. from the bottom of the ninth back to the first inning in regards to financial liability for the ignition switch defect,” said Robert C. Hilliard, who represents some plaintiffs against G.M.G.M. said it was reviewing the ruling, but it noted that it did not decide whether the prebankruptcy claims were valid.“Many of the claims we face have been brought on behalf of car owners who want to be compensated even though they have not suffered any loss,” a company statement said.Mr. Hilliard said hundreds of injury and wrongful death lawsuits were delayed while the appeals court considered the case, including 265 that he had filed. General Motors’ filings with securities regulators say another 101 lawsuits are pending that claim G.M.’s actions caused vehicle values to decline.But some of the strongest cases against G.M. may have been among about 400 already settled by the compensation expert Kenneth R. Feinberg, for a total of $594.5 million.G.M. says those who settled gave up their rights to sue, but Mr. Hilliard said he would look into whether some of those claims could be reopened.In 2009, Judge Gerber allowed General Motors to emerge from bankruptcy free from prebankruptcy liabilities. But plaintiffs’ lawyers said that G.M. had misled the court seven years ago because it knew about but failed to disclose the ignition switch problems.The switches, which can slip out of the run position and cause cars to stall unexpectedly, are linked to at least 124 deaths and 275 injuries.In its ruling on Wednesday, the appeals court said that the desire to move G.M. through bankruptcy quickly was “laudable,” but that it did not do away with basic constitutional principles.“Due process applies even in a company’s moment of crisis,” the court said.Advertisement