By SYDNEY EMBERJULY 13, 2016
During a recent meeting at Time Inc.’s headquarters in downtown Manhattan, Jeff Karp extolled the virtues of Sports Illustrated Play, the company’s new digital division focused on youth sports.Known as SI Play, it would revolutionize youth sports, Mr. Karp, the division’s chief executive, said by videoconference from his office in Redwood City, Calif., the way Amazon had done for shopping and Google for search. Using the SI Play platform and its app, parents would be able to sign their children up for teams, follow their schedules and buy merchandise. A new mobile app would allow them to communicate with other parents and update game scores in real time.“This is going to be a huge opportunity,” Mr. Karp said.It was a bold statement, and one that reflected the seismic shift in strategy this once-iconic magazine company is undertaking as it struggles to gain its footing in an increasingly digital world. Since its spinoff from Time Warner two years ago, Time Inc.’s stock has tumbled roughly 30 percent. The company’s revenue has declined every year since 2011. In a move endowed with outsize symbolism, the company moved last year from the Time & Life Building in Rockefeller Center, its storied home of more than five decades, to new offices that sit in the shadow of One World Trade Center.“There’s no evidence that they’ve turned things around,” said Tim Nollen, a senior analyst at Macquarie Capital. “Anyone in this country would look at it as a magazine publisher that is struggling.”AdvertisementHoping for something of a resurgence, the company on Wednesday named Alan Murray, the editor of Fortune, as its chief content officer, overseeing all of Time Inc.’s editors in the United States. Mr. Murray, 61, a former deputy managing editor of The Wall Street Journal, succeeds Norman Pearlstine, 73, a former editor in chief of Time Inc. who rejoined the company in 2013 and helped guide it through its spinoff.AdvertisementTime Inc. also announced a broader reorganization of its advertising sales and brand development teams, including the creation of dedicated digital sales teams, as it shifts its attention away from its print products, which include magazines like Time, People, InStyle, Entertainment Weekly and Sports Illustrated.Other publishers who long depended on print advertising are also fighting to survive. But Time Inc.’s approach has at times seemed frenetic. It has pushed aggressively into areas like mobile, events, video and native advertising. In the last year, it purchased HelloGiggles, a lifestyle site aimed at women, and Viant, the parent company of Myspace. In addition to SI Play, it recently introduced Instant, a mobile platform featuring videos about celebrities. At an annual presentation to advertisers in May, it announced plans for an ad-supported streaming video service from People and Entertainment Weekly.Those moves, however, do not mask disappointing financial numbers. Last year, circulation revenue declined 5 percent and advertising revenue fell 7 percent. Newsstand revenue fell 8 percent.In the first quarter of 2016, Time Inc. reported a net loss of $10 million.“Yes, the results are bad,” Mr. Nollen, the analyst said. Still, he added, “I think they’re doing the right thing to convert to a better media business beyond trying to make print magazines.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There have been bright spots. Digital advertising revenue increased 23 percent in the first quarter of 2016, and its sites now draw about 110 million unique visitors a month in the United States, according to comScore.In an interview, Mr. Murray shared little on his vision for the editorial direction of the company. Instead, he said he intended to focus on new forms of advertising and the company’s mobile and social strategies. “We have to think differently about how we relate to our advertisers,” he said. “We need to help brands tell their stories,” he added, echoing what has become an oft-repeated marketing catchphrase.Joseph A. Ripp, the chief executive of Time Inc., said that the company would continue to focus on its digital side and would also look to grow its international business even as it faced headwinds. Mr. Pearlstine, who will stay at the company as vice chairman, will focus on international opportunities, Mr. Ripp said.The leadership shuffle will most likely bring more questions about the future of Time Inc.’s magazines. At the very least, Mr. Murray’s new role means the company will have to find a new editor for Fortune, a big-name brand whose luster, like that of other magazines in Time Inc.’s portfolio, has faded even as its website continues to publish scoops that can send the financial media world into a tizzy.AdvertisementMr. Murray, who joined Fortune two years ago, will remain the magazine’s editor until the company names his successor.For all of the emphasis on digital growth, Mr. Ripp insisted that the company was still devoted to its magazines.“Print will continue to shrink slowly over time,” Mr. Ripp said. “What we’re simply doing is we’re not defining ourselves as a print company as we were before.”A version of this article appears in print on July 14, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.