AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael Cieply and Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — In the face of threatened legal action from the football star Jameis Winston, CNN did not back away from broadcasting “The Hunting Ground,” a documentary about sexual assault on college campuses that has stirred controversy since its January debut at the Sundance Film Festival.“CNN is proud to provide a platform for a film that has undeniably played a significant role in advancing the national conversation about sexual assault on college campuses,” the network said in a statement. The film was shown on the network at 8 p.m. Eastern time on Sunday. Mr. Winston, a quarterback for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, is the focus of a segment in “The Hunting Ground.” While attending Florida State University in 2012, Mr. Winston was accused of sexual assault. He asserted his innocence, did not face criminal rape charges and was cleared of violating Florida State’s student code of conduct. The movie, directed by Kirby Dick and produced by Amy Ziering, asserts that Mr. Winston received preferential treatment from officials.A lawyer for Mr. Winston, John Boudet, sent a letter to CNN on Friday stating that the film “manipulates, misstates or simply omits facts to present a false narrative.” The letter, first reported by The Hollywood Reporter, outlines grounds for a possible lawsuit. Mr. Boudet did not respond to phone and email queries on Sunday.On their website, Mr. Dick and Ms. Ziering dismiss critics of the film, saying, “The truth is on our side.” In a statement on Sunday afternoon, they said: “We were not surprised by the lengths Mr. Winston and his lawyer were willing to go to stop the public from seeing this film. When documentaries bring to light uncomfortable truths about powerful people and institutions, it’s not unusual for them to wage aggressive campaigns to silence their critics. We fully stand behind Erica Kinsman and all of the survivors who bravely spoke out in our film.” Ms. Kinsman is Mr. Winston’s accuser.Mr. Winston’s threat of legal action came a week after 19 Harvard professors attacked “The Hunting Ground,” saying it distorted the university’s handling of a sexual assault claim. The accusation eventually resulted in a conviction for misdemeanor nonsexual assault against a student, Brandon Winston, who was not named in the film, but was named in the professors’ letter. Late last week, Brandon Winston’s defense team and supporters unveiled an elaborate website that explains their view of his actions and takes “The Hunting Ground” to task for what it calls “critical omissions and distortions.” Mr. Dick and Ms. Ziering last week challenged the Harvard professors’ action in a text message to The New York Times. It said, in part: “Everything in ‘The Hunting Ground’ is accurate and we fully stand behind our Harvard Law survivor’s account of her assault, as well as the accounts of all the subjects in our film.”Escalating denunciation of “The Hunting Ground” comes as the movie is being considered by members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for a so-called short list of 15 documentary feature Oscar contenders, which will be released next month. The film’s critics have also had an eye on the large viewership CNN may bring to a film that found only a tiny audience in theaters when released in February by the Weinstein Company’s digitally oriented Radius-TWC unit. As of March, for instance, another controversial documentary, “Blackfish,” about the treatment of whales in captivity, had been seen by about 27 million viewers on CNN, though it had just $2 million in ticket sales when Magnolia Pictures released it in 2013. Those pushing back against “The Hunting Ground” have seized on an email, cited in the letter to CNN, in which an investigative producer for the documentary wrote, in soliciting an interview from an accuser, “We do not operate the same way as journalists — this is a film project that is very much in the form of advocacy for victims, so there would be no insensitive questions of the need to get the perpetrators’ side.” CNN has said that its airing of “The Hunting Ground” will be accompanied by “extensive associated coverage” that will give “full and fair treatment” to the subject of sexual assault on college campuses. Typically, the network would air a film twice on the day of its premiere. But “The Hunting Ground” is airing only once on Sunday, partly because the associated discussion stretches the presentation to three hours, and partly because terror attacks and alerts around the world have given live news programming an especially high priority.Last Monday, John Thrasher, the president of Florida State University, publicly declined to join a CNN panel discussion of the film and sexual assault, saying that he and other university presidents had considered the session to be “window dressing” for a film they judged to be unfair and misleading. “We wanted no part in making CNN look like it was being fair while allowing the network to kick the can of journalistic integrity down the road.”John Koblin contributed reporting from New York.Advertisement