AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelEven as Philippe P. Dauman, Viacom’s embattled chief executive, pushes ahead with plans to sell a 49 percent stake in the company’s Paramount Pictures film and television studio, it appears increasingly unlikely that such a deal will come to fruition.In a statement on Friday, National Amusements — the private theater chain company owned by Sumner M. Redstone — called Paramount one of Viacom’s most valuable assets and said that pursuing a sale now could hinder Viacom’s business prospects as well as limit the value of a sale for all of Viacom at some point in the future.Mr. Redstone, who is 93 and in poor health, controls about 80 percent of the voting shares in Viacom and CBS through National Amusements, which was started by his father. Mr. Redstone has said through representatives that he disapproved of a deal for Paramount, yet until Friday neither he nor National Amusements specifically outlined why.The fight over Paramount is one of the crucial battlegrounds in the war over the future of Mr. Redstone’s $40 billion media empire. At an investor conference last month, Mr. Dauman pitched the Paramount deal as one that would ignite growth at Paramount, which has delivered dismal results. The studio has been a drag on Viacom; the company’s stock price has plunged nearly 30 percent in the last year.Mr. Dauman said that the transaction would involve a strategic global investor and unlock $10 or more per Viacom share.War has spread across the empire of Sumner Redstone, one of the entertainment industry’s most tenacious titans. At stake are the fortunes of his family and confidants, as well as the fate of Viacom and CBS.In its statement, National Amusements said that its goal for Viacom was to create long-term value for all shareholders and that “undertaking a Paramount transaction at this time would undermine rather than advance this goal.”“The complexities of joint ownership of Paramount would undoubtedly extend far beyond Paramount into other divisions of Viacom and limit its options to take on partners,” the statement, which was distributed by a spokesman, Stephen Labaton, said. “Further, any Paramount transaction would chill the interest of parties that may be interested in a larger transaction involving all of Viacom.”In a statement, Lex Suvanto, a Viacom spokesman, said that the company would continue to “pursue the best outcome for all of Viacom’s shareholders.””It is beyond understanding that National Amusements would continue in its attempts to interfere with a potential transaction that would create a unique opportunity to drive long-term value for both Paramount and Viacom, without even waiting for the facts,” Mr. Suvanto said.Earlier this week, it was reported that Viacom was in talks with the Dalian Wanda Group of China to sell a 49 percent stake in Paramount. The development was confirmed by a person briefed on the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity.National Amusements disclosed in June that it had changed Viacom’s corporate bylaws to prevent Viacom from selling any part of Paramount without unanimous approval of Viacom’s board, effectively putting a moratorium on any potential sale. A Viacom spokesman called the actions “illegitimate,” stating that they stemmed from “invalid changes” to the National Amusements’ board.Court fights now are being waged in three states, all centered on the question of whether Mr. Redstone has the mental competency to make decisions about his business empire and whether he is being manipulated by his daughter, Shari Redstone. A Massachusetts judge is expected to make a decision soon on whether the suit before him should be dismissed, or if it should proceed, whether it should stay in Massachusetts or move to California, where Mr. Redstone lives.Brooks Barnes contributed reporting.Advertisement