By LIZ ALDERMANJULY 14, 2016
When Theresa May pulled up at 10 Downing Street as Britain’s new prime minister, her husband, Philip, got out of the car and waited for her to emerge. He trailed slightly as the pair walked toward cameras. Then he quietly stood far to the side as she gave her speech.Philip May, Britain’s new first gentleman, has rarely been a man for the limelight. But as a wealthy financier suddenly thrust onto one of the world’s biggest stages, he is quickly confronting the scrutiny that accompanies the modern political power couple.The news had barely broken that Ms. May was taking office when headlines questioning a possible conflict of interest blared in the news media.“Theresa May’s husband is a senior executive at a $1.4 trillion investment fund that profits from tax-avoiding companies,” The Independent, a British newspaper, wrote, reminding readers that Ms. May had vowed to make multinational companies pay their fair share of taxes. The article was picked up by the likes of RT, a Russian news website, and quickly made the rounds on Twitter.AdvertisementAnd his ties to the world of finance are bound to invite close inspection, as Ms. May delves into the negotiations over Britain’s departure from the European Union. She will play a pivotal role in deciding the fate of The City of London and the rest of London’s financial industry. He may have access to market-moving information as the spouse of one of the world’s most powerful leaders.AdvertisementFor now, the optics of the criticism appear to outweigh the substance.Mr. May, a sunny man with a penchant for tailored pinstripe suits and brogues, does not run a rabble-rousing hedge fund that takes major stakes in companies and aggressively demands change from management. His employer is not a big bank that was bailed out by the government. He is not a high-flying, fast-moving trader.The new first man of Britain works at a low-key American investment firm as a client-relationship manager. He no longer invests money, but acts as a go-between with the firm’s clients.Founded in 1931, the firm, Capital Group  is a behemoth in the relatively staid world of mutual funds, overseeing more than $1.4 trillion in assets. It operates in the same business as Fidelity Investments, the large American money manager. Capital Group tends to avoid the limelight and investment fads, largely favoring a long-term buy and hold philosophy.That does not mean Mr. May’s work will not create potential conflicts — real or perceived — for the couple to navigate. Capital Group, which in the United States runs more than 40 funds selling under the brand name American Funds, is a top owner of shares in dozens of major multinationals like Microsoft, General Electric, JPMorgan Chase, Coca-Cola and Boeing. And the firm invests in Starbucks and Amazon, two companies Ms. May cited in a recent speech pledging to quash tax avoidance.Conjugal scrutiny is certainly to be expected, especially when there is the appearance of possible conflict.When Mary Jo White, the chairwoman of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, was nominated in 2013, Democratic lawmakers turned a spotlight on her husband, John W. White. Mr. White was then co-chairman of the corporate governance practice at Cravath, Swaine & Moore, representing many of the companies the S.E.C. regulates. Ms. White assured lawmakers that her husband’s role would not influence her work.Former President Bill Clinton has invited a raft of criticism, most recently for visiting Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch on her government plane. The meeting raised concerns that Mr. Clinton had compromised the Justice Department’s politically delicate investigation into Hillary Clinton’s email practices while she was secretary of state, and forced Ms. Lynch to defer to the F.B.I. on whether to bring charges in the case.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So far, the handful of dirt thrown at Mr. May has not stuck. The most damning comment to emerge in British news media from colleagues about Mr. May is that he is a fairly “head-down” type of guy, a politically quiet man who is happy to take a back seat.AdvertisementIf anything, he has invited comparisons to Sir Denis Thatcher, the low-key husband of Margaret Thatcher, Britain’s first female prime minister. Mr. Thatcher played a supporting role to the Iron Lady’s career in the spotlight, and famously stated that a partner should “always be present, never there.” Mrs. Thatcher said that being prime minister had been a lonely job, but “with Denis there, I was never alone.”Mr. May has stuck with his wife through rough times, including the loss of her parents soon after they were married. Ever since the pair met at Oxford, at a Conservative Party disco, he has quietly supported her as they both rose early in careers in the financial world.He was by her side as Ms. May pivoted into British politics 13 years ago, first getting elected to Parliament and eventually serving for six years in the difficult cabinet post of home secretary, overseeing the nation’s domestic security and immigration agencies. She has described him as her “rock.”Mr. May earned a reputation as an astute stock picker in the late 1990s when he ran pension funds for Prudential Portfolio Managers. He eventually moved to Capital Group in 2005, where he veered away from the money managing business and put his skills as a people person to use managing client relationships.As the new first gentleman, Mr. May will be scrutinized as never before, whether for his financial ventures or his sartorial choices. He can only hope the type of coverage likely to emerge in the British news media will be more along the lines of a headline that recently appeared Wednesday in the newspaper Metro right after Ms. May took office.“Theresa May’s husband steals the show in sexy navy suit as he starts new life as First Man,” the headline read.“Oh,” the article continued. “And let’s not forget those shoes.”A version of this article appears in print on July 15, 2016, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Bigger Stage for a Political Spouse Accustomed to a Supporting Role.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »