AdvertisementSupported byBy Nathaniel PopperJPMorgan Chase reported better-than-expected financial results on Thursday and gave credit to improvement in the American economy.The bank, the nation’s largest, said that it was seeing broad demand for loans from consumers and businesses in the United States. JPMorgan’s loan portfolio in the second quarter grew 16 percent from a year earlier and 3 percent from the previous quarter.“That speaks well for the U.S. economy and the consumer in particular,” said JPMorgan’s chief financial officer, Marianne Lake. “We’re expecting continuing moderate growth and demand in the U.S.”JPMorgan is the first of the big banks to announce its quarterly financial results, and its signs of growth appeared to please investors. Stocks rose after the results were released. Nine of the 10 industry sectors of the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index showed gains Thursday, and banks rose the most, 0.9 percent.For the second quarter, earnings at JPMorgan slipped to $6.20 billion, or $1.55 a share, from $6.29 billion, or $1.54 a share. Wall Street had been expecting earnings of $1.43 a share, according to a survey of analysts by Thomson Reuters.Improving results from its Main Street and Wall Street divisions helped push up the firm’s overall revenue 3 percent, to $25.2 billion, from a year earlier.Goldman Sachs reported a 78 percent jump in quarterly profit as the Wall Street bank earned more from bond trading and its expenses fell.On Tuesday, the bank’s chief executive, Jamie Dimon, wrote an op-ed article in The New York Times announcing that the company would be giving pay raises to its lowest-salaried employees.Mr. Dimon wrote that the move was driven in part by his optimistic outlook and would allow his employees to share in the economic growth.And on Thursday, the bank sounded a relatively optimistic note about the potential impact of Britain’s recent vote to leave the European Union.“We see this as a political and economic challenge, but not a financial crisis,” Ms. Lake said.Before the vote, Mr. Dimon had warned that JPMorgan might have to move thousands of employees out of Britain if it opted to leave the European Union.Ms. Lake said on Thursday that the company would decide on any moves only after the exact terms of Britain’s exit had been negotiated.“It’s very early days — things will unfold very slowly,” she said. “We would like to believe that we can continue to have our European franchise headquarters based in London.”The trading activity around “Brexit,” as Britain’s decision to exit the European Union is called, appears to have helped the results from JPMorgan’s trading divisions, and particularly its bond and fixed-income units. Those units have been struggling in recent years. In the second quarter, revenue from fixed-income markets rose 35 percent from a year earlier.Banks have been hit hard in the market turmoil during the first half of the year, and there has been concern about the potential impact of Britain’s exit.OpinionJamie DimonAdvertisement