By CONRAD DE AENLLEJULY 15, 2016
Stocks have shown no clear trend in more than a year; valuations are high and corporate earnings have been weak.The market at last reached new highs this month. It may well continue to rally, but it will have to do so against a backdrop of weak corporate earnings, a less accommodating Federal Reserve and lingering uncertainty surrounding Britain’s vote in late June to leave the European Union.The combination of difficult fundamental conditions and a stock market that has had such trouble getting over the hump could make this a good time for owners of equity portfolios to start playing defense. The most obvious way to do that is to sell stocks and hold more cash and other assets, but there are alternative strategies that can keep investors in the game. An important consideration in determining which, if any, defensive approach to use is whether an investor is focused on the short or long run.“Time horizon is key in terms of how much anyone will care about this,” said Christine Benz, director of personal finance at Morningstar, the investment research firm. “If you’re investing long term, you don’t get too worked up about it, but for people in or near retirement, it does seem reasonable to protect against the downside.”AdvertisementAssuming you want to buy actively managed mutual funds, her preferred tactic is “buying a fund that has played good defense in the past,” she said. Managers of funds that fit the bill tend to have an especially keen eye on value and will build a big stockpile of cash if they are unable to find enough stocks at reasonable prices. Examples that Ms. Benz offered included the F.P.A. Crescent and the AMG Yacktman Service funds.AdvertisementMark Balasa, chief investment officer of the financial advisement firm Balasa Dinverno & Foltz, also considers an investor’s time horizon important when it comes to protecting a stock portfolio against a decline. But in a way his strategy is almost the reverse of what Ms. Benz has in mind.If the aim is more tactical, to guard against an imminent decline, “that involves some form of timing the market, which is very difficult to do,” Mr. Balasa warned. But he is happy to hold funds with solid defensive characteristics for the long term, no matter the market environment.“Part of our screening process is to look at performance in up and down markets,” Mr. Balasa said.He advised against placing too much emphasis on defense, however. “If the downside capture is good,” he said, using a term for resilience in falling markets, “then the upside is capped. As a long-term hold, that’s a challenge.”Instead of looking solely for funds that hold up particularly well in downturns, Mr. Balasa seeks out those whose managers concentrate on high-quality stocks. This group would also largely figure in the first type of fund, although the overlap isn’t perfect. High-quality stock include those of companies with consistent earnings histories or feature strong dividend growth, or both.“We do that all day long, not just because we think the market is going to be all that volatile, but because long-term exposure makes perfect sense,” Mr. Balasa said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BlackRock’s iShares and Vanguard have exchange-traded funds that tweak benchmark stock indexes to put extra weight on high-quality companies, he noted, and asset management firms such as AQR and Dimensional Fund Advisors have mutual funds with similar approaches.Laurie Kamhi, managing director of LCK Wealth Management, considers funds that have demonstrated an “ability to find undervalued stocks for the long haul” — for instance by focusing on companies that have healthy dividend yields or a history of increasing their payouts — to be resilient in downturns. Some funds that she mentioned were T. Rowe Price Equity Income, Vanguard Dividend Growth, the Oakmark Fund and the Oakmark Equity and Income Fund.AdvertisementMs. Benz also liked Vanguard Dividend Growth and American Century Equity, another fund that emphasizes yield and quality.For investors who do want to make a tactical defensive play, Mr. Balasa suggested all-weather funds whose managers have the freedom to own defensive assets and take other steps to guard against declining stock prices, such as Pimco All Asset All Authority, G.M.O. Global Asset Allocation and BlackRock Global Allocation. But Mr. Balasa cautioned that the managers of those funds might not be inclined to take a defensive posture when their shareholders would like them to.Another way to play defense is to shift a portion of a portfolio into exchange-trade funds that specialize in sectors like health care and consumer staples that are coveted for their ability to outperform the market on the way down. A related tactic is to buy an exchange-traded fund that owns low-beta stocks, or those that are less sensitive than average to market movements.But sensible investment ideas often seem less so when more people have them, and that could apply to these types of funds right now. Ross Levin, founding principal of the advisory firm Accredited Investors, said that strong interest in low-beta stocks has elevated their price-earnings ratios to unacceptable levels.“If you look at multiples of the stocks that those funds tend to own, it’s questionable whether they will be as defensive as people who buy them think,” he said. “That safe sector is no longer safe as we understand it.”The same goes for other segments of the market that are ordinarily defensive, Ms. Benz said.“It looks like the high-quality patch is a little bit picked over, and staples look expensive,” she said. “That idea has been out there for a while. Investors gravitating to this strategy may be a little bit late.”As an opponent of market timing, Mr. Balasa worried about investors being a bit late or early in whatever tactical moves they made. But he acknowledged that a sober decision to become more defensive now could be wise to prevent becoming more defensive in a moment of panic later on.“Long term you’re better off being invested,” he said, but exercising more caution with a stock portfolio “can help on the behavioral-finance side. To tell someone to hang in there and stay the course wears thin very quickly” in a bear market. Having a more defensive posture all along, he added, “arguably doesn’t change clients’ risk profile all that much, but it allows them to stay the course and not harm themselves.”A version of this article appears in print on July 17, 2016, on Page BU22 of the New York edition with the headline: Picking the Right Kind of Protection.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.