AdvertisementSupported byOff the ShelfBy Paul B. BrownWhen it comes to planning your financial future, you may be starting in the wrong place.That’s the contention of a new book by Jason Vitug, a millennial who founded the lifestyle website Phroogal.He says mistakes tend to happen at the beginning of financial planning.In the book “You Only Live Once,” which is aimed at his generational cohort, Mr. Vitug writes that people usually start their financial planning with the wrong kinds of very specific goals. For example, they want to retire by age 64 with $1 million in savings or buy a house within five years, or a new car within two — or a combination of these targets.The problem with that approach, he says, is that those decisions end up governing many parts of your life — financial and otherwise — and may not be aligned with what is truly important to you. If extensive leisure travel gives your life meaning, for example, he points out that having a house and car could tie you down.Mr. Vitug argues that you need to figure out your ultimate desires first — after all, as his book title states, you’ve only got one life — and then set financial goals to help you achieve them.For example, if traveling for pleasure is most important, he writes, you should keep possessions to a minimum, find a job or start a career that allows for substantial time off and concentrate on saving enough money to allow you to indulge your passion. This, as his subtitle says, is “the road map to financial wellness and a purposeful life.”Will this lead you to a purposeful life? Possibly.But financial wellness? That’s an open question, because Mr. Vitug does not spend much time explaining how to achieve the financial goals you have set.While he does a terrific job of addressing the need to keep credit card debt to a minimum, explaining that high interest rates can be a significant drag on achieving your ambitions, he is short on many other specifics. For example, his section on investing is only two pages long.This is intentional, he says. He writes that it is important to understand that “managing your finances responsibly can be summed up with the following advice: Save more than you spend, invest early and frequently, pay off debt and use credit sparingly, build assets and create passive income.”Because he assumes that readers know this, he appears to think that there is nothing further to discuss.That’s an unfortunate assumption, however, and it could cause problems. It is unlikely that most millennials know enough about managing their money, as a study released this year, “Millennials and Financial Literacy: The Struggle With Personal Finance,” suggests.PwC, the accounting and consulting firm that conducted the study, defined millennials as “the generation of Americans born between the early 1980s and the mid-1990s.” The study found that only 24 percent of them “demonstrated basic financial knowledge.” The study concluded: “Among the overall population, millennials are the age group with the lowest level of financial literacy.”If Mr. Vitug is trying to educate millennials, then even a basic primer would have helped.But his bigger point is right. The life you want to live should determine your financial goals.Advertisement