By CARLA FRIEDJULY 15, 2016
The jury is still out on whether the negative-yield experiment playing out in Japan and across Europe will deliver on its intended goal of spurring economic growth. But central banks have managed to engineer some short-term good news for American bond investors.Negative yields have served as a powerful magnet pulling rates down just about everywhere, and as yields fall, bond prices rise. Britain’s vote to leave the European Union pushed yields down even further in late June, helping to bolster prices.For the second quarter, the average intermediate core United States bond fund posted a solid 2.3 percent total return and gained 4.9 percent in the first six months of the year, nearly one percentage point ahead of the gain for the S.&P. 500. (Total return is the combined result of the yield you are paid and any changes to the underlying prices of the bonds you own.)Vanguard Total Bond Market Index fund, the largest mutual fund, earned a 5.5 percent return in the first six months of the year, just ahead of the 5.3 percent gain for the largest exchange-traded fund, iShares Core U.S. Aggregate Bond. Metropolitan West Total Return fund, one of the largest actively managed bond funds, generated a gain of nearly 4.5 percent in the first half of the year.AdvertisementDon’t count on that lasting.“We have stepped through the looking glass,” said Scott Clemons, chief investment strategist at Brown Brothers Harriman wealth management. Even with negative rates in much of the world, interest rates could move lower in the near term, yet the expectation is that they will eventually begin to move off their historic lows, which will cause bond prices and investor total returns to fall.AdvertisementGoldman Sachs estimates that a one percentage point rise in interest rates would reduce the value of bonds in the Barclays U.S. Aggregate Index — the benchmark for high-quality core bond investments — by $1 trillion.“The rise in yields from where we are now comes with no cushion.” Mr. Clemons said. “People need to get used to looking at unrealized capital losses.”Yet with so many investors seeking safety and streaming into bonds, actual losses are being pushed into the future.Still, BlackRock and Vanguard expect annualized returns for core United States bonds to be around 1 percent or so over the next five to 10 years. That’s even before accounting for inflation; real returns would probably be below zero.In a report titled “Diminishing Returns,” the McKinsey Global Institute said inflation-adjusted returns for high-grade United States bonds could be between zero and 1 percent over the next 20 years. Research Affiliates, a quantitative asset management firm, says core United States bonds could deliver real annualized returns ranging from a 1 percent loss to a 1 percent gain over 10 years.“It’s basic arithmetic,” said Chris Brightman, chief investment officer at Research Affiliates, referring to the fact that a bond’s current yield predicts future returns.Rick Rieder, BlackRock’s chief investment officer of global fixed income, points out that 10 years ago, most fixed income investments had yields of at least 3 percent. At the end of June, the 10-year Treasury note yielded 1.5 percent. The iShares Core U.S. Aggregate Bond E.T.F., which tracks the Barclays U.S. Aggregate Index, has a trailing 12-month yield of 2.3 percent, barely ahead of the rate of inflation. The only way to earn 3 percent these days is to stick your neck out into high-yield and emerging-market debt. “In this environment, counting on core fixed income for returns is going to be difficult,” Mr. Rieder said.AdvertisementPursuing higher yields always means taking on more risk, but those risks are magnified right now. Sure, longer-term bonds pay marginally higher yields. But those yields are still well below historic norms and thus won’t offer much of a cushion when prices rise. And the longer the maturity of a bond, the more price volatility you will incur when rates rise. And junk bonds and emerging-market debt need careful consideration at this point in the economic cycle.“We are of the opinion that investors shouldn’t reach for yield now and should accept lower returns,” said Stephen M. Kane, a portfolio manager in the United States Fixed Income Group at TCW, which runs more than $150 billion in bond portfolios, including the $78 billion Metropolitan West Total Return mutual fund.The fund has about 60 percent of assets in a mix of cash and low-yielding — but superliquid — Treasuries and government agency bonds, and its current yield is below 2 percent. Its one-year gain of 4.4 percent lagged the Barclays Aggregate by nearly one percentage point.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Kane said that performance was “frustrating” but the managers don’t want to be aggressive in this market. “Our defensive strategy today,” he added, “is the dry powder that we will be able to invest once valuations are better.”Taking the long view has paid off for patient investors. Over the last 10 and 15 years, MetWest Total Return ranks in the top 5 percent of similar portfolios, according to Morningstar.Granted, the prospect of watching your core bond portfolio fail to keep pace with inflation isn’t cheery news, but it’s worth reminding yourself why you own bonds in the first place.“All too often, investors forget that low returns are far better than big losses,” said Harold Evensky, chairman of Evensky & Katz/Foldes Financial Wealth Management. “When markets turn down — and they will — even zero returns will look pretty attractive.”Joe Davis, global chief economist at Vanguard and head of its investment strategy group, puts the odds at “well over 90 percent” that we are due for a stock bear market in the next few years. In 2008, when the S.&P. 500 lost 37 percent, the Barclays U.S. Aggregate Index gained more than 5 percent. Today’s low yields mean bonds probably would not gain that much, but there is no likelihood of a real meltdown, either. Since 1976, the benchmark index has never lost more than 3 percent in a calendar year.Given that the Barclays U.S. Aggregate is now laden with low-yielding government bonds that will be most sensitive to a rate rise, venturing beyond a pure core index fund may be worth considering.AdvertisementBKD Wealth Advisors, which manages more than $2.5 billion, recommended core bond index funds before rates plummeted. But now, said Jeff Layman, BKD’s chief investment officer, the firm relies on actively managed funds, including Metropolitan West Total Return, DoubleLine Total Return and Guggenheim Total Return. These funds might add some incremental performance.Mr. Evensky peppers client portfolios with nontraditional bond funds that aren’t tethered to the Barclays Aggregate, including JPMorgan Strategic Income Opportunities, Goldman Sachs Strategic Income and BlackRock Strategic Income Opportunities.A recent analysis by Morningstar found that nontraditional bond funds have outperformed core bond funds when rates are rising, but have underperformed core bond funds when the stock market sells off, because they tend to own holdings like junk bonds and emerging-market debt whose fortunes are often in sync with stock market performance.Mr. Rieder, co-manager of BlackRock Strategic Income Opportunities, says the challenge today for investors is “How can I get 2 percent to 4 percent from bonds to help my portfolio?” BlackRock Strategic Income Opportunities currently has about 15 percent invested in junk bonds and owns non-United States bonds as well.In a research note titled “Negative Rates are Dangerous to Your Wealth,” Mr. Brightman, of Research Affiliates, said that in the current markets, a classic balanced approach — 60 percent invested in United States stocks, 40 percent in domestic high-grade bonds — has an expected 10-year annualized return of 1.3 percent after inflation. That anemic return may not get investors to their retirement goals.To improve the chances of achieving a 5 percent annualized return, Mr. Brightman created what he calls a “maverick” portfolio. It is risky, however. The only United States bonds are long-term Treasuries, and there are no United States stocks. Instead, the portfolio contains a 20 percent stake in emerging market stocks and 20 percent in noninvestment grade bonds, among other asset classes. He estimated that it would generate about 40 percent more volatility than the classic 60-40 approach.Mr. Brightman acknowledges that most investors lack the fortitude to stick their necks out that far, and he doesn’t recommend it for the fainthearted. His advice for dealing with the ramifications of negative interest rates: “Save more, plan on working longer and living more frugally.”A version of this article appears in print on July 17, 2016, on Page BU12 of the New York edition with the headline: Why Good News for Bond Buyers May Well Be Fleeting.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.