By CONRAD DE AENLLEJULY 15, 2016
The stock market at midyear hovered around a record high. But after several disturbing weeks in which prices soared, then plunged, then soared again, the view from the summit, or near it, may not be so pleasant.Stock fund owners escaped the second quarter with modest gains, but the extreme volatility leaves them to contemplate fresh uncertainties in the final half of 2016.Share prices were advancing steadily until British voters decided in a referendum on June 23 to leave the European Union. Although polls showed a close race throughout the “Brexit” campaign, the result came as a shock — one that evidently wore off quickly, as stocks fell precipitously but then recovered nearly all of the Brexit losses in the final days of the month.The British vote overshadowed a far less surprising decision earlier in June by the Federal Reserve not to raise interest rates. Explaining the Fed’s thinking to a Senate committee, Janet L. Yellen, the central bank’s chairwoman, highlighted “considerable uncertainty” about the economy.AdvertisementWhatever uncertainties investors faced, in whatever corner of the world, the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index ended June at 2,098.86, up 1.9 percent for the quarter.The post-Brexit bounce — after the post-Brexit swoon — helped to produce a 2.5 percent return for domestic stock funds in the quarter, according to Morningstar. The average international stock fund rose 1.4 percent, but portfolios in Europe lost 3.4 percent.Even if the British referendum had gone the other way, American stocks might have been vulnerable to a decline, albeit not necessarily all at once, and after their rebound, they may be vulnerable to one again. The S.&P. 500 ended the quarter trading at 19 times the earnings that component companies reported in the previous four quarters, compared with a historical average of about 15.Not only are valuations high, but earnings growth is low and expectations are falling. Analysts estimated earnings of $118.79 for the 2016 S.&P. 500 at the end of June, according to FactSet Research, a figure that has declined in each of the last six quarters.The conundrum that investors face heading into the second half is that alternative destinations for their money aren’t cheap, either. Yields on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note, for instance, declined in the second quarter to 1.4 percent from 1.78 percent. That helped the average long-term government bond fund gain 6.5 percent, and bond funds in general rose 2.6 percent.AdvertisementSome niches within the markets — stocks of companies in one industry or region, bonds from certain types of issuers — may offer adequate return prospects at acceptable risk, investment advisers say. But they warn that gains are likely to be meager at best in broad asset classes. Few options are good; some may be good enough.“It’s hard to find real pockets of value in the financial markets today,” said Rebecca H. Patterson, chief investment officer of Bessemer Trust, a firm that advises wealthy families. “I don’t see much where you can say, ‘Aha! This is a great opportunity.’”Neither does Robert Arnott, chairman of the investment advisory service Research Affiliates. He blames the Fed and its peers for much of the situation.“The mainstream markets that most people rely on are generally pretty expensive, with anemic yields,” he said. “Central banks deserve most of the credit for that, basically blowing bubbles all over the world.”But not everywhere.“If you look outside the mainstream markets, you see some bargains,” Mr. Arnott said. “The lowest-hanging fruit is emerging-market stocks. They’ve been in a brutal five-year bear market.”In contrast to American stocks, indexes of emerging markets are trading at less than 10 times earnings. Emerging-market bonds are similarly cheap, in his view, with yields at a greater premium to those on Treasury debt than at any time since 1998, during the Asian financial crisis and Russian debt default.“When you see spreads this wide, it makes sense to put a large toe in the water,” he said.Traders displayed no such circumspection when it came to British and Continental European stocks and currencies after the Brexit referendum. They took stock indexes down nearly 10 percent in just a few hours and sold the euro and especially the pound, which fell more than 10 percent, to its lowest level since 1985, and failed to recover with stocks.Comments from global banks after the referendum were mixed. Deutsche Bank called the result “a sign of Europe’s increasing fragility” and warned that “this outcome points to greater risks.” The S.&P. 500 could fall to 1,950, Deutsche said, and banks and companies with high European sales are particularly vulnerable.AdvertisementUBS Wealth Management advised staying the course, treacherous though it may be.“Given considerable uncertainties, we would encourage investors not to sell down risk assets in a time of heightened market volatility and lower-than-average liquidity,” the bank said in a note to clients. “We are confident in the prospects for positive returns for U.S. equities.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Focusing on the outlook for emerging markets, HSBC said there probably would not be much direct impact on business. The bank cautioned, however, that “the U.K.’s referendum decision to leave the E.U. means we are entering an uncertain world and there will likely be pressure on emerging-market financial assets based on immediate risk aversion.”Jeremy Richardson, a manager of stock portfolios for RBC Global Asset Management, said that the world was plenty uncertain before June 23 rolled round.“A big question that hangs over all of us is, How do we move on from this world of low, even negative, interest rates that we find ourselves in?” he said. “Central banks are running out of policy tools; that creates a level of uncertainty. Perhaps that’s one of the reasons why equity markets have not been more robust.”Mr. Richardson recommends avoiding long-term bonds or the stocks of companies that investors may view as proxies for them for their stable trading patterns. Their popularity has made them expensive, just like bonds, he warned.He prefers stocks of “businesses that do things a little differently,” including discount clothing retailers and the carmaker Tesla. He also likes companies involved in cloud computing and so-called big data, as well as immunotherapy, or the development of cancer treatments that enhance immune system responses to tumors.“People spend so much time on what Janet Yellen is going to say next or the price of copper and tin” instead of focusing on individual companies, Mr. Richardson said. “If you’re just talking about the market, you’re missing a big part of the story.”But central banks remain a big part of the story, too. However the Fed and its peers might go about extricating themselves from nearly a decade of extraordinary monetary policy, James Paulsen, chief investment strategist at Wells Capital Management, wishes they would just get on with it.“We have uninterrupted growth with full employment,” he said. It’s no longer appropriate, he said, “to employ crisislike policies when the crisis is long past in the U.S.”AdvertisementThough he considers the economic backdrop benign, Mr. Paulsen acknowledges that valuations are quite high, so he envisions “midsingle-digit buy-and-hold returns” and expects the S.&P. 500 to trade between 1,800 and 2,200 in the second half.He favors sectors like financial services, industrials and materials and would avoid consumer sectors, where prices have been bid up. Foreign markets may do better than the United States, in his view, because they are less further along in the upward slope of their economic cycles.Other niches that Mr. Paulsen would consider include market-neutral and other alternative funds, which try to achieve modest returns with minimal risk, and real estate and commodity funds, in case the Fed loses control and inflation begins to stir.Ms. Patterson at Bessemer cautioned that all manner of developments, from terrorism to slowing growth in China, could cause turmoil in the markets this year, and she reminded investors that the Brexit referendum wasn’t the only vote that must be factored into asset prices. She expects some companies to hold off on hiring and investment decisions as the presidential election draws closer.“Even with a benign outcome” to the various sources of uncertainty, she said, “given valuations and the outlook for profits, being neutral in equities makes sense.”Among the few assets she prefers in the present climate are high-quality corporate bonds and shares of global companies that tend to trade with less volatility than the overall market, as long as they are also reasonably priced.If such slim pickings and the prospect of slim returns leave investors feeling disappointed, Mr. Paulsen has a simple piece of advice: Get over it.“You’ve got to look at the world you live in,” he said. “There’s not much available anywhere.” Trying to make the best of a mediocre situation, he added: “The best of this bull market is long past, but that doesn’t necessarily mean it’s over.”A version of this article appears in print on July 17, 2016, on Page BU11 of the New York edition with the headline: Stormy at the Top.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.