By JAMES KANTERJULY 19, 2016
BRUSSELS — The European Union’s antitrust chief imposed a record fine of 2.9 billion euros, or $3.2 billion, on a group of truck makers on Tuesday, part of a trend toward steeper penalties for competition violations in the 28-nation bloc.The fine was for price-fixing and operating a secretive system aimed at delaying the installation of pollution-curbing exhaust pipes and engines. Less than a week ago, the European Commission, the bloc’s executive arm, announced a new round of antitrust charges against Google, on suspicion that some of the company’s advertising products had restricted consumer choice.“We have, today, put down a marker by imposing record fines for a serious infringement,” Margrethe Vestager, the European Union’s competition commissioner, said in a statement. “For 14 years, they colluded on the pricing and on passing on the costs for meeting environmental standards to customers. This is also a clear message to companies that cartels are not accepted.”The announcement brings more bad news for Volkswagen, which has been embroiled in a diesel emissions scandal that began in the United States, and which recently set aside $14.7 billion to compensate customers there for having installed software that made its vehicles seem less polluting than they were.AdvertisementAmong the companies cited in the statement for having broken antitrust rules is the truck maker MAN, which is owned by Volkswagen. MAN is not among the companies being fined, however, as it revealed the existence of the cartel.AdvertisementIn the statement, the commission said it did not find any links between the cartel and so-called defeat devices installed by Volkswagen in passenger cars.The truck makers being fined are DAF, Daimler, Iveco and Volvo-Renault. Daimler faces the largest single fine, and it must pay slightly more than €1 billion, also a record.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Together, the five companies account for about nine in 10 medium and heavy trucks produced in Europe, the commission said.A sixth company, Scania, was not included in the fines announced on Tuesday as it has not settled.The European Commission can impose fines of up to 10 percent of a company’s global worldwide sales for breaking European Union competition laws. The companies have the right to appeal, seeking to overturn or lower the fines, at the Court of Justice of the European Union in Luxembourg.Fines in the region for cartel violations have steadily risen in recent years, largely because financial punishment is the main way for European Union regulators, who unlike their American counterparts cannot jail price-fixers, to enforce their laws. From 1990 to 1994, the bloc imposed fines on cartels totaling €540 million. Two decades later, from 2010 to 2014, the commission imposed fines on cartels totaling €8.7 billion.Ms. Vestager, a former Danish economy minister, was appointed competition commissioner in 2014. Some of her biggest cases have involved the rapidly expanding digital sector. Along with Google, Ms. Vestager is also investigating whether Luxembourg gave unfair tax breaks to Amazon and whether Ireland offered similar treatment to Apple.Even so, the number of American companies in her sights has led some critics to suggest that Ms. Vestager and her predecessors have a bias against competition from the United States. The record-breaking fines imposed against the truck companies — which are all based in Europe — could help counter that view.In a separate case on Tuesday, Ms. Vestager’s team opened an investigation into whether French government plans for financially supporting Areva, a beleaguered state-owned maker of equipment for nuclear power plants, are compatible with European Union competition rules.Follow James Kanter on Twitter @jameskanter.A version of this article appears in print on July 20, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Price-Fixing Truck Makers  Get Record Fine in Europe.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.