JULY 17, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.32 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.42 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.26 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Alpharetta, Ga., $52.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Florida Board of Education Lottery, $214.7 million of debt securities. Competitive.Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, $344.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Pennsylvania, $1.2 billion of debt securities. Postponed.AdvertisementSwarthmore Borough Authority, Pa., $59.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Newton, Mass., $61.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementSan Francisco Bay Area, $84.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Columbus, Ohio, $453.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Aurora, Colo., acting by and through its Utility Enterprise, $426.9 million of first lien water refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Austin Community College District, Tex., $86.3 million of limited tax refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Baltimore County, $150 million of general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Central Texas Regional Mobility Authority, $75.8 million of subordinate lien revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.El Paso, $67.9 million of water and sewer revenue improvement and refinancing bonds. Hutchinson, Shockey, Erley & Co.Florida Development Finance Corporation, $51.9 million of educational facilities revenue bonds. BB & T Capital Markets.Harris County Hospital District, Tex., $60.7 million of combination tax and revenue certificates of obligation. J. P. Morgan Securities.AdvertisementLas Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority, $97 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Lone Star College System, Tex., $129 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Louisiana Citizens Property Insurance Corporation, $52.9 million of taxable assessment revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Louisiana Citizens Property Insurance Corporation, $166.5 million of assessment revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency, $61.3 million of housing bonds. Barclays Capital.Medina Valley Independent School District, Tex., $69.7 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Hilltop Securities.Metropolitan Transportation Authority, $520 million of transportation revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Mississippi Development Bank, $61.5 million of Department of Corrections Walnut Grove and East Mississippi Youth Correctional Facilities special obligation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Municipal Gas Authority of Georgia, $80 million of gas revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York State Housing Finance Agency, $55 million of affordable housing revenue bonds. Sibert Brandford Shank & Co.North Harris County Regional Water Authority, Tex., $259.2 million of lien revenue and refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.AdvertisementOhio Water Development Authority, $135 million of Drinking Water Assistance Fund revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Pennsylvania Higher Education Facilities Authority, $115 million of Drexel University revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Port of Seattle, $250 million of first and intermediate lien revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Pulaski County, Ark., $88 million of Arkansas Children’s Hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Stephens.Rhode Island Health and Education Building Corporation, $87.8 million of Public Schools Revenue Bond Financing Program refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Santa Rosa, Calif., $96.3 million of wastewater refinancing bonds. Raymond James.South Carolina Public Service Authority, $50 million of revenue obligations. Barclays Capital.State Building Authority of Michigan, $663.8 million of revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Travis County, Tex., $121 million of limited tax refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Trust for Cultural Resources New York City, $277.2 million of revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Washington State Housing Finance Commission $60.1 million of nonprofit housing revenue and refinancing bonds. Ziegler.A version of this article appears in print on July 18, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Securities Auctions Set for the Week of July 18.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.