AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere’s a look at what’s coming this week.BANKINGBank of America announced its second-quarter financial results on Monday, with Goldman Sachs following on Tuesday and Morgan Stanley on Wednesday. The big banks that released their results last week generally reported better-than-expected earnings, particularly after a first quarter that was one of the worst in years. Investors will be looking for signals on how the banks are responding to the continuing lull in interest rates, which has made it more difficult to earn money through lending. After Britain’s vote last month to leave the European Union, the banks are also likely to be heavily questioned on what they are now planning to do with their operations in London. Nathaniel PopperTECHNOLOGYA raft of earnings reports from old-guard technology companies will say much about the transition to the new-tech world of cloud computing, mobility and artificial intelligence. IBM, which is trying to get other companies to use its Watson supercomputer, will report its second-quarter results on Monday, as will Yahoo, the once-giant internet portal that is selling core assets. Microsoft, a leader in cloud computing, reports on Tuesday. The chip companies Intel, a titan in the personal computer days that fell short in mobile, and Qualcomm, a mobile leader that has run into competitive woes, are on Wednesday. On Friday, General Electric, a century-old manufacturer looking to lead in the sensor-driven internet of things, will also report. Among the newer guard, Netflix reports on Monday. Quentin HardyECONOMYThe European Central Bank will meet in Frankfurt on Thursday, but it is not expected to make any major changes to monetary policy. Mario Draghi, the central bank’s president, will hold his first news conference since Britain voted to leave the European Union and will certainly be asked how “Brexit” might affect monetary policy. Mr. Draghi will probably also be asked about his views on how Europe should deal with a worsening banking crisis in Italy, his home country. Barring any striking developments, analysts expect the central bank to hold off from any action at least until September. Jack Ewing On Thursday, at 10 a.m. E.D.T., the National Association of Realtors will release data on sales of existing homes in June. Last month, the association reported that home sales in May ran at their healthiest rate since February 2007, before the housing market collapsed and the economy fell into recession. While economists expect a slight moderation in the pace of sales for June, low mortgage rates are expected to keep annual sales at a healthy annualized level of about 5.5 million units. Nelson D. SchwartzMEDIAComic book fans are getting their capes and cowls primed for their annual pilgrimage to Comic-Con International, which opens on Thursday in San Diego. The event has evolved in recent years into a showcase for Hollywood studios, which will be clamoring for the attention of an army of nerds expected to exceed 130,000. Virtual reality will have a big presence: FX Networks is promoting “American Horror Story” with a virtual reality experience, and Warner Bros. has similar plans for “Suicide Squad.” Entertainment Weekly will host Con-X, a fan zone with a stage for D.J. sets and Q. and A.s with celebrities. And “South Park” will celebrate its 20th anniversary with interactive activities and a panel. Gregory SchmidtAUTO INDUSTRYOn Friday, auto industry executives and government officials will descend on Detroit to discuss the rising concerns of cybersecurity and hacking. Automobiles have essentially become supercomputers on wheels, and more of them are linked to the internet, posing security risks. (A year ago, researchers showed that they were able to remotely take control of a Jeep Grand Cherokee as it rolled down a highway.) The gathering, called the Billington Automotive Cybersecurity Summit, is intended to highlight what car companies and policy makers can do to meet the challenge. Speakers include Mary T. Barra, chief executive of General Motors; Anthony Foxx, the transportation secretary; and Mark Rosekind, head of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Neal E. BoudetteECONOMYFinance ministers and central bank governors from 20 of the world’s biggest economies will gather in Chengdu, in western China, for a two-day meeting that begins on Saturday. On the agenda will be how to address the challenges to the global economy presented by Britain’s vote to leave the European Union. With China’s currency, the renminbi, showing some new signs of weakness, its currency policies are also likely to be in focus. Speaking in Berlin last week, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew told reporters that it was important that all members of the Group of 20 work to “consult closely with one another on exchange rate policy, and to refrain from competitive devaluation.” Neil GoughAdvertisement