By SYDNEY EMBERJULY 19, 2016
It was a tweet heard round the media world.Shortly after 4 p.m., Matt Drudge of The Drudge Report website, wrote on Twitter that Roger Ailes was leaving as chairman of Fox News with a $40 million financial package, after an investigation into allegations that he had sexually harassed Gretchen Carlson, a former Fox anchor. Accompanying the tweet was what appeared to be a separation agreement between Mr. Ailes and the network, which he founded 20 years ago.The news also appeared as a banner headline on The Drudge Report in bold block letters under an image of a siren that typically signifies big, breaking news.It appeared to be an enormous scoop for Drudge, one that sent media organizations scrambling to confirm the news. The Daily Beast published a brief article saying Fox News had confirmed that Mr. Ailes would leave the network. Variety also posted an article on its website, saying an anonymous source had confirmed that Mr. Ailes was out.Then Mr. Drudge deleted his tweet. The banner headline on The Drudge Report was changed from the dramatic “Exclusive” wording to the milder “Ailes FoxNews Drama.” An unattributed quotation saying, in part, “Roger Ailes has never sexually harassed Megyn Kelly” also appeared above the siren. Soon, The Daily Beast amended its article to say that Fox News had “walked back” its earlier confirmation that Mr. Ailes was leaving the network.AdvertisementThe Drudge Report, which has become known more for its aggregation and flashy headlines than for breaking big stories, had thrown the media into full-on pandemonium. Many news outlets had been working since Monday to confirm a report in New York magazine that Mr. Ailes was on his way out.On Tuesday, the magazine published another article saying Megyn Kelly, a star anchor at Fox News, had told investigators that Mr. Ailes had sexually harassed her. The Financial Times followed with its own article confirming New York magazine’s assertion that Rupert Murdoch and his two sons — who lead Fox News’s parent company, 21st Century Fox — wanted Mr. Ailes gone.AdvertisementAt 4:39 p.m., roughly 20 minutes after Mr. Drudge’s now-deleted tweet was first sent, Brian Stelter, the host of CNN’s “Reliable Sources,” posted a tweet that read: “I am hearing conflicting information about whether Roger Ailes is out at Fox News. Ailes is in his office at Fox HQ. Stay tuned…”Others wondered why Mr. Drudge had deleted his tweet and whether his doing so meant that the separation agreement was potentially not legitimate.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m so confused right now with what drudge is doing,” Hadas Gold, a media reporter for Politico, tweeted at 4:42 p.m.Mr. Drudge did not reply to a request for comment.Shortly before 5 p.m., 21st Century Fox released a statement. “Roger is at work,” the company said. “The review is ongoing. And the only agreement that is in place is his existing employment agreement.”So goes the high-speed media chase in the internet age. Like The Daily Beast, Variety modified its article to reflect Fox’s statement. Other news organizations, including The New York Times, published articles saying that, while Mr. Ailes was not gone from Fox News, he and the network were negotiating terms of his departure.Even the Murdoch-owned New York Post, which had not run a story when Ms. Carlson filed her lawsuit, chose to feature the developments at Fox on its Wednesday front page, with the headline “What the Fox!”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.