AdvertisementSupported byBy Jackie CalmesWASHINGTON — For almost four years, Congress and the White House have done little to make their long-promised overhaul of the corporate tax code a reality. Now the blockbuster pharmaceutical merger of Pfizer and Allergan has put new pressure on all sides to act.Pfizer’s takeover of Ireland-based Allergan — the largest deal to date to avoid American taxes by reincorporating in a lower-tax country — provoked a leading Republican on Monday to call for at least stemming so-called corporate inversions, if a sweeping rewrite of the tax code remains out of reach.“The best way to resolve these issues would be through a comprehensive tax overhaul,” Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, chairman of the tax-writing Senate Finance Committee, said in a statement. But, he added, “It’s imperative we explore what actions can be taken now.”That is a shift for Mr. Hatch from an all-or-nothing approach to tax reform, but sweeping change has remained elusive. In a polarized capital given more to legislative crisis than to compromise, leaders in both parties have long claimed that an overhaul of the loophole-laden corporate tax code could yield common ground. Business groups have clamored to make it so.In a raft of statements from Capitol Hill on Monday, lawmakers in both parties condemned Pfizer’s move and reiterated their calls for comprehensive tax reform. But the reiterations only underscored that talk has long stood in for legislating.President Obama’s Treasury Department released a detailed framework for rewriting the code in 2012, proposing to close corporate loopholes, broaden the base of taxable business income and reduce the corporate income tax rates that are sending businesses like Pfizer overseas.Senior congressional Republicans were broadly on board with that approach, which is the same formula — broader tax base, lower rates — that defined Congress’s previous landmark rewrite of the tax code in 1986, under President Ronald Reagan.But Mr. Obama has hardly made corporate tax reform a priority, and a reluctance by the generally assertive Republican-controlled Congress to move without the president suggests that Republicans worry a signature issue may be better politics than policy. The details inevitably divide business allies into winners and losers.“Any permanent solution to combating inversions should be legislated by Congress,” Mr. Hatch said. But “for that to happen,” he continued, “we must have strong leadership from the White House.”A Republican chairman of the tax-writing House Ways and Means Committee, former Representative Dave Camp of Michigan, put forward a comprehensive plan in 2014 but got little support from party colleagues. His successor as chairman, Representative Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, embraced the Camp plan in spirit at least. Then Mr. Ryan was elevated to speaker last month, and now defers on tax policy to a new, untested chairman, Representative Kevin Brady of Texas. In the Senate Finance Committee, Mr. Hatch — one of the few current lawmakers who were in office for the tax rewrite nearly 30 years ago — has not initiated a similar tax overhaul effort since Republicans took over the Senate in January. Two committee members, Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York, and Senator Rob Portman, Republican of Ohio, have worked toward a bipartisan framework along with Mr. Ryan in the House — not for a full overhaul of the corporate code, but for a change in international taxation that would also address inversions.The initial impetus for the Portman-Schumer-Ryan effort to overhaul international taxes was both parties’ desire to come up with billions to finance the cost of a multiyear transportation and infrastructure bill this year. The tax bill, in theory, would raise those revenues with a one-time tax on multinational corporations’ earnings held outside the United States, and would also provide a new minimum tax on foreign earnings.But in recent weeks, with Senate Republican leaders including Mr. Hatch and Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, cool to the idea of an international tax package, Congress made progress on a separate transportation bill, with its costs offset by assorted revenue provisions and budget changes.Congressional Republicans began openly suggesting that they should just wait to overhaul the corporate tax code until 2017, when perhaps they would have a Republican president to work with. Then came the Pfizer-Allergan news, made official on Monday, and once again Americans were learning that brand-name companies were becoming corporate expatriates to cut their tax bills, while most of their operations remained stateside, with all the advantages of American residency.Twice since last year, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew has issued regulations to reduce the incentives for corporate inversions — in September 2014 and just last week. But, he warned, the administration can only do so much without Congress.“Our actions can only slow the pace of these transactions. Only legislation can decisively stop them,” Mr. Lew told reporters on Friday.In the year since the administration first urged Congress to act against inversions — with Mr. Obama assailing corporate expatriates as unpatriotic — Republicans and some Democrats have resisted acting. What was needed, they said again, was a comprehensive overhaul of the corporate code. Yet again they did not propose one.While the Pfizer-Allergan merger had Mr. Hatch and a few others, mostly Democrats, summoning action specifically against corporate inversions, many lawmakers fell back on the familiar call for the holy grail of a complete overhaul of the code.“Let’s stop the political hand-wringing and get to work creating a U.S. tax code that’s built for growth,” said Representative Brady, the new Ways and Means Committee chairman. “Tax reform is a key pillar of our pro-growth agenda.”Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Finance Committee, warned against more limited legislation simply to address inversions, saying on Monday, “The only course of action that will stop this concerning trend of American firms continuously looking for ways to shift their headquarters overseas is comprehensive tax reform.”“Our tax code and our economy work as an ecosystem, so when Congress or the administration make changes in one area to solve an immediate crisis like inversions, there’s always a risk of unforeseen effects popping up somewhere else,” Mr. Wyden added. “Bipartisan, comprehensive tax reform will require serious political will and independence from members of Congress, but this inversion crisis shows that it needs to happen soon.”Advertisement