AdvertisementSupported byBy John Koblin and Michael M. GrynbaumWill Fox News’s prime-time lineup remain intact? Will the network’s ratings fall back to earth after this wild presidential election? Who could possibly replace Roger Ailes?Breathless, yes, but Fox News’s seemingly unassailable position as the most powerful cable news channel was rocked this week by the news that Mr. Ailes, the only leader the network has ever known, was negotiating his exit as chairman after accusations of sexual harassment.No matter how unseemly his departure, Mr. Ailes will leave Fox News in strong shape. Thanks to an election year that has been a boon for all cable news channels, the network has never had higher ratings. And on Wednesday, as confusion swirled about the leadership of the network, many financial analysts told investors that the huge profits it delivers for 21st Century Fox were in no danger of suddenly disappearing.“There’s a very loyal Fox audience,” said Andrew Heyward, a former president of CBS News. “That was part of Roger’s brilliance: to identify a very large group that got badly underserved by mainstream TV news. Those people are not going anywhere.”But in the television industry — particularly in Cleveland, where many senior executives are attending the Republican National Convention — speculation about the network’s future flowed freely at cocktail parties and political breakfasts.The most pressing topic was who could replace the 76-year-old Mr. Ailes.Among the initial candidates being discussed in the executive offices of 21st Century Fox, according to a person briefed on the discussions who spoke on the condition of anonymity, are familiar names like Bill Shine, Fox News’s senior executive vice president for programming; David Rhodes, the president of CBS News and a former Fox executive; and Jesse Angelo, chief executive of The New York Post.Mr. Shine has the advantage of already being at Fox News. His appointment could calm the nerves of Fox employees, many of whom have privately complained this week about being left in the dark about what is going on at the network.Mr. Rhodes worked at Fox News for several years and has an understanding of the idiosyncrasies of the network. CBS remains in third place in both the evening news slot and in the lucrative morning hours but it has seen ratings improvements, particularly for “CBS This Morning.” Mr. Rhodes is also friendly with James Murdoch, one of the three top executives at 21st Century Fox.Mr. Angelo, who was the best man at James Murdoch’s wedding and remains a close friend, has spent his entire career working for the Murdoch empire. When Rupert Murdoch debuted a pet project of his, the short-lived iPad news project The Daily, he chose Mr. Angelo to run it. He has been the publisher of The Post for three and a half years.It is also possible that the Murdochs could choose another senior Fox News executive (Jay Wallace and Michael Clemente both run divisions) or someone from Sky News, their European flagship, which James has been closely involved in. Such a pick would offer corporate continuity and signal that the Murdochs are serious about refreshing the culture of Fox News post-Ailes.But Sky News is a far more sober outlet than its scrappier American cousin. Its anchors are restrained from offering boisterous opinions by strict European broadcasting rules. That could make for a rocky transition to the American cable news landscape, where editorializing is the norm.Whoever comes in will have to take care of a potentially restless prime-time lineup. Several of the network’s stars, including Bill O’Reilly and Sean Hannity, have clauses in their contracts that will allow them to leave if Mr. Ailes is no longer in a position of power, according to a person with knowledge of their deals who discussed a personnel issue on the condition of anonymity. Mr. O’Reilly suggested in a recent interview that he was contemplating retirement. Megyn Kelly’s contract expires in a year and she has been open about the possibility of leaving.Ms. Kelly participated in an internal investigation into Mr. Ailes, prompted by a sexual harassment lawsuit filed by the former anchor Gretchen Carlson on July 6. Ms. Kelly told investigators that Mr. Ailes made a number of advances toward her in the past, according to two people briefed on the matter.Mr. Ailes has denied the accusations by Ms. Carlson and Ms. Kelly.Whether Ms. Kelly’s participation will alienate her from Fox News colleagues who are loyal to Mr. Ailes is an open question.While there is no direct parallel to Mr. Ailes in the history of television news, either in personality or current circumstances, there are examples of similar operations losing their rudders — the retirement of Roone Arledge from ABC News in 1998 or the ouster of Ted Turner from CNN in 2001. Each departure coincided with a period of difficulty for their former divisions.Mr. Turner’s exit from CNN — a network he created — roughly aligned with the rise of Fox News as the top-rated cable news channel.Mr. Arledge was a beloved figure who oversaw the creation of shows like “20/20” and “Monday Night Football” and drove the ABC News evening flagship, “World News Tonight,” to longtime ratings dominance. By the time Mr. Arledge left, ABC News was beginning to show signs of wear and tear. In the years that followed, as ABC News worked to regain its footing, NBC News used the opening to pull far out in front in ratings.Fox News remains by far the highest-rated cable news network, and by a wide margin. Even so, CNN has made up some ground this year, narrowing Fox News’s lead in the 25- to 54-year-old demographic that is important to advertisers to its slimmest margin since the 2008 election year. (Ratings tend to go up during election cycles.)But even if CNN is having a strong year, a Fox News without Mr. Ailes is still formidable.Financial analysts were skeptical that any change would affect Fox News’s bottom line, especially because the lucrative affiliate fees that Fox News earns are locked in for years.If there is one area of concern, it is the network’s aging audience. According to Nielsen, the median age of a Fox News viewer is 67, the oldest of the cable news channels. (MSNBC’s is 63, and CNN’s is 61.)And with the rise of Facebook Live and other live-streaming services, there is a legitimate question about whether cable news channels face long-term growth problems. Until this election, and Donald J. Trump’s involvement in it, cable news channels were showing gradually declining ratings.“Sustaining this level of intensity after November is going to be a challenge,” Mr. Heyward, the former CBS president, said. “The biggest challenge is one that Roger himself hadn’t really confronted: the transition to digital platforms.”And whoever succeeds Mr. Ailes will have two missions: bringing a restless staff back together and figuring out a future for the network.As Charles L. Ponce de Leon, the author of the 2015 book “That’s the Way It Is: A History of Television News in America,” put it: “A broader course correction is necessary at Fox News — they must attract younger viewers — and that kind of effort will be extremely difficult because its loyal viewers have such rigid expectations.”Brooks Barnes contributed reporting.Advertisement