AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerAbout $5.3 trillion changes hands daily in the foreign exchange market. When banks make trades in currencies on behalf of customers, similar to when they trade other securities like stocks or bonds, they are supposed to put the client’s interests ahead of their own. But that’s not how it always works out. In a case announced on Wednesday, prosecutors say two HSBC employees used information they had gotten about a pending client transaction to trade ahead of it, turning a profit for the bank in the process.This is called “front running,” a practice in which a trader places orders on a security for the firm’s own account, taking advantage of advance knowledge of orders coming from its customers.In the case in question, the customer was looking to exchange about $3.5 billion for British pounds, a fairly large transaction, says John Halligan, the president of Global Trading Analytics in Rutherford, N.J. “It would have made the radar.”A trade that big has the potential to move the price of that security. Under normal circumstances, the transaction would be handled to minimize that risk, saving the client money.This is where the front-running came into play. The bank employees bought British pounds before placing the client’s order, federal prosecutors in Brooklyn say, expecting that the large transaction would raise the price of the pound. The client trade was set up to be done in two stages roughly 40 minutes apart in the early afternoon on Dec. 7, 2011. The HSBC employees had already bought pounds in the days leading up to the transaction and, while they were executing it, they traded in a way that pushed up the price of the pound even more, something the prosecutors call “ramping.”Front-running is not an uncommon practice. In 2009, regulators cracked down on 14 Wall Street firms for front-running customer stock trades.Traders with potentially market-moving information are likely to use it, according to a working paper by a group of academics for the European Central Bank. Mutual funds have long complained that their big trades are front-run as word leaks out, leaving them with an inferior price. Regulators have focused on whether big banks use customer information to glean such advantages, either through their own trading activities or by tipping favored clients.Prosecutors on Wednesday cited a phone call between the defendants during which they discussed how high they could ramp the price of the pound “before the victim company would ‘squeal,’” the complaint said. The price was the highest that day for that type of currency trade, allowing the traders to generate significant profits. How significant? About $3 million when the price of the pound went up, plus another $5 million in fees they charged for placing the trade for their client.Advertisement