By BARRY MEIER and BENJAMIN WEISERJULY 20, 2016
In a setback for victims of attacks linked to Iran, a federal appeals court in New York on Wednesday threw out a lower-court ruling that had upheld the government’s move to seize a landmark Manhattan building on charges that it was a front for Iran.The court, in a separate decision, also reversed a ruling that could have allowed people with relatives killed in terrorist attacks tied to Iran to collect proceeds from the sale of the property, at 650 Fifth Avenue near Rockefeller Center.The decisions, by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, sent the cases back to a district court judge for further proceedings.The office tower is the largest single asset seized by the Justice Department as a result of charges that its owners acted on behalf of the Iranian government in violation of economic sanctions against Iran and also engaged in money laundering. Estimates of its value, depending on the strength of the real estate market, have ranged from $800 million to $1 billion.AdvertisementAt a minimum, the rulings on Wednesday mean that families who received large judgments in a series of terrorism-related lawsuits against Iran will have to wait longer, perhaps several years, before collecting on some of those judgments.Among other things, the appellate judges found that there were enough questions about whether the building’s majority owner, the Alavi Foundation, knew that its partner was controlled by Iran to merit a trial on that issue. That partner, Assa Corporation, owned 40 percent of the building.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Judge Katherine B. Forrest of Federal District Court in Manhattan ordered the property’s forfeiture in 2013. At the time, Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, said in a statement that the decision “paves the way for the largest-ever terrorism-related forfeiture and provides a means of compensating victims of Iranian-sponsored terrorism.”Federal prosecutors struck a deal with lawyers for individual families or groups holding judgments against Iran under which those claimants were to receive a pro rata distribution of proceeds from the building’s sale.James L. Bernard, a lawyer for some of the families, said on Wednesday: “The Second Circuit has now sent the case to trial on several issues. We look forward to a quick recovery for our clients at trial.”Mr. Bharara’s office had no comment.A lawyer for the Alavi Foundation, Daniel S. Ruzumna, said: “We are very pleased by the rulings of the Court of Appeals. We look forward to vindicating our clients’ rights and interests at trial.”The appellate panel’s rulings, written by Judge Richard C. Wesley, were joined by Judges Amalya L. Kearse and Reena Raggi.A version of this article appears in print on July 21, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Appeals Court Rejects Seizure of Building Said to Be a Front for Iran.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.