By LESLIE PICKERNOV. 23, 2015
The billionaire and activist investor Carl C. Icahn took aim at another famous American company on Monday, the Xerox Corporation, and he stepped up pressure on the insurance giant American International Group.In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr. Icahn announced he had built up a 7.1 percent stake in Xerox, saying that the shares, which had fallen 22 percent this year, were undervalued.Mr. Icahn said that he would have “discussions with Xerox’s board about improving operational performance and pursuing strategic alternatives, as well as potentially attaining board representation.”“We are aware that Carl Icahn has made an investment in the company,” Xerox said in an emailed statement. “Xerox welcomes open communications with shareholders and values constructive dialogue.”AdvertisementThe fact that Xerox has attracted Mr. Icahn to the fray is not especially surprising. The company, known for printers and copiers, reported declining revenue and a loss in the third quarter, despite being profitable during the same period a year ago.AdvertisementUrsula Burns, the Xerox chief executive, last month announced some steps the company would take as a result.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Although we already have taken steps to accelerate cost reductions and prioritize investments to drive improved productivity and higher margins, our board determined that undertaking a comprehensive review of structural options for the company’s portfolio is the right decision at this time,” Ms. Burns said in a statement on Oct. 26.Shares of Xerox surged nearly 9 percent in after-hours trading.In addition to one about Xerox, Mr. Icahn released a statement about the American International Group, another company in which he has a sizable stake.In October, Mr. Icahn had encouraged the insurance giant to accelerate its cost-cutting and separate into three public companies.Peter D. Hancock,the A.I.G. chief executive, was unwilling to take “bold steps,” according to Monday’s statement, so Mr. Icahn plans to solicit the support of shareholders. The proposal may include a new director who would succeed Mr. Hancock as chief if the board requested, Mr. Icahn said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.