AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackThe Food and Drug Administration said Wednesday that it had approved generic versions of the blockbuster cholesterol-lowering pill Crestor, rejecting a last-ditch and controversial effort by AstraZeneca to stop cheaper competition from reaching pharmacy shelves.The move should considerably decrease the price of the drug and result in a sharp loss of market share for AstraZeneca. The brand-name drug has a retail price around $260 a month, according to GoodRx.com. With multiple generics now coming onto the market, the price could eventually drop as much as 80 to 90 percent.AstraZeneca argued in a petition to the F.D.A. and in a federal lawsuit that the agency could not legally approve any generics of Crestor because the drug had recently been approved to treat children with an extremely rare disease.It contended that the drug was in that way protected from competition, even for use in treating high cholesterol in adults, by the Orphan Drug Act, which encourages companies to develop drugs for rare diseases.The company’s tactic was criticized as an attempted abuse of the Orphan Drug Act, including by the F.D.A. itself.On Tuesday, a federal judge denied AstraZeneca’s request for a temporary restraining order barring the F.D.A. from approving the generics. And on Wednesday, the agency approved generics from eight manufacturers.“This case is not about the medical needs of a small population of pediatric patients with a rare disease,” the F.D.A. and Justice Department said in a brief filed in the lawsuit. “It is about AstraZeneca’s profit-driven desire to substantially extend its virtual monopoly on one of the world’s most popular medicines.”Crestor, a cholesterol-lowering statin, was prescribed 20.3 million times in the United States last year, the second-most of any brand-name drug after Synthroid, a thyroid medicine, according to the prescription tracker IMS Health. Crestor is AstraZeneca’s best-selling drug, accounting for $5 billion of its $23.6 billion in product sales last year, with about $2.8 billion of that in the United States. The drug has been on the market for 13 years and was scheduled to lose its patent protection from generics on July 8.One generic, made by Allergan, has been on the market since early May under an agreement settling patent litigation with AstraZeneca. It has been gaining market share rapidly.But prices typically don’t plummet until there are multiple generics, as there will be now. The newly approved generics, called rosuvastatin calcium, are made by Apotex, Aurobindo, Glenmark, Mylan, Par, Sandoz, Sun and Teva.A recent study in the journal Health Affairs estimated that patients in Medicare Part D typically have a co-payment of $42 for a Crestor prescription compared with only $4 for a prescription to a generic version of Lipitor, another statin.In its court filings, AstraZeneca said approval of multiple generics would mean an immediate loss of $400 million in sales, causing it to lay off employees and cut back on research.The company’s efforts to prevent the new generic competition seemed like a long shot. Its stock was up slightly in late morning trading.A spokeswoman for AstraZeneca said the company was disappointed with the court ruling and considering its options.It could continue its lawsuit and seek a reversal of the F.D.A. action. But according to its own court filings, that might not do much good because the generic companies were expected to immediately flood the market with enough supply to last months.In 2014, with the patent life on Crestor nearing its end, AstraZeneca tested the drug in 14 children with a rare disease called homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, which puts people at a high risk of heart attacks because of extremely high cholesterol levels. The study showed that Crestor lowered cholesterol more than a placebo, not a big surprise, and that was enough for approval.Under the Orphan Drug Act, Crestor was granted seven years of protection from generics, but only to treat that disease. That meant that information on use of the drug for that rare disease could not be included in the labels of the generic versions.AstraZeneca argued that since the labels of the generics are generally supposed to be identical to that of the brand-name drug, the F.D.A. could not approve generics at all, and that doing so might pose a safety risk.The F.D.A. rebutted those arguments in its denial of AstraZeneca’s petition.Two senators who have been investigating drug prices have asked AstraZeneca for a briefing to explain “how the public interest would be advanced by creating an additional exclusivity period for 20 million U.S. prescriptions based on a pediatric indication that serves approximately 300 U.S. patients.”The request was made in a letter, sent Tuesday, from Susan M. Collins, Republican of Maine and chairwoman of the Senate Special Committee on Aging, and Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri, the committee’s ranking member.Advertisement