By PETER EAVISNOV. 23, 2015
Every year, the largest banks have to undergo a theoretical test to assess how they might fare in a period of extreme stress in the markets and the economy.Now, that test may become substantially tougher.A senior official at the Federal Reserve, the bank regulator that administers the so-called stress tests, said on Monday that the Fed was discussing changes to the test that could make it harder for banks to pass.The stress tests estimate losses during a period of turbulence and then subtract those losses from a bank’s capital, the financial buffer that a bank has to maintain to insulate itself from shocks and losses. A bank effectively fails the tests if its capital falls below a minimum level after the theoretical losses.In an interview with Bloomberg Television, Daniel K. Tarullo, the Fed governor who oversees regulation, said there was “more than a pretty good chance” that banks would have to have a higher amount of minimum capital left after suffering the theoretical losses envisioned in the stress tests.AdvertisementThe Fed has indicated in the past that the tests could get more stringent. And Mr. Tarullo’s comments underscored its intent to press ahead with changes to the tests, which were introduced after the financial crisis to give regulators a way to check the health of big banks each year.The Fed wants to make the tests tougher to reduce the risk that a failure of single large bank could bring down other big firms. No actual proposal has been made, however.The tests have become something of a thorn in the side of the banks. Banks that fail them can be barred from making payouts to shareholders in the form of dividends and stock buybacks. Bankers have also asserted that the Fed’s communications about the tests have not always been clear. And the tests appear to have pressed banks to have more capital than they would if they were subject only to traditional capital rules.Higher capital has made the big banks more resilient. But there is debate over whether the requirements can crimp lending and trading.Banks build up capital by financing their activities with more equity and less borrowing. They measure their performance by a metric that expresses profits as a percentage of equity.AdvertisementSo as banks have increased their equity to meet stiffer capital requirements, the percentage return has shrunk. Banks have been getting out of businesses on which the return is low.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In some ways, this winnowing may be beneficial, since activities with low profitability may not be helpful to the wider economy in the longer term. And higher capital does not appear to have held back certain crucial activities.In recent years, for instance, banks have bolstered lending to corporations while their Wall Street operations have helped funnel trillions of dollars to companies through the bond market.Still, lending to consumers has been relatively subdued. As a result, some analysts wonder whether tougher stress tests, and the even higher capital levels they might lead to, would start to have negative consequences.“At some point, there’s a trade-off,” said Mike Mayo, a banks analyst at the international brokerage and investment firm CLSA. “Loan growth in this economic expansion has only been one-third of the usual pace.”Mr. Tarullo, in the Bloomberg interview, suggested ways in which stress tests may be changed.The changes could affect the amount of capital a bank would have to have left after the losses estimated by the test. Right now, a bank passes if during its test its capital does not fall below certain levels. On one measure, for instance, the level cannot fall below 4.5 percent of a bank’s assets.Mr. Tarullo suggested a way of raising the stress test minimum that would stem from a different set of capital rules. These other rules state that the bigger the bank, the more capital it must hold. A large bank may, for instance, have to keep extra capital, or a surcharge, of 3 percent of its assets, on top of a basic requirement of 7 percent.He also suggested that the Fed might decide to add some or all of that surcharge to the stress test minimum.. In a theoretical case, if all of the surcharge were added to a minimum of 4.5 percent, a bank’s capital could not fall below 7.5 percent in order to pass.The Fed could, of course, add only a portion of the surcharge. And it could give banks some relief by softening other parts of the test if it ends up adding some or all of the surcharge to the capital requirement, according to a person briefed on the discussions. Any changes would be incorporated in the 2017 stress tests.Even so, any capital increase, could prompt banks to start raising capital to make sure they did not fall below the minimum. They could raise capital levels by paying out less of their equity to shareholders. Faced with tougher capital requirements, banks may also choose to continue get smaller. Indeed, when discussing a new capital measure last year, Mr. Tarullo seemed to welcome some shrinkage of the big banks. “This measure,” he said, “might also create incentives for them to reduce their systemic footprint and risk profile.”A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Fed Official Expects Test for Big Banks to Be Stricter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.