By PRADNYA JOSHIJULY 22, 2016
Fox News has been the highest-rated cable news network for 15 years, making it a source of immense profit for its parent company, 21st Century Fox. It is a significant voice in national politics and, with its extensive use of graphics and its comfort with editorializing, a major influence on its competitors.The network’s pugnacious style and its position as a platform for conservative politics and ideas have made it a hit with an audience that felt ill-served by other news outlets. It has also made the network a target of derision by those who feel it is more a mouthpiece for the Republican Party than a legitimate news network.Through it all, Fox News has been led by Roger Ailes, its chairman. That ended on Thursday  when Mr. Ailes was officially ousted after accusations of sexual harassment made by a former anchor.Below, a look at the two-decade shared history of Fox News and Mr. Ailes.The network was started on Oct. 7, 1996, by Rupert Murdoch, who hired Roger Ailes as its founding chief executive. Among its first shows were “The O’Reilly Report” (later renamed “The O’Reilly Factor”) and “Hannity & Colmes.”AdvertisementExecutives asserted that the network would take a “fair and balanced” approach, and Mr. Ailes said other news outlets were often unfair when covering topics like religion. Ted Turner, who started CNN as a 24-hour news channel in 1980, said he looked “forward to crushing Rupert Murdoch like a bug.”AdvertisementBy January 2002, Fox News surpassed CNN in the ratings and became the No. 1 cable news channel. It has remained on top since. After the Sept. 11, attacks, Fox News began promoting military issues. Many programs and correspondents covered the fighting in Afghanistan with a sense of patriotism. Fox News Channel’s political talk shows were dominated by conservative commentators, including many of the “neoconservatives” who had pushed for the war in Iraq.During the early years of the Iraq war, media critics took note of what seemed to be an explicitly pro-war stance, even when issues like torture and waterboarding came to light.Mr. Ailes never ceded any biases in the news coverage. “If we look conservative, it’s because the other guys are so far to the left,” Mr. Ailes said in an interview in The New York Times Magazine.Brit Hume, once of ABC News, was one of the most prominent hires that Mr. Ailes made when the network began in 1996. Over the years, he hired Greta Van Susteren away from CNN, and he hired Chris Wallace, a longtime network correspondent, in 2003.Anchors like Bill O’Reilly, Glenn Beck and Sean Hannity became bona fide stars, with influence that spread beyond the network and made them best-selling authors and highly rated radio hosts.Megyn Kelly has become one of the more recognizable faces on the network, especially during this year’s election cycle.AdvertisementFox News’s perceived biases and style have long been fodder for various comedians. Fox News hasn’t always taken kindly to the criticism. In August 2003, Fox News sued Al Franken (then a comedian, now a senator), saying he had violated its trademark on the slogan “Fair and Balanced” in the title for a book he had written. (Fox News lost the suit).The topics of discussion on various Fox shows were a favorite target for Jon Stewart when he was the host of “The Daily Show.” Mr. Stewart said that he talked about the network a lot because it was “truly a terrible, cynical, disingenuous news organization.”Conservative-leaning pundits, in particular Bill O’Reilly, were also the basis of the character played by Stephen Colbert on Comedy Central’s “The Colbert Report.”In 2009, as the Tea Party movement gained strength, Fox hosts actively covered and promoted Tea Party rallies. Issues ranging from big government to questioning President Obama’s birthplace were long-running topics of discussion on various shows.Donald J. Trump even entered the “birther” debate by notably proclaiming his doubts on Fox News.“A birther is a person that wants — these are great Americans in many cases, in most cases — they want to see the president was born in this country,” Mr. Trump told Fox News’s Greta Van Susteren in March 2011. “They want to see the president actually has a birth certificate.”Tensions between Fox News and the Obama administration escalated in the first term. “I’ve got one television station that is entirely devoted to attacking my administration,” Mr. Obama said in 2009. Over his time in office, however, Mr. Obama has done one-on-one interviews with Fox News hosts like Bill O’Reilly and Chris Wallace.Fox News’s reach is evident in the latest election race. Its ratings during primary debates soared, netting viewership generally reserved for popular sports events.The Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, had a strained relationship with Fox News during the primaries, with the Fox journalist Megyn Kelly becoming one of his biggest objects of ridicule. But after months of hostility and public antics, Ms. Kelly and Mr. Trump reached a détente of sorts in May. Mr. Trump also regularly called in to other shows on the network.Just weeks before the national conventions, however, Fox News and Mr. Ailes were again in the spotlight when the former Fox News anchor Gretchen Carlson filed a sexual harassment suit against him. The lawsuit prompted 21st Century Fox, the network’s parent company, to start an internal investigation, which eventually led to the departure of Mr. Ailes.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.