By CHAD BRAYJULY 20, 2016
LONDON — The bond giant Pimco has hired Emmanuel Roman, the chief executive of the British hedge fund manager Man Group, as its new top executive, as the California-based fund looks to turn around its fortunes.The announcement comes nearly two years after William H. Gross, Pimco’s co-founder — who is known as the “bond king” — was forced out and joined its rival, Janus Capital Group.The hiring of Mr. Roman, a former Goldman Sachs banker who joined Man in 2010, comes at a pivotal time for Pimco, which is owned by the German insurer Allianz.Pacific Investment Management Company, or Pimco, has seen hundreds of billions of dollars in client assets walk out the door since Mr. Gross’s departure, and it is facing a lawsuit by Mr. Gross accusing the company of wrongful termination and seeking $200 million in damages.AdvertisementPimco has called the lawsuit “legally groundless” and is seeking its dismissal.“Manny’s deep understanding of global markets, unique skills in investment management and appreciation of Pimco’s macro-based investment process make him the ideal executive to position the firm for long-term success,” Daniel J. Ivascyn, Pimco’s chief investment officer, said in a news release on Tuesday.AdvertisementMr. Roman will join Pimco on Nov. 1, replacing Douglas Hodge as chief executive, and will be based at the company’s headquarters in Newport Beach. Mr. Roman, 52, joined Man in 2010 after it acquired GLG Partners, where he was co-chief executive. He has nearly 30 years of experience in the investment industry, including 18 years at Goldman Sachs.Mr. Hodge will move into a new role as managing director and senior adviser, Pimco said.At Pimco, Mr. Roman will find a company that has struggled to regain its stride — and client trust — since the departures of Mr. Gross and Mohamed A. El-Erian, the company’s former chief executive.Mr. El-Erian, who had long been seen as Mr. Gross’s heir apparent and had served as Pimco’s most prominent spokesman, abruptly left the company in January 2014. Mr. Gross was forced out about nine months later.Client withdrawals at Pimco have weighed on the operating profit of Allianz’s asset management arm in recent years, and they have caused some investors to call for the insurer to take a more direct role in managing Pimco.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Allianz said that in the first quarter of 2016, those outflows at Pimco slowed, but continued to weigh on its overall client assets in its asset management arm. Allianz had 9 billion euros, or about $9.9 billion, in net outflows in the three-month period, driven by clients pulling funds from Pimco, the company said. That was compared with €62 billion in outflows in the first quarter of 2015.In June, Pimco notified employees that it was cutting 68 jobs, or about 3 percent of its work force, and closing some funds as part of a cost-cutting effort.Man Group, based in London, is one of the world’s largest publicly traded hedge fund managers, and it has seen its business stabilize under the leadership of Mr. Roman, who took the chief executive’s role in 2013.The company began as a barrel maker along the Thames River in London in 1783 and evolved into an investment manager. It has offices in 16 countries and had $78.6 billion in assets under management as of the end of March.AdvertisementUnder Mr. Roman, Man has made a variety of acquisitions as it looks to expand the geographic base of institutional investors and increase the scope of its operations in the American market.Since 2013, it has reached deals to buy Pine Grove Asset Management, a hedge fund manager with offices in New York and Summit, N.J.; Numeric Holdings, an investment manager based in Boston; Silvermine Capital Management, a leveraged loan manager based in Connecticut; and a portfolio of funds with about $1.2 billion in assets from Merrill Lynch Alternative Investments, a unit of Bank of America.In the first quarter, Man had inflows of $500 million in new client money, a positive sign for Mr. Roman’s turnaround efforts. That was compared with outflows of $1.3 billion in the same quarter a year earlier.Luke Ellis, Man’s president, will succeed Mr. Roman as chief executive on Sept. 1, the company said on Wednesday. Mr. Ellis has been with Man since 2010.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.