AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill VlasicDETROIT — Despite federal safety investigations of Tesla’s self-driving cars, the company’s chief executive, Elon Musk, is hardly backing off on his grand plans for autonomous vehicles.In a blog post late Wednesday, Mr. Musk updated Tesla’s “master plan” with a pledge to expand beyond electric cars into battery-powered pickups, semitrucks and buses, and to equip them with advanced self-driving systems.He made no mention of the fatal May 7 accident involving a Tesla Model S with its Autopilot system engaged, or of the federal scrutiny of the technology. A criticism of that system has been that, despite its name, its collision-avoidance abilities depend on the human driver’s being ready to immediately retake control of the vehicle in a crisis.In his blog post, Mr. Musk indicated that the eventual focus would be on vehicles that fully drive themselves. And he doubled down on promises to improve Tesla’s autonomous driving systems, as part of a major expansion of its product line.“As the technology matures, all Tesla vehicles will have the hardware necessary to be fully self-driving with fail-operational capability, meaning that any given system could break down and your car will drive itself safety,” he said in the post.Mr. Musk, however, gave no timetable for the technology and acknowledged that regulators were moving cautiously before approving vehicles that drive themselves.“There will still be a significant time gap, varying widely by jurisdiction, before true self-driving is approved by regulators,” he said.Two federal agencies, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and the National Transportation Safety Board, are investigating Tesla’s Autopilot system, in particular its emergency braking function.The Transportation Department is also developing initial guidelines for self-driving vehicles that could transform the automotive landscape and open the door for autonomous models from a number of manufacturers.Mr. Musk’s strategy also included a vigorous defense of his proposal to merge Tesla, which is losing hundreds of millions of dollars a year, with SolarCity, a money-losing solar-panel maker in which he has a major ownership stake.From Zip2 to OpenAI, a look at the entrepreneur’s many companies.He said Tesla’s mission to build zero-emission vehicles and battery packs would be complemented by SolarCity’s sales of solar panels. “The time has come to bring them together,” he said.A major expansion of Tesla’s California car assembly plant is already underway to increase production to fill more than 300,000 orders for its planned Model 3 sedan, whose price of about $35,000 would be about half that of the Model S.The company is also preparing to begin production of batteries at a new factory in Nevada.But Mr. Musk is already setting bigger targets for future electric vehicles.He said the company was developing a compact sport utility vehicle, a “new kind” of pickup truck, buses for public transit and the Tesla Semi truck, which could be unveiled as soon as next year.But while Mr. Musk is envisioning a wide-ranging line of future products, analysts are more concerned with Tesla’s ability to deliver on its current expansion plans.“Elon Musk has laid out a grandiose plan for the future with no time frames and few specifics, and no mention of how and when Tesla will be profitable,” said Michelle Krebs, an analyst with the firm AutoTrader.Another analyst, Jessica Caldwell of Edmunds.com, said Mr. Musk was further differentiating Tesla from traditional automakers.“Tesla’s goals are far different from that of other automakers because they start and end with completely eliminating the need for fossil fuels,” she said. “Its competition, meanwhile, is focused on mobility solutions first and energy sources second.”The competition, too, is mainly making money. On Thursday, for example, General Motors said it had a profit of about $2.9 billion in the second quarter, in which it sold 2.4 million vehicles globally.That compares with the 14,000 vehicles Tesla has said it delivered to customers in the second quarter. The company is not scheduled to announce its second-quarter financial results until Aug. 3.In the first quarter, Tesla lost $282 million.Advertisement