By MICHAEL M. GRYNBAUMJULY 21, 2016
For hundreds of Fox News employees gathered in Cleveland for the Republican National Convention, the abrupt resignation of Roger Ailes came as a disorienting shock. Mr. Ailes, who dominated the network for two decades, is facing multiple allegations of sexual harassment by women who worked at Fox, including Gretchen Carlson, the former anchor who sued Mr. Ailes this month.On Thursday in Cleveland, hours before covering the convention’s final night, several Fox anchors who were close to Mr. Ailes broke their silence about his departure and its impact on the network. The anchors mostly demurred when asked directly about the allegations against Mr. Ailes, whose ouster has been celebrated by critics who say he created a hostile environment for women.Chris Wallace, “Fox News Sunday” anchor:“Roger Ailes is the best boss I’ve had in almost a half a century in journalism. I admired him tremendously professionally, and loved him personally. He and Rupert came up with the idea of Fox in the beginning, and as sad as I am for Roger to go, I can’t think of a better person to keep the vision of Fox News going than Rupert. ... I intend to stay at Fox and work for Rupert as hard and as loyally as I did for Roger.“There are people in tears. I shed mine a couple of days ago when the stories started to come out, that made this day seem like it was likely. I never knew a boss who transmitted a sense of mission, a team of common purpose, more than Roger did. And the thing that’s different from any place I ever worked is, people feel a personal connection to Roger, and I think a lot of people feel a deep sense of personal loss.”Bret Baier, chief political anchor, whose family is close to Mr. Ailes:“I think it’s very sad, to be honest. It was tough, but we have a job to do. It’s a big night tonight, we had a big night last night. We’ve all worked with and for Rupert for a long time, and so in one sense it will be a continuation. But in another sense, it feels bad. And it’s a bad feeling. Roger was always great to me, and my family, I’ve always talked about that, and it’s tough to see him go.“It’s a mixture of dealing with the reality of this news and the sadness of it, and the import and the big job that we have tonight. ... We’ll deal with how to work in this new atmosphere day-to-day. I don’t think it’s going to change much from my perspective, as what I do every day. I think a lot of what we do on the news side is bottom-up, and it’s always been that way. I’m betting that Rupert is going to continue that exact same process.”Asked about the allegations against Mr. Ailes, Mr. Baier said: “I don’t know all the stuff that’s out there. I don’t know what they’re dealing with; I haven’t seen or heard anything. I know the Roger I know.”Mr. Baier said that, like some other Fox anchors, his contract includes a clause stating that if Mr. Ailes leaves, he can, too.“I’m really happy at Fox, and as long as, you know, things are going like they’re going, I think I couldn’t be happier.”Mike Huckabee, former governor of Arkansas, former host of Fox’s “Huckabee,” now a network contributor:“I love the guy. I mean he’s been great. That’s all I want to say. I love the guy, and he’s been really, really good to me.”Brit Hume, senior political analyst and a 20-year Fox veteran, echoed that sentiment:“I’m absolutely heartbroken that all this happened. I love the guy, and I love working for him.”Later, Mr. Hume returned to clarify his remarks:“When I said I love the guy, that’s present tense.”Asked if he would remain at Fox for the long haul, Mr. Hume replied: “At my age, there’s no long haul left.”Greta Van Susteren, host, “On the Record”:“There’s no question it’s tough. I went through a change at CNN back in 2001. It’s tough, but I would tell you, it’s quite inspiring to all of us that Rupert Murdoch flew back and he’s taking over the helm, and he made everyone feel really good. He’s not changing anything. So change is always tough, but I think Rupert Murdoch coming back was a big deal for all of us.”Asked if she is planning to stay, Ms. Van Susteren laughed and walked away, saying: “I’ve got a show to do.”A version of this article appears in print on July 22, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Reaction at Fox News.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.