By ELISABETH MALKINSEPT. 30, 2015
MEXICO CITY — As the price of oil was plummeting in July, the Mexican government auctioned off leases to explore blocks in the Gulf of Mexico. With energy companies retrenching, the auction was a failure.But Mexico’s fortunes changed on Wednesday. In a follow-up auction, the Mexican government put five production blocks up for bid and awarded contracts for three, well above the average for similar auctions in Latin America.The success of Wednesday’s bidding appeared to put the government’s new oil policy back on track. Mexico has ended more than 75 years of a state monopoly to invite in foreign investment in an attempt to end a decade-long decline in oil production.Investors were attracted by relaxed rules and by the characteristics of the blocks, which hold probable oil and gas reserves, analysts said.Advertisement“I think the message is clear,” said Oscar López Velarde, Ernst and Young’s oil and gas tax leader in Mexico, who advised some of the bidding companies. “As soon as you see a good selection of blocks, you will see people coming into the country.”AdvertisementThe Italian national oil company Eni International won the block that attracted the most bids, offering more than double the government’s minimum price. An Argentine-led consortium including Pan American Energy, in which BP has a stake, won a second block.The third block had only one bidder, a consortium made up of an American company, Fieldwood Energy, and a Mexican company, Petrobal. The former director of exploration and production for Mexico’s state-owned company Petróleos Mexicanos, Carlos Morales Gil, is the director of Petrobal.Another auction, set for the middle of next year, is likely to attract the most interest. Those are for deepwater areas in the Gulf of Mexico, just south of American waters where international oil companies have found large reserves of oil and gas.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Does any of what worked today work for deep water?” said Jeremy M. Martin, director of the energy program at Institute of the Americas in La Jolla, Calif. “That’s what they need to work out in the coming weeks and months.”For the July auction, the first to offer production-sharing agreements for private investments, rigid regulations for the bidding and the type of blocks being offered for exploration ended with the disappointing result: Contracts for only two of 14 blocks up for bid were awarded.This time around, the National Hydrocarbons Commission in Mexico relaxed many of the rules and gave companies two weeks’ advance notice on the minimum price that it would accept, a measure intended to give companies time to adjust their bids. It also extended what companies could do in the areas up for auction, adding the right to explore for new oil as well as pumping oil from the existing reserves.“I think it was another good sign that the government took the approach to fix what did not work in the first bid,” said José Antonio Prado, a lawyer with Holland & Knight, who has worked in the energy industry.With the blocks auctioned on Wednesday holding probable reserves, production is expected to begin as early as 2020, according to Pablo Medina, an analyst at Wood Mackenzie, an oil consultancy.“The assets are good,” said Read Taylor, executive vice president for Sierra Oil and Gas, a Mexican company with backing from the American private equity firms Riverstone and BlackRock. Sierra won the two blocks that were awarded in the first auction but was left empty-handed on Wednesday. “It was a very competitive market today.”An article on Thursday about Mexico’s most recent auction of offshore oil leases misstated the surname of a lawyer with Holland & Knight who commented on the results. He is José Antonio Prado, not Pardo.A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Successful Auction for Oil Drilling Contracts in Mexico After Weak Debut .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.