AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressUnited States markets closed lower on Thursday as investors hit the pause button after a record-setting streak. Several companies, including Intel and Southwest Airlines, reported earnings that disappointed investors. Shares of industrial and materials companies had some of the biggest declines.KEEPING SCORE The Dow Jones industrial average ended the day down 0.42 percent and the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index fell 0.36 percent. The Nasdaq composite index fell 0.31 percent. On Wednesday, the S.&P. 500 and the Dow set new highs and the Dow had a ninth consecutive day of gains.HOW MUCH HIGHER? Stocks have risen steadily since hitting a bottom nearly a month ago, helped by better-than-expected reports on corporate earnings and the economy. But while the data has often topped analysts’ forecasts, it hasn’t been very strong. Corporate earnings most likely weakened last quarter, for example, and the economy is still growing at a weaker rate than before the Great Recession. That could keep stocks hemmed in, said Rich Weiss, senior portfolio manager at American Century.“It’s a confounding market,” he said. “This is a case where the U.S. stock market is the only place to go. It’s the best relative purchase out of markets.”Even though stock prices may look expensive relative to how much profit companies are earning, Mr. Weiss said American stocks could stay high because foreign stocks and bonds looked even less attractive.BETTER PROFIT Shares of General Motors rose 1.9 percent after the company said its profit last quarter more than doubled from a year ago. The company also raised its earnings forecast for the year.FULLY EQUIPPED Shares of United Rentals rose 10.2 percent after strong quarterly results.EBAY RISES Shares of eBay were up 11.6 percent after the company reported stronger-than-expected earnings for the latest quarter.SOUTHWEST FALLS Southwest Airlines stock fell 10.4 percent after the company reported revenue and earnings growth that fell short of analysts’ expectations. The stock had the biggest decline in the S.&P. 500.INTEL SLIDES Shares of the chip maker Intel fell 4.5 percent. The company reported slower revenue growth last quarter than analysts expected.EUROPEAN MARKETS In Germany, the DAX edged up 0.1 percent, and in France, the CAC 40 lost 0.1 percent. The FTSE 100 was down 0.4 percent in Britain.EUROPE GROWTH The European Central Bank left all its interest rates at record lows, but its chief, Mario Draghi, said it could add further stimulus as it gets a better sense of the effects of Britain’s recent vote to leave the European Union.ASIA’S DAY The Nikkei 225 ended up 0.8 percent in Japan, while in Hong Kong, the Hang Seng gained 0.6 percent. The Shanghai composite index added 0.4 percent in China. The Kospi slipped nearly 0.2 percent in South Korea.COMMODITIES The price of United States crude oil dropped 66 cents, to $45.09 a barrel. Brent crude, the international benchmark, fell 56 cents to $46.61 a barrel. Gold rose $11.70, or 0.9 percent, to $1,331 an ounce.CURRENCIES AND BONDS Bond prices rose slightly. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note slipped to 1.57 percent from 1.58 percent a day earlier. The dollar fell to 106.03 Japanese yen from 106.87 yen late Wednesday. The euro rose to $1.1011 from $1.1005.Advertisement