AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsMichael Elliott, a journalistic anomaly who held management positions at the world’s three major English-language newsweeklies before mutating from editor to humanitarian, died on July 14 in Washington. He was 65.The One Campaign, the advocacy group co-founded by the rock star Bono to combat extreme poverty and preventable disease, announced his death. Mr. Elliott was the group’s president and chief executive from 2011 until he retired this year. His wife, Emma Oxford, said the cause was complications of bladder cancer.Mr. Elliott had earlier been editor of Time International and Newsweek International, and Washington bureau chief and political editor of The Economist.Born in Britain and educated at Oxford, he was an accidental journalist. He had been a college teacher and, at 33, was about to be hired as a management consultant when Andrew Knight, the editor of The Economist, persuaded him to join the magazine.“He told me, ‘You will make much less money but you will have much more fun,’” Mr. Elliott once said, “both of which were true.”Mr. Elliott went on to distinguish himself as an infectiously passionate and buoyant, if sometimes discombobulated, editor. (Sartorially, he could be picked out by his signature kangaroo-skin Akubra bush hat.) At Time, he wrote more than 20 cover articles. At The Economist, he inaugurated the Bagehot and Lexington columns on British and American politics.He made his turn toward humanitarianism while working for Newsweek, after the magazine ran an article in 2000 titled “Can Bono Save the Third World?” When a headhunter for Bono’s organization came calling, Mr. Elliott was primed to decide that after years of writing about problems, it was time to do something about them.“As a journalist he was special because he had a huge amount of heart,” Walter Isaacson, a former managing editor of Time, said in an email, “and that helped him make the unusual leap into the humanitarian realm and be so inspiring at it.”Rarely deskbound, Mr. Elliott exercised hands-on leadership, dealing with refugees from the Middle East and hunger in sub-Sahara Africa as the One Campaign’s membership rose to more than seven million from two million. The group, founded in 2004, lobbies governments to fight disease, expand access to energy and combat corruption.“Above all else, he wanted his life to be useful,” Bono, of U2, said in a recorded tribute played at Mr. Elliott’s retirement party two days before he died.“His decades as scribe and editor had not made him cynical,” Bono continued. “Rather he saw himself as an evidence-based optimist.”He typically invoked Winnie-the-Pooh’s maxim: “Mustn’t grumble.”Michael John Elliott was born in Liverpool on May 31, 1951, the son of William Stewart Elliott, a secondary school headmaster, and the former Evelyn Barclay.He was raised in a home where, he recalled, “the ‘Messiah’ was considered light entertainment.” While his parents never flew in a plane and lived and worked within four miles of where they were born, Michael began his global travels by hitchhiking to London when he was 15.After earning a bachelor’s degree in jurisprudence in 1972 and a bachelor of civil law degree at Worcester College, Oxford, he taught at Northwestern University in Illinois and had a tenured professorship at the London School of Economics and Political Science.In addition to his wife, he is survived by their daughters, Roxana and Gina Elliott; his brother, Ian; and his sister, Angela Rees.In 1986, two years after joining The Economist, Mr. Elliott moved to the United States as Washington bureau chief. He left in 1993 for Newsweek, where he was diplomatic editor and then editor of the international edition, and later in 2000 went to Time, where he became international editor in 2005. He was also a presenter for a current affairs program on the British ITV network.Mr. Elliott wrote four books, including “The Day Before Yesterday,” a rosy view of his adopted country. (Although he had an honorary knighthood, he became a United States citizen in 2006.)“Mr. Elliott’s brisk account is so sharply written, so relentlessly fair-minded and so packed with unexpected asides and bright mini-essays that it will probably engage even those who are bound to resist its sunny thesis,” John Leo, a columnist for U.S. News & World Report, wrote in The New York Times Book Review in 1996.At his retirement party, Mr. Elliott ended his speech by reciting a passage from Derek Walcott’s poem “Omeros,” about women lugging coal. It expressed his hope that fellow writers would articulate the struggles of ordinary people:Look, they climb, and no one knows themThey take their copper pittances, and your dutyFrom the time you watched them from your grandmother’s houseAs a child wounded by their power and beautyIs the chance you now have, to give those feet a voice.Advertisement