AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — The eurozone is in a state of uncertainty. It is still dealing with the aftershocks of financial and debt crises. It is coping with new threats like Britain’s vote to leave the European Union. And it is guarding against a shaky banking system in Italy.So when Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, and the bank’s Governing Council met on Thursday, they held interest rates steady — the benchmark rate was kept at zero — but there were still plenty of issues to address. Mr. Draghi’s words are followed closely in financial markets, and he was questioned closely about those issues.Here is what he had to say:“Euro area financial markets have weathered the spike in uncertainty and volatility with encouraging resilience.”“It’s too early to say what is going to be the final impact. The only thing that we can say is that it’s a risk that has materialized, and it’s a downside risk.”The financial fallout so far from Britain’s vote last month to leave the European Union has not been as bad as expected. The European Central Bank did not need to take any overt action to calm markets, but Mr. Draghi said that the bank’s announced willingness to deal with any shocks — as well as historically low interest rates and strong regulations — helped limit any negative reaction. Much will depend on how long it takes for Britain to negotiate its exit, he said.He was not asked about expectations the central bank will again try to bring financial market clearing operations — which serve as intermediaries in financial transactions — into the eurozone, from London. The central bank has tried that before, but it was blocked by the European courts. A renewed effort may be easier, as Britain may no longer be part of the European Union’s single market and would not have the clout to prevent it. Frankfurt or Paris would be likely alternatives.“Some steps have been undertaken in Italy.”“They are certainly steps in the right direction. More should be done.”Italy’s banks may be in trouble. They are groaning under the weight of 360 billion euros, or $396 billion, in bad loans, but many are too weak to raise the money they need to absorb any losses.That is a problem for the European Central Bank, which is in charge of bank supervision across the eurozone. Italy will be a test of the central bank’s crisis management skills, and of new European Union rules intended to ensure that taxpayers do not have to pay for bank rescues. Those rules say bank shareholders and creditors — for example, owners of bonds issued by the banks — should suffer first. But forcing shareholders and creditors to take the losses could create shock waves in financial markets.Mr. Draghi is well acquainted with the landscape. He was previously governor of the Bank of Italy, and, before that, he spent a decade as director general of the Italian Treasury.Eurozone banks in general “are better if not much better than they were before” in terms of the danger they might go out of business, Mr. Draghi said. But he expressed concern that they are not very profitable, and that bank share prices were low, noting that banks have more trouble raising new capital from investors if their share prices are depressed.“We have given enough evidence not only of our readiness to act, and our willingness to act, but also to being able to adapt our programs so as to reach the objective.”The European Central Bank started buying bonds issued by eurozone countries in March 2015, part of a program called quantitative easing — a form of money printing intended to cut market interest rates and stimulate the eurozone economy. It has so far accumulated government debt worth €875 billion.The program has succeeded in pushing down interest rates, in some cases below zero. But the supply of such bonds is finite. By some calculations, the central bank will have trouble keeping its promise to maintain the debt purchases at least until March 2017. It said on Thursday that it would continue its pace of bond buying, and Mr. Draghi countered claims by some economists that the central bank will run out of debt to buy by arguing that the bank had shown a history of being ready and willing to adjust its bond-purchase plan in the face of changing circumstances.He declined to comment, however, on whether the bank could, for example, loosen its self-imposed restrictions on the bond buying. In particular, the bank could give itself more leeway to avoid bonds from Germany, which are in such demand that they have negative yields, meaning investors are willing to pay money, rather than receive interest, to own them.Follow Jack Ewing on Twitter @JackEwingNYT.Advertisement