By SAM ROBERTSJULY 22, 2016
William Gaines, an investigative reporter for The Chicago Tribune who shared two Pulitzer Prizes for exposing corruption in Chicago and was a finalist for a third, died on Wednesday in Munster, Ind. He was 82.The cause was complications of Parkinson’s disease, his daughter, Michelle Gaines, said.Mr. Gaines, who joined The Tribune in 1963 and uncovered malfeasance for most of his tenure, until he retired in 2001, won his first Pulitzer in 1976 for local investigative specialized reporting on a newspaper team that exposed mortgage abuse in federal housing programs and horrific conditions at two private hospitals — including one where, while working undercover as a janitor, he was enlisted to assist during surgery.“The experience was frightening to me; it was depressing,” he wrote in a Tribune column in 1975, “for I knew that it was not just a fluke that I, a janitor, had been called on to do the work of trained orderlies and nurses’ aides.”He shared his second Pulitzer in 1988, for investigative reporting, with Dean Baquet, now the executive editor of The New York Times, and Ann Marie Lipinski, now the curator of the Nieman Foundation for Journalism at Harvard University. The prize recognized a series of articles that uncovered waste and self-dealing in the Chicago City Council. The Pulitzer board called the series “a model of municipal reporting.”AdvertisementIn 1996, Mr. Gaines and The Tribune’s David Jackson were finalists in the investigative reporting category for what the Pulitzer board described as “stories that probed questionable business dealings” by the Nation of Islam.Advertisement“Bill Gaines was one of the last of the great Chicago undercover reporters,” Mr. Baquet said this week. “He played a janitor in a bad hospital to get evidence of poor care firsthand. And he played a sick indigent man to try to prove ambulances don’t pick you up if you can’t pay.”In the late 1970s, The Chicago Sun-Times’s surreptitious operation of a bar to document shakedowns by city inspectors generated a criticism from fellow journalists against similar forms of deception in news gathering. “So Bill shifted gears and became the finest public records expert I know,” Mr. Baquet said. “He could find anything in obscure records across the country before the internet placed all online.”Howard Reich, a Tribune critic with whom Mr. Gaines wrote “Jelly’s Blues: The Life, Music and Redemption of Jelly Roll Morton” (2003), said that despite all his awards, Mr. Gaines was so unpretentious that potential targets of his investigations underestimated him.“How much of a threat can he be?” Mr. Reich wrote in The Tribune. To which he replied, “You have no idea.”William Chester Gaines was born in Indianapolis on Nov. 1, 1933, to Philip Gaines, a grocery owner, and the former Georgia Smith.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After graduating from Butler University in Indianapolis in 1956 with a bachelor of science degree in broadcasting, he served with the Armed Forces Radio and Television Service in Germany. When he returned, he worked as a reporter for various radio stations and was president of the South Bend radio station WAMJ.In addition to his daughter, he is survived by his wife, the former Nellie Gilyan; two sons, Michael and Matthew; and six grandchildren.After retiring from The Tribune, Mr. Gaines was named to the Knight chair in journalism at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.AdvertisementSeveral of his students conducted an extensive study that concluded in 2003 that the Washington Post Watergate source known as Deep Throat was Fred F. Fielding, a former associate counsel to President Richard M. Nixon. Two years later, W. Mark Felt, the F.B.I.’s second in command during the Nixon administration, revealed that in fact he was Deep Throat. Mr. Gaines advised his students that it was “a learning experience for all of us.”After retiring from teaching, he was named professor emeritus in 2007.Mr. Gaines’s ambition to become an investigative reporter manifested itself when he was a college student working part time as a radio newscaster.“It seemed the news was going into my eyes and out of my mouth without pausing in brain matter,” he wrote in 2007 in his textbook, “Investigative Journalism: Proven Strategies for Reporting the Story.”But covering Indiana and Michigan as a reporter for broadcast networks and spending his first decade at The Tribune as a print reporter left him unsatisfied, Mr. Gaines said. Being just an observer was not enough.“I discovered that I would have to be an investigative reporter to satisfy my quest for finding and reporting the news,” he wrote. “In this role I could investigate and then report on my own findings; I could help by revealing wrongdoing.”A version of this article appears in print on July 23, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: William Gaines, 82, Prizewinning Investigative Reporter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.