
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

JULY 22, 2016
The ExamWorks Group buyout and related lawsuit shows how changing takeover laws are steering shareholders toward more appraisal actions and making deals riskier for buyers.I wrote about ExamWorks and the litigation surrounding its $2.2 billion buyout by the private equity firm Leonard Green earlier this month. The complaint filed in Delaware Chancery Court says that the buyout process was flawed in large part because of the participation of management and board members. It also takes a swipe at ExamWorks’ bankers, the investment banks Evercore and Goldman Sachs, as being unduly conflicted. And it says ExamWorks’ law firm, Paul Hastings, was also conflicted because it represented management, the company and the special committee.A recent case will shape how the ExamWorks case unfolds and also chart a path for the future of merger litigation.In the Delaware Supreme Court’s decision in K.K.R. Financial last October, the court held that a fully informed vote of disinterested stockholders is a protection to the transaction. If bad deeds were disclosed and the shareholders approved the deal knowing about them, then the courts would look no further. Any liability goes away.AdvertisementThis affects the plaintiff’s strategy in ExamWorks (the lawyers are two prominent plaintiffs’ firms, Prickett, Jones and Kessler Topaz). In this case, they say there is not full disclosure of the conflicts. But even if there were, the shareholder vote on the deal would destroy the ExamWorks plaintiffs’ case. The decision in the K.K.R. Financial case creates a Catch-22 for plaintiffs – you need to plead good facts for your complaint to make a case. But the disclosure of these facts means that your case goes away if shareholders approve this transaction.AdvertisementThe K.K.R. decision is a huge boon to defendants in takeovers, encouraging them to disclose everything to avoid litigation. After all, when the time comes to vote on a deal most shareholders, particularly institutional investors, seem happy enough to accept the premium even if it was not as high as it could have been.Plaintiffs’ lawyers are still trying to game how the K.K.R. decision affects their cases. There are at least two ways around this, neither of which is happening in ExamWorks.The first is appraisal rights, where shareholders who believe they haven’t gotten good value for their shares ask a court to assess their value. In the recent Dell decision, Judge Travis Laster (who is the same judge in the ExamWorks case) made it clear that if the sale process was run improperly, then the merger price should not be used to make an appraisal rights award. Instead, it should become a matter of fair value. In the Dell case, that meant the shareholders exercising their appraisal rights received a higher price.The K.K.R. case does not apply to appraisal proceedings. And so, presumably we should see a fair bit of appraisal rights action in ExamWorks and other cases where there are questions about the deal process. The ExamWorks transaction seems ripe for an appraisal action because the premium was only 4 percent over the closing price of the stock the day before the transaction was announced.Buyers often deal with this issue by putting a condition in their deals that they are not required to close if more than 5 or 10 percent of shareholders exercise appraisal rights. But surprisingly, no such provision was put in the ExamWorks deal. And so this may leave Leonard Green with a big liability after the transaction closes, one that will not be covered by insurance.The second approach is to bring a preliminary injunction to halt the deal. In the K.K.R. case the court noted a difference between litigation that comes after the completion of the deal and litigation before its completion. Litigation after would be subject to dismissal if the facts were fully disclosed and approval was given — according to the K.K.R. rule decided by the Delaware court in October. However, before completion, when there is only the opportunity to enjoin the transaction, the old higher standards apply, requiring the company to get the highest price reasonably available.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And so, in this situation and to avoid application of the K.K.R. rule, the plaintiff would try to enjoin the deal arguing that it was unfairly negotiated. The problem with this approach is that the Delaware courts have made it clear that they are opposed to halting transactions. Indeed, in the recent Delaware Supreme Court case involving the merger of C&J Energy Services and Nabors Industries, the court seemed to go out of its way to say that an injunction to halt a pending merger should be used sparingly.To be fair, it has happened. The very same judge here did so in the Del Monte case, where he enjoined the deal and stripped out all the deal protections to allow for a higher bidder. But the ultimate problem is that it does not result in money damages for shareholders (and it also means fewer attorneys’ fees for the law firms bringing these cases).AdvertisementAnd so the K.K.R. decision seems to channel shareholders into seeking appraisal rights if they feel aggrieved, and we will find out if that happens in the ExamWorks case.But this still leaves the plaintiffs in the ExamWorks case wondering whether their battle will produce a big judgment or settlement. To deal with this issue, the ExamWorks litigation is going a third route. The plaintiffs’ lawyers originally opted for the second route, a preliminary injunction. They did so to avoid the problem of the K.K.R. decision and a Delaware law that allows ExamWorks to exculpate its directors from liability for all but bad faith conduct and breaches of the duty of loyalty.At a hearing before Judge Laster two things happened. First, the judge looked favorably on a proposal by the defendants’ lawyers to have an expedited trial, because holding up the deal would be adverse to ExamWorks. Second, Judge Laster outlined how he would view K.K.R. and the issues of disclosure. In this case, he would apply “enhanced scrutiny in this context to determining whether a breach occurred.” If this was shown, he would turn to the damages and see if there was conduct in bad faith or a breach of the duty of loyalty to assess damages.In light of this, the plaintiffs dropped their request for a preliminary injunction and are now pursuing the expedited trial route, which will presumably take place after the deal closing. The plaintiffs reserved the right to bring new disclosure claims after the closing.The strategy here seems to be let the deal close and only amend for bad disclosure after that. And so the K.K.R. decision would not preclude shareholders from receiving monetary damages.It is a careful threading of the problem, and I admit I am not sure I understand exactly what the judge means here — there seem to be two assessments for breach. No doubt the law firms are also lining up appraisal clients, and this likely will be a sign of more to come. But watch the strategies and procedures here as this case will not just be about when and if lawyers can be held liable for misdeeds, but how litigation unfolds under the new game in town.Ultimately, we have two conclusions, though. Judge Laster may get a chance to detail how this litigation unfolds, and buyers beware.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »