
UPDATED December 5, 2016

Related Article
Elon Musk served as a real-life role model for Tony Stark, the superhero in the “Iron Man” movies. His personal life has provided fodder for tabloids. “Mr. Musk is about as close as we have,” a New York Times review of his biography said, “to early industrial titans like Henry Ford, Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller.” Here are his companies.After leaving South Africa for Canada at 17, Mr. Musk earned degrees in economics and physics at the University of Pennsylvania. In 1995, Mr. Musk went on to a graduate program in applied physics and materials science at Stanford. He stayed two days before dropping out to start Zip2, a dot-com publishing business that he started with his brother in 1995. The company helped newspapers develop city directory websites. Compaq bought the company in 1999 for $307 million in an effort to make its search engine, AltaVista, more competitive with rivals like Yahoo.Mr. Musk then founded X.com, which provided financial services and payment by email. X.com merged with Confinity to form PayPal, and Mr. Musk built it into the primary method that eBay bidders use to pay for their purchases.He took the company public and sold it to eBay for $1.5 billion in 2002. Mr. Musk was left with about $170 million after selling his stock.Instead of starting another internet company, he invested almost all of his PayPal fortune into more complex projects: $100 million into SpaceX, which he founded in 2002, $50 million into Tesla and $10 million into SolarCity.RelatedIt Pays to Have Pals in Silicon Valley (Oct. 17, 2006)Unable to find a feasible rocket to realize his dream of growing plants on Mars, Mr. Musk started his own rocket company. His long-term goal is to send people to Mars, which he regards as essential for the survival of humanity. SpaceX almost went out of business. The first three launchings of the small Falcon 1 rocket failed. One more failure, Mr. Musk said, and he would have run out of money. As he went through a divorce, he had to borrow money from friends.The fourth launching succeeded. In 2008, NASA awarded SpaceX a cargo contract, and in 2012, the company launched the first private craft to dock with the International Space Station.In 2015, Google, along with Fidelity, invested $1 billion in SpaceX. The rocket company has a NASA contract to fly astronauts to the station in 2017 and aims to land one of its capsules on the surface of Mars in 2018.RelatedAdding Rocket Man to His Résumé (Feb. 15, 2010)After Telsa unveiled its first electric car in 2006, the company attracted unprecedented interest despite a $100,000 price tag.In 2010, the Energy Department gave Tesla hundreds of millions in low-interest loans and the company had the first initial public offeringinitial public offering by an American automaker since Ford’s debut in 1956.Burning through cash and missing production targets, Tesla turned to investors and taxpayers in 2012. In a presidential debate that year, Mitt Romney included Tesla among a group of “losers.” But Tesla soon generated positive headlines, including a glowing review for the Model S from Consumer Reports. The company’s shares rose, and Tesla paid off the loans from the Energy Department. In 2013, a graphic YouTube video of a Model S engulfed in flames prompted questions about the safety of its lithium-ion batteries. A federal safety investigation ended after Tesla said it would provide more battery protection. And the company planned a $5 billion factory to produce batteries for a mass-market electric car.In 2015, Tesla unveiled a software update that would turn the Model S into a self-driving car. Mr. Musk later said the so-called Autopilot feature was “probably better than a person right now.”In June, it was revealed that a Model S driver in Florida had been killed while operating his car in self-driving mode. It was the first known fatality in a vehicle being operated by computer systems. The idea came to Mr. Musk and a cousin in a recreational vehicle heading to the Burning Man festival in 2004. Solar energy, they agreed, could be big.In 2014, SolarCity, the nation’s largest rooftop solar provider, was a Wall Street darling. Once nearly $86 a share, its stock price fell on doubts about a business model that relies on government subsidies and utility incentives.In November, investors in Tesla approved a takeover of the embattled solar company, which had been seen as a bailout of sorts.A hypothetical high-speed train would take people to San Francisco from Los Angeles in roughly 30 minutes. That is a speed of almost 800 miles an hour over a 400-mile transportation system. In 2013, Mr. Musk theorized that if he made it his top priority, he could have a prototype within a year or two. He estimated that the project would cost around $6 billion and that the price of a one-way ticket would be $20.RelatedA Hyperloop One Founder Sues the Start-Up He Left (July 13, 2016)Mr. Musk, Peter Thiel and Reid Hoffman said last year that they would establish an artificial-intelligence research center to develop “digital intelligence” to benefit humanity.The long-range goal of the organization, called OpenAI, will be to create an “artificial general intelligence,” a machine capable of performing any intellectual task that a human can, according to Mr. Musk. He has previously raised concerns about artificial intelligence, describing it as our “biggest existential threat.”Putting the two together will yield a green-energy company whose products include electric cars and solar panels for homes.AdvertisementPutting the two together will yield a green-energy company whose products include electric cars and solar panels for homes.