AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedThe charitable trust that controls Hershey has reached a tentative deal with the Pennsylvania attorney general that would shake up its governance, in exchange for warding off a potential legal battle.If a final agreement is reached, it would settle a monthslong dispute between Kathleen G. Kane, the Pennsylvania attorney general, and the Hershey Trust Company.Ms. Kane had set a July 31 deadline for the trust company to formally resolve issues arising from an earlier investigation into the organization.It is unclear what effect the settlement might have on the chocolate maker’s defense against an unwanted $23 billion takeover bid by a fellow snack maker, Mondelez International.Set up by Hershey’s founder, Milton S. Hershey, the trust is connected to a nonprofit school for needy children that was founded in 1909. The Milton Hershey School Trust owns 8.4 percent of the confectioner’s common shares and 81 percent of the special voting shares. But the shares are voted by the board of the Hershey Trust Company.Under the terms of the prospective final agreement, the trust would limit its trustees to 10-year terms, according to a person briefed on the matter who was not authorized to speak publicly. Three trustees — Robert F. Cavanaugh, James E. Nevels and Joseph M. Senser — would step down by the end of the year.The chairwoman of the trust, Velma A. Redmond, would step down by the end of 2017, along with another trustee, James M. Mead.A spokesman for the board of the Hershey Trust Company said in a statement on Friday that it had reached “an agreement in principle” with the attorney general and was “working on the final details in productive discussions” with the office.Pennsylvania’s first deputy attorney general, Bruce L. Castor Jr., said in a separate statement: “Yesterday, I met with board members and a lawyer for the trust, along with our people, and I agreed on behalf of the attorney general in principle to a series of changes that the trust would implement.”The prospective deal’s terms were reported earlier by Reuters.Advertisement