AdvertisementSupported byFair GameBy Gretchen MorgensonThink the world of accounting is dull? Then you don’t know about the new auditing rule that is about to raise many companies’ reported profits and bring greater clarity to the actual taxes big corporations pay.The rule change involves a new approach to stock option accounting, and it will have the greatest impact at companies that dispense oodles of these awards as employee compensation. It arrived in March to little fanfare and was imposed by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, which sets auditing standards for United States corporations.The new rule relates to the tax benefit that a company receives when it gives options to executives and workers. The change doesn’t affect what a company must pay in taxes related to its stock option grants. It simply shifts the place where a company reports the options-related tax benefit. The shift makes the benefit more evident to investors.The standards board changed the rule as part of its accounting simplification program, intended to reduce the costs and complexities of auditing standards and maintain “the usefulness of the information provided to users of financial statements,” as the regulator put it.But the change will have other effects. Along with appearing to juice many companies’ net earnings, it is likely to bring the spotlight back to the issue of low corporate taxes in America, possibly reigniting that debate.The new rule “sort of appeared from F.A.S.B. without any advance warning,” said Robert Willens, an authority on accounting and tax matters who flagged it in an early-April report for clients. “This is not something F.A.S.B. highlighted as one of their more important announcements, although I think it definitely is,” he said.Bear with me while I explain the mechanics of the rule.Every year, companies generate a tax benefit when they issue nonqualified stock options, the most common type. (Nonqualified options are ones that don’t qualify to be taxed at a more beneficial rate for the recipient.) The amount of the benefit to the company equals the cost of the options at the time they were dispensed multiplied by the company’s effective tax rate, generally 35 percent in the United States.A company does not immediately realize this tax benefit, though. Rather, it becomes a deferred tax asset on a company’s books. Only when employees exercise their options does a deduction actually occur.To compute how much a company is allowed to deduct from its taxes at that point, it must compare the exercise price of the option at the time of the grant with the stock price when the employee exercised it.When stocks are rising, as they have been recently, employees typically exercise their options at far higher levels than the prices at which the options were granted. That creates a larger tax benefit for a company than it anticipated; this excess amount is what the company deducts from its taxes.Nothing about this process has changed. What’s different under the new rule is where the deduction shows up on a company’s books.Under previous rules, the stock option tax benefit counted as a credit on a company’s balance sheet. But with the new rule, F.A.S.B. requires that the deduction run through the income statement. This deduction will enhance net profits, especially among big option issuers like health care and technology companies.Although the new rule does not take effect until 2017, some companies have already noted its likely effects. McKesson, the health care giant, said in late June that adhering to the accounting standard would add 20 cents a share to its  2017 fiscal year earnings, a 1.5 percent increase over its previous forecast.The bigger a company’s option grants, of course, the larger the effects of the rule will be on its net earnings.According to Equilar, the executive compensation analysis firm in Redwood City, Calif., health care companies topped the list of industries in options awards to their chief executives last year, a fairly good proxy for overall grants. Services companies, industrial goods manufacturers and technology concerns are also big options dispensers. Utilities granted the fewest options, Equilar said.In addition to making some companies’ bottom lines look better, Mr. Willens said, the deductions associated with the new rule will bring into focus the low tax rates these companies now pay. By shifting the tax benefit to the income statement, investors will have a much clearer picture of the actual tax outlays their companies make.The fact is, few companies pay the 35 percent effective corporate tax rate in the United States. Popular tax-reducing tactics — such as keeping cash earned overseas where tax rates are lower than in the United States — bring companies’ actual cash outlays for taxes far below their effective rates.Unfortunately, a company’s true tax rate is not something investors can determine from reading its financial statements. But the change in stock options accounting will give investors a closer approximation of the taxes a company actually pays.Consider Facebook, a big options granter. Its most recent annual financial filing indicates that it has $1.72 billion in unrecorded excess tax benefits resulting from share-based awards it has dispensed.“Once this proposal is implemented,” Mr. Willens said, the company’s “effective tax rate will go down by two-thirds. Instead of being 40 percent, it will be maybe 12 or 13 percent.”Of course, Facebook’s true tax rate may be even lower than that — we can’t tell. Still, the glimpse of what corporations actually pay in taxes, brought to light by the F.A.S.B. rule change, “could become a P.R. problem for these companies,” Mr. Willens said. “Some companies are going to be unhappy that these amounts will be reflected in the income statements, because they will be subjected to more criticism.”Another possible side effect of the accounting change, he said, involves the current corporate fad of earnings reports that don’t adhere to generally accepted accounting principles. These reported results — known as adjusted or pro forma earnings — eliminate certain costs and are therefore rosier than they would be under accounting rules.Employee stock grants are one of the costs that companies typically remove when adjusting their earnings. So to the degree that the new rule makes a company’s net profits look better, it will no longer be necessary to deduct stock options costs to achieve that end, Mr. Willens said.Overall, the F.A.S.B. rule change will present a truer picture of a company’s financial position, in Mr. Willens’s view. “It never made a lot of sense that the excess tax benefits bypassed the income statement and were credited to the balance sheet,” he said. “These companies were not paying taxes on account of option exercises, but the financial statements made it look like they were. Companies’ tax rates were overstated, and there can’t be any defense for that.”Twitter: @gmorgensonAdvertisement