By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and ALEXANDRA STEVENSONNOV. 23, 2015
For most of its 38 years, Elliott Management has been a lucrative hedge fund run solely by its founder, the billionaire Paul E. Singer, a man known for his hard-nosed trades and outsize influence in politics.Now for the first time, Mr. Singer will run the $27 billion investment firm with a partner who first joined 26 years ago by answering an employment ad in The Wall Street Journal.Elliott told its staff of more than 350 employees on Monday that it had appointed as co-chief executive Jonathan Pollock, who will help to steer the hedge fund as it continues to grow.Though Mr. Pollock and Mr. Singer insisted that the promotion was in some ways a formality — Mr. Pollock, 52, had already performed most of the responsibilities of the job in recent years as co-chief investment officer — it was a nod to the fact that at some point Elliott’s 71-year-old founder will step down.AdvertisementThat day, however, is not coming anytime soon, Mr. Singer said in an interview last week in the firm’s Midtown Manhattan offices, a few blocks from Central Park. But it is a recognition that the hedge fund, known for publicly shaking up companies and, most recently, for waging a protracted court battle with Argentina over its defaulted debt, has grown far bigger than one man.Advertisement“The impulse that creates hedge funds is independence and creativity,” Mr. Singer said. “The challenge is building a team,” he added, touching on the biggest test for hedge funds today.One of the biggest trials for firms, almost always started by one or two individuals, has been to turn them into institutions that last beyond their founders.Many of the industry’s founding hedge fund titans have retired in recent years, choosing to close up shop. Some, like Julian Robertson, the well-known founder of Tiger Management, and Stanley F. Druckenmiller, the founder of Duquesne Capital, returned money to investors and now focus on managing only their own money.Whether a hedge fund founder has a clear succession plan or not is a question frequently asked by investors, many of them pension funds and institutional investors who will keep their money with one manager for the long term, sometimes for decades.The industry has also battled through several difficult months. Market gyrations have left many managers and their investors nursing large losses as once-profitable bets have turned sour, creating an environment where managers have been quick to liquidate their funds.Elliott has weathered storms better than many of its rivals. Its two main funds are up 2.9 percent and 2.5 percent, after fees and expenses, for the year as of Oct. 15. By comparison, the HFRX Global Hedge Fund Index is down 1.6 percent over that same period.The hedge fund also has filled in other senior roles during that time, hiring a onetime Citigroup executive as chief operating officer and a deputy United States attorney as its first general counsel ever.Advertisement(The hedge fund also promoted Richard Ritholz, its head of commodities trading, to its fifth equity partner.)The newly minted senior executives will free Mr. Singer and Mr. Pollock to focus on overseeing Elliott’s huge book of investments, which runs from the United States to Africa to South Korea, and includes stocks, bonds and more esoteric financial instruments.As a distressed debt investor, one of its specialties, Elliott buys bonds owned by companies on the brink of bankruptcy, a situation in which it can have a say in how things play out after bankruptcy. It has established itself as a holdout investor in defaulted government debt in countries like Peru, Congo-Brazzaville and Argentina.And the firm has also made its name as a successful activist investor, buying stakes in companies and calling for them to change strategic course, often by selling themselves. It is a strategy that has produced victories for Elliott over the years, most recently helping pave the way for the storage provider EMC to sell itself to Dell for more than $60 billion earlier this year.On Monday, the firm disclosed another big activist position, having acquired a 6.4 percent stake in the metals giant Alcoa.It is not just the firm and its financial dealings that have been in the public eye. Mr. Singer has become a fixture in the political world as one of the wealthiest and most powerful political donors in the country — last year he gave more money to Republican candidates and causes than any other donor, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. When he publicly threw his support behind Senator Marco Rubio of Florida last month, pundits predicted the move would shift the political race among the Republican candidates.Even as a staunch Republican with passionate views on fiscal conservatism, Mr. Singer has also been a strong supporter of same-sex marriage, donating millions of dollars to the cause. He has talked publicly about how his gay son, Andrew, helped to change his views.Becoming co-chief executive seemed like a distant possibility when Mr. Pollock first saw Elliott’s ad — which told interested applicants to contact “R. Plant,” a tongue-in-cheek reference to Robert Plant of Led Zeppelin, a favorite musician of Mr. Singer’s — 26 years ago.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Upon joining the firm, Mr. Pollock said, his responsibilities began not with running complex trades but with taking lunch orders. (His biggest innovation was faxing the lunch requests so he had proof that he placed the order correctly, a mistake that cost one of his predecessors dearly.)AdvertisementWhat did Mr. Singer recall of the junior analyst during that time? “I don’t remember,” he said. “I am told I was tough on him.”Mr. Pollock rose through the ranks of the hedge fund, beginning as a junior analyst after a stint at E. F. Hutton. He later opened Elliott’s offices in London, Hong Kong and Tokyo, while eventually overseeing part of the firm’s investment. In 2011, he became co-chief investment officer.Since then, he has assumed more responsibilities, including weighing in on the firm’s big trades and deliberating on overall strategy. Eventually, Mr. Singer decided that it was time to give him a title that matched his workload and skills.Both men insisted that Mr. Singer remained “fully engaged” in the hedge fund’s main business.“Paul and I share the senior risk management role,” Mr. Pollock said. “We view every position as our own position.”They are doing so at a time of uncertainty in the markets. The summer was wracked by sharp slides in the stock markets that badly wounded many hedge funds. Several prominent funds, including one run by the $72 billion Fortress Investment Group, were forced to close. And even top-flight investors like Bridgewater Associates were not spared.In Elliott’s best-known bitter legal battle with Argentina, there is fresh hope that the country’s newly elected president Mauricio Macri will be able to negotiate with the firm. NML Capital, a unit of Elliott, has led a group of holdout investors in seeking full repayment of bonds Argentina defaulted on in 2001. After the default, Argentina offered to exchange defaulted bonds for new “exchange bonds” worth significantly less — an offer the holdouts rejected.NML Capital sued Argentina after a breakthrough district court ruling in Manhattan. The judge, Thomas P. Griesa, ruled that whenever Argentina paid its exchange bondholders it would also have to pay the holdouts. Last summer, unable to make a payment to its exchange bondholders, Argentina defaulted on its debt once again. In Buenos Aires, graffiti of vultures is strewn across the city, a direct reference to NML Capital and the other holdout investors.Mr. Singer and Mr. Pollock have asserted that they are willing to negotiate. But under the presidency of Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, relations became increasingly tense. The two sides have not sat down to negotiate, they added.Advertisement“By being a country that scoffs at the rule of law, they sacrifice so much,” Mr. Singer said, adding, “It makes so much sense for Argentina to sit down with us.”With the change in government that resulted from Argentina’s election on Sunday, many hope that the holdouts and Mr. Macri will be able to find a solution.The executives insist that Elliott’s reputation as unfairly litigating against poor countries over their debts they cannot pay — or as Ms. Kirchner memorably put it “a vulture fund” — is unfounded. So-called sovereign debt investments account for less than 2 percent of the hedge fund’s overall capital, they said.“Over the 14-year period I don’t think the Argentina situation defines us within the investing community,” Mr. Pollock said.The firm will continue to focus on what Mr. Singer called “Elliott-type trades.” He defined them as trades that are not necessarily low risk, but that are likely to reap substantial rewards.The goal is the same as it has been for decades.“We try to make money, as close as is possible, all the time,” Mr. Singer said.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Elliott Management Appoints Its First Co-Chief Executive.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.