AdvertisementSupported byInside WealthBy Robert FrankIt has become a rite of summer: A party in the Hamptons spins out of control and becomes a symbol of wealth gone wild. This year, that party was Brett Barna’s “Sprayathon.”Mr. Barna’s July 3 bash at a large Sag Harbor home featured copious champagne showers, costumed dwarfs and more than 500 revelers in bathing suits swarming around a pool littered with pizza and bottles. After The New York Post reported that the home used for the party was rented, and that the owner was planning to sue, seeking $1 million in damages, Sprayathon went viral on social media and became a Wall Street mini-scandal.Mr. Barna, 31, was fired from his job as a hedge fund trader at Moore Capital, where he had worked for seven years. Moore, founded by the legendary investor Louis Moore Bacon, said Mr. Barna’s “personal judgment was inconsistent with the firm’s values.”Vanity Fair and other websites likened Mr. Barna to the character played by Leonardo DiCaprio in “The Wolf of Wall Street,” the film about a hard-partying Wall Streeter. The story seemed to sum up all that was wrong with the Hamptons and wealth today.Except, it wasn’t the full story. Now, another side of Sprayathon is emerging, and it centers on the owner of the home, a man named Omar Amanat, who was arrested recently on fraud charges unrelated to the Hamptons incident.The problems began on Friday, July 1, two days before the party. Mr. Barna, a bearded former rugby player from the Midwest, was looking for an event space for his fund-raiser for Last Chance Animal Rescue in Southampton. He reached out to a real estate contact, who recommended a stately shingled home with a pool in Sag Harbor, owned by Mr. Amanat.Mr. Barna contacted Mr. Amanat, who asked for $27,000 for a five-day rental, to be paid immediately in cash. Mr. Barna didn’t have the cash on hand, so they made the transaction through Airbnb. On July 2, Mr. Barna visited the site and said he was surprised to discover that another group had already rented the house for the weekend.Mr. Barna went ahead with the party plans, keeping the event outdoors to avoid the other tenants. He said he hired a former police chief and eight security guards to keep the crowd outside and maintain order, and had eight portable toilets set up. The party went from noon to 6 p.m., with the party cleared out by 7 p.m., he said.Mr. Barna said that despite the coverage, the party was “good clean fun” that raised $100,000 for Last Chance Animal Rescue. In spite of reports of about 1,000 guests, he said there were about 500.He does regret some aspects of the party, like the dwarfs dressed in red-white-and-blue suits carrying champagne guns. “I would probably not make that decision if I had to do it over,” he said.“We raised money for charity,” he said. “Nothing illegal happened, and no one complained.”Except for Mr. Amanat. Even before the party, Mr. Barna said he got repeated texts and calls from Mr. Amanat asking for more money. After the party, the texts became more aggressive, though Mr. Amanat never said why he should be paid more, according to Mr. Barna. A business associate of Mr. Amanat told Mr. Barna they wanted $13,000 on top of the $27,000 that had been paid, Mr. Barna said.Mr. Barna disputed the payment to Airbnb on his credit card, citing the other renters who prevented him from using the house.Mr. Barna kept the text messages he received from Mr. Amanat. One from Mr. Amanat’s phone number said,“I’ll keep my cool for another 24 hours, then I’ll handle things another way.” A later text read: “When you least expect it one night, something so unspeakably bad is going to happen to you (maybe its karmic law, maybe it’s a friend of mine who heard what you did to me). Personally I won’t do a thing to you.”On July 6, The New York Post quoted an anonymous owner of the home saying he was suing Mr. Barna for $1 million because the partyers had damaged the pool, wrecked furniture in the house and stolen artworks. The story blew up online along with pictures on social media from the party. (No suit has been filed, and no damage claim or complaint has been sent to Mr. Barna.)Mr. Barna says none of his guests were in the house. He has pictures showing the house before and after the party, with no visible damage. He says he was so shocked by the publicity that he couldn’t respond to initial media requests for comment.Then, on July 13, Mr. Amanat was arrested by Federal Bureau of Investigation agents at his New Jersey home. The charges weren’t related to the Hamptons house. The Department of Justice charged him with four counts of fraud, including conspiracy to commit wire fraud and securities fraud, in connection with investments related to a tech start-up called Kit Digital. Kit’s former chief financial officer pleaded guilty to fraud in March, and the C.E.O. was extradited to the United States from Colombia last week to face fraud charges.Mr. Amanat, a 43-year-old self-described investor and philanthropist who has a long list of business disputes and lawsuits stretching from Hollywood to London, was released Tuesday on bail. He declined to comment.Sharon McCarthy, a lawyer for Mr. Amanat, said: “I am not able to answer these questions. I am focused on other matters related to the criminal case.”Mr. Barna said that after the arrest, the reasons for his dispute with Mr. Amanat became clear. He says Mr. Amanat was trying to pressure him for extra cash that Mr. Amanat might need to post bail after his impending arrest; when Mr. Barna didn’t pay, Mr. Amanat made Mr. Barna’s party public.“Omar knew exactly what he was doing when he planted this story,” Mr. Barna said. “His goal was to cream me in the press to pressure me into giving him more money.”Paul Fried, a Hamptons developer who’s a friend of Mr. Amanat and helped broker the deal with Mr. Barna, said the damage from the party was “extensive” and crews were still trying to repair the pool, decks and plumbing systems. Mr. Amanat requested money after the party because “after trashing the house, Barna refused to pay for the rental,” Mr. Fried said. He added that there was “zero connection” between the party and Mr. Amanat’s fraud charges.Mr. Barna doesn’t expect any sympathy, or even to get his job back. But he wants a fuller account of a party he says was tame compared with others that got no mention in the media.“If you looked at photos from other parties held that weekend in the Hamptons,” Mr. Barna said. “You would find plenty that were a lot worse.”ROBERT FRANK is CNBC wealth editor and the author of “Richistan.”Advertisement