JULY 24, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.32 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.43 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.28 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Board of Education, $242 million of debt securities. Competitive.Alexandria, Va., $70.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Miami-Dade County, Fla., $185.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.North Carolina, $200 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementAlabama Federal Aid Highway Finance Authority, $550 million of special obligation revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.AdvertisementAnaheim, Calif., $52 million of special tax refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.California Health Facilities Financing Authority, $850.6 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Illinois Finance Authority, $972.6 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Indiana Finance Authority, $474 million of highway revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.McMinnville School District No. 40, Ore., $89.4 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $57 million of William Paterson University revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Nez Perce County, Idaho, $66 million of pollution control revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Northwest Independent School District, Tex., $61.5 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Bosc.Ohio, $217.2 million of major new state infrastructure project revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Poway Unified School District Public Financing Authority, Calif., $50.1 million of special tax revenue refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Rhode Island Health and Educational Building Corporation, $266.8 million of hospital financing revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Tennessee, $363 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Wisconsin, $317.1 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.A version of this schedule appears in print on July 25, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.