AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere’s a look at what’s coming this week.TECHNOLOGYThis is a big week for tech company earnings, as Twitter, Facebook, Apple and Alphabet — Google’s parent company — are expected to report their quarterly financials. The theme remains the same for all four companies: to describe how well they are monetizing their mobile customers, whether it is iPhone sales for Apple or the performance of mobile advertising for Facebook, Twitter and Google. Mike IsaacBANKINGShareholders of the German exchange operator Deutsche Börse have until Tuesday to approve a merger with the London Stock Exchange Group. Nearly two weeks ago, the exchange agreed to lower the acceptance threshold for investors in Deutsche Börse to exchange their stock for shares in a new holding company for the combined entity. The vote by Britons to leave the European Union has raised questions about whether the merger could be completed under its current terms and, in particular, whether the combined entity’s holding company should be based in Britain, as planned. Chad BrayOIL INDUSTRYMajor oil companies are planning to report their second-quarter earnings this week. BP will lead off on Tuesday, and Royal Dutch Shell and Total, of France, will report on Thursday. Exxon, Chevron and Eni, of Italy, will follow on Friday. Shares of most of these companies have performed well this year as investors bet that the industry’s heavy cost-cutting combined with stabilizing oil prices would improve results. In a sign of the pressures on the industry’s work force, maintenance crews on seven Shell platforms in the British North Sea plan to strike for 24 hours on Tuesday to protest reduced pay. Stanley ReedECONOMYThe Federal Reserve is unlikely to raise its benchmark interest rate when its policy-making committee meets on Tuesday and Wednesday. The domestic economy continues to expand, and concerns about the global economy have eased, but Fed officials see little downside in waiting a bit longer. The Fed’s postmeeting statement, however, could indicate the first step toward rate increases later this year. Binyamin Appelbaum On Wednesday, at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department will release its estimate of the change in durable goods orders in June. Economists expect to see an overall drop of 1.1 percent, because of a fall in demand for aircraft. Core activity, which does not include the volatile aviation category, probably rebounded slightly after weakness in the spring. Nelson D. SchwartzBANKINGSeveral of Europe’s biggest banks are reporting their second-quarter results this week, among them Deutsche Bank; the British lenders Barclays and Lloyds Banking Group; Santander, of Spain; and the Swiss banks Credit Suisse and UBS. It will be the first time the region’s largest lenders will update the investing public on their financial outlooks since Britain voted to leave the European Union last month. European bank stocks have been hit hard since the June 23 referendum because of uncertainty about the economic impact of the vote.At the same time, the European Banking Authority is expected on Friday to announce the results of its latest stress test aimed at measuring the ability of European lenders to survive a financial crisis or severe economic downturn. The tests this year will not have a minimum capital threshold for banks, so no institution can fail, or pass, the exercise. Instead, the information will be passed on to local banking supervisors, like the Bank of England, to determine if further actions are needed. Chad BrayAUTOMOBILESVolkswagen will on Thursday report its second-quarter earnings, which will be weighed down by the cost of the company’s emissions scandal. The company said in a preliminary report last week that it would show an operating profit of 5.3 billion euros for the first half of 2016 after subtracting €2.2 billion for fines and legal settlements. That sum brings the total set aside for emissions wrongdoing to €18.4 billion. Investors are hoping the carmaker will show progress in improving the profitability of its core Volkswagen brand. Jack EwingUTILITIESAfter years of preparatory work, the French utility Électricité de France — better known as EDF — says it will make a decision on Thursday on whether to go ahead with the first nuclear power station to be built in Britain since the 1990s. The plant, at Hinkley Point in southwest England, has become a crucial test of whether nuclear plants can be built in industrialized countries in the wake of the 2011 Fukushima disaster in Japan. Despite the huge cost, about 18 billion pounds, the British government wants the power from the plant to replace aging generating facilities. Stanley ReedECONOMYOn Friday, at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department will offer its initial estimate of economic growth in the United States in the second quarter. Wall Street economists think growth picked up during April, May and June, and the consensus is predicting an annualized growth rate of 2.6 percent for the period. That represents a considerable increase from the anemic 1.1 percent annual growth rate recorded in the first quarter. Consumer spending provided much of the tailwind, even as businesses remain cautious about new investments. Nelson D. Schwartz The European Union statistics agency will issue a preliminary estimate on Friday for second-quarter growth in the eurozone as well as the latest inflation and unemployment figures. The data will provide only a hint of the economic impact of Britain’s vote to leave the European Union, which took place near the end of the quarter. Still, growth is expected to slow, from an annual rate of 2.2 percent in the first three months of the year, as eurozone residents became more cautious about spending. Jack Ewing The Bank of Japan is widely expected on Friday to take new measures in its fight against deflation. The Japanese central bank pushed its benchmark interest rate below zero this year and has been buying trillions of yen of government debt in an effort to shore up consumer prices and stimulate economic growth. But so far, the policy has not yielded the results it hoped for. Analysts are looking for the bank to reduce rates further below zero or perhaps expand purchases of other kinds of assets, like exchange-traded equity funds. Jonathan SobleAdvertisement