AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaVerizon is continuing to invest in ancient web history. The telecom company on Monday said it was paying $4.8 billion to buy Yahoo’s core business. It effectively justifies rival T-Mobile’s tongue-in-cheek claim earlier this year that Verizon is having a midlife crisis. The Verizon boss, Lowell McAdam, after all, is betting the deal will help attract digital advertisers by meshing the internet-search firm with AOL, another 1990s highflier that Verizon bought last year.It is an appealing idea. Yahoo brings with it not just its search and advertising units, but also content like sports and finance that could play well with AOL’s assets like The Huffington Post and TechCrunch. Verizon will also get its hands on Yahoo’s 600 million monthly mobile users.Yahoo shareholders, though, have an exceptionally gloomy view of the business. It does not help that the division’s earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, is likely to be just $770 million this year, according to Thomson Reuters data, down from $2 billion a decade ago. But investors do not even reckon the units being sold are worth anything. The overall company has around $5 billion in net cash and owns stakes in Alibaba and Yahoo Japan that are worth some $41 billion, yet Yahoo’s market value is just $37 billion.Mr. McAdam’s vision ought to resonate on Madison Avenue. Advertising executives are nervous about the twin powers of Facebook and Alphabet’s Google, which are expected to account for more than half of the American digital advertising revenue this year, according to the research firm eMarketer.They have shown little inclination to send more business to either of Verizon’s dot-com 1.0 duo. Yahoo and AOL’s collective slice of the $69 billion digital-ad market is expected to be 5.2 percent this year, eMarketer forecasts, and is likely to decrease to 4.8 percent in 2017.That has allowed Google and Facebook to gobble up most of the digital-advertising market. It may be that Tim Armstrong, who will run the combined AOL-Yahoo business, has a great plan to turn these two internet also-rans into a formidable force. History suggests otherwise.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement