AdvertisementSupported byBy Barry MeierFor professional athletes and weekend warriors alike, it appeared to be welcome news: the discovery by researchers of a new knee ligament that, if repaired, might help tens of thousands of people with an injury from sports or an accident.In the fall of 2013, a study about the finding was published in a small medical journal, generating extensive press coverage in the United States and Europe. A Florida company quickly began marketing a repair procedure those researchers helped develop. And soon, patients were asking about the knee surgery, and doctors were performing it.But today, as the reconstruction procedure gains popularity, an intense dispute is unfolding about what role, if any, the ligament plays in knee function — and whether the anterolateral ligament, as it is called, even exists.In addition, several experts said it was unclear whether the new procedure resulted in more harm than good, because there was no long-term data about how patients fared.“Even if you think this ligament exists, the big leap of faith is, Why are you trying to reconstruct it?” said Dr. Mark Miller, an orthopedic expert at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville.The procedure’s adoption offers a window into how an untested treatment can quickly make its way from the pages of an obscure publication to the operating room.No comprehensive data exists on how frequently doctors use the technique. But interviews suggest that some doctors are performing the procedure in about 20 percent of their patients who undergo surgery for a common sports injury, a torn anterior cruciate ligament, or A.C.L.Every year in the United States, about 200,000 people undergo surgery to repair a torn A.C.L. In about 10 percent of those patients, experts say, the repaired knee continues to give way when they turn quickly.The new procedure is being promoted as a way to address that problem by making a patient’s knee more stable, and it has gained some admirers.“The results are very good,” said Dr. Vic Goradia, an orthopedic specialist in Richmond, Va., one of the doctors who estimated that they had performed the new procedure in about 20 percent of his A.C.L. reconstructions. He said the surgery costs about $2,500.The story of the new procedure traces to 2012, when Dr. Steven Claes, a researcher at the University Hospitals Leuven in Belgium, was pursing his doctorate.While examining cadavers, Dr. Claes identified a previously undefined ligament — a type of tissue that connects bones — along the outside of knee. He named the structure the anterolateral ligament, or A.L.L.He and several colleagues said that the A.L.L. might play a critical role in the knee’s stability and that it could be damaged at the same time as an A.C.L. tear. As a result, they said, a failure to reconstruct the little-known ligament might account for the lack of success of A.C.L. repair in some patients.His research caught the attention of specialists, including Dr. Adrian Wilson, a knee expert in Britain who is also a consultant to a medical products company in Florida, Arthrex, that sells devices and surgical tools for orthopedic procedures.Dr. Wilson said he arranged for Dr. Claes and another Flemish colleague to meet in the spring of 2013 with Arthrex engineers to develop an A.L.L. reconstruction procedure using the company’s devices. Dr. Claes signed a consulting contract that June with Arthrex.Smaller private companies like Arthrex can commercialize products and promote procedures that use those devices more quickly compared with larger publicly traded companies, which often have many more internal layers of approval. Orthopedic specialists said that makes smaller firms appealing to doctors who develop new devices or techniques because the doctors can earn consulting contracts or large royalty payments sooner.“They are known for being fast,” Dr. Robert F. LaPrade, a knee expert in Vail, Co., said referring to Arthrex.The chief executive of Arthrex, Reinhold Schmieding, declined to be interviewed for this article. But in a statement, the company said its “processes and policies meet or exceed industry quality standards to assure safe and effective use of our products.”In mid-2013, as Arthrex and Dr. Claes were working on developing an A.L.L. repair procedure, Dr. Claes was trying to get his study about the ligament published. After it was rejected by two major medical journals, he turned to a less prestigious one, Journal of Anatomy. The journal is produced by the Anatomical Society, a British professional group.“It is a lower-tier journal,” Dr. Claes said. “It is not one that orthopedists read.”Still, when the study was published, it generated headlines at many major news organizations, including The New York Times. Soon after, patients began asking doctors about it.Around the same time, Arthrex released a videotape featuring Dr. Claes demonstrating an A.L.L. repair procedure using the company’s devices. He was then paid by Arthrex to demonstrate the repair to other doctors.In the A.L.L. procedure, devices that act like anchors are placed in a patient’s thigh and shinbone and a tendon is attached between them to take the place of the damaged ligament.Arthrex said in its statement that it did not run clinical trials examining the benefits and risk of A.L.L. reconstruction. It added that the devices used in the surgery were cleared by the Food and Drug Administration for surgery on other knee ligaments.Doctors may use the devices cleared for one operation in another procedure if they believe their use will benefit patients.Dr. Wilson, the British expert, said that a French clinic that performed dozens of A.L.L. reconstructions reported a sharp drop in the percentage of patients who reinjured their A.C.L.But not all doctors are so positive. At a professional conference in May, Dr. Freddie Fu, the chairman of the department of orthopedic surgery at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, squared off against Dr. Claes over the question of whether the A.L.L. existed. Dr. Fu reported that a team of experts at his facility had concluded after a review that the A.L.L. was not a distinct ligament but was part of a well-known anatomical structure.“We think it is not important in supporting the knee,” said Dr. Fu, who has emerged as a leading critic of A.L.L. reconstruction.Dr. Claes responded that the criticism might reflect Dr. Fu’s championing of an A.C.L. reconstruction technique that has not proved successful.“He hates me,” Dr. Claes said.Other experts have also expressed concern about the procedure. One worry is that it could restrict a knee’s range of motion. While such an outcome might be desirable in a tiny fraction of patients whose repeated A.C.L. reconstructions have failed, constraining the knee can produce long-term damage or even early arthritis, they said.“We need a bit of science before jumping into this,” said Dr. LaPrade, the expert in Vail.Dr. LaPrade added that earlier techniques used on the types of patients now considered candidates for A.L.L. reconstruction had resulted in problematic outcomes. But for now he is performing the new procedure in only about 1 percent of his patients.Dr. Claes, who continues to work as an Arthrex consultant, remains optimistic about the procedure.But he also acknowledged that it was an experiment in progress.“For the moment,“ he said, “we do not have long-term papers saying this is the way to go.”Advertisement