By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 25, 2016
United States markets slipped lower on Monday as the market pulled back after a four-week gain that brought it to record highs. Investors were assessing another batch of corporate earnings and looking ahead to this week’s Federal Reserve policy meeting. Yahoo shares fell after Verizon Communications announced that it would buy most of Yahoo’s internet businesses for $4.8 billion.KEEPING SCORE The Dow Jones industrial average ended the day 0.4 percent lower, and the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index fell 0.3 percent. The Nasdaq composite index edged 0.1 percent lower.YAHOO’S DEMISE Yahoo shares fell 2.7 percent after the company announced that Verizon would buy Yahoo’s advertising, media and email businesses for $4.8 billion, ending a five-month auction. Verizon will add Yahoo to its portfolio of recently purchased media companies, which includes AOL.After the deal is complete, Yahoo will be a shell of its former self, existing mainly as a holding company for its Alibaba and Yahoo Japan investments, as well as its patent portfolio.AdvertisementVerizon shares fell 0.4 percent.TAKING A BREAK It’s quite common for a market that has run up so far so fast to retreat. With the slow summer trading season and lack of economic news, traders say there are few reasons to be buying the market right now.Advertisement“This is a broad, but benign, sell-off,” said Ryan Larson, head of United States equity trading for RBC Global Asset Management.Larson pointed out the recent price-to-earnings ratio on the S.&P. 500, or the amount money that investors are paying for each dollar of earnings, which was trading at nearly 20. That was far above the typically 14-16 times that investors are usually comfortable with.
            Position of the Dow Jones industrial average at 1-minute intervals on Monday.        17,60017,550Previous close18,570.8517,50017,45010 a.m.Noon2 p.m.4 p.m.JULY 25, 2016
“It’s another reason why the market looks fatigued at the moment,” he said.ACCELERATING Sprint stock soared 26 percent after the company reported a wider-than-expected loss but added a larger number of subscribers than expected. SoftBank of Japan bought a controlling stake in Sprint nearly three years ago.ENERGY Oil prices continued their monthlong slide, with the price of United States crude falling $1.12, to $43.07 a barrel. Brent crude, the global benchmark, slipped $1.05, to $44.66 a barrel in London.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The 2 percent drop in oil prices dragged down major energy companies. Chevron shares were down 2.4 percent and Exxon Mobil stock gave up 1.9 percent, the two biggest drops in the Dow Jones industrial average. Oil prices are down nearly 12 percent this month.EUROPEAN MARKETS In Germany, the DAX closed up 0.5 percent and in France, the CAC 40 was up 0.2 percent. The FTSE 100 lost 0.3 percent in Britain.CENTRAL BANKS The Bank of Japan and United States Federal Reserve are both meeting this week. With Japan’s economy barely growing, economists are speculating about whether its central bank may push more stimulus this week. The American economy is in better shape than other advanced economies, and expectations are that the Fed could look to raise interest rates again soon. If the Fed highlights the recent better-than-expected economic reports, economists may move up their predictions for when the next rate increase could happen. The Fed pulled rates off their record low in December but has not moved further.ANALYST’S VIEW Marc Ostwald, an analyst at ADM Investor Services, said the Fed would probably be in “wait and see” mode as it assessed the economic and market impact of Britain’s vote to leave the European Union. He said it would be “particularly interesting to see how they reference the solid run of (economic) data in terms of the policy outlook,” as it could mean they would consider a rate increase as soon as September.AdvertisementGLOBAL MEETING Over the weekend, envoys of the Group of 20 major economies, meeting in China, promised to protect the world economy from the shock waves of Britain’s decision to leave the European Union and to increase sluggish growth, while rejecting trade protectionism. While the statement was short of concrete promises, the tone seemed to have reassured some investors at a time of heightened uncertainty.ASIA’S DAY The Nikkei 225 declined 0.04 percent in Japan, while in Hong Kong, the Hang Seng gained 0.1 percent. The Shanghai composite index added 0.1 percent in China. The Kospi was up 0.1 percent in South Korea. In Australia, the S.&P./ASX 200 gained 0.6 percent.CURRENCIES AND BONDS The dollar fell to 106.04 yen from 106.17 yen. The euro rose to $1.0978 from $1.0961. Bond prices rose. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note fell to 1.56 percent from 1.57 percent.A version of this article appears in print on July 26, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Market Weighed Down by Sinking Energy Sector.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.