By CLAIRE BARTHELEMYNOV. 23, 2015
Luxembourg, the country once known as the European “Death Star” of financial secrecy, is looking to improve its image.Buffeted by the accusations that it was helping multinational corporations evade billions of dollars in taxes, the country has embarked on a long-term rebranding effort that the government hopes will help the world see it with different eyes.The effort has yet to yield a catchy slogan, but it may not matter. Unless you remember similar exercises that centered on the themes “The eternal and fascinating Romania,” or “I feel SLOVEnia,” your image of Luxembourg is probably set.This is not the view of a cynical resident or just another analyst. This is the opinion of the man who coined the phrase “nation branding” in the 1990s, Simon Anholt.Advertisement“There is just no evidence that it has ever succeeded in changing the image of a country,” Mr. Anholt, a policy advisor, said by telephone. “People recognize it for what it is: state propaganda from a foreign government.”AdvertisementMr. Anholt said the so-called Luxleaks scandal, in which leaked documents revealing that the government had helped some 300 corporations including Microsoft, Disney and Koch Industries, dodge billions of dollars in taxes, would do more to determine Luxembourg’s image than a marketing campaign.“If Luxembourg wants to replace its negative image with a positive image, it would have to do something really good and do it consistently for a long long time,” he said.Luxembourg, however, believes in branding. The state secretary, Francine Closener, points out that it worked for Switzerland. Because of Swiss marketing, she said, the country is identified with things besides its financial center.“We only started doing this now, because we didn’t think it was necessary for a long time,” she said. “It wasn’t very important to us if we were known in the world and why — because we were doing fine.”The country has been aware of its tarnished reputation for some time. The previous government, under Jean-Claude Juncker, established a panel made up of the representatives of the monarchy, several ministries and two public-private agencies that promote business to spearhead the branding effort.The panel hired two marketing agencies which conducted surveys and focus groups to determine how residents perceived their country and what it could promote. The project is expected to cost almost one million euros, or just over $1 million, in 2016, when a marketing campaign will begin.The surveys were conducted by the country’s statistics agency and the answers submitted showed that Luxembourg was seen as “reliable, dynamic and open,” the government announced. These preliminary results will help frame the marketing campaign, it said.AdvertisementBut while local products like wine and sausage will be promoted as part of the campaign, it is the financial industry — as the country’s largest — that remains at the center. This year alone, the group Luxembourg for Finance embarked on so-called financial missions in places like Dubai, Sweden, Canada and China. It also hosted the Luxembourg Renminbi Forum and plans to host an Islamic finance workshop this week.The government has also turned to the public to help improve the country’s international standing. Voters were asked in a referendum this year to give voting rights to foreigners, who make up around 46 percent of the country’s population. Not only would Luxembourg been the first European Union member to do so, but supporters also saw it as a way to promote the country as a business location. But 80 percent of Luxembourgers voted no.Mario Hirsch, a political scientist, said such marketing campaigns are “made to divert, to keep people from questioning things.”“To me, nation branding is a smokescreen behind which business can go on as usual,” said Mr. Hirsch, a visiting senior research fellow at the European Union Institute for Security Studies in Paris, added that that does not mean that “business as usual is necessarily bad or wrong.”Some believe the country’s bad image is a result of an outside smear campaign.“The things we are accused of are things that are practiced by other and larger nations which, of course, don’t go at each other but choose to point the finger at us, a small nation, and find support in doing so, because we are doing so well,” said Emile Haag, author of “The Rise of Luxembourg from Independence to Success.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A local arts collective has a different view. Richtung22, known for poking fun at national treasures, staged a satirical communication campaign and theater piece about Luxembourg, portraying it as a regressive half-democracy with an industry based on the motto, “It’s not illegal if you do it in Luxembourg.”“How absurd is it to say Luxembourg is open, dynamic and reliable?” says Lars Schmitz, a member of the collective.Before Luxembourg, it was the former Soviet nations that were best known for rebranding as they entered the global marketplace. Ukraine has made several branding attempts since its independence in 1991. Slogans like “Ukraine. All about U” and “Ukraine. For snowlovers” painted a portrait of a holiday destination both fun and cozy, far from its Soviet bleakness.After the breakup of the Soviet Union, countries all over Eastern Europe and the Balkans paid marketers for a new start. In addition to the Romania and Slovenia campaigns, there was Albania’s “A New Mediterranean Love,” the government’s effort to attract tourists and foreign investment.AdvertisementOnly one year after splitting from Serbia, Kosovo hired BBR Saatchi & Saatchi in 2009 to come up with a brand for the country. The result was “The Young Europeans,” a campaign with a video showing young adults collectively building a Kosovo-shaped puzzle on a sunny day. The effort cost the government €5.7 million, a considerable expenditure for the poor Balkan country.Regardless of how Luxembourg’s campaign fares, it can be secure in the fact that it already ranks higher than the United States, Japan and Israel on Mr. Anholt’s new Good Country Index, which evaluates how each nation takes care of security, health care, climate issues, equality and other issues.“The reality,” Mr. Anholt said, “is that it probably deserves a better reputation than it has now acquired for itself.”A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Luxembourg Tries for an Image Makeover.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.