By CHAD BRAYJULY 27, 2016
LONDON — Standard Chartered, an Asia-focused bank based in London, said on Wednesday that José Viñals, who oversees financial stability at the International Monetary Fund, would join the lender as its new chairman this year.Mr. Viñals, the I.M.F.’s financial counselor and director of its Monetary and Capital Markets Department, will join the bank’s board in October and succeed John Peace as chairman on Dec. 1.As part of an overhaul of Standard Chartered’s top management last year, Mr. Peace said that he would leave the lender this year.“José brings deep and extensive economic, political and regulatory experience of our markets and an exceptional grasp and understanding of the international financial system,” William T. Winters, who joined Standard Chartered as its new chief executive last year, said in a news release.Advertisement“We have made significant progress in the delivery of our strategic objectives and I look forward to working with José on the next phase of the group’s growth,” Mr. Winters added. “He’s a proven leader, truly global in his perspective and I am delighted that we’ll be working together.”AdvertisementMr. Viñals joins Standard Chartered as Mr. Winters looks to turn around the lender’s prospects. Last year, the bank said it would raise up to $5.1 billion in new capital, shed 15,000 jobs and cut costs as part of its overhaul.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Slowing growth in Asia, bad loans and lower commodity prices have hurt the bank’s results, sending it to a $2.36 billion loss in 2015.Before joining the I.M.F. in 2009, Mr. Viñals previously worked for 25 years at the Central Bank of Spain, serving as deputy governor. He also is a former member of the European Central Bank’s monetary policy committee.In his new role, he will receive an annual salary of 1.25 million pounds, or about $1.6 million, as well as “standard benefits,” Standard Chartered said.The lender also announced that Naguib Kheraj, its senior independent director, will take on the role of deputy chairman beginning in December. Mr. Kheraj has been a member of the bank’s board since 2014.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.