AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — The Federal Reserve left its benchmark interest rate unchanged on Wednesday, but it issued an upbeat assessment of economic conditions that suggested a growing chance that it would increase rates later this year.The Fed, in a statement after a two-day meeting of its policy-making committee, said that the economy had overcome wobbles this year and that job creation had increased with moderate economic growth.Importantly, the central bank added that it saw fewer clouds on the horizon as the United States entered the eighth year of an economic expansion.“Near-term risks to the economic outlook have diminished,” the statement said, though it added that the Fed remained wary about the weakness of inflation and about “global economic and financial developments.”Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, has won broad support among Fed officials for a patient approach to raising rates.But after a unanimous decision to leave rates unchanged at the Fed’s last meeting in June, there was one dissent at the July meeting. Esther L. George, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, voted for a quarter-point increase in the Fed’s benchmark rate.Ms. George, who has expressed concern that persistently low rates will lead to financial instability, voted in favor of rate increases in March and April.Recent data “indicates that the labor market has strengthened and that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate rate,” the Fed said in its statement. “Job gains were strong in June following weak growth in May.”Yet pockets of weakness remain, the Fed said, including a paucity of investment by businesses.The Fed did not raise rates at its last meeting in June, citing concern about a downturn in domestic job growth and uncertainty on the eve of Britain’s referendum on leaving the European Union.Those concerns have eased. The economy added 287,000 jobs in June and financial markets rebounded quickly even though the British unexpectedly voted to leave the European Union.Yet Fed officials made clear in the days before the July meeting that they were inclined to wait at least a little longer.“Sometimes you just have to take some time and let the waters clear,” Dennis P. Lockhart, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, said in a speech in Victor, Idaho, this month.Moreover, Fed officials have increasingly concluded that rates may remain unusually low for the foreseeable future. Before the financial crisis, the Fed estimated that holding its benchmark rate around 5 percent was a neutral policy, neither providing stimulus nor hitting the brakes.Now, after years of downward pressure on global rates, the Fed pegs that neutral rate at around 3 percent. That means the impact of holding the benchmark rate near zero has diminished — and it also means the Fed’s return to “normal” may not take as long.Still, some Fed officials have continued to emphasize that they expect to raise rates at least once before the end of the year. Some analysts predict that the Fed will move at its next meeting in September, although markets put the chances at only 20 percent. There are also meetings scheduled in November and December.In the next big event on the Fed’s calendar, Ms. Yellen is scheduled to speak at an annual policy conference in Wyoming in late August.Advertisement