AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Oil & MoneyBy Andrew E. KramerMOSCOW — A refinery went to the Chinese. A stake in a Siberian oil field went to BP. And a large regional oil company widely expected to be gobbled up by Rosneft, the Russian state oil giant, remained on the balance of a government agency instead.With a powerful ally of President Vladimir V. Putin at the helm, Rosneft has for more than a decade grown rapaciously inside Russia and abroad, as a company coming to symbolize the wealth and might of Russia during the oil boom.But that changed this year. Rosneft, though still the world’s largest publicly traded oil company when measured by production, has been unloading assets while struggling to pay down debt.“The government is really facing tough times,” said Ildar Davletshin, an energy analyst at Renaissance Capital, a Moscow investment bank.The average price of Ural blend oil, the main Russian export grade, was $97 a barrel last year, but it has averaged just $57 in the first half of this year, and has been selling for even less this fall.Starting this summer, some analysts have been seeing a pivot away from the economic model of recent years, when political allies such as Rosneft’s president, Igor I. Sechin, led large state companies toward a new emphasis on efficiency and even competition.Though it is too early to gauge the seriousness of this shift, the effects are already being felt in the oil industry. Mr. Sechin, once an unassailable figure in Russian politics and, like Mr. Putin, a former Soviet intelligence agent, has suffered slights that whittle away at his stature. So far this year, however, there has been only one high-profile, politically hued dismissal of an executive in the industry.After the regional oil company Bashneft was renationalized last year after a legal battle, the asset was not immediately amalgamated into Rosneft, as expected. Then, Rosneft was refused bailout funds to repay debt; it has been forced instead to shed assets and offer China equity stakes in Siberian petroleum projects, something Russia had resisted until now.Rosneft and the China National Chemical Corporation traded in September a stake in a refinery under construction in the Russian far east for shares in refineries inside China, a deal that transfers to the Chinese the up-front investment in the Russian refinery.“They have to adjust the old model,” Mr. Davletshin said. “The old model was based on the large state companies. I doubt Putin will change this in the middle of the crisis. But if they use this model, they have to ensure it works,” and does not drain money from state coffers.Just two years after buying BP’s joint venture in Russia, TNK-BP, in what was seen as another step toward the consolidation of the industry in state hands, Rosneft turned around this spring and sold a 20 percent stake in the Taas-Yuryakh field in eastern Siberia to BP.In August, the company formally rescinded its request for a bailout from one of Russia’s sovereign wealth funds, leaving it few options but to divest itself of assets. Rosneft executives say its strategy is “deleveraging” the debt taken on in the TNK-BP purchase. About $25 billion of syndicated loan debt to large Western banks, including Barclays and Bank of America, comes due in the next six months.Back in a high oil price environment, BP sold its TNK-BP joint venture here at a price that valued reserves at about $4.50 per barrel. Then this year, it paid about $2 per barrel for its share in the new field. Having sold dear and bought cheap from Rosneft, BP’s president in Russia, David Campbell, said at the signing ceremony in St. Petersburg in June, “I’m pleased we have been able to conclude this transaction.”There’s no such pleasure being expressed by the Russian government over what senior officials are now openly suggesting is bungled management of the large state enterprises, though Rosneft has not been singled out.After the president of the Russian railway monopoly, Vladimir I. Yakunin, another longtime associate of Mr. Putin and reputed former K.G.B. agent, resigned, the economy minister, Alexei Ulyukayev, said the railroad management had returned to “the realm of reality.” Executives were no longer asking for a 140-billion-ruble, or $2 billion, bailout, and could cut costs instead, Mr. Ulyukayev said.The government, said Alexander Abramov, an economist at the Higher School of Economics, is grappling with the problem of its own making of the past decade in forming gigantic, inefficient state monopolies, a hallmark of Mr. Putin’s economic policies.Not surprisingly, waste and inefficiency flourished. Rosneft’s capitalization is now less on the London Stock Exchange, about $38 billion, than the $56 billion the company paid for the TNK-BP subsidiary two years ago.Rosneft, in a statement, drew attention to the company’s exceptionally low production costs from currently pumping fields, and high profit margin. Rosneft’s outlay of $3 per barrel produced is the lowest among major oil companies, for example. “The company is constantly working on boosting efficiency,” Rosneft said in the statement. Rosneft shares rose slightly this year, while international competitors fell as much as 27 percent, for Shell.Under Mr. Sechin, the company said, reserves grew 40 percent and the company has made a profit for the past 13 consecutive quarters. The longer outlook is less certain.Output is projected to fall by 1.1 percent this year in the start of a long, slow slide not only for Rosneft but the oil industry as a whole, as onshore fields in Siberia are peaking and declining.Before tensions flared in the Ukraine crisis, Rosneft had planned to stabilize output by taking the industry offshore.Sanctions have indefinitely delayed those plans. For now, the company says its strategy to keep Russia in oil is to drill more intensively in already producing fields in western Siberia.“We reached a decision, so as not to lose market share, to correct the business plan toward pumping from already active fields,” Mr. Sechin told Prime Minister Dmitri A. Medvedev at a meeting in August. Mr. Sechin told Mr. Medvedev he would also shake up the leadership of underperforming subsidiaries.Rosneft will pay about $23 billion less in taxes this year compared to last because of the oil price collapse, unseating Rosneft as the country’s largest taxpayer. Gazprom has again assumed that role. Rosneft will be treading water at best to hold its current output volumes. “Flat would be a real good result” for the coming year, Mr. Davletshin said.Advertisement