By JACK EWINGJULY 27, 2016
FRANKFURT — Deutsche Bank has plenty of reasons to abandon Wall Street, like many of its European brethren. It faces a raft of investigations, has received a failing grade from American regulators, and an official report suggests that no lender in the world has more potential to create financial mayhem.But Deutsche Bank does not have many good options.Unlike rivals, it cannot fall back on lucrative wealth management businesses or dependable branch networks. The risky investment bank is its only obvious font for profit.And earnings figures published on Wednesday illustrated how investment banking remains both a blessing and a curse for Germany’s biggest bank. It effectively broke even in the second quarter after revenue from trading plunged and it absorbed the cost of job cuts and legal problems.Deutsche Bank subtracted 612 million euros, or about $673 million, from pretax profit to cover the cost of reducing the bank’s work force by about 3,000 people, as well as expenses related to lawsuits and official investigations, and to reflect declines in the value of past acquisitions.AdvertisementAt its heart, Deutsche Bank is still trying to find a new identity, nearly eight years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers spurred a global financial crisis.AdvertisementJohn Cryan, the soft-spoken chief executive, was welcomed as a much needed change from his brasher investment banker predecessors when he took charge a year ago. But employee morale is sagging, and he is under increasing pressure to show that he can create a bank that is profitable yet not a danger to itself and others.“The fundamental question for Deutsche Bank is how the profitability will look when all the risks have been reduced,” said Ingo Speich, a senior fund manager at Union Investment in Frankfurt, one of Deutsche Bank’s largest shareholders. “The bank has to show in the next 12 months that they can achieve this turnaround.”Investors have their doubts. Company shares have fallen by more than half in the last year and are trading at their lowest level since at least 1996. The shares fell more than 2 percent on Wednesday.Marcus Schenck, the bank’s chief financial officer, said on Wednesday that top managers were aware that investors were waiting for them to deliver.“We are doing a major cleanup job,” he said. “It’s going to take two or three years.”The latest problem came last month when Deutsche Bank failed an examination by the Federal Reserve of its system for planning capital, the buffer of cash and securities that every bank must maintain.Deutsche Bank had enough capital, the Federal Reserve said. But overseers at the central bank gave the Deutsche Bank Trust unit in the United States a failing grade for the systems it uses to keep control over the money.“The firm over all continues to have material unresolved supervisory issues that critically undermine its capital planning process,” the Federal Reserve said.AdvertisementIts assessment highlighted a deeper problem at Deutsche Bank: years of neglect of its internal computer systems.Adding to the humiliation, a report from the International Monetary Fund in June implied that Deutsche Bank was a threat to the global financial system. Of all the world’s big banks, the I.M.F. said, “Deutsche Bank appears to be the most important net contributor to systemic risks.”The report heightened the anxiety outsiders already had about the bank’s €42 trillion derivatives portfolio, one of the largest in the world.Deutsche Bank executives have long argued that the eye-popping derivatives figure is misleading. Most of the derivatives cancel one another out, they say, because the bank is essentially an intermediary between two parties taking opposite sides of a bet on whether, for example, interest rates will rise or a currency will lose value.But outsiders have no way to peer into the derivatives portfolio to see for themselves, and what people do not know makes them nervous.They are right to worry, said Richard Portes, a professor of economics at London Business School. He has done research recently showing how problems at European banks can undermine not only the financial system but also European governments.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“A deterioration of the position of Deutsche is likely to be bad news for other banks in Europe and therefore bad news for government debt markets in countries like Italy,” Mr. Portes said.Deutsche Bank’s push into investment banking has been fraught ever since it began in the mid-1990s. In 1998, it agreed to buy Bankers Trust to gain a beachhead in the United States. The $10 billion price tag was criticized, and Deutsche Bank was still booking losses last year to reflect the unit’s diminished value.But that purchase put it in the same league as American giants like Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase — something no other European bank could lay claim to.AdvertisementThen came the financial crisis and an aftermath littered with lawsuits and investigations. Deutsche Bank has also been accused of being among banks that conspired to fix interest rates used as benchmarks for trillions of dollars in mortgages, credit cards and other loans. Last year, the bank was accused of facilitating Russian money laundering.Much of the legal scrutiny comes from the United States. But Deutsche Bank remains committed to the market, where it is the biggest foreign investment bank, Mr. Schenck said on Wednesday.At a fundamental level, Deutsche Bank is faced with a world where banks are far more heavily regulated than they were a decade ago.One by one, European banks like the Royal Bank of Scotland caved in to official pressure and scaled back their ambitions. Swiss rivals like UBS and Credit Suisse have targeted wealth management. Others have focused on domestic retail banking.Deutsche Bank, though, has long portrayed itself as a universal provider that offers checking accounts to ordinary citizens, as well as high-priced merger advice to giant corporations.But the bank was slow to invest in services like online banking, and its German branches have trouble competing with local savings banks. It is selling a big piece of its branch network and says it plans to concentrate on wealthy clients.“Deutsche Bank should have invested more in the domestic market,” said Jan Duscheck, head of the banking department at the United Services Trade Union, which represents Deutsche workers.Mr. Cryan has been frank about the bank’s shortcomings. He told the magazine Der Spiegel this month that Deutsche Bank’s “systems were and are inefficient” — leading to accusations that he is undermining morale.AdvertisementA recent survey of employees found that fewer than half are proud to work for Deutsche Bank. Plans to cut jobs have created a climate of insecurity. Mr. Cryan acknowledged in a letter to employees this month that the survey results “paint a sobering picture of the mood inside our bank.”Some Europeans fret that the region could be left without a global contender in investment banking. “Asian customers and European customers don’t want to be dependent on just the American banks,” Mr. Speich of Union Investment said.But others say it would not really matter.“Maybe it’s a problem on some symbolic level that Germany wouldn’t have a world-class bank,” said Nicolas Véron, a senior fellow at the Bruegel research institute in Brussels, “but they would get over it.”Follow Jack Ewing on Twitter @JackEwingNYT.A version of this article appears in print on July 28, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Deutsche Bank, Facing Pressure to Change Its Ways, Struggles to Find Direction.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.