AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — Volkswagen is still several months away from being able to clarify who was responsible for installing emissions-cheating software in millions of diesel vehicles and plunging the company into crisis, the automaker’s leader said on Monday.The statement by the chief executive, Matthias Müller, is a further indication that the company’s internal investigation is moving slowly. That could raise tensions with United States authorities eager to identify who was responsible.“We are speaking here of very complex occurrences, which in some cases are far in the past,” Mr. Müller said in a speech to about 1,000 Volkswagen managers gathered Monday at the company headquarters in Wolfsburg, Germany.“It will take several months before there are conclusive findings,” he said, according to a partial text of his remarks.However, in a positive development for Volkswagen, Mr. Müller said it would be less complicated and less costly than feared to bring cars in Europe with illegal software into compliance with emissions regulations.Of more than 11 million cars programmed to cheat on emissions tests, the overwhelming majority are in Europe. About 500,000 of the vehicles are in the United States.Last week, representatives of Volkswagen and its Audi division met with Environmental Protection Agency officials to present proposals for making cars in the United States compliant with clean air rules. Audi said on Monday that it would install updated software in about 85,000 vehicles that the E.P.A. said were also programmed to deceive regulators. The cost of replacing the software will be in the “mid-double-digit millions of euros,” Audi said.The vehicles are the Audi A6, A7, A8, Q5 and Q7 equipped with V6 diesel engines from the 2009 model year and later. Porsche Cayenne and Volkswagen Touareg S.U.V.s from the 2013 model year onward also have the engine and must be reprogrammed, Audi said.Volkswagen admitted that 11 million of its vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat on emissions tests. This is how the technology works and what it now means for vehicle owners.Volkswagen must also repair cars with 2-liter diesel motors such as the Golf, Jetta and Passat since 2009 that have illegal software. Volkswagen has not yet given details of those remedial measures, which could be more complex than the measures in Europe because the United States places stricter limits on emissions of nitrogen oxides, pollutants linked to lung ailments.Volkswagen has admitted that diesel-powered cars sold in the United States since 2009 were programmed to detect when they were being tested, and to activate equipment that helps neutralize nitrogen oxides. On the road, the equipment was partly deactivated, improving the cars’ engine performance.Mr. Müller said 2-liter diesel engines in Europe could be made compliant by updating software. Cars with 1.6-liter engines will require some new equipment in addition to the revised software. But Mr. Müller said the hardware changes, like alterations to the air-filtering system, would be relatively simple.The company is still working on modifications for 1.2-liter diesel motors, but it is likely that a software update will be sufficient, Mr. Müller added.Volkswagen did not sell cars with 1.2-liter or 1.6-liter diesel engines in the United States.In the course of Volkswagen’s internal investigation, led by the law firm Jones Day and including auditors from the consulting firm Deloitte, computers, smartphones and documents like meeting minutes have been seized, Mr. Müller said. Investigators have also conducted numerous interviews, he said.He said his goal was to present a preliminary report on the inquiry by the end of the month. The final report will take longer.This month, Volkswagen offered amnesty to employees who come forward with information. The unusual measure was seen as a sign that investigators were having trouble persuading workers to talk. The amnesty program, which protects people from being fired but not from criminal charges, expires at the end of the month.Prosecutors in Braunschweig, Germany, are pursuing a separate criminal inquiry, focusing on six suspects who have not been identified. That investigation is still considered preliminary. Birgit Seel, a prosecutor and spokeswoman for the Braunschweig state’s attorney, said no decision on whether to open a formal investigation was expected until next week at the earliest.Volkswagen needs to explain how the cheating occurred and who was responsible or it could face higher penalties. In early September, the United States Justice Department said it would put increased emphasis on identifying and punishing guilty individuals in cases of corporate misconduct. The policy reflected frustration that large fines paid by companies, and ultimately borne by shareholders, were not enough of a deterrent to rogue executives.The policy was announced only weeks before the Volkswagen emissions cheating came to light, making the company a prime test case.Advertisement