AdvertisementSupported byFair GameBy Gretchen MorgensonThe mania surrounding Valeant Pharmaceuticals International hit its peak a year ago. Strange as it may seem today after all that has happened, on Aug. 5, 2015 — two weeks after a dazzling second-quarter earnings report — the drug company’s stock closed at $262.52.J. Michael Pearson, Valeant’s chairman and chief executive at the time, took a victory lap when he announced those earnings. “We once again exceeded our guidance and delivered our fourth consecutive quarter of greater than 15 percent organic growth,” he said.Heady days. Since then, Mr. Pearson has been removed, the stock has lost over 90 percent of its value and the company that made its name buying drug companies and jacking up the prices of their products is under investigation by multiple arms of the law.On Aug. 9, Valeant is scheduled to report this year’s second-quarter results. It is unclear, of course, what they will be.But new financial data related to Valeant’s dubious pricing strategy provides some unsettling clues, both to the company’s future performance and how it generated past results.The new information, which has largely escaped notice elsewhere, involves “price appreciation credits,” an obscure but vital source of cash to Valeant that is directly linked to its pricing practices. Now that those practices are under scrutiny, the money Valeant receives from these credits is likely to decline substantially or disappear outright.Price appreciation credits are not uncommon in the pharmaceutical industry. They come about when a drug company increases the cost that its wholesalers must pay for a product they have contracted to distribute. Under these contracts, when Valeant raises the price of a drug, it receives a credit from its wholesalers reflecting the impact of that price increase on those wholesalers’ current inventory.Valeant flagged price appreciation credits for the first time in late April when it filed its 2015 annual report with regulators. They showed up again in its first-quarter 2016 earnings filed with regulators in June, even though the credits were not disclosed in the company’s news release announcing those results.While the credits are not unique to Valeant, their outsize contributions to the company’s cash flows appear to be. In recent periods, they have equaled one-fifth or more of Valeant’s operating cash flow, its financial filings show.Like other drug companies, Valeant uses the credits to offset distribution service fees it pays to its wholesalers. Adam J. Fein, president of Pembroke Consulting and author of the Drug Channels blog, said the theory behind price appreciation credits was to ensure that a manufacturer, not a wholesaler, captured the profits resulting from rising drug prices.But at most companies, price appreciation credits don’t exceed the amount of the distribution fees they pay to wholesalers. The credits are generally small enough that they don’t show up in financial filings, Mr. Fein said.Sure enough, there’s no mention of price appreciation credits in recent annual filings of the nine companies Valeant considers its peers, including Amgen, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly and Gilead Sciences.“They generally would not be itemized,” Mr. Fein said in an interview. “You’re unlikely to see it called out because it’s not going to be big enough in the scheme of the numbers.”Except, that is, at Valeant. In last year’s fourth quarter, for example, Valeant’s operating cash flow of $562 million included a “true-up payment” of $138 million related to price appreciation credits, its filing revealed. That represented almost 25 percent.During the first quarter of 2016, Valeant again reported receiving such a wholesaler payment. This time the amount was $110 million, equal to 20 percent of Valeant’s $558 million in operating cash flow.Including that payment, Valeant’s operating cash flow was up 14 percent from the same period in the previous year. Without the payment, its cash flow would have been down almost 9 percent.Valeant’s 2015 annual filing shows price appreciation credits spiking that year, contributing net revenue of $171 million; in 2014, their impact was just $53 million and was smaller still, $44 million, in 2013.Even so, Valeant did not highlight the impact of these credits until 2016. Asked why, Laurie Little, a Valeant spokeswoman, said in a statement that price increases taken in 2015 resulted in a higher amount of price appreciation credits relative to previous years.Digging into the 2015 figures shows that the credits surged to a combined $111 million in the second and third quarters, up from $19 million in the first quarter. Not surprisingly, this jump occurred as the company was imposing some of its most aggressive price increases.On June 18, 2015, for example, Valeant raised the price of Glumetza, its diabetes drug, to $3,432 from $572, according to Truven Health Analytics. And about a month later, on July 31, 2015, Valeant hiked Glumetza’s price again to $5,148.Zegerid, a treatment for acid reflux and other stomach problems, is another example. During the third quarter of 2015, Valeant increased its price twice, raising it to $3,034 from $421, Truven said. And in late July of last year, Valeant increased the price of Cuprimine, a treatment for Wilson’s disease, a toxic accumulation of copper in the liver and other organs, to $26,189 from $6,547.Michael Krensavage, founder of Krensavage Asset Management and a longtime pharmaceutical analyst who is betting against Valeant shares, said its recent disclosures about price appreciation credits demonstrate that the company was much more reliant on price increases than most investors probably knew.With Valeant’s pricing model under siege, he added, these credits are not likely to be a gift that keeps on giving. “Valeant is likely to lose a large chunk of its cash flow just when the company is strapped for money,” Mr. Krensavage said in an interview.Valeant has warned investors that a change in its model would mean fewer price appreciation credits, posing a risk to its financial position. In its 2015 annual filing, the company said: “By limiting or eliminating price increases on certain of our products, this will result in fewer or lower price appreciation credits from certain of our wholesalers.”Sure enough, in the first quarter of this year, the company said that beyond the $110 million price appreciation credit “true up,” credits on both its existing operations and its acquired businesses were “nominal.”As for future wholesaler payments, Ms. Little of Valeant said the company did not anticipate any more in 2016.“In May 2016, Valeant announced the formation of a new Patient Access and Pricing Committee that will be responsible for the pricing of the company’s drugs,” she said in a statement. “The committee will take a disciplined approach to reviewing the company’s pricing of drugs, and will consider the impact on patients, doctors and our health care industry partners.”Valeant’s dubious pricing practices, of course, were a major propellant of its highflying stock. Now investors have a clearer picture of how much Valeant’s operating cash flow benefited from those practices.Those benefits are vanishing. Live by the sword, die by the sword.Twitter: @gmorgensonAdvertisement