AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Credit Suisse on Thursday reported a surprise profit for the second quarter, bolstering its chief executive, Tidjane Thiam, as he tries to turn the Swiss bank around during a period of challenging financial markets and after losses in recent quarters.Mr. Thiam, who left the British insurer Prudential to take the role at Credit Suisse last summer, is in the middle of an extensive overhaul of the lender, shrinking its investment bank and placing greater emphasis on its wealth-management business, particularly in Asia and other emerging markets.But the turnaround at the second-largest bank in Switzerland, behind UBS, has not been as smooth as Mr. Thiam might have hoped. Since joining Credit Suisse, he has had to contend with continued turmoil in the financial markets that has cut into the confidence of clients, a stock price that has declined more than 50 percent and tension within the bank over his strategy shift.On Thursday, the bank — which has large operations in New York and London — reported a profit of 170 million Swiss francs, or about $171 million, for the three months ended June 30. That compared with a profit of 1.05 billion francs in the second quarter of 2015.Analysts had expected Credit Suisse to post a loss, as it had done in its previous two quarters.“It’s only a start. There is a lot of work left,” Mr. Thiam told reporters on Thursday. “All we’re saying here today is that things are moving in the right direction and we’re fixing a lot of problems that had developed over a long period of time. We’re making good progress in the right direction.”In a letter to shareholders, Mr. Thiam said the bank remained cautious in its outlook for the second half of the year “in view of the uncertainty created by significant geopolitical and macroeconomic concerns,” including Britain’s vote last month to leave the European Union.Despite beating expectations, Credit Suisse’s shares continued their decline on Thursday, falling more than 3 percent in midday trading in Switzerland.Revenue dropped 27 percent to 5.11 billion francs in the second quarter, from 6.96 billion francs in the same period a year earlier. Operating expenses declined 6 percent in the quarter to 4.94 billion francs.The decline in revenue was driven by adjustments in the valuation of a portfolio of investment banking assets that are no longer considered compatible with the bank’s core strategy and are being wound down. The restructuring of several businesses also reduced revenue, the bank said.Andrew Coombs, a Citigroup analyst, said in a research note on Thursday that the results were decent and were reinforced by a much stronger capital position than expected, helped in particular by a reduction in so-called risk-weighted assets.Credit Suisse’s global markets and investment banking businesses were both profitable in the second quarter — albeit less so than in 2015 — as the bank continued its reshaping.The global markets business reported a 61 percent decline in pretax profit to 154 million francs in the quarter from 391 million francs in the same period of 2015.“Global Markets saw a significant improvement as we completed our restructuring in terms of right sizing and risk reduction,” Mr. Thiam told analysts on Thursday. “The division is now able to continue to focus on serving its clients.”Pretax profit for the investment banking and capital markets business declined to 135 million francs from 145 million francs. The bank’s international wealth management business reported a 10 percent decline in pretax profit, to 245 million francs from 272 million francs.Credit Suisse’s Asia-Pacific business reported a pretax profit of 206 million francs, down from 367 million francs. The profit of its universal bank in Switzerland dipped to 453 million francs from 468 million francs.On Thursday, the bank also said it was among several financial institutions that had received inquiries from government and regulatory authorities “concerning banking relationships between financial institutions, their clients” and the Panama-based law firm Mossack Fonseca, after the disclosure of a trove of internal documents known as the Panama Papers.The documents outline the use of overseas accounts by people in politics, the rich and figures in sports and entertainment.“Credit Suisse is conducting a review of these issues and has been cooperating with the authorities,” the bank said.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.Advertisement