AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerDespite growing pressure in Washington to curb a tax-saving strategy used by American companies, recent proposals by the Treasury Department would not have affected the Pfizer-Allergan merger.At issue is a merger tactic known as an inversion, in which a United States company acquires a foreign company located where taxes are lower and moves the headquarters of the combined company abroad to take advantage of lower tax rates.On Thursday, Treasury proposed new rules to curb the ability of American companies to pull off a transaction like this, particularly where the combined company moves to a third low-tax country where neither has substantial operations.The Pfizer-Allergan combination has many of the attributes of an inversion: A big American company is merging with a smaller company based in Ireland, where there are lower taxes. Except, accounting experts say, the merger is not an inversion.To qualify, Pfizer shareholders would have to have 60 percent or more of the combined company, says Robert Willens, an independent tax consultant. But in this deal, Pfizer shareholders are getting 56 percent of the combined company and Allergan, 44 percent.That means all bets are off, Mr. Willens says. “Treasury’s proposals don’t touch them.”A spokesman for the Treasury Department said that it did not comment on specific transactions.News of the Pfizer-Allergan tie-up prompted a swift reaction from lawmakers in Washington.In New York, where Pfizer is based, Senator Chuck Schumer, a Democrat and member of the Senate Finance Committee, said the firm’s decision to move its headquarters was “truly disappointing.”“Rather than abandoning America’s shores, Pfizer should work with Congress to make international reform, and growth in America, a reality.”A fellow Democrat, Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island, called on Republicans to bring anti-inversion legislation that was introduced earlier this year to a vote. Mr. Reed and several other members of the Senate and House introduced the legislation in January but it hasn’t budged since. Citing the Joint Committee on Taxation, he said that inversions cost the United States about $33.5 billion in tax revenue.Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, the Republican chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, said the news of the merger “only further underscores the arcane, anti-competitive nature of the U.S. tax code.”“Short of a tax overhaul that will make it easier for American companies to invest and create more jobs at home, Washington ought to work together to explore viable policy-driven, apolitical solutions that will effectively combat inversions,” he said.Representative Sander M. Levin, a Michigan Democrat who is the ranking member on the House Ways and Means Committee, said, “Tax-motivated corporate inversions have cost the U.S. tens of billions of dollars, and place an increasing burden on American taxpayers.”“It is clear that Republicans in Congress need to join Democrats in stepping up to the plate to address this issue,” he said.Donald J. Trump, a Republican candidate for president, said in a statement: “The fact that Pfizer is leaving our country with a tremendous loss of jobs is disgusting. Our politicians should be ashamed.”Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, a Democratic candidate for president, said the Pfizer-Allergan merger would be “a disaster” for American consumers.“It also would allow another major American corporation to hide its profits overseas,” he said in a statement. “The Obama administration has the authority to stop this merger, and it should exercise that authority. Congress also must pass real tax reform that demands that profitable corporations pay their fair share of taxes.”His rival for the nomination, Hillary Rodham Clinton, also spoke out on the issue of inversions on Monday.“We cannot delay in cracking down on inversions that erode our tax base,” Mrs. Clinton said, adding she would propose specific steps to block inversions. She said such transactions “take advantage of loopholes that litter our tax code, distort incentives for investment, and disadvantage small businesses and domestic firms that cannot game the international tax system.”Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew said last week that the department would make every effort to end the use of inversions — and planned further rule changes in the coming months — but he also urged Congress to act.The rule changes that Treasury announced last week may not affect recent mergers. For example, in a statement on Friday, the medical device maker Medtronic, which moved to Dublin this year through its $43 billion acquisition of Covidien, said the Treasury rules “do not have a material financial impact on the company.”Pfizer shareholders are getting one share of the combined company — to be called Pfizer P.L.C. — for each one they hold or the option of cash from a $12 billion pool set aside for them. Allergan shareholders are getting 11.3 shares of Pfizer for each share of Allergan they hold.The transaction, which requires shareholder and regulatory approval, is expected to close in the second half of 2016.The transaction was carefully devised to avoid being an inversion in the first place, Mr. Willens said. Technically Allergan is the acquirer and Pfizer is the target.Another key is the financing of the $12 billion pool of cash available to Pfizer’s shareholders, he said. That cash is coming from Allergan’s side of the equation, through its sale of its generics business to Teva Pharmaceuticals. Had it been a distribution by Pfizer, it would have been difficult for Pfizer shareholders to dip below the 60 percent ownership threshold, Mr. Willens said.Lastly, the combined company will go on a series of share buybacks after the merger’s close, which could have raised issues, but last week’s proposals by Treasury did not address so-called skinny-down rules.Advertisement