AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere’s a look at what’s coming up this week:TECHNOLOGYElizabeth Holmes, the founder and chief executive of the beleaguered blood-testing company Theranos, is scheduled to speak Monday at the annual meeting of the American Association for Clinical Chemistry in Philadelphia. In an effort to restore Theranos’s credibility — and her own — Ms. Holmes is expected to present what will essentially be the first data shared by the secretive company about its technology, which is said to require only a finger prick of blood to perform multiple medical tests. Ms. Holmes will then answer questions from what is sure to be a skeptical audience of medical laboratory experts. The company has been criticized for not publishing data in peer-reviewed medical journals, but that is the least of its problems. Government regulators, citing numerous deficiencies in testing procedures, have barred Ms. Holmes, a 32-year-old Stanford dropout, from owning or operating a clinical laboratory for two years. And Walgreens has closed the Theranos testing centers in its drugstores. Andrew PollackECONOMYOn Monday morning, the Institute for Supply Management will release figures for the I.S.M. manufacturing index for July. Economists are looking for a slight softening in the index, as manufacturers continue to grapple with pressure from a strong dollar and weak demand from the energy industry. Still, the index is expected to remain above the crucial 50 threshold, which indicates that the factory sector is continuing to expand rather than contract, in a sign the economy is not about to slip into recession. Nelson D. SchwartzAUTO INDUSTRYInvestors will be looking for signs of stagnation in the American auto market on Tuesday, when carmakers report their July sales of new vehicles. Analysts are projecting flat sales compared with the same month in 2015, when the industry set a new annual sales record of 17.4 million vehicles. But some auto executives have recently sounded a note of caution about the market in the United States, predicting that costly discounts on many models will be needed to maintain last year’s torrid pace of sales. Bill VlasicBANKINGIt will be another busy week for earnings reports as several of Europe’s biggest banks share their second-quarter results, among them HSBC, Standard Chartered and the Royal Bank of Scotland, along with the French lenders Crédit Agricole, Société Générale and UniCredit. Results at European banks have not been as dire as some had feared in the quarter, particularly as uncertainty in the financial markets weighed on trading revenue. Credit Suisse and UBS, for instance, both beat analyst expectations, and Deutsche Bank essentially broke even. The British bank Barclays had a solid quarter in its core businesses, but its profit declined 41 percent as it accelerated plans to sell or close businesses and assets that it no longer considered central to its strategy. And Lloyds Banking Group, a British rival, said it would cut an additional 3,000 jobs and close more branches as it warned about a likely “deceleration” in economic growth after Britain’s vote in June to leave the European Union. Chad BrayAUTO INDUSTRYTesla Motors will report its earnings for the second quarter on Wednesday, and the bottom line numbers could hardly come at a time of more scrutiny for the maker of high-priced electric cars. Tesla is facing investigations of its self-driving Autopilot technology, which was a factor in a fatal crash on May 7. The company has also announced that it plans to acquire Solar City, whose biggest shareholder is Elon Musk, Tesla’s chief executive. Tesla has also recently opened the so-called Gigafactory, the gigantic battery factory it built in Nevada. The automaker is expected to report a loss for the second quarter, as it has for the last several quarters, because of the heavy spending on the Gigafactory, the introduction of its Model X sport utility vehicle and the development of a more affordable Model 3 compact. Neal BoudetteECONOMYThe Bank of England is widely expected to cut interest rates on Thursday after signaling that economic pressures from Britain’s vote to leave the European Union could necessitate an easing of rates. The Monetary Policy Committee has left its benchmark rate steady at 0.5 percent since March 2009, but the central bank said in July that “uncertainty flowing from the referendum result was likely to depress economic activity in the near term.” Also on Thursday, the bank is also expected to release its latest predictions on inflation, to be followed by a news conference by its governor, Mark Carney. Inflation is an important metric for its monetary policy decisions. Chad Bray On Friday, at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department will release data on the job market in July. Economists and investors will be paying close attention to this report, after the up-and-down results in recent months. Employers cut way back on hiring in May, only to follow with a burst of job creation in June.The consensus for July calls for a gain of 180,000 jobs as well as a slight decline in the unemployment rate to 4.8 percent. But another surprise could be in the offing. If the final figure is significantly better than expected, as was the case in June, it will increase the odds of an interest-rate increase by the Federal Reserve in September. Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisement