

      By LIZ MOYER

UPDATED August 3, 2016

William A. Ackman has had his ups and downs as the manager of the $12 billion asset hedge fund Pershing Square Capital. He specializes in making big, concentrated bets and backing them up with bold – often very public – pronouncements about his investment theses. Sometimes his investments score big, such as with his stake in Burger King in 2014, when the fast-food restaurant unveiled plans to merge with the doughnut-and-coffee chain Tim Hortons and move its corporate headquarters to Canada, which has lower taxes; and a stake in the mall operator General Growth Properties. But sometimes his investments disappoint, as in the cases of Herbalife and Valeant Pharmaceuticals and Canadian Pacific Railway. (In early August, Pershing sold all of its holdings in the railway company.) As of June, Mr. Ackman had 12 stocks in his portfolio, which was down 21 percent this year. Here is a look at how some of his ideas have fared. Mr. Ackman’s latest stumble has been with a big bet against Herbalife, the nutritional supplement company he has been battling for nearly four years, placing him on the opposite side of the fence as the billionaire Carl C. Icahn.Though federal regulators struck a $200 million settlement with Herbalife last month that will force it to dramatically change its business, it will be able to remain in operation. That is something Mr. Ackman had staked as much as $1 billion on not happening, after shorting the shares in 2012 and publicly declaring the company a Ponzi scheme.Herbalife shares are up 26 percent since the beginning of the year. Mr. Ackman counted on the shares heading in the opposite direction. Pershing has lost billions of dollars on its bullish bet on Valeant Pharmaceuticals, which Mr. Ackman called his best investment idea last year, arguing that it was an “underappreciated platform.” The drug maker’s shares have tumbled amid a management shake-up and questions about business practices.Still, Mr. Ackman has gone to bat for the company, testifying in Congress earlier this year about its drug pricing policies. Valeant shares, which traded above $200 last September, are down 78 percent so far this year. As of an investor presentation last month, it made up about 6 percent of Pershing’s capital.Mondelez, the giant packaged food and beverage company, makes up 15 percent of Pershing’s capital, and the holdings include stock and options. After Mr. Ackman took the stake in Mondelez, speculation emerged that he would push for a sale.In June, the candy maker Hershey rebuffed Mondelez’s bid to buy it for $23 billion. Pershing said on a shareholder conference call last month that regardless of whether a transaction with Hershey gets done, it doesn’t want Mondelez’s board to take its eye off the productivity and cost savings goals it has already set. Shares are down nearly 4 percent since the beginning of the year.Pershing took a $1.5 billion stake in the animal health care stock Zoetis in November 2014, about one year after it spun off from Pfizer. It is now 8 percent of Pershing’s capital. In explaining his investment idea, Mr. Ackman said pet ownership is rising and drugs are increasingly being used to treat pets and livestock. Zoetis could be a target by another big drug company, such as Bayer or Novartis. Pershing had a representative on the company’s board for a year until Zoetis’s shareholder meeting in May. Pershing sold a chunk of shares in May and another chunk in July, bringing its ownership to just 3.8 percent. Shares are up 7 percent this year.The owner of Burger King and Tim Hortons makes up 15 percent of Pershing’s capital and in the second quarter shares were up 7.5 percent. Mr. Ackman first acquired a stake in Burger King in 2012, seeing it as undervalued and a situation ripe for a turnaround. Another big shareholder – 3G Capital – had a track record of improving underperforming companies. In August 2014, when Burger King acquired Tim Hortons, Mr. Ackman’s bet paid off. Shares are up nearly 20 percent this year.Advertisement