
Advertising By                     
 BROOKS BARNES
 
JULY 31, 2016
LOS ANGELES — Matthew McConaughey took a big swig of bourbon and nestled deeper into a hotel penthouse sofa. Then, with zeal, he sat straight up and began sniffing the air like a bloodhound.“They can smell it,” he said in an ominous tone. “Millennials, and I know this for a fact, can smell solicitation. And it’s a turnoff. The best ads are not solicitous.”Add advertising maestro to Mr. McConaughey’s résumé.Mr. McConaughey — Oscar winner, Texan, renowned bongo player — has signed a contract with Gruppo Campari, the premium spirits company, to serve as creative director for Wild Turkey bourbon. The multiyear deal goes far beyond pitching a product, as Mr. McConaughey has recently done for Lincoln. This time, in addition to appearing on camera, he will write and direct the spots. He has also involved himself in recording music for the campaign, which will be introduced in September.He will also appear in an online documentary about the history of the 161-year-old brand and will have a say in how Wild Turkey bottles are photographed for still ads. Moreover, Campari wants his take on developing new Wild Turkey products, with a Matthew McConaughey-branded bourbon as a possibility, he said.“I told them, ‘I don’t want to be just a face. I have ideas. I’m an idea man,’” Mr. McConaughey said. “The brand is a little dusty, and in some ways I’m shaping a full-on reintroduction.” He continued: “The great news is that Wild Turkey hasn’t changed in all these years — it’s totally authentic. And that appeals to millennials. Because they can smell fake. Some manicured, bearded hipster soliciting them? No, thanks.”AdvertisementHe took another sip before adding, “And millennials don’t want bourbon lite. These people want bourbon, brother!”AdvertisementCampari seems thrilled — if a bit startled — by the attention Mr. McConaughey has been lavishing on Wild Turkey, which the company bought for $575 million in 2009 and where it has since poured $100 million into operations upgrades.“I did get more than I bargained for, but in a great way,” Melanie Batchelor, vice president for global spirits, said by phone from Campari offices in Italy. “Personally, I have been completely overwhelmed with his level of commitment.”The celebrity endorsement has been part of Madison Avenue’s playbook since at least the 1940s, when film stars were paid to promote cigarettes. But only in the last decade have Hollywood A-listers been willing to let a consumer brand define them to the same degree as a movie role. Mr. McConaughey, for instance, is now just as famous (or more) for his Lincoln car commercials as for “Dallas Buyer’s Club,” the film that won him the 2014 Academy Award for best actor.Yet there are downsides to ad work. Mr. McConaughey’s eccentric Lincoln ads have been mocked by “Saturday Night Live” and “The Ellen DeGeneres Show.” (“I actually think they’re cool little pieces of art,” Mr. McConaughey said of the spots. “They’ve been good for Lincoln and good for me.”)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Stars invariably overlook the risks because the advertising partnerships, unlike most movie roles these days, can bring enormous paychecks: Deals like the one Mr. McConaughey made with Wild Turkey are typically worth tens of millions of dollars, talent agents say.“I’ve always been interested in the art of the sell,” Mr. McConaughey said, noting that he interned as a college student at an Austin, Tex., advertising agency, where he worked on a “Don’t Mess With Texas” commercial.After being hurt by distillery underinvestment in the 1980s and the vodka boom of the 1990s, bourbon has experienced blistering growth over the last decade, as the “Mad Men” and classic cocktail crazes helped consumers rediscover brands like Pappy Van Winkle and Old Crow. For the fiscal first quarter, which ended in March, domestic sales of Wild Turkey increased 7.6 percent from the same period a year earlier.But Campari wants Mr. McConaughey to supercharge Wild Turkey sales both in the United States and overseas. “Older, particularly Southern, gentlemen have always loved the brand, but we need to close the gap between our perceived quality and our actual quality,” Ms. Batchelor said. In other words, many people see Wild Turkey as a downscale choice, and Campari wants to change that.The new marketing campaign will not “suddenly get all hoity-toity and alienate our core drinkers,” Mr. McConaughey said. Instead, it will emphasize that “this drink is unapologetically itself, and if you’re living your life that way as well, then Wild Turkey will probably find you.”AdvertisementThe official tag line for the campaign is “It’ll Find You.”“It’s going to be fun and wild, but the opposite of solicitous,” he said, pouring himself another drink. “So-lic-it,” he added, dragging out the syllables and clinking the ice in his glass. “We’re not gonna go that route.”A version of this article appears in print on August 1, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Face for Wild Turkey? This Actor Writes the Ads, Too.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »