AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonThe fight over Viacom is digging in for years of litigation as each side holds on to its own self-righteous claim to the poorly performing media company.That was made clear by two court rulings last week in Massachusetts and Delaware.In both cases, the courts ruled against Viacom’s controlling shareholder — National Amusements — as well as Sumner M. Redstone and his daughter, Shari. Both courts found that the issues raised required a trial to examine whether Mr. Redstone, 93, was competent to remove Philippe P. Dauman and George Abrams from the trust that will control Viacom and CBS on Mr. Redstone’s death or incapacity. Also at issue is the removal of Mr. Dauman, Mr. Abrams and three others as directors of Viacom.The trial will open up something of a Pandora’s box. For years, the trust that controls Viacom and CBS — its workings and operations — was shrouded in mystery. This failure of disclosure suited all the parties in the current mess, at the expense of the minority shareholders.Now, the legal proceedings promise years of wrangling and messy outcomes.In the Massachusetts case, the Redstone family’s best hope was that the case would be dismissed in light of proceedings in California, where Mr. Redstone’s choice of his daughter as his health care proxy had been approved. But the Massachusetts judge said that because the trust had been formed and was administered in Massachusetts, and some of the trustees, including Ms. Redstone, had ties to the state, the case could be heard there.The judge, George F. Phelan of Norfolk County Probate and Family Court, did dismiss the claims brought by Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams over their board seats, saying the Delaware court would determine their merit.And he did not allow an immediate medical examination of Mr. Redstone. But he ruled that the questions of “undue influence” over Mr. Redstone and whether he was competent required a trial, which is scheduled for October. No one is sure, by the way, which state’s law on “undue influence” — whether Ms. Redstone is taking advantage of her father’s state and manipulating him — will govern this issue. Massachusetts, California, Delaware and even Maryland, where National Amusements is incorporated, are all possibilities. Each standard is different and might lead to a different outcome.In the Delaware proceeding, the disclosure that Mr. Redstone executes the proxy for the National Amusements shares also meant that a trial was likely. Chancellor Andre G. Bouchard of the Delaware Court of Chancery did not buy the argument that the issue was moot because the National Amusements board had also validated this consent, finding this a question of fact to be determined at trial. That case left more of an opening for an examination of Mr. Redstone. But the judge also wants to be careful to coordinate disclosure with the other three actions.The Delaware case is also scheduled to be tried in October.It’s hard to know what will happen in Massachusetts, other than endless litigation. The judge clearly relished writing the 76-page opinion, and it was probably no coincidence that he issued his opinion the day before the Delaware opinion. But even if he rules for Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams, there will be an appeal.And even then, Mr. Redstone would need to be ruled incompetent by three doctors or a court of relevant jurisdiction before the trust could take control of the shares.If Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams win, they will try to unseat the other trustees, while Ms. Redstone will probably sue them claiming breach of fiduciary duty.Legal wrangling over the course of decades is not unusual for trusts. It’s a lesson for estate planners everywhere. The Delaware action is more likely to be resolved on a quicker timetable, perhaps even by year-end, although the Massachusetts judge seems to want to keep pace. The Redstones’ case in Delaware will be aided by the state courts’ mission to try to resolve disputes quickly and with finality – this will ultimately be decided by the Delaware Supreme Court. So while the immediate fate of Viacom may be settled in Delaware by the end of the year, the ultimate fate of the trust and of Viacom itself will take years and years of litigation.So how will the Delaware court decide?As before, it is hard to see a path for victory for Mr. Dauman. His removal could be invalidated. But there remains the question of the continuing operation of Viacom. Would National Amusements be barred from voting its shares for the duration of Mr. Redstone’s infirmity? That would be unusual, but certainly within the power of the Delaware court.And if this happened, it is unclear whether the board could even be re-elected. At least one major shareholder, Mario Gabelli, has called Mr. Dauman’s departure inevitable. It is telling that the minority shareholders the directors claim to protect may in the end unseat them.The problems with this litigation are compounded because the corporate machinery of Viacom has been turned to help Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams — which appears to me to be a breach of fiduciary duty by those officers.This litigation should be settled for all involved, with some face-saving measures for Mr. Abrams and Mr. Dauman.In the end, I have no sympathy for Mr. Redstone, who made this mess.His daughter is clearly looking out for her own interests, but at least she is stepping up to be a guardian. To be sure, her father set up an arrangement in which she would not have control, but that does not mean that the trust as it exists does not benefit her and her family.As for the Viacom directors, they allowed Mr. Redstone to be paid millions of dollars until their own jobs seemed in jeopardy.For Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams, this is really about saving their own jobs and faces. If Mr. Redstone’s control did not exist, the two men would not be there in the first place. They were happy to care about minority stockholders only when it benefited them. If they really cared about Mr. Redstone, they would step back and let Viacom be run by an independent board and fight about Mr. Redstone’s care.That’s the thing about sycophants: Their worship belies their true intentions. Or as Eugene V. Debs put it, “I would rather a thousand times be a free soul in jail than to be a sycophant and coward in the streets.” And a half a billion dollars poorer.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.Advertisement