
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

JULY 31, 2016
Olivier Jolivet  is chief executive of Aman Resorts.Q. You are French but have lived in many countries. Tell me about your background and education. A. I spend part of my early childhood in Morocco and then Ivory Coast, so that gave me early on a sense of different cultures. I came back to France for the baccalaureate [secondary school final exam], and it was a bit challenging to readapt to the French lifestyle, so as soon as I completed my studies I moved abroad again, first to Germany.Q. You were posted to Asia early in your career. What was that like?A. When I was about 26 and working for Club Med, I was offered a move to Singapore as a business developer for the company. Within two years, I was promoted to chief financial officer for Asia-Pacific. I was 28-29, which was very young, especially because the Asia-Pacific region was worth about $300 million at the time for the group and had about 500 people.Q. How did you cope? A. Work hard and learn fast. In the meantime, at least look like you know.Q. Many people say surround yourself with smarter people. AdvertisementA. You need to instill some confidence around you.Q. What is your philosophy of management?A. In the world of hospitality, in order to make people feel safe and well taken care of, you need to have situational intelligence. I think it has helped me in my career to move a bit faster. Situational intelligence is about how to adapt yourself and your attitude. Most people are not prepared to do that, because it’s not something you learn in school. Yet it’s so critical in the business world today.AdvertisementFor me, it makes all the difference between a potential manager and an excellent manager: people who have the intelligence to adapt themselves to the people they are talking to. I say it to all my team, especially in the hospitality industry and especially in Asia, “You can come out and say, ‘This is what I am, this is the philosophy of the company, let’s go.’ ” But I really believe that when you do business in Thailand or in China, you can’t take this attitude, you need different skills.Q. What cultural differences have you observed during your career managing in Asia?A. In Japan, for example, you need to first get a consensus around the table, and how you arrive at this consensus can take a lot time. You need to start from the bottom to convince and slowly move to the top. You need to get the consensus from the base, and once the consensus is reached, then they are the best people to execute the plan. But before you arrive to that consensus, it could take you a long time, and if you fail to follow this process, the project may never move forward. They have a word for this that translates into “slow resilience.”The Japanese will tell you the word “no” doesn’t exist. It’s the way you phrase the question. The “yes” means, “Yes, I understand the message.” It doesn’t mean they agree with you.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. So when do you know it’s a real “yes”?A. When they have a consensus among themselves. You ask them to discuss and come back after they’ve got that consensus. The hierarchy is so important to Japanese society.In Southeast Asia, in general, it’s the opposite: You need to talk to the top, and people will execute.In India, it’s a very different ballgame. This is the biggest democracy in the world, and the culture is so complex and so diverse it can be very challenging to manage. That’s why you have so few luxury brands in the country. The cost of entry is just too high. India is a key market for us, but after 30 years we still only have two hotels there — that’s how difficult it is to move things forward there.Q. Great service is a major part of what distinguishes top hotels. How do you achieve this?A. It’s about every employee, but really every employee, feeling accountable for the experience our guests have during their stay. It’s about motivating employees to be really passionate about their jobs and about really caring about the guests. The general manager of the hotel is the host, and he’s welcoming guests like he would welcome someone from his own family. But we are also treating our employees like they are our guests, part of the family, by showing real empathy toward them. The beauty of Aman is that we can do this because we’re small — we can run each hotel like a family business. That’s possible when you have 40 rooms, but you can’t when you have 1,000 rooms.Q. What would you tell your younger self?A. To be patient. To never make a decision on the spot, always take your time. When you are younger, you’re more impulsive — you want things to happen faster so you are more direct — but that’s when people say “yes” without always agreeing with you. So you need to have much more empathy with people. Before I was more like, “Money never sleeps, let’s do a deal fast, let’s go.” Now I spend more time explaining to people what we want and why, explaining the value of a deal and where we’re going.A version of this article appears in print on August 1, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »