JULY 31, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.27 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.38 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.19 percent.The following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Board of Education, $198.4 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Environmental Protection, $185 million of debt securities. Competitive.Miami-Dade County School District, $200 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementMinnesota, $301.2 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Competitive.Minnesota, $479.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementNew York, $250 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Plano Independent School District, Tex., $257.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Clark County Water Reclamation District, Nev., $251.6 million of general obligation refinancing bonds.Connecticut, $250 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Connecticut, $250 million of taxable general obligation bonds. Competitive.McKinney Independent School District, Tex., $78.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Alaska Housing Finance Corporation. $111 million of general mortgage revenue bonds.Alvin Independent School District, Tex., $90.2 million of unlimited tax schoolhouse refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Austin Independent School District, Tex., $284.1 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Ramirez.Concord Community School Building Corporation, Ind., $52.4 million of refinancing bonds. City Securities.AdvertisementConnecticut Housing Finance Authority, $145 million of housing mortgage finance program bonds. Morgan Stanley.Corpus Christi Independent School District, Tex., $103.7 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Corpus Christi, Tex., $76.2 million of utility system junior lien revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Forsyth, Mont., $144.7 million of pollution control revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Glendale Unified School District, Calif., $70 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Guam, $245 million of limited obligation Section 30 bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Hamilton County, Ohio, $321.7 million of sales tax refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Hospital Authority No. 2 of Douglas County, Neb., and Hospital Authority No. 1 of Sarpy County, Neb., $280 million of health facilities revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Humble Independent School District, Tex., $183.8 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Humble Independent School District, Tex., $85.2 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.AdvertisementLincoln, Neb., $120 million of Lincoln Electric System revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Los Angeles County Redevelopment Refunding Authority, $248.7 million of tax allocation revenue refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Maricopa County Community College District, Ariz., $191 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Marple Newtown School District, Pa., $66 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $149 million of Berklee College of Music revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency, $52 million of single-family housing revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Massachusetts Water Resources Authority, $100 million of general revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Miami-Dade County, $742 million of aviation revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.AdvertisementNew York City, $855.6 million of general obligation bonds. Goldman Sachs.North Carolina Medical Care Commission, $124.4 million of health care facilities revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Oakland Unified School District, Calif., $265 million of general obligation and general obligation refinancing bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Oklahoma Municipal Power Authority, $129 million of power supply system revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Omaha Public Power District, $177 million of electric system revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, $314.3 million of oil franchise tax senior revenue refinancing bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.San Antonio, $364.3 million of debt securities. Ramirez.San Diego Regional Transportation Commission, $325 million of sales tax revenue limited tax bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.University of Texas Board of Regents, $259.5 million of permanent university fund bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.University of Texas Board of Regents, $350 million of revenue financing system bonds. Goldman Sachs.Wisconsin, $598.1 million of general fund annual appropriation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.A version of this schedule appears in print on August 1, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.