By JONATHAN SOBLEAUG. 2, 2016
TOKYO — In the three and a half years since he won the Japanese prime minister’s office on a pledge to rekindle economic growth, Shinzo Abe has tried many tactics to coax the economy into expanding.He persuaded the central bank to flood the country with cheap money. He sanctioned a sharp fall in the value of the yen, a boon for big exporters like Toyota and Panasonic. And he increased government spending, pouring cash into areas as varied as day care and defense.The result has been well short of the renaissance Mr. Abe promised. Now his government is embarking on what may be its biggest spending program yet.On Tuesday, the government detailed a package of financial measures that it said was worth 28 trillion yen, or $274 billion, equal to more than 5 percent of Japan’s gross domestic product. Economists immediately began debating its impact, with many arguing that the jolt it would give to growth would be much smaller than the headline number suggests.AdvertisementMr. Abe is trying to accelerate an economy that, since he took office at the end of 2012, has created millions of new jobs but little wage growth. Economic output has flip-flopped between expansion and contraction, and deflation — a corrosive decline in consumer prices — remains stubbornly entrenched.“We’ve put together a bold stimulus proposal that is an investment in the future,” Mr. Abe said on Tuesday. It will allocate money to social programs and infrastructure, including the construction of a high-speed train that will use magnetic levitation, or maglev, technology to float above its tracks.AdvertisementThe stimulus program represents a redoubling of Mr. Abe’s effort to promote growth and crush deflation, which has dogged Japan since the 1990s.Though he has approved spending increases before, he has relied heavily on the money being pumped into the economy by the central bank, the Bank of Japan. This year, the bank took the extreme measure of reducing its benchmark interest rate below zero.The central bank’s policies have let the government borrow at extremely low interest rates. Some economists saw the latest increase in spending as a sign that Mr. Abe is in effect assuming that the bank will underwrite government spending more directly in the future — an approach sometimes called helicopter money because it essentially drops money into the public’s hands.“While helicopter money is a concept still frowned upon thus far, such coordination does make the first step in blurring the line as central banks run out of stimulus measures,” said Lee Jin-Yang, an analyst at Aberdeen Asset Management.Mr. Lee and other economists noted that the stimulus contains only ¥7.5 trillion in new government spending, and that the money would be doled out on an uncertain timetable. The rest of the program takes the form of low-interest loans and financial guarantees, which can help stimulate economic activity but do not contribute nearly as directly to growth.The government estimated that the stimulus would increase gross domestic product by 1.3 percent, though it did not say over what length of time.AdvertisementAbout ¥3.5 trillion will be spent on social items like wage subsidies for people who leave work to care for children or aging relatives. But more will be spent on infrastructure, including the maglev train, which the government wants to help build between Tokyo and Osaka by as early as 2037, eight years earlier than a previous timetable.The stimulus effort faces obstacles. Perhaps the biggest is the yen, which has strengthened again this year, cutting into profits at Japanese multinationals and leaving them even less inclined to raise wages.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Abe is not only betting that Japan can spend its way to growth, but that economic expansion will help the country claw its way out of a canyon of debt. Japan’s government debt is bigger than that of any other country, relative to the size of its economy. Mr. Abe argues that things will only get worse if output keeps shrinking, so spending more now will make Japan financially stronger down the line.In June, he announced that he would delay a planned increase in the national sales tax by two and a half years — another decision that prioritized growth over an immediate fix for the deficit.The approach has its critics. Some economists argue that the government would be better served by focusing on deregulation and other structural changes that would make the economy more competitive. Others fear a repeat of the 1990s, when the government spent heavily on public works without much of a return.“There were temporary pickups in the economy,” wrote Makoto Hara, an economics commentator at the Asahi Shimbun newspaper, “but in the end we were left with ballooning government debt and two lost decades.”Follow Jonathan Soble on Twitter @jonathan_soble.A version of this article appears in print on August 3, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: New Round of Stimulus for a Struggling Japan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.