By MIKE McPHATE and BEN SISARIOAUG. 2, 2016
Rush Limbaugh, the king of conservative talk radio, has renewed his contract with the distributor iHeartMedia, the company announced on Tuesday.In a statement, iHeartMedia declined to disclose specifics of the deal, calling it only a “long-term, multiplatform agreement.”During his program on Tuesday, Mr. Limbaugh said he wanted to keep the financial terms secret, but said he would be staying on four more years.“I don’t do this for any reason other than I love it,” he said.He said his father had taught him to be discreet about pay.Advertisement“It was a sign of good manners, bad manners, class and no class, and I’ve never forgotten it,” Mr. Limbaugh said. “It’s kind of a joke for people to throw out numbers anyway, because I don’t earn a salary.”AdvertisementMr. Limbaugh said he had pondered “moving on to something else” but was persuaded to stay on by top executives at iHeartMedia. In a statement, he also joked, “I really want to be on the air if the Russians find Hillary’s emails,” a reference to the Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The Rush Limbaugh Show,” which is broadcast every weekday from noon to 3 p.m., debuted in 1988 and became an immediate hit. It remains the top-rated program on Premiere Radio Networks, a subsidiary of iHeartMedia.In 2008, Mr. Limbaugh signed a $400 million, eight-year deal with Premiere Radio Networks, among the most lucrative deals in radio at the time.Talkers, a trade publication covering talk radio, estimates that Mr. Limbaugh reaches 15 million people each week, making him by far the most popular host. In its announcement, iHeartMedia did not specify the size of Mr. Limbaugh’s audience but said that it had grown by 27 percent over all since last year for listeners aged 12 and up.Still, Mr. Limbaugh’s broader influence in the culture — and his sway with advertisers — has been widely questioned in the industry, in part because of radio’s uncertain place in the crowded media landscape. Mr. Limbaugh’s show also suffered after his attacks on Sandra Fluke, a law student whom he mocked as a “slut” and a “prostitute” after she spoke to a congressional hearing about birth control in 2012. Many sponsors withdrew their advertising from the show in protest.“Rush might not be the force he once was,” said Michael Harrison, the editor and publisher of Talkers, “but he is still at the top of the heap in news/talk radio and the biggest voice in radio political talk.”A version of this article appears in print on August 3, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Limbaugh Renews Contract With iHeartMedia for 4 Years.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.