AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaThe New York Times said on Monday that Alex MacCallum, an assistant managing editor currently overseeing audience development, would take control of its video department.Ms. MacCallum, 35, will begin in the position when she returns from maternity leave in January, the company said. Her new title will be assistant editor and senior vice president, video. She will continue to supervise the audience development group, the company said.The appointment signals the end of an uncertain period for the video department, which has been without a full-time leader since the paper announced a broad revamping of the unit in July. That was followed by an announcement of buyouts with the prospects of layoffs there earlier this month.In a note to employees on Monday, The Times’s executive editor, Dean Baquet, and the company’s chief executive, Mark Thompson, described video as a “key editorial and commercial priority” and described Ms. MacCallum as “a strong leader who has a deep appreciation for the mission of The Times and embodies the spirit of collaboration that we are working to extend throughout the company.”Mr. Baquet and Mr. Thompson said they expected Ms. MacCallum “to step in and continue to shape a new vision for both our video journalism and our video business on all platforms.”They said that Justin Bank would take over the day-to-day responsibility for audience development and report to Ms. MacCallum, who will provide strategic oversight of the unit.She will report to both the business side and the newsroom, they said.In an interview, Mr. Baquet said that though The Times had had many successes in video it had, like most other news organizations, not “figured out a way to make sustained, day-in and day-out quality.”Video journalism on the web, he said, is an entirely new medium, distinct even from television.“Literally the size of it makes it different, it has got to be interspersed with words sometimes. It’s a shorter form for the most part,” he said. “It’s just different.”The aim, he said, is to make video as consistently good as the rest of The Times’s news report. To that end, it will most likely be more news-driven.“We’ve been doing print journalism for a million years,” he said. “We know how to do it. But this is a different skill and it requires different kinds of talent.” Ms. MacCallum, he said, “is great at building things that can be sustained. She built an audience operation that is arguably the best of any newspaper around.”It is increasingly important, Mr. Baquet said, that the newsroom and business sides of the newspaper “meld everywhere now. I think we’re at a moment in the life of journalism where the business model for all news organizations has changed dramatically. The only way we build a business model that sustains the future of The New York Times is that the two sides work together, understanding where the guardrails are.”Advertisement