AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningThere are longstanding differences between Boston and New York, like the rivalry between the Red Sox and the Yankees. Adding a new one, the federal appeals courts in each city have taken different approaches to the type of benefit a tipper must receive in exchange for inside information to make trading on it a violation of the securities laws.The Supreme Court will decide what type of benefit must be provided to prove a quid pro quo arrangement, and it could take insider trading law in a new direction.In a 1983 decision, Dirks v. SEC, the Supreme Court said that tipping required proof of a quid pro quo arrangement between the source of the information and the person trading on it. That included monetary benefits along with “when an insider makes a gift of confidential information to a trading relative or friend.”The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan roiled the world of insider trading in December 2014 in United States v. Newman when it overturned the conviction of two hedge fund managers charged with profiting on information passed through a chain of tippees, as the providers of information are known. The appeals court found insufficient evidence that the defendants knew about any benefit provided to the tippers, a requirement to prove a violation.In reaching that conclusion, the judges also described what constitutes the benefit necessary to show insider trading. Friendship alone is insufficient “in the absence of proof of a meaningfully close personal relationship that generates an exchange that is objective, consequential, and represents at least a potential gain of a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature.”Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, objected vehemently to the decision, claiming that it could create “a potential bonanza for friends and family of rich people with material nonpublic information.”More recently, in the first criminal case to go to trial in Manhattan since the decision in the Newman case, federal prosecutors are pursuing charges against an investment banker, Sean Stewart, who was accused of tipping his father about impending deals that led to more than $1 million in profits when the father passed the information on to a friend to trade on it. Mr. Stewart denies any intention that the information be used by his father, who was described by his lawyer in an opening statement as “weak, foolish and selfish.”Before the Newman case, the government would simply have pointed to the familial relationship as sufficient to prove the benefit. But the appeals court ratcheted up the requirement for a benefit, so the Justice Department has pointed to Mr. Stewart’s father using some of the profits from the trading to hire a photographer and pay for the rehearsal dinner at his son’s wedding.That is a bit of a stretch, especially when almost any parent would try to provide that for a child. This shows how much of an impact the Newman decision has had. Prosecutors in New York have to search for something tangible passed between the tipper and tippee to get a case in front of a jury.The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in Boston takes a more relaxed view of what is necessary to show the benefit. Last week, in United States v. McPhail, it upheld the conviction of a defendant who tipped off his golfing buddies at a country club outside Boston about developments at American Semiconductor that he learned from another golfing friend who worked for the company.Prosecutors pointed to two benefits that showed the quid pro quo requirement for insider trading. First, there were “concrete” ones that involved his expectations of a free dinner, wine and a visit to a massage parlor with the friends trading on the information, who earned more than $500,000 in profits.The second was more subtle, that the tipper “stood to benefit from the group’s general gratitude for his largess” so that “it makes him one of the guys, they’re all kind of impressed.” This is the “Caddyshack” element of insider trading in which tipping is as beneficial to one’s reputation as the confidential information itself. The appeals court found the combination of the two enough to support the conviction.We usually think of federal law as uniform throughout the country, but the question of what is enough to prove tipping inside information has resulted in what the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit called “some inter-circuit tension.” The Supreme Court will hear oral arguments on the issue in a case, Salman v. United States, in early October. In this case members of a close-knit family passed along confidential information without anything tangible exchanged among them. The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which heard the case, is more closely aligned with the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit on the benefit issue.The Supreme Court could decide the case by simply reiterating its position in the decision on the Dirks case about gifts between family members, which would not require proving anything of monetary value passed between the tipper and tippee. One way to confine the gift theory would be to limit it to particularly close relationships, so that more casual friendships — golfing buddies, for example — would require something of actual value passed in exchange for the information.The defendant in the Salman case filed a brief urging the court to adopt the Newman test that would require some proof of a valuable benefit exchanged between the tipper and tippee, not just warm feelings generated by making a gift to a family member. The question that the justices would have to confront if they take that approach is how much of a benefit is enough so that the lower courts can figure out whether a parent paying for a child’s wedding rehearsal dinner might be sufficient to prove insider trading.The Salman case could drag the Supreme Court into a quagmire of providing rules about what is and is not required to show a benefit and how different types of personal relationships might affect the analysis. The justices are often reluctant to rewrite the law in detail, but that is what they will have to do if they require proof of a particular benefit in tipping cases.What is odd about the law in this area is that the benefit requirement is far removed from what is considered wrongful about insider trading, which is the misuse of confidential information for personal gain that undermines confidence in the market. Whether someone got a benefit, such as a rehearsal dinner or the promise of a trip to a massage parlor, seems hardly relevant to showing securities fraud.The justices could take the law in a different direction, perhaps following the suggestion of a friend-of-the-court brief filed by the Center on the Administration of Criminal Law at New York University. Instead of proving a benefit, the proposal would require the government to show the tipper made an unauthorized disclosure of information that the person knew would be used by the tippee to trade. The focus would be on the parties’ knowledge rather than the nature of the relationship between them.The Justice Department is sure to resist this approach because proving intent is always the most difficult element in a white-collar case. This approach could make showing insider trading based on tips even more perilous because an intentional disclosure of confidential information might not violate the law if tippers could credibly argue they did not know what the tippee would do with the information.A decision in the Salman case that raises the standard for proving insider trading beyond what the Justice Department deems acceptable could also push Congress to step in and define the law more broadly than it is now.The unfolding drama of what constitutes this type of insider trading could end up changing the law significantly, all because the appeals courts cannot agree on what is a benefit.Advertisement