By ANDREW POLLACKAUG. 1, 2016
PHILADELPHIA — Elizabeth Holmes tried to salvage the reputation of her embattled blood-testing company here on Monday, discussing its technology and data at a scientific meeting for the first time. Instead of focusing on sins of the past, she made promises for the future.Ms. Holmes said that Theranos, the company she started, was developing a new version of its technology that she called the mini-laboratory, or miniLab. She said the technology would be able to perform multiple types of medical tests in a box that could be placed on a table in a doctor’s office. She said the company was seeking approval of a test to detect infection by the Zika virus.The presentation suggested that Theranos was shifting its business model toward selling medical testing machines, rather than strictly being a laboratory that performs tests by itself.“This is an inflection point for our company and a new chapter as we introduce our technologies to the world,” Ms. Holmes said, in addressing the annual meeting of the American Association for Clinical Chemistry.AdvertisementThe speech met with some skepticism. Stephen R. Master, one of the experts chosen by the conference to question Ms. Holmes after her talk, pointed to the company’s claims of being able to perform numerous tests from a few drops of blood.Advertisement“The evidence that you presented fell far short of that,” Dr. Master, an associate professor of pathology and clinical medicine at Weill Cornell Medical College, said to a scattering of applause.Theranos had been invited to present at this conference in the past but had declined. This year, however, the company is no longer a hot Silicon Valley start-up that can afford to create an allure of mystery. Now, the company and Ms. Holmes are in makeover mode.Government inspections and articles in The Wall Street Journal have challenged the company’s claim that it can perform multiple tests from a finger prick of blood. Even more seriously, federal regulators, citing serious quality-control problems, have revoked the license for Theranos’s main laboratory and barred Ms. Holmes from owning or operating a laboratory for at least two years. Theranos is trying to avert those crushing penalties from taking effect early next month.The company is also under investigation by federal prosecutors, the Securities and Exchange Commission and some members of Congress.The decision to offer the podium to Ms. Holmes was somewhat controversial within the clinical chemistry association. Perhaps that is why the music played just before her presentation was “Sympathy for the Devil.”Nonetheless, the ballroom, which held about 2,500 people, was packed and there were two overflow rooms set up with video feeds. Ms. Holmes spoke for nearly an hour, then answered questions from the audience and an expert panel for nearly half an hour. The questions were not screened in advance by the company, according to Patricia Jones, the association’s president.By focusing on the miniLab system, which is under development and has not been used to test samples from paying customers, Ms. Holmes was able to largely avoid talking about the loss of the laboratory’s license, which she said was a procedural issue separate from the technology the company is developing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She also sidestepped questions about the inaccuracies of the previous generation of Theranos technology, which was used to perform tests on paying customers.Advertisement“We know there’s a lot of questions about the past,” she said in answer to a question. “And in the appropriate forum we will address those.”Ms. Holmes, 32, dropped out of Stanford to start Theranos when she was 19, and her presentation provided a glimpse of what all the engineers she hired have been working on for 13 years.She said the miniLab would be able to perform various types of tests in one box, including DNA testing, cell counts and chemical measurements, something she said other companies could not do as readily. And yes, she said, the machine would do many tests using tiny blood samples.Inside the machine, a robot shuttles samples from one device to another, including a centrifuge, image sensors, and a system for amplifying DNA. The boxes in doctor’s offices or remote testing stations would be controlled remotely from a central laboratory, which could analyze the results.But there are challenges to this new business model. Theranos will have to get approval from the Food and Drug Administration for the tests, and executives did not say how soon the company will be able to do that. The approval it is seeking for the Zika test is for emergency use during the current outbreak, a lower standard than full approval. And each test would need a separate approval.Other companies are also developing testing equipment that uses small samples and can perform multiple tests.“I didn’t see anything that necessarily made my jaw drop,” Dr. Master of Weill Cornell said in an interview after the talk. “It’s nice engineering. They’ve done some good things. They haven’t done the impossible. The whole ‘fundamentally changing the paradigm’ — I haven’t seen that.”Ms. Holmes presented data, generated by Theranos, showing that the miniLab’s measurements of things like lipids, potassium, cell counts and Zika infection were very similar to that of systems from other vendors that are already on the market.She said the company was having outside organizations evaluate its technology, and that data would be presented at some point in the future. She and other executives said the company was going to publish data in peer-reviewed journals, something it has not done in the past, in defiance of scientific convention.AdvertisementMost of the data presented on Monday used blood taken from the veins, not the capillaries of the finger. But Ms. Holmes presented some data showing that the results from the miniLab were similar whether a finger prick or venous draw was used. She also discussed in detail how the finger-prick samples were drawn and preserved in a way to prevent the blood from clotting or breaking apart.A version of this article appears in print on August 2, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Theranos Shifts to Medical Testing Machines.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.