
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

NOV. 23, 2015
The adage that “you can’t teach an old dog new tricks” certainly does not apply to criminal laws, which are routinely used in new situations hardly conceived when they were adopted. That will play out this week in New York when a judge will have to decide whether daily fantasy sports constitute gambling under laws adopted long before these contests were even possible.New York State’s attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, filed lawsuits against the two leading daily fantasy sports companies, FanDuel and DraftKings, asking for an injunction to stop them from operating, saying that they are violating the prohibition on gambling that is part of the state’s constitution.Like many such legal disputes, this one centers on a seemingly simple phrase in the definition of gambling in New York State’s penal law: “A person engages in gambling when he stakes or risks something of value upon the outcome of a contest of chance or a future contingent event not under his control or influence.” Chance means that “the outcome depends in a material degree upon an element of chance, notwithstanding that skill of the contestants may also be a factor therein.”In a memorandum filed as part of the case, Mr. Schneiderman asserts that daily fantasy sports “is nothing more than a rebranding of sports betting” which is “plainly illegal.” He stepped up the criticism in an editorial in The New York Daily News when he called the argument that the contests did not qualify as gambling because they involved a measure of skill “nonsense.”AdvertisementShowing how important the issue has become, DraftKings brought in David Boies, one of the country’s leading litigators, to fight the attorney general’s case. FanDuel has temporarily suspended operations in New York, while DraftKings continues to allow residents there to play. A hearing is set for Wednesday in the New York Supreme Court in Manhattan to consider Mr. Schneiderman’s request.AdvertisementIn a conference call on Friday, Mr. Boies challenged the claim that daily fantasy sports contests clearly violate the law, asserting that they have been legal for the past eight years the company has operated.Josh Adams owed $30,000 to friends and family when he finally decided to face his gambling addiction. Then he discovered fantasy sports.“The attorney general is entitled to change his mind,” Mr. Boies said, but “he is not entitled to unilaterally change the law.” Like most gamblers, winners claim their victories were the result of skill, while losers blame bad luck — a quarterback’s ill-timed interception or an untimely injury to a key player are the usual culprits — so there is certainly an element of both in daily fantasy sports. Figuring out what is a “future contingent event” outside the player’s control or influence is also far from clear because the contest’s outcome can be attributed to the games played on the field as much as the decision to select certain players to compose a fantasy team.Mr. Schneiderman’s complaint emphasizes the promotional advertising by FanDuel and DraftKings to show it is a form of gambling, pointing to the get-quick-rich claims that make it sound more like winning the lottery than a test of skill and knowledge. But advertisements are rarely evidence of what happens in the real world because not everything can be the best, brightest or biggest, as often promised to consumers.On the flip side, claims that the government is changing the rules after allowing the companies to operate for years is not how the law is usually interpreted. Just because everyone else drives fast does not change the speed limit, regardless of whether it is routinely unenforced. So Mr. Schneiderman’s decision to try to put a stop to contests his office considers a violation of the gambling prohibition is not affected by whether he arrived a bit late to the game.It should not come as any great surprise that a law adopted long before the advent of daily fantasy sports is not as unambiguous as the opposing sides have proclaimed it to be. So any decision in the trial court is likely to be appealed by the losing side, which means any final resolution of the scope of the gambling prohibition is probably months away.The larger question is whether shutting down daily fantasy sports is the best way to address issues raised about how they involve elements of gambling. The contests can be feed the addiction of compulsive gamblers, as a front-page article in The New York Times on Monday describes how easily the unregulated world of fantasy sports can be abused.AdvertisementThe world survived the elimination of most online poker sites from the United States a few years ago, so cracking down on this newest form of entertainment may not have too much of an impact. The contests are popular with casual players who do not abuse them, however, so denying access to what is for many a harmless form of entertainment may be overkill.
            In 2006, Congress tried to crack down on illegal online sports betting. Today, Internet wagering is thriving, and a new business that resembles gambling, fantasy sports, is winning millions of players and stoking controversy. The Times, with the PBS series “Frontline,” investigated illegal gambling in the Internet age.        Finding ‘Who’ and ‘Where’ Within the Cyber-Betting UniverseCash Drops and Keystrokes: The Dark Reality of Sports Betting and Daily Fantasy GamesThe Offshore Game of Online Sports BettingDraftKings Leaves Door Unlocked for Barred Fantasy Sports PlayersTo Those With Addiction, Daily Fantasy Sports Looks a Lot Like GamblingN.F.L. Data Deal: A Bet on Gambling?
Sign up to receive an email
			when we publish the next stories in this series.
		
Have a question or anonymous tip?

Terms and conditions
Something went wrong.

				Thank you for your submission.
			Massachusetts has gone in a different direction that may signal a better way to deal with issues related to daily fantasy sports contests. The state attorney general, Maura Healey, proposed regulations that would curtail how the companies operate to address potential problems related to gambling and maintaining the integrity of the contests.The new rules would prohibit minors from playing the games and require companies to take steps to limit abusive practices by gamblers, such as setting deposit limits and not marketing to those who identify themselves as having gambling problems. Contests based on college or high school athletes would be prohibited, and companies could not advertise or promote themselves at amateur or school venues.More drastic measures could affect how profitable the daily fantasy sports companies could be if the regulations were adopted broadly. The proposal would limit players to one account per company and require “reasonable measures” to verify their identity to limit anyone from playing through multiple accounts, including efforts to block proxy servers that might hide who is actually entering contests. Nor could a company extend credit to a player, further distinguishing this type of play from Las Vegas-style gambling. The rules would also limit deposits to $1,000 per month unless the company verifies a player’s ability to sustain higher losses, another step to keep participants from risking too much.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An issue that has come up with the daily fantasy sports contests is the fact that the top players win the bulk of the prizes, including many who are employees of other companies running contests. Ms. Healey’s proposal would prohibit employees and those with access to inside information about how teams are being put together from participating, along with professional athletes and their agents.To level the playing field even further, companies would have to develop contests in which those top players are excluded, giving average participants a better chance at winning.The companies may not like this degree of regulation because it is could make contests less attractive as inexperienced participants are segregated, keeping the small fish away from the sharks swimming in the daily fantasy sports pool. But if the alternative is shuttering their operations in states like New York, which supplies more than 10 percent of the players, then restrictions imposed by the states may be the better alternative.The challenge facing the daily fantasy sports companies is getting their own level playing field through a single set of regulations that they can follow. If some states ban residents from participating while others impose potentially conflicting restrictions, then their operating costs could become prohibitive as they juggle multiple rules.This could threaten a major source of advertising revenue for broadcasters and the professional sports leagues that have ties to the companies, so they can be expected to support changes to allow FanDuel and DraftKings to continue to thrive. That possibility may generate enough pressure to create a uniform set of rules for the contests. Because without daily fantasy sports, how would we ever see the anomaly of a Jets fans rooting for Tom Brady because he happened to be on their team?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »