AdvertisementSupported byMorning AgendaBy Amie TsangYield-starved investors are so desperate for returns that they have been willing to take on the risk of investing in a country that recently underwent a failed coup and an attack on its main airport. Turkish stocks and bonds have been rising, in spite of the country’s debt being downgraded. It seems a 10-year bond offering a 9 percent reward is too tempting to turn down, even if the inflation rate is 8.7 percent and the currency is heading south.Stocks and bonds in developing markets have been on a tear as investors scoop up discounted stocks and hunt for returns in a world of super-low interest rates. They are rooting around in places like Brazil and South Africa, while markets more broadly appeared to be in a lull.The turbulence that followed Britain’s vote to leave the European Union has dissipated and left behind only an uneasy calm. But there are still events that could rouse investors, as Bloomberg reports. As one fund manager put it: “At some point, the jaws must snap.”Tesla’s Costly Ambitions No one expects Tesla to turn a profit anytime soon, but for investors, the deeper worry is that Tesla has been inconsistent in its growth plans. The company, which reported on Wednesday a loss of $293.2 million in the second quarter, also missed its target of delivering 17,000 vehicles by 3,000.And its expansion plans cannot mask the challenges it faces in turning its innovations into mass productions and serious revenue. The company has to satisfy more than 300,000 preorders for its cheaper Model 3 sedan and meet its production targets while contending with heightened scrutiny from federal auto safety regulators and the Securities and Exchange Commission.On the agenda The Bank of England will publish its latest monetary policies and inflation report at 7 a.m. A news conference follows at 7:30 a.m. Viacom, Kraft Heinz and LinkedIn are among the companies reporting earnings.Federal Reserve Fines Goldman Sachs $36 Million A case that raised questions about revolving doors between the government and Wall Street has escalated, and the Federal Reserve has forced Goldman Sachs to pay a penalty over the leak of confidential information from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The decision by the Federal Reserve is awkward since one of its own employees disclosed the information, but the Fed seems determined to take a tougher stance against misconduct on Wall Street.The fight is not over yet: The Fed is also trying to bar Joseph Jiampietro, a manager of the Goldman Sachs executive who received the leaked documents, from the banking industry. Although the leaked documents were found on Mr. Jiampietro’s desk, the company never established that he knew about the leak. Mr. Jiampietro’s lawyer accused the Fed of using his client as “an industry scapegoat.”Sign up here for more DealBook emails and alerts.Advertisement