AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra AlterScholastic had high expectations for “Harry Potter and the Cursed Child,” which arrived on July 31 with an enormous first printing of 4.5 million copies.The publisher’s optimism was well warranted, it seems. The play has become an overnight blockbuster, selling more than two million hardcover copies in the first 48 hours, Scholastic said on Wednesday, calling the sales “unprecedented for a script book.”More than 5,000 bookstores and libraries around the country celebrated the publication of “Cursed Child” with release parties over the weekend.The play, which is being billed as the eighth book in the Harry Potter series, is a continuation of the story, but also with a stark departure in style and form. It was written by the playwright Jack Thorne, with input from the creator of the series, J. K. Rowling, and the play’s director, John Tiffany. The plot unfolds 19 years after the Battle of Hogwarts, when an adult Harry Potter, now a father and a civil servant working at the Ministry of Magic, sees his own children off to Hogwarts.In a review in The New York Times, Michiko Kakutani wrote that the story translated well to the page, arguing that “even though it lacks the play’s much-talked-about special effects, it turns out to be a compelling, stay-up-all-night read.”The publication coincided with the opening of the play in London, which drew rapturous reviews from theater critics and fans.But the book, which arrives nearly a decade after Ms. Rowling officially ended the series, has already caused a minor schism among devoted Potterheads. While many readers were ecstatic about the chance to have more material on Harry and his friends, others have faulted Ms. Rowling for licensing out her story and characters. Some fans have lashed out online, saying they feel they were duped and misled by the prominence of Ms. Rowling’s name on the cover.“This is NOT a Harry Potter book I frankly feel disgusted even adding it to the collection,” one disappointed fan wrote on Amazon. “It reads like a poorly written fan fiction.”For Scholastic, the Harry Potter books have been a reliable cash cow, with more than 160 million copies sold in the United States and more than 450 million copies sold worldwide. In the fiscal quarter ending on May 31, Scholastic’s children’s trade sales rose 12 percent in the fourth quarter and 14 percent for the year overall, “largely due to strength in core publishing, both frontlist and backlist, and its Harry Potter franchise,” the company said.The sales of “Cursed Child” are a testament to the longevity of the franchise, though they fell far short of the sales record set in 2007 by “Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows,” the seventh book in the series. “Deathly Hallows” sold 8.3 million copies in the United States during its first 24 hours on sale.Some fans hoped that Ms. Rowling, who has moved on to publishing fiction for adults, might bring Harry out of retirement and write more novels. But Ms. Rowling quickly put an end to those hopes over the weekend.“He goes on a very big journey during these two plays and then, yeah, I think we’re done,” Ms. Rowling said in an interview with Reuters at the play’s opening. “I’m thrilled to see it realized so beautifully, but, no, Harry is done now.”Advertisement