AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaTime Warner’s willingness to serve as sous-chef in Hulu’s crowded kitchen could keep the broth from spoiling.Hulu, the digital TV service, will get $580 million from Time Warner, the American media conglomerate, and fresh programs from its TNT and CNN networks. Notably, however, Time Warner will hold a smaller stake in Hulu than other major investors and refrain from joining a board already crowded by rivals like Walt Disney, 21st Century Fox and Comcast.Hulu has charted a rocky path since it was started in 2007. Owners clashed over competing ideas and agendas, including trying to protect lucrative fees collected by cable operators to carry their networks. Twice, the service has been put up for sale. A private equity backer sold out. Comcast’s involvement was hamstrung by regulators as part of its acquisition of NBC Universal. Along the way, Hulu lost its highly regarded chief executive.Despite the turmoil, Hulu has benefited from consumers who are increasingly watching TV shows and movies when they want and on devices of their choosing. Hulu has quadrupled the number of paying customers in four years to 12 million, pulling in at least $1.2 billion from those on the lowest plan at $8 a month. That does not include advertising revenue, which Credit Suisse estimates will be $850 million this year.Time Warner’s 10 percent stake, at a $5.8 billion valuation for Hulu, precedes a planned introduction of Hulu’s live-streaming service next year. That feature will distinguish it from rivals like Amazon and Netflix, which trades at a higher multiple of sales than Hulu does based on its new investment. For now, only shows from the Turner networks will be available, though there are discussions about adding ones from Time Warner’s HBO, home to the hit “Game of Thrones.”Hulu will pay Time Warner for the shows, in much the same way that traditional cable companies pay fees to Time Warner. In that sense, at least some of the money from Time Warner will boomerang back to it. Jeffrey Bewkes, the chief executive of Time Warner, emphasized on Wednesday that his company’s investment would give Hulu more programming firepower. Doing so without muscling in too much on the operations may give the joint venture a better shot at success.Advertisement