By SAM ROBERTSAUG. 3, 2016
Mary Ann Madden, who for three decades challenged New York magazine readers to compose double dactyls, literary limericks, godawful puns and dexterous spoonerisms in a weekly competition that foreshadowed hashtag games on Twitter, died on July 26 at her home in Manhattan. She was 83.The cause was a stroke, said Steven Clar, her executor.Ms. Madden, a gifted wordsmith, was recruited by her friend Stephen Sondheim, the composer and lyricist, to create the New York Magazine Competition, which made its debut in 1969. At the time, he held a part-time job there devising cryptic crossword puzzles for the back pages every week but had found it becoming too time-consuming.When he shifted to once every three weeks for about a year (succeeded by Richard Maltby Jr.), Ms. Madden took over the page the rest of the time. At her retirement in 2000, she had edited 973 wordplay competitions.“If the week’s collection of entries looked a little lame to her after she turned it in,” Christopher Bonanos, a senior editor, wrote  last week on the magazine’s website, “she’d get off the phone, and 15 minutes later, a couple of extras would arrive in my inbox, all of them better than the ones we’d received.”AdvertisementThose late entries often came from a “Grace Katz, N.Y.C.,” and they frequently won an honorable mention. Ms. Madden owned a cat named Grace.AdvertisementHer witty wordplay competitions attracted a weekly average of 1,500 readers, who would read the magazine from the back. They would also send in postcards and letters with inspired entries that ranged from the esoteric to the painfully sophomoric.One contest — a hypothetical newlywed game — generated 9,000 responses. (One read: If Tippi Hedren married Albert Camus and Taylor Caldwell married General Thieu, they would be Tippi Camus and Taylor Thieu.)Ms. Madden’s celebrity friends were among the competitors. David Halberstam, the author, once said he had earnestly submitted 137 entries without even an honorable mention. David Mamet, the playwright, fared better, winning the competition for the World’s Perfect Theatrical Review with this entry: “I never understood the theater until last night. Please forgive everything I’ve ever written. When you read this I’ll be dead.”One contest asked for an advertisement with a self-fulfilling prophecy. (“Depressed? Alone? Join our new Lonelyhearts Club! Simply send us your name and address. No one will call.”)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other competitions solicited the opening line of a conversation between Martians and Earthlings (“Hi! We met in Roswell”); Olympic events of the future (opinion poll vault); fanciful definitions for words beginning with K (Kleig light: low-calorie version of famous German beer); sequels (“The King and II”) and prequels (“Two Dalmatians”).Mary Ann Dolby was born in Manhattan on Oct. 8, 1932, the daughter of Joseph G. Dolby, who owned Hotel 70 Park at East 38th Street, and of the former Helen Fallon.She attended the Convent of the Sacred Heart in Greenwich, Conn., was presented at the Gotham Ball and graduated from Marymount Manhattan College, where she majored in English. She and her husband, Henry N. Madden Jr., were separated. No immediate family members survive.One of her mentors was Mike Nichols, who hired her as an assistant when he and Elaine May were a successful comedy team. She couldn’t type, but he respected her intellect and enjoyed playing cribbage with her during work breaks. Her machine-gun delivery also inspired Mr. Sondheim’s staccato lyrics to “Buddy’s Blues” from “Follies.”AdvertisementThe best of the more than a million competition entries were collected in three anthologies. The contest endured to inspire The Washington Post’s Style Invitational and recent viral hashtag games on Twitter, like #AddaWordRuinaMovie and #DeBlasiosNewYork.The original New York Magazine Competition ended when Ms. Madden quit. She was asked at the time why was she leaving.“You take your 973 best shots,” she replied, “and then it’s time to stop.”An obituary on Thursday about Mary Ann Madden, creator of the New York Magazine Competition, misstated the name of a Washington Post contest that competition inspired. It is the Style Invitational, not the Washington Post Invitational.A version of this article appears in print on August 4, 2016, on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: Mary Ann Madden, 83, Creator of Wordplay Contests.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.