AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromFreshRealm got its start as a meal kit business, sending customers all the fixings to make, say, chicken quinoa salad with arugula and pistachios, or lemon-Dijon salmon with potatoes and green beans.Along the way, it has stumbled upon a different booming business: the packaging system FreshRealm pioneered, a sort of reusable puzzle box for meal kits.Dozens of meal kit companies have popped up over the last five years, delivering precisely cut and measured ingredients and a set of instructions to help even the most reluctant cook put a fresh meal on the table.But the kits leave behind piles of boxes, plastic bags and cold packs. Pressured by consumers to reduce such packaging waste, some companies have tried to cut down on the garbage they create, including turning to a competitor, FreshRealm, for its shipping crates.“When we were creating it, I think people weren’t necessarily thinking about packaging waste or preparation time or the cold chain needed to preserve fresh foods,” said Michael Lippold, chief executive of FreshRealm, a subsidiary of Calavo Growers, which markets fresh produce and a variety of fresh prepared foods. “Now that consumer concerns about packaging are coming up, there’s definitely a lot of interest in our box.”Packaging is perhaps the most critical element of the meal kit business, which must ensure that raw meats and vegetables get to the consumer without being contaminated or looking as if someone played soccer with them. So any tweak to reduce the insulation needed to maintain proper temperatures or the plastic that protects precut food from discoloration and contamination requires judiciousness and a good bit of innovation.Some companies have stopped using plastic foam insulation. Others try to encourage recycling, or give people the option of sending the packaging back.FreshRealm has made its box a central selling point of its delivery service. But it has also started providing its box system to competitors as part of a bundle of services that includes prepped ingredients supplied by a sister company, the Renaissance Food Group.The meal kit business Terra’s Kitchen, for instance, uses FreshRealm’s system. Mike McDevitt, its founder and chief executive, started the company after becoming a father and deciding that he wanted his child to have a dinner table experience like the one he had growing up.But when he tried one of the major meal delivery services, there were two things about it he didn’t like: the amount of time it took to prepare the meals, and the packaging.“Every Tuesday, as I was going out to the recycling bin, I had at least 12 to 15 little plastic bags, ice packs and another cardboard box, and that just felt like it wasn’t sustainable,” he said.So Terra uses FreshRealm’s “shipping vessels,” reusable boxes tailored to the prepared foods that it sends to customers.The boxes are 17-inch-square cubes made of polyurethane. Inside, five drawers house metal plates that help maintain the desired temperature. The drawers can hold up to four grab-and-go meals or the ingredients for two meal kits, Mr. Lippold said.The boxes are delivered by FedEx. Once the food is removed from the box, the customer just puts the container back together and slaps on a return label. FedEx picks it up and returns it to FreshRealm. The company then sanitizes the box and puts it to use again.“If you’re a meal kit company with a national program that delivers perishables to the door, you have to build your own infrastructure of refrigerated trucks — and that’s a big challenge,” Mr. Lippold said. “Our boxes are able to ship everything from a heat-and-eat lasagna to a grab-and-go salad and fresh-cut watermelon at 32 to 41 degrees Fahrenheit — it’s a massive competitive advantage.”Other meal kit companies argue that their services produce less waste than a trip to the grocery store to buy the ingredients for the same meals. They say that sending customers precisely measured ingredients cuts down on food waste, and that grocery stores also produce a lot of packaging waste.But Adam Gendell, associate director of the Sustainable Packaging Coalition, an environmental group, says this is the same sort of argument that Keurig made about its single-serve coffee pods when they were introduced. “We all know, though, that coffee pods have become an environmental issue,” he said.So far, environmental groups have not expressed much concern about packaging waste generated by the meal kit industry, in part because the business is still so nascent. A recent report on the business from the NPD Group, a consumer research firm, found that only 3 percent of people 18 and older had tried a meal kit in the last year.Still, the meal kit industry knows that packaging is an Achilles’ heel, so companies continue to work to reduce it.Matt Salzberg, a founder of Blue Apron, one of the first meal kit companies, said the company worked constantly to reduce the packaging waste that its kits create.Mr. Salzberg said Blue Apron was trying to make sure everything in its kits was recyclable. It also was one of the first meal kit businesses to give consumers the option of returning Blue Apron packaging to the company.“We’ve routinely redesigned our packaging to take out lots of packaging,” he said. “We’ve probably cut out packaging by 50 percent just through better packaging design.”Freshly, a prepared meals company, made a change to its packaging after hearing complaints from customers concerned about the Styrofoam it was using to insulate its boxes. So it did some research and came up with a substitute made from recycled denim, which has been used for insulation in housing.“Because millions of people are getting meal kits in boxes, as an industry we’re gaining the purchasing power to go to major packaging concerns and say we want better solutions,” said Michael Wystrach, a founder and the chief executive of Freshly.“Styrofoam,” he said, “is no longer the best or even the most economic choice.”Advertisement