AdvertisementSupported byApp SmartBy Kit EatonSTEP aside, Instagram. There’s a newer, smarter photo app taking social media by storm: Prisma.Most mobile photo-editing apps let you touch up photos with a built-in filter to add a nostalgic sepia tone, a touch of contrast or a darkening vignette. Prisma does something different. The app takes an image, breaks it down and turns it into something new. The end result looks like something created by an artist with a paintbrush on canvas instead of a photo.With the help of artificial intelligence, the app repaints an original picture from scratch. “We don’t use filters, which are applied on top of the picture,” said Alexey Moiseenkov, chief executive of Prisma Labs, the app’s maker.The trick is that Prisma’s so-called neural networks have been trained to emulate many different art styles, and can transform your landscape photos, selfies or even snapshots of your cat into something much more interesting.The app, which was released in June on iOS and last month on Android, is quickly gaining traction. Prisma has been downloaded more than 15 million times on each platform, according to Prisma Labs, which is based in Moscow. That compares with more than 75 million downloads for Pokémon Go after its release a few weeks ago. But unlike Pokémon, which has the marketing might of Nintendo behind it, Prisma is becoming trendy purely by word of mouth.“It went viral in a flash,” Mr. Moiseenkov said.The app is simple to use and impressive — the effects are often eye-popping, and you will find yourself using many filters on an image before settling on the one you like best.To use Prisma, you either snap a photo using the built-in camera controls or choose an image from your archive. Then you dial through the available special effects, which include blobby impressionism, Picassoesque abstraction, mangalike cartoons and even classic Japanese pen and ink paintings, and select one with a tap.Prisma’s A.I. algorithms are based on open-source code that the company’s team has improved upon so that it works much faster. The app sends your photo to the company’s servers, where your image is reworked in a few seconds and then sent back to the app, where you can see the results.Photos are temporarily stored before being deleted the next day, Mr. Moiseenkov said.You can publish your image to Instagram or Facebook directly from Prisma, or download it to share via messaging or email. Images include a Prisma-branded watermark, but users can choose to remove this in the settings.The Prisma app is free — so how will the company make money? Mr. Moiseenkov said it would let large brands sponsor a few effects each month, which will be its main path to revenue. Prisma is free of advertisements.Though the app is already popular, there are several improvements on the way, including the ability to apply the same effects to video clips.The makers of the popular third-party keyboard app SwiftKey have turned their attention to another communication medium: emoji.The new Swiftmoji app makes it easier to find just the right emoji to add an emotional twist to messages you send online, intelligently suggesting emoji you might use based on the words you have just typed. It’s clever and useful, especially if you find the whole emoji phenomenon confusing. Swiftmoji is free on iOS and Android.Advertisement