AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressUnited States markets closed higher on Wednesday after a survey showed that hiring by private companies continued at a solid but unspectacular clip in July.KEEPING SCORE The Dow Jones industrial average gained 0.23 percent by the close of trading, and the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index added 0.3 percent. The Nasdaq composite index gained 0.4 percent.HIRING A survey by ADP said that private United States payrolls grew by 179,000 in July as companies like retailers and shipping companies brought on more workers. The total suggested that employers continued to hire new workers, and at a faster pace than they did in the spring, when hiring slowed sharply.Still, economic growth has been sluggish this year, and there are signs there are not many workers available to fill jobs. Economists forecast that the government’s jobs report, which will be released Friday, will show a gain of 175,000 jobs.FINANCIAL GAIN Financial stocks were among the top gainers on Wednesday. Shares of the insurance company the American International Group rose 7.3 percent after it issued a strong second-quarter report. Intercontinental Exchange, the owner of the New York Stock Exchange and other stock markets, said it would split its stock 5-for-1 and buy back $1 billion in shares. Its stock rose 5.3 percent. Shares of Bank of America added 2.5 percent.CLOTHING SLUMP Shares of the clothing, handbag and accessories company Kate Spade fell 18.2 percent after the company disclosed weak results and lowered its estimates for the year.CROCS ROCKED Shares of the footwear maker Crocs dropped. It reported a smaller-than-expected profit in the second quarter and its sales fell $25 million short of estimates. Its third-quarter sales forecast fell ever further below analysts’ estimates. The stock fell 23.3 percent.HANES DOWN The underwear and T-shirt and sock maker Hanesbrands reported disappointing results, and its shares lost 2.5 percent.FITBIT IS STRONG Shares of the fitness tracker maker Fitbit rebounded after its quarterly results came in stronger than expected. The stock rose 13.5 percent. It had lost more than half its value this year. Fitbit went public in June 2015 with an offering of $20 a share and traded around $50 a share a year ago.ETSY EARNINGS Etsy shares rose 8.9 percent. Etsy, the online crafts marketplace, said sales were better than expected, and it raised its sales and other projections for the year.POKÉMON POWER Zagg, a mobile device accessory company that bought the smartphone charger company Mophie this year, reported an unexpected profit and sales that were stronger than estimates. It said the popularity of the game Pokémon Go buoyed its sales as players needed to recharge their phones more often. The stock rose 10.5 percent.EUROPEAN MARKETS In Germany, the DAX was up 0.3 percent, and in France, the CAC 40 was down 0.2 percent. The FTSE 100 was down 0.2 percent in Britain.ASIA’S DAY The Nikkei 225 declined 1.9 percent in Japan, while in Hong Kong, the Hang Seng lost 1.8 percent. The Shanghai composite index added 0.2 percent in China. The Kospi dropped 1.2 percent in South Korea. In Australia, the S.&P./ASX 200 slid 1.4 percent.ENERGY Oil prices recovered from their recent plunge. Benchmark United States crude added $1.57, to $41.08 a barrel, on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Brent crude, used to price international oils, rose $1.23, to $43.03 a barrel, in London.BONDS AND CURRENCIES Bond prices held steady and the yield on the 10-year Treasury note remained at 1.56 percent. The dollar rose to 101.32 yen from 100.88 yen. The euro fell to $1.1171 from $1.1227.Advertisement