AdvertisementSupported byMorning AgendaBy Amie Tsang"Don’t raise your voice at me. It’s not becoming of a woman.” “Honey.” “Darling.” “You either run with the nannies or you run with the wolves.” A pat on the head. An arm around the shoulder.Female lawyers might once have had to ignore comments and actions like these for fear of imperiling their careers. But the American Bar Association will vote on Monday on whether to prohibit harassment and discrimination by lawyers in the course of practicing law, establishing protections nationwide that are already in place in many states.Sexist remarks to female lawyers are “among the more overt signifiers of the discrimination, both stated and implicit, that contributes to their underrepresentation in the legal field,” according to a study by the bar association.Law Firms Bolster Antitrust Practices It’s hiring season for law firms looking to prepare themselves for a heightened scrutiny of mergers by competition regulators. Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison has hired four partners, including Rick Rule, the youngest person to lead the antitrust division of the Justice Department when he was appointed 30 years ago.Elsewhere, James J. Tierney, the government antitrust lawyer who oversaw the complaint that accused six major Silicon Valley companies of colluding not to recruit competitors’ employees, is joining the law firm Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe.On the agenda The Labor Department will publish data on July’s job market at 8:30 a.m.Chamber of Commerce Champions Inversions Law firms may have accepted the government’s tough stance on competitionn, but the administration’s authority over tax-avoiding mergers is still in question. The  Chamber of Commerce has filed a lawsuit to block rules that prevent American companies from merging with overseas corporations and then moving their headquarters there to save on tax.Republicans have also fought these measures. “This case is a direct result of regulations that will make it harder for America to compete,” said Representative Kevin Brady, a Texas Republican who is chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee. “What our job creators and workers need is a tax code built for growth — one that encourages businesses to invest and create jobs at home.”Sign up here for more DealBook emails and alerts.Advertisement