AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Kevin Warren, chief operating officer of the Minnesota Vikings, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant. Q. What were your early years like?A. I was born and raised in Phoenix and grew up in a middle-class family. I’m the youngest of seven kids. My dad was a professor and principal, and my mother was a librarian. So, quite naturally, with two educators in the house, education was paramount. I also played sports, from elementary school and into college.But when I was 12, I was in a serious accident. I was riding my bike, and a lady in the neighborhood accidentally ran up on the curb and hit me. I flew 30 feet, and landed on a little patch of grass and ended up breaking my femur. I was in traction for about six weeks in the hospital, and in a body cast for seven months after that.I was blessed at an early age that I recognized the frailty of life. The doctor told me I was lucky to be alive, and that if I had landed on the cement around that small patch of grass, they would be planning my funeral. So every day, I spend my time and energy trying to work hard and leave a positive legacy.Tell me more about your parents.Their approach was really based on two elements: passion and effort. I don’t think they ever looked at a report card of mine. And with sports, they were never focused on me scoring X number of points. They said that if you’re passionate about what you’re doing and you put in extreme effort — not just average effort, but extreme effort — the results are going to be fine. It really troubles me when I see people who are not passionate or they’re just putting in partial effort.What else were you doing outside of class besides sports?I had a paper route. We would have to get up early, around 4 a.m., and I would get home at 5:15 a.m. I learned a lesson about the importance of minute details. I picked up another kid’s paper route because I wanted to grow mine. There was one house in particular that I delivered papers to, and at the end of the month I went to collect my money. The guy at the door said, “We didn’t order the paper.” I said, “I’ve been delivering your paper here for a month.” He said, “I know, but we didn’t order it.”It turned out his house number included a six, and the top part came undone, so it was upside down, like a nine. He wouldn’t pay me, and the people with the correct address were upset because they had not gotten their paper, so I lost double. That was an incredible lesson for me about how, as you go through life, the minute details are so important.You were part of the St. Louis Rams organization when the team won the Super Bowl in 1999. Lessons from that experience?I joined the Rams in ’97 as legal counsel and vice president of player development. We were 5-11 that year, 4-12 the next, and then the third year we went 16-3 and won the Super Bowl. It was incredible. Probably the most powerful lesson from that experience is that we won that Super Bowl by one yard. Mike Jones made the tackle on Kevin Dyson at the one-yard line.We had Hall of Fame players. None of our starters missed any time. We had the league M.V.P. in Kurt Warner, and we had five former N.F.L. head coaches on staff. Everything fell into place. And we won the Super Bowl by one yard.It goes back to that lesson I learned with my paper route. You have to make sure you focus on the little things. For the players, it might be the extra wind sprints, or in my current role, helping an employee deal with a personal issue. All those little things don’t seem like much, but when you add them up, they can be that important yard in a game.How has your leadership style evolved?The metaphor I like to use is that in the first part of my life and my career, I was rolling through stoplights. I was so busy. And now in my position, I stop at a stoplight and really take an opportunity to observe the surroundings. Maybe there’s someone on the side of the road who needs some help. Maybe there’s someone in a rush that needs to go ahead. That’s where I am now. There are more demands on my time, but I’ve become a much better listener. I’ve slowed down my thought process and tried to make sure I’m there for everyone.How do you hire?They have to have a certain level of skill to be able to do the job, but then I want to know, are they passionate and do they give great effort? Are they really willing to learn? I don’t look at transcripts. I’m not concerned about test scores.And I want to make sure they are there for the right reasons, too. People will come in my office looking for a job who really just want to “wear the uniform.” That comes through in the questions they ask me, like, whether they get a chance to eat with the players and do they get free tickets. You have to be in it for the right reasons. You have to be interested in more than just wearing the uniform.What career and life advice do you give to new college grads?I think the best thing is for people to be really honest with themselves. Step off the treadmill a little bit and be honest with yourself about what you really want to do, what you want your legacy to be, what you want your life to look like.And people should really focus on nirvana. I’ve been blessed to reach nirvana because in my quiet times along this journey, I would sit and dream and write things down that I wanted to do. You most likely can’t reach a goal that you have not already achieved in your head. If, in your mind, the best you focus on is running an eight-minute mile, you will never run a six-minute mile.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement