By HIROKO TABUCHIAUG. 4, 2016
Airbags made by a Tennessee supplier came under heightened scrutiny on Thursday after a rupture in one of its bags was linked to the death of a driver in Canada last month.The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, the American regulator, said it had opened a formal investigation of bags made by the company, ARC Automotive.The fatal rupture raised the prospect of adding millions of cars to an already extensive recall of exploding airbags made by another manufacturer, Takata.American regulators are investigating hybrid airbag inflaters made by ARC that use both a gas and an explosive compound called ammonium nitrate. The agency had opened a preliminary inquiry into at least eight million airbag inflaters made by ARC for use in Chrysler, General Motors, Kia and Hyundai cars through 2004, but the formal investigation will go beyond that population of inflaters. The agency was still determining the number of airbags affected, it said.AdvertisementBryan Thomas, a spokesman for the agency, said the ARC airbag inflaters had not been recalled, but said a safety recall was “one possible outcome” of the investigation.AdvertisementTakata’s airbags have been linked to at least 14 deaths and more than 100 injuries, mostly in the United States. Fourteen automakers have recalled some 64 million Takata airbag inflaters in the United States, and millions more worldwide.The death in Canada was the first known fatality linked to a rupture in an airbag from a supplier other than Takata. But the safety agency said on Thursday that the ARC and Takata airbag inflaters had “significant design differences” and that the fatal ARC rupture probably had a different cause.According to the Canadian auto safety regulator, Transport Canada, the driver of a 2009 Hyundai Elantra died when the driver’s side airbag inflater exploded after a low-speed collision in Newfoundland on July 8.“The incident was a low-speed collision, which was expected to be survivable,” Daniel Savoie, a spokesman for Transport Canada, wrote in an email.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The cases in the United States that prompted a preliminary investigation last year involved ARC airbags in a Town and Country minivan in 2009 and in a Kia Optima sedan in 2014.In the 2009 incident, Lois Dutton of Ashtabula County, Ohio, was severely injured when her airbag ruptured in a collision with a snowmobile. Ms. Dutton said in a 2014 interview that she “saw a cloud of white smoke and a flash of white” as the airbag ruptured upon impact.ARC uses a small amount of ammonium nitrate encased in the airbag inflater. Takata, which also uses ammonium nitrate in its inflaters, has acknowledged that the compound can break down over time, especially when exposed to high humidity.But ARC also uses an inert gas mixture that is stored in the airbag’s inflater at high pressure, the safety agency said. It said humidity was probably not a factor in ARC’s case.AdvertisementThe Canadian and American regulators declined to identify the driver who was killed, citing privacy concerns. The two agencies said they were cooperating in their investigations.In a statement, Jim Trainor, a Hyundai spokesman, expressed the automaker’s “condolences and deepest sympathy to the driver’s family.” He said Hyundai was cooperating with regulators in both countries to determine the cause of the rupture, as well as which models might be affected by the defect.Representatives of General Motors and Fiat Chrysler said the automakers were cooperating with regulators. Kia did not respond to a request for comment. Calls to Art Eshoo, vice president for operations at ARC, went unanswered.A version of this article appears in print on August 5, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Another Airbag Maker Is Under Scrutiny After a Fatal Rupture.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.