By SAM ROBERTSAUG. 4, 2016
Robert Rosencrans, a daring cable television industry pioneer who was instrumental in creating C-Span, the unfiltered public affairs network that faithfully covers government proceedings and civic events, died on Wednesday in Greenwich, Conn. He was 89.The cause was complications of a stroke, his son Richard said.“There probably wouldn’t be a C-Span without him,” Brian Lamb, the network’s founder and executive chairman, said in an interview on Thursday.C-Span, a private, nonprofit, industry-financed service, began as the Cable-Satellite Public Affairs Network in 1979, at a time when fewer than one in five homes was wired for cable.Today it comprises several television and radio channels and a web presence, offering a variety of gavel-to-gavel coverage of Congress, presidential campaign events and other public affairs programming, including lectures and forums, book reviews, viewer call-in programs and interviews.AdvertisementAfter Mr. Lamb pitched the concept to cable operators, Mr. Rosencrans wrote a $25,000 check on the spot and persuaded other industry executives to pony up $450,000 in seed money to start the network. He became C-Span’s founding chairman.AdvertisementMr. Rosencrans, joined by equally audacious engineers, investors and programmers, perceived that cable’s potential was in exclusive programming, not merely serving viewers in sparsely populated areas beyond the reach of broadcasters.In conjunction with Madison Square Garden, he drove the creation of a sports channel featuring Knicks and Rangers games. When general programming was added, it evolved into the USA Network. (The MSG Network still exists separately as part of Madison Square Garden.)Investing nearly $100,000, his Columbia Cable Systems was credited with being the first cable operator to install a satellite receiving station in 1975, to deliver the Muhammad Ali-Joe Frazier championship fight from Manila to its Florida subscribers.On Thursday, the National Cable Telecommunications Association said Mr. Rosencrans’s early cable systems were “precursors to today’s life-changing television and internet infrastructure.”Robert Morris Rosencrans was born on March 26, 1927, in New York City. His father, Alvin, was an immigrant from Austria who imported ornaments for women’s hats. His mother, the former Eva Greene, immigrated from Russia and became a dress designer. Some of her creations, including an inaugural gown worn by the first lady Mamie Eisenhower, were credited to her sister-in-law and partner, Nettie Rosenstein, under whose label the fashions were sold.Mr. Rosencrans was raised in Woodmere, on Long Island, and planned to enroll in Dartmouth but decided to stay closer to home after his older brother died in combat during the final months of World War II. After enlisting and serving stateside in the Army Air Forces, he majored in economics at Columbia University and graduated in 1949 with bachelor’s and master’s degrees. (A fan of the Giants baseball team, he attended the 1951 game at the Polo Grounds in which Bobby Thomson’s “shot heard ’round the world” home run won the pennant.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He is survived by his wife, the former Marjorie Meyers; three sons, Richard, Ron and Robert; a daughter, Robbie Heidinger; and 11 grandchildren.After Mr. Rosencrans had brief, unsatisfying stints in retailing, a friend referred him to Box Office Television, which was hoping to help movie theaters compete with television by offering closed-circuit programming, like live theater, and Harlem Globetrotter basketball and Notre Dame football games. The company, whose investors included the comedian Sid Caesar, also produced programming for hotels.AdvertisementAfter Box Office Television bought TelePrompTer in 1956 to expand its closed-circuit programming, Mr. Rosencrans received a call from a cable system operator in Casper, Wyo., who wanted to feed a boxing match to his subscribers.“Cable system?” he recalled asking. “What’s a cable system?”A quick study, he recruited other investors and in 1961, began buying up small-town systems, brokered the 1975 fight broadcast (which was credited with persuading Time Inc. not to pull the plug on HBO); approached Madison Square Garden to start MSG; helped organize, with Kay Koplovitz, the USA Network, which was the first basic cable channel distributed by satellite; offered Robert L. Johnson a few hours of Friday-night satellite time, which became Black Entertainment Television, or BET; and then answered Mr. Lamb’s invitation to start C-Span.Mr. Rosencrans, a political liberal, invested in C-Span with his Columbia Cable partner, Kenneth S. Gunter, a conservative. In 1977 he said that he saw the channel as a public service and a promotional opportunity.“I was tired of knocking on congressmen’s doors to explain what cable television was,” he recalled. “So if nothing else, I thought it would put cable on the map in Washington.”He was also an early investor in PublicAffairs, a publisher of literary fiction and topical nonfiction founded in 1997 by Peter Osnos.His Columbia Cable evolved into UA-Columbia Cablevision. He was dismissed when the company was divided in 1984, but then started Columbia International, another operator, which he sold in 1995 for an estimated $600 million.Given his success, he recalled in 2005 in an interview with the alumni magazine Columbia College Today, he began somewhat inauspiciously. Among the programming produced by Box Office Television were corporate infomercials, including one in which Robert S. McNamara, then a Ford Motor Company executive, introduced the Edsel.“McNamara and the Edsel,” Mr. Rosencrans mused. “Good thing I don’t believe in omens.”A version of this article appears in print on August 5, 2016, on Page A25 of the New York edition with the headline: Robert Rosencrans, Who Propelled C-Span, Dies at 89.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.