AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerAs regulators continue to clamp down on deals they believe will harm competition, the small group of lawyers who focus on antitrust have become even more in demand.In an effort to strengthen its antitrust practice, Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, is hiring four partners. The group, which is decamping from Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft, includes Rick Rule, who was the youngest person to lead the antitrust division of the Justice Department when appointed 30 years ago.Mr. Rule — who will become co-chairman of the firm’s antitrust group — will be joined by Jonathan S. Kanter, Joseph J. Bial and Andrew J. Forman at Paul Weiss in Washington.“Given the intense regulatory scrutiny of strategic M.&A. transactions and the heightened focus on antitrust enforcement, trends highly likely to continue, we are thrilled to be able to add a marquee merger-clearance team and elite antitrust litigators, led by Rick Rule,” Brad S. Karp, the chairman of Paul, Weiss, said in an email. “This opportunity takes full advantage of our market-leading litigation and public M.&A. practices.”Regulators have embarked on a string of lawsuits against what the government perceives to be anticompetitive mergers. These concerns caused the breakup of Baker Hughes’s proposed $35 billion combination with Halliburton, another oil-field services provider. Similar reasoning thwarted the $6.3 billion merger of Office Depot and Staples.Most recently, the Justice Department sued to block two health insurance deals: Aetna’s $37 billion acquisition of Humana and Anthem’s $48 billion takeover of Cigna. Mr. Rule and his team have been representing Cigna in the latter transaction. Mr. Rule has also been advising Microsoft in its $26 billion quest to buy LinkedIn.The four new hires are a bet by Paul, Weiss that the Justice Department will continue to be tough under the next administration — whoever wins the White House in November — since any big deal signed today would probably be reviewed after the new president assumes office.The law firm has been increasing its hiring in recent months. In April, the firm announced that it had brought over one of Wall Street’s top deal makers, Scott A. Barshay, to become the global head of mergers and acquisitions. Antitrust lawyers help mergers and acquisitions lawyers like Mr. Barshay advise clients whether a deal could clear regulatory hurdles, given the possible deal structures and divestitures. They also serve as litigators if the government decides to challenge a deal through the court system.“With what’s going on in the U.S. antitrust enforcement environment, clients need top-tier antitrust advisers,” Mr. Barshay said in a phone interview.Advertisement