By JULIE WEEDNOV. 23, 2015
Last year on the Friday after Thanksgiving, Diana Stilson snagged a stay at a Hawaiian hotel, paying 10 percent of the list price through a deal on Expedia. This Thanksgiving weekend, she hopes to find a similar vacation bargain online.After years of intense competition among retailers over Thanksgiving weekend, hotel, airline and other travel websites have entered the fray, holding sales of their own in the hope of steering holiday spending to travel and experiences.The cut-rate travel deals are already now “standard in the industry,” said Cole Hernandez, a spokesman for Denihan, a hotel operator. Her company has Thanksgiving weekend deals planned for its upscale hotels in Manhattan.“We saw a real jump in Black Friday-Cyber Monday hotel deals last year and expect even more this year,” said Chris Anderson, professor of hotel administration at Cornell University. The hotels use the promotions for a variety of reasons, he said, including to attract new customers, to sell rooms that might otherwise be empty and to associate their brand with the excitement of the season.AdvertisementHotels are not the only ones offering the bargains: Airlines, aggregators, tour companies and others with travel-focused websites are joining in.AdvertisementCustomers are responding to the offers, companies say. A 2014 deal that cut the price of stays at the Hilton Waikoloa Village in Hawaii by 50 percent generated more than 11,000 booked nights in 24 hours, a significant increase compared with the daily average, according to Hilton. Grand Lucayan, a resort on Grand Bahama Island, topped $103,000 in revenue on the day of its 2014 Monday-after-Thanksgiving sale, five times the revenue generated on that day the previous year.Like many of the best-priced deals on Thanksgiving weekend, supplies are often limited. There are only so many rooms or flights that travel companies are willing to part with at the lowest prices, Mr. Anderson said. Additionally, those sales aim to be incremental and not replacing higher-revenue business.“The last thing a hotel wants is customers who would have purchased at higher prices getting access to these low prices,” he said, so programs are devised with parameters like specific stay dates or limited room availability.Val Kalliecharan, a vacation planner on Turks and Caicos, said that sales there helped hotels fill rooms that might be vacant in their least popular times like January. “Any holes that can be filled go directly to the bottom line,” he said. The sales also allow hotels to sell the rooms straight to guests rather than through third-party booking sites like Expedia, Ms. Hernandez said.Expedia itself is offering deep discounts. The company tried its first large-scale Monday-after-Thanksgiving promotion last year, said Sarah Waffle Gavin, a spokeswoman for Expedia, and ended up with the third-busiest day of the year in terms of transactions. This year’s post-Thanksgiving sales will be even more extensive, she said, including a mobile-only offer on Friday and promotions on Monday for 90 percent off room rates at four top-tier hotels in four cities. Every hour, the hotels and cities will change, encouraging customers to check the site often.Thanksgiving weekend travel purchases may be displacing physical purchases as experiences gain in popularity as gift items. Salina Gray hopes to find a Christmas vacation for her family instead of store-bought gifts like electronics and clothing.“It’s the only time of year the whole family can go away together,” Ms. Gray said, “but it’s also the most expensive time to travel.” If she can find a trip, she said, “we can just shop the after-Christmas sales for a few things when we get back.”Travel companies are encouraging this shift. “We see travel gift-giving pick up during the holiday time frame,” Ms. Gavin said. Expedia’s Hotels.com started gift cards last year to serve this market.AdvertisementSmaller travel companies are also joining the sale. Peggy Goldman, owner of Friendly Planet Travel in Jenkintown, Pa., is offering a 24-hour deal promoting up to $500 off her company’s tours to destinations like Cuba and India. “It’s one of the most searchable sales of the year,” she said, and plans to participate using digital marketing techniques to compete with the larger travel companies.Student Universe, a Boston travel agency that aims at students, says it holds after-Thanksgiving sales because college students are typically home with their parents over the weekend and can make large purchase decisions together for their travel.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Airlines are also promoting discounts. The Alaska Airlines website is advertising a Monday sale, but no specific travel dates or destinations have been released yet. The site encourages customers to keep checking back for details. On Nov. 29-30, Fiji Airways is offering up to 40 percent off round-trip flights to Fiji, Australia and New Zealand.Travel companies are mixing and matching their delivery vehicles to reach a variety of customers. Hotwire will have an email exclusive offer on Friday, and a mobile exclusive offer on Monday, both adding savings on top of the broader sale it is holding in November.For consumers, part of the lure is the thrill of the hunt. “The deals get snapped up quickly, so you have to be ready to hit the buy button,” said Ms. Stilson, who found the hotel deal in Hawaii. “But you also have to read the fine print about restrictions.”According to Ms. Gavin, it took only nine minutes for Expedia’s Cyber Monday deals to sell out last year.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Holiday Weekend Bargain-Hunting, for Fares and Rooms.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.