AdvertisementSupported byLettersTo the Editor:“Trade Is Good, but Voters Aren’t Buying It” by N. Gregory Mankiw (The Upshot, Economic View, July 31) misunderstands resistance to the Trans-Pacific Partnership.Yes, isolationism, nationalism and ethnocentrism exist in a minority, but more thoughtful critics of T.P.P. object not to international trade but to trade agreements that are biased toward corporate interests, allow abuses of labor and the environment, and are unaccompanied by effective trade adjustment assistance for those American workers who pay the price for the increased prosperity that trade brings to the rest of us.Daniel FinnSt. Cloud, Minn., July 31The writer is a professor of economics at St. John’s University.To the Editor:If we believe the study quoted by N. Gregory Mankiw, there are two categories of voters: those who believe that global trade is intrinsically good (as advertised by mainstream economists), and the less educated and therefore “isolationist, nationalist and ethnocentric,” who are skeptical of global trade and outsourcing.Far from being ignorant, this group understands very well what globalization and outsourcing have done to the defunct middle class, who are less well off than their parents and still less vulnerable than their children. At the same time, globalization has offered enormous opportunities to a minority while inequality has reached obscene levels. The “Brexit” vote by the “uneducated” British should be a wake-up call for advocates of ever-expanding global trade.J. ErnweinMareil-Marly, France, Aug. 1To the Editor:I wish that N. Gregory Mankiw had addressed a fact that always has puzzled me: Why does interstate trade never come in for the same attacks as international trade? Why is it that the movement of shoe and garment factories out of the Northern United States into Southern states, and the rise of commerce through canals and railroads, are not bashed as historical tragedies that resulted from free trade?In fact, how can it be logical to suggest that workers everywhere would gain today if international trade were curtailed, while continuing to support free trade within the United States?Bernard WasowWashington, Aug. 1The writer is a professional economist with a Ph.D. in economics from Stanford University.Letters for Sunday Business may be sent to sunbiz@nytimes.com.Advertisement