
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

AUG. 5, 2016
Bristol-Myers Squibb has suffered a $21 billion self-inflicted wound.The amount is the value that investors wiped off the pharmaceutical company on Friday morning after its trial to greatly broaden the use of one of its most promising cancer drugs failed. It was an unnecessarily risky move for Bristol, whose immunotherapy has been outselling Merck’s. The stumble will allow its more cautious rival to clean up.Bristol’s Opdivo and Merck’s Keytruda are shaping up to be two of the biggest blockbusters for the pharmaceutical industry. The drugs have proved to be effective against forms of lung, skin, kidney and other cancers by cutting the brakes on the immune system’s response. In the second quarter, Bristol sold $840 million of Opdivo – almost seven times as much as in the same period last year.Taking on lung cancer use has provided the most glittering prize. Sales of Opdivo, Keytruda and related drugs for lung cancer will exceed $20 billion in 2022, according to Cowen. The biggest chunk of this will come from previously untreated patients.The way to bring in even more revenue is to show that such drugs work on more forms of cancer and to use these treatments earlier. Merck took a relatively safe path. It proved in June that Keytruda worked in untreated non-small-cell lung cancer patients in whom at least 50 percent of the tumor cells produced a protein called PD-L1. Various trials have shown that the success of Keytruda and Opdivo is highly linked, but not entirely, to having cells that produce this protein. There are not, however, many patients with such a high amount of PD-L1.Bristol went for the win. Its drug already sells more than two times as much as Merck’s, and it created a trial to widen this lead, focusing on patients with tumors with just 5 percent or more of cells producing PD-L1. That is a far harder target to hit, but it would also have opened up a lot more patients to treatment.Bristol will probably have to wait until 2018 to hit back at its rival. That is when a trial of Opdivo in combination with another drug for treating lung cancer should report. Earlier trials suggest this is a remarkably effective way to treat the disease. Until then, Merck has a clear path to gain market share – and the $11 billion added to its market value on Friday morning implies shareholders agree. It is an expensive therapy for Bristol’s hubris.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »