AUG. 7, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.27 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.44 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.23 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Board of Education, $175 million of debt securities. Competitive.Florida Board of Education, $198.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Environmental Protection, $185 million of debt securities. Competitive.Louisville & Jefferson County, Ky., $221.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementPennsylvania, $1.2 billion of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Washington State, $60.7 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.AdvertisementKansas City, Mo., School District, $50 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.Milwaukee Sewerage System, $100 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Allegheny County, Pa., Sanitary Authority, $115 million of sewer revenue bonds. Boenning & Scattergood.Arlington, Tex., Higher Education Finance Corporation, $56.7 million of education revenue system bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Bexar County, Tex., Hospital District, $190.4 million of limited tax refinancing bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank & Company.Build NYC Resource Corporation, N.Y., $75 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Elk Grove, Calif., Community Facilities District No. 2005-1, $114.8 million of Laguna Ridge special tax bonds. Piper Jaffray.Fairfax County, Va., Economic Development Authority, $64.9 million of residential care facilities mortgage revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler & Company.Fort Worth Independent School District, $374 million of unlimited tax refinancing and school building bonds. Raymond James.AdvertisementHawaii, $199.1 million of highway revenue bonds. Robert W. Baird & Company.Henderson, Nev., Local Improvement District No. T-18, $54.3 million of limited obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jacksonville, Fla., $149.4 million of special revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Johnson County, Kan., Unified School District Nos. 223 and 233, $318.9 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Lakeland, Fla., $80 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Lake Washington School District, Wash., $203.7 million of unlimited tax general obligation and refinancing bonds. Davidson Securities.Lamar, Tex., Consolidated Independent School District, $90 million of variable rate unlimited tax schoolhouse bonds. BOK Financial Securities.Lehigh County, Pa., General Purpose Authority, $136 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Lexington County, S.C., Health Services District, $171 million of hospital revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Lycoming County Authority, Pa., $53 million of college revenue bonds. George K. Baum & Company.Michigan Housing Development Authority, $162 million of rental housing revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.New York Utility Debt Securitization Authority, $500 million of restructuring bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Port St. Lucie Utility, Fla., $210 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Regents of the University of California, $1 billion of medical center pooled revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.AdvertisementUtah Transit Authority, $142.1 million of subordinated sales tax revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Victor Valley Union High School District, Calif., $55 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.West Virginia Economic Development Authority, $65.4 million of solid-waste disposal facilities revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Will County, Ill., $175 million of general obligation bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.A version of this article appears in print on August 8, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.