By THE NEW YORK TIMESAUG. 7, 2016
Here’s what to expect in the week ahead.OIL INDUSTRYMonday is the deadline for environmental activists in Colorado to submit the signatures required to put two proposals on the state’s ballot in November. Both would restrict hydraulic fracturing in oil and gas fields. Hydraulic fracturing, better known as fracking, allows oil companies to fracture shale and other hard rocks with water, chemicals and sand to free oil and gas. Environmentalists contend that the practice can pollute air and local water supplies, but the companies insist it is safe. The more aggressive of the two initiatives would amend the Colorado Constitution to outlaw fracking within 2,500 feet of occupied buildings, water resources and public spaces like parks. Clifford KraussDRUG INDUSTRYValeant Pharmaceuticals will report its quarterly earnings on Tuesday, providing new clues about how and whether the company can climb out of its current morass. One focus will be on how Joseph C. Papa, Valeant’s new chief executive, plans to reduce the company’s debt to avoid possible violations of its covenants in 2017, according to David Maris, an analyst at Wells Fargo Securities. There is also speculation that Valeant will again reduce its earnings forecasts for 2016, having done so twice already. Mr. Papa was named chief executive in late April, replacing J. Michael Pearson, who had built Valeant through serial acquisitions and aggressive price increases on old drugs. But the once high-flying company fell to earth starting last fall as concerns arose about those price increases, the high debt from all those acquisitions and Valeant’s once-secret relationship with a mail-order pharmacy. Valeant faces various federal investigations and its stock has fallen more than 90 percent from its peak a year ago. Andrew PollackENTERTAINMENTIt was the Disney earnings call that sent shock waves through the media industry: One year ago, Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, acknowledged that fewer people were subscribing to ESPN as part of a traditional cable package, starting a panic about the future of television. Disney’s stock has since fallen 20 percent. So, when Mr. Iger again takes the mike on Tuesday to discuss its fiscal third-quarter results, all eyes will be on ESPN. Insight into Disney’s latest thoughts about piping its television networks to consumers over the internet is hoped for.Wall Street will also be paying attention to Disney’s theme parks. How is the new Shanghai Disneyland doing? How strong is Disney World in Florida, where an alligator attack led to negative headlines? Are safety fears (especially after the nightclub shooting in Orlando) taking any toll? Brooks BarnesECONOMYTwo important indicators of the health of the economy will come out this week. Macy’s, the nation’s largest department store, is scheduled to report earnings on Thursday. The retailer has struggled to compete against the growth of discount and low-cost rivals, particularly online, and revealed unexpectedly weak results last quarter. And on Friday, the Commerce Department will release retail sales data. Analysts expect the data to show that spending climbed slightly in July. Rachel AbramsOn Friday morning, the University of Michigan will report its initial estimate of consumer sentiment in August. Economists expect to see a slight rise in the index to 91.3, from a final July reading of 90, reflecting healthy hiring, a strong housing market and continued low energy prices. The stock market’s July rebound after the vote by Britain in June to leave the European Union also bodes well for the consumer outlook this summer. Nelson D. SchwartzA version of this article appears in print on August 8, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Fracking Ballot Proposals,  and Disney’s Earnings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.