AdvertisementSupported byBy Noam Scheiber and Sydney EmberIn the fall of 1991, an obscure law professor named Anita Hill pushed the issue of sexual harassment into the public consciousness when she accused her former boss, the Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas, of having repeatedly made lewd overtures toward her.But the episode sent a mixed message, in the view of many discrimination experts. While it raised awareness about a corrosive workplace behavior, the intense backlash against Ms. Hill, not least from members of the United States Senate, suggested that women faced great obstacles in redressing such abuses. (Mr. Thomas denied the allegations.)Nearly 25 years later, after a string of sexual harassment allegations that led to the ouster of Roger Ailes, the former chairman of Fox News, and a cascade of sexual assault accusations against the comedian Bill Cosby, some of those experts believe we may be approaching another Anita Hill moment.The Ailes and Cosby cases, they say, could be influential among women across the work force not just because of the intrinsic power of these examples, but because they come at a moment of empowerment for women in their struggle for equality. And when women’s assertiveness produces dramatic results like the resignation of Mr. Ailes, it can inspire more women to follow the same path.“When Anita Hill came out against Clarence Thomas, she got nothing and Clarence Thomas got life tenure,” said Linda Hirshman, a Supreme Court biographer and former women’s studies professor. “If anything would make the idea of women coming forward into a real threat, it would be the wicked confluence of everybody’s dad, Bill Cosby, and Roger Ailes, the scariest man in the world — the fact that those two are going down.”Still, workplace advocates caution that a greater sense of power, and even high-profile legal victories, will not necessarily lead to a significant increase in the number of women who take formal action. They note studies indicating that the great majority of sexual harassment incidents at work still go unreported.“Women might feel more qualified for lots of jobs, and they don’t expect to get discriminated against, but that has not translated into complaining about harassment,” said Chai Feldblum, a commissioner with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission who, along with a colleague, Victoria Lipnic, spent a year producing a report on the subject. “The research shows it is unfortunately a reasonable response in most workplaces not to say anything because people will experience retaliation,” Ms. Feldblum said.That sentiment was echoed by Carol Costello, a CNN anchor who, in a segment that aired last week, said that she had been sexually harassed when she was younger. Ms. Costello said she was inspired by the Ailes and Cosby cases to step forward, and thought it was important “to add my voice to the cause,” but was skeptical about whether it would lead to systemic change.“I still think that there are consequences for women who come forward vocally or file lawsuits,” she said in an interview. “A part of me still thinks that things haven’t changed all that much.”The number of women filing sexual harassment charges with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission did increase significantly in the years after Ms. Hill came forward. But the impact of her testimony on that increase was somewhat muddied by a 1991 law that gave people alleging employment discrimination the right to a jury trial and allowed for additional monetary awards.Widely publicized cases appear to have played a role in prompting others to come forward in a variety of narrower contexts as well.The award-winning 2012 documentary “The Invisible War” shined a light on a chronic pattern of sexual abuse in the military, including the case of Kori Cioca, who alleged that she was raped while serving in the Coast Guard and sued two defense secretaries for failing to prevent her and other personnel from being assaulted. The movie was widely viewed within the military, including at the most senior levels. According to Pentagon statistics, reports of sexual assault jumped to more than 5,500 in fiscal year 2013, from about 3,600 the year before. There were about 6,100 reports in 2015. (A Pentagon spokesman noted that by 2012 the military had just begun to change how it responds to sexual assault reports.)A similar pattern appears to have played out in the banking industry. After the equal employment commission joined a prominent discrimination case against Morgan Stanley in 2001, the agency saw an uptick in sex discrimination charges from inside financial firms.The advertising industry has had its own increase in women speaking out. In March, the chief executive of the storied agency J. Walter Thompson resigned after a female employee filed a lawsuit accusing him of racist and sexist behavior. Within weeks, a number of top female executives had come forward to publicly describe their own experiences with sexism in the industry.The matter involving Gretchen Carlson, the former Fox anchor who filed a sexual harassment and retaliation lawsuit against Mr. Ailes last month, appears to be having a similar effect, beginning with at least two women who breached settlement agreements to describe their own experiences at the network.In an interview with The New York Times published two days after Mr. Ailes resigned, Rudi Bakhtiar, who worked for the network a decade ago, said Fox News let her go after she rebuffed advances from a colleague and filed a complaint about it internally. She said she was emboldened to tell her story publicly because of Ms. Carlson’s lawsuit.Kamee Verdrager, a lawyer, is pursuing her own yearslong legal battle over allegations of discrimination against a former employer, the law firm Mintz Levin, which stripped her of two years’ seniority after she returned from maternity leave, and subsequently fired her. (Mintz Levin denies the allegations of discrimination but doesn’t dispute these facts.) She said that prior examples of women speaking out could provide an enormous psychological boost for others contemplating their own action.In Ms. Verdrager’s case, reading a book about women’s struggles to succeed in the legal profession, which included numerous interviews with women who had faced discrimination, helped persuade her to file her complaint. “That book changed my life,” she said. “The takeaway was that this is not unique to me. It’s epidemic.”Historians point to a change in women’s perception of their own power, like the growing discussion about the merits of workplace assertiveness, as epitomized by the book “Lean In” by Facebook’s chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg. They also point to more assertive forms of activism in recent years, including the group End Rape on Campus, which helps survivors file federal complaints and find legal and mental health services. Experts say these movements have been nurtured by women’s rising levels of education, economic power and connectedness through social media.But the same connectedness that can provide support for victims can also work against them; some plaintiff’s lawyers argue that the risks of speaking out have actually increased over time. Three decades ago, a court filing would have been extremely difficult for a prospective employer to uncover. Today, said Linda D. Friedman, a prominent employment lawyer who has brought many cases against Wall Street firms, the “troublemaker” charge is likely to dog plaintiffs their entire lives.“Any H.R. person in the country can do a Google search and come up with a federal complaint before deciding whether to hire a person,” she said.To the extent that a high-profile case like Ms. Carlson’s may encourage more survivors of harassment to come forward, many advocates say, it is more likely to happen indirectly, by first persuading employers to take discrimination and harassment claims more seriously. Only after most employees believe they can speak up without risking their careers, a development that many plaintiff’s lawyers doubt is imminent, will they do so in substantially larger numbers.Still, if the fallout from the accusations against Mr. Cosby and Mr. Ailes is any indication, an increasing number of women may be concluding that speaking up is more likely than before to result in punishment for the alleged perpetrator rather than the accuser.Ms. Hill, now a professor at Brandeis University, is cautiously optimistic, though she worries that the $40 million payment Mr. Ailes reportedly received to leave Fox News could detract from the lesson of the case.“The fact the company is now not only talking to the women” who have said they experienced harassment, “but also talking about whether others were enablers, that’s important,” she said. “Women who experienced harassment in their own workplace may see this as a possible outcome.”Advertisement