AdvertisementSupported byMorning AgendaBy Amie TsangDonald J. Trump has laid out his economic vision, and it included deep tax cuts for the wealthy, tearing up climate change agreements and abandoning trade deals. He insisted, “We can’t fix a rigged system by relying on the people who rigged it in the first place,” highlighting the fine line that he has to tread between between being anti-elite and yet absolutely elite. It’s tough to be seen as a successful billionaire businessman who is also an outsider trying to work for the little guy.Perhaps that is why his economic circle lacks the heavyweight economists who backed past Republican nominees or any women. Still, he is trying to add more establishment voices, like Stephen A. Schwarzman, the co-founder of the Blackstone Group, to his group. The question is whether some of these names will get on board if Mr. Trump adjusts his behavior over the next few weeks, Andrew Ross Sorkin says.Think Tank Scholars Moonlight as Corporate Consultants They offer themselves as independent arbiters and their authority on matters can help shape government decisions. But some have been conducting research at think tanks while also being paid by corporations that wanted them to help shape government policy. Many think tanks also readily confer “nonresident scholar” status on lobbyists, former government officials and others who earn their primary living working for private clients, with few restrictions on outside work.An examination of 75 think tanks found that researchers who also worked as registered lobbyists, members of corporate boards or outside consultants in litigation and regulatory disputes only intermittently disclosed their dual roles. Does this affect the credibility of think tanks? Some people think so. “Without being perceived as credible and objective, our studies just get thrown on the scrap heap,” said Adam S. Posen, the president of the Peterson Institute.On the Agenda Disney and Valeant release their quarterly earnings.Walmart Tries a New Tack When Walmart, the world’s largest retailer, bought a year-old online bulk retailer, it was an acknowledgement of the power of Amazon — not even the mightiest brick-and-mortar stores can go it alone against the online behemoth. It also showed that Walmart.com had fallen short and the purchase of Jet, known for an algorithm that encourages bulk buying, was an attempt to to shore up its online efforts.The $3.3 billion that Walmart is paying for the acquisition is an eye-watering figure, but the company is hoping that Marc Lore, Jet’s founder, will make it worth the money. Mr. Lore is a serial e-commerce entrepreneur who managed to sell Quidsi, a company with a collection of e-commerce websites, to Amazon for more than $500 million and is regarded as one of the few executives who can help put a dent in Amazon.Sign up here for more DealBook emails and alerts.Advertisement