By JOHN KOBLINAUG. 8, 2016
Harry Potter is coming to NBC’s cable stations.Starting in 2018, all eight “Harry Potter” films, and the coming films of the spinoff series “Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them,” will be seen on the NBCUniversal stations Syfy and USA, the company announced on Monday. NBC will also acquire the rights to additional Harry Potter source material to use at its Universal theme parks, an increasingly important source of income that NBCUniversal’s parent, Comcast, has invested in heavily.The movies will also be available to run on NBC’s broadcast network.Warner Bros., which owns the rights to the films, will move the basic cable TV rights to NBC from Disney, which played the movies on its network, Freeform.“J.K. Rowling’s Wizarding World has captured the imagination of fans of all ages, from all walks of life, all over the world,” said Bonnie Hammer, the chairwoman of NBCUniversal’s cable empire.“I’m thrilled that our networks will be the home for this brilliant storyteller’s magical creations for years to come.”AdvertisementAs TV ratings decline, Syfy and USA are going through a face lift. USA, in particular, is moving from its so-called “blue sky” programming to grittier shows like the hacker drama “Mr. Robot,” which won the Golden Globe for best drama this year.AdvertisementBut as much as cable executives are focused on developing scripted original programming, repeats of movies continue to serve as a vital vehicle to keep the ratings up, and affiliate fees high. The “Potter” films, adapted from the popular book series by J.K. Rowling, took in nearly $8 billion at the global box office.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The deal represents the biggest in NBCUniversal’s history for movie rights for any franchise, and will cost more than $200 million, according to a person briefed on the details.HBO, a corporate cousin of Warner Bros., will continue to have a first look deal for the new “Fantastic Beasts” movies, a prequel to Ms. Rowling’s books. The first installment in the three-film series will be released in November.The deal, first reported by The Wall Street Journal, lasts through 2025, and will allow NBCUniversal, which is owned by Comcast, to use even more Harry Potter material at its theme parks at Universal Studios Hollywood, Universal Orlando and Universal Studios Japan. That may not mean there will be new attractions. NBCUniversal cited “fan events, movie screenings and promotional activities.”NBC already had rights to Potter theme park attractions in Orlando and Hollywood.“Each of the Harry Potter areas within our theme parks around the globe build on the incredible stories of J.K. Rowling and the amazing films created by Warner Bros.,” Tom Williams, chairman of Universal Parks, said in a statement. “These are special places where the entire family can experience the adventures of Harry Potter.”A version of this article appears in print on August 9, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: NBCUniversal Buys TV Rights to ‘Harry Potter’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.