By AMIE TSANGAUG. 10, 2016
The investment bank Jefferies, which never took federal bailout money and is not hemmed in by the restrictions imposed on banks that did, has developed an appetite for risk. And it is matching its appetite with bold moves, bolstered by some helpful relationships.Its interests in the field of financial technology have grown—it has repackaged loans from upstart lenders and is linked to Lending Club. Jefferies’s $37 billion in assets remain tiny next to giants like Goldman Sachs at $878 billion, but its share of Wall Street trading has doubled since 2006. It is also a subsidiary of, Leucadia National, which “can write a significant equity check at a moment’s notice,” said Chris Kotowski, an analyst at Oppenheimer. Read more about how the bank has used its room to maneuver here.Disney Bets on Streaming As viewers of satellite and cable services decline, and streaming options proliferate, critics say that Disney has exposed itself to the slowdown with ESPN. But the company hopes to ward that off with a deal for a 33 percent stake in BamTech, Major League Baseball’s streaming division. It also has the option to buy a controlling interest in BamTech in the next few years.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BamTech will work with Disney to introduce an ESPN-branded subscription streaming service offering sports like hockey, tennis and cricket, which ESPN owns the rights to but does not televise. Could this be its first step toward offering Netflix-style streaming? The company has repeatedly said it was not ready to introduce a direct-to-consumer service in the United States, but it has been testing the waters with DisneyLife, which streams Disney films and shows.AdvertisementAmerican Bar Association Forbids Sexist Remarks Several bars already have rules against singling out someone on the basis of race, religion, sex, disability or other factors, and now the A.B.A. has one, too.Until now, there have been few consequences for lawyers using demeaning and misogynistic terms to undermine their opposing counsel. Advocates of the rule said the lack of a national prohibition has allowed too many sexist remarks toward female lawyers. Female lawyers on Facebook certainly had experiences to share when The New York Times asked.AdvertisementCritics have argued that the broad rule would impair free speech while representing clients, but no lawyers signed up to speak against the new restrictions.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.