
Another View By                     
JEREMY G. PHILIPS

AUG. 10, 2016
Walmart’s $3.3 billion purchase of Jet.com, an online retailer, and Unilever’s $1 billion acquisition of Dollar Shave Club, a company that mostly sells razor blade subscriptions online, were home runs for brilliant entrepreneurs (and, of course, their backers).The unanimous takeaway has been that incumbents everywhere are poised to get their clocks cleaned by a stampede of disruptive insurgents — unless they buy them first.This analysis, however, misdiagnoses recent transactions as a series of new-versus-old shootouts.To be sure, the web has been grinding down barriers to entry for 20 years, reducing the advantages of incumbents. For new entrants, this flatter playing field creates opportunity. But since the key tools at their disposal are universally available — including to companies like Facebook and Google, with enormous scale advantages — this only helps them get into the game, not capture any value lost by legacy firms. Short-term success may be driven by exceptional execution; long-term value creation requires building a defensible model.Any microeconomics textbook will tell you there are limited sources of competitive advantage. The most valuable companies combine several reinforcing strands, like scale and customer loyalty. Gillette has long been, literally, a textbook example.AdvertisementIn 1996, Warren E. Buffett, then the largest shareholder in Gillette, commented: “You go to bed feeling very comfortable just thinking about two and a half billion males with hair growing while you sleep. No one at Gillette has trouble sleeping.”AdvertisementBut 20 years later, management at Gillette (long since acquired by Procter & Gamble) is probably tossing and turning a little more. Gillette’s scale still provides formidable advantages (wide retail distribution, superior patented technology through large R.&D. investment), and its well-known brand (reinforced through mass-media advertising) creates a strong habit in loyal customers acquired early in their lives.However, those advantages are plainly no longer as formidable as they were at the company’s zenith. For an insurgent like Dollar Shave Club, online sales reduce the impact of Gillette’s big lead in drugstore shelf space, and cloud-computing services reduce the required upfront technology investment. Targeted direct marketing on Facebook and other social channels obviates the need for a mass-media campaign, while customer reviews and word-of-mouth can spread the word. At the high end, Gillette’s patented, multi-blade, vibrating razor is a tough opponent, so naturally new entrants focus on the entry level — where they can rebrand cheap, no-name blades to compete.Since these business tools are universally available, they plainly don’t inherently confer advantage on any one player. Dollar Shave’s success was driven by exceptional execution, particularly in building a brilliant marketing engine and putting out a promotional video that went viral.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Jet’s case, the serial entrepreneur Marc Lore was able to build a large e-commerce company for a few hundred million dollars in just a couple of years by taking an innovative approach to pricing and distribution. And Walmart is plainly convinced that Jet’s expertise and momentum will help it compete with Amazon. Jet’s negative gross margins, which would have required large continuing investments, will disappear when combined with Walmart’s purchasing and distribution scale.While it is hard to stay ahead solely through superior execution over an extended period, it is sometimes enough in the short term to draw a deep-pocketed buyer where there are strong, immediate synergies. Creating enormous value over the long term requires turning a tactical edge into some form of durable advantage.While there are plenty of extraordinary start-ups creating new markets with a path to genuine advantage, self-described “disrupters” often find that the same forces that allowed them to get going initially also let in a horde of rivals. Competition drains away profit.This is particularly likely where the “disruptive innovation” does not greatly change the cost structure or end-user experience. Putting a thin layer of software on a people-intensive service business, for instance, may win some immediate sales against Luddite competitors, but it is not necessarily sustainable, nor will it conjure up fat margins. New and existing competitors can often spiff up their supporting tech, too.As the Columbia Business School Professor Bruce C. Greenwald pointed out in his book “Competition Demystified,” product differentiation on its own is not the basis for sustainable advantage. In his renowned example, “almost everybody makes toasters” — and if consumers one day demanded “toasters that sing when the bread is ready” — soon every manufacturer would offer a “crooning toaster.”The rise of web-fueled competition is plainly inexorable. Computers are infinitely patient and accurate in comparing prices and opportunities, and now companies can provide a complete set of services to atomize the fixed costs formerly required for market entry.AdvertisementHowever, despite the threat to profits, there is no cause for gloom. Superior tactical execution can still create real value, particularly where it provides ammunition for a bigger war (like Walmart’s battle with Amazon). And in the long term, value is created not by disruption, but by weaving together advantages (as both Amazon and Walmart have done in different ways) that together create a barrier that is hard to storm.Jeremy G. Philips is a general partner at Spark Capital and an adjunct professor at Columbia Business School.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »