By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 10, 2016
Employers in the United States advertised more openings and hired more people in June, increasing evidence that the job market has rebounded from a brief soft patch in the spring.The number of job openings rose a modest 2 percent to 5.6 million in June from 5.5 million in May, the Labor Department said Wednesday. Still, that figure remains below the 5.8 million openings advertised in April, the highest in 16 years.Hiring increased 1.7 percent in June to 5.1 million, a solid level but below a recent peak of 5.5 million in February.Businesses are hiring at a healthy pace even as economic growth has lagged, in part because the work force has become less productive. The economy expanded at an annual rate of just 1 percent in the first half of the year, though analysts expect growth to accelerate to about a 3 percent annual rate in the current July-September quarter.AdvertisementStill, with more Americans earning paychecks, spending and growth could strengthen in coming months.The pace of job openings has leveled off this year, though it remains at a healthy level.Advertisement“We see no sign of any downturn, suggesting employers remain fundamentally bullish,” said Ian Shepherdson, chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, a forecasting firm.The government previously reported that employers added a net total of 292,000 jobs in June, the most in eight months.Hiring was also strong in July, when a net total of 255,000 jobs were added, the government said Friday. The unemployment rate remained at a low 4.9 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Wednesday’s figures track gross hiring in June, as well as job openings, and come from a report known as the Job Openings and Labor Turnover survey, or Jolts. The monthly jobs report that was released Friday calculated a net total of job gains in July after subtracting those who quit, retired or were laid off.The job market’s health is a key factor in the Federal Reserve’s deliberations over when it will next raise the short-term interest rate it controls. Fed officials noted after their most recent meeting in July that hiring had picked up and that the number of people seeking work had fallen.Friday’s robust jobs report for July slightly increased the likelihood that the Fed will raise rates at its September meeting, though most economists say they think the Fed won’t move until December.In other economic news, the Treasury Department said on Wednesday that the deficit came in at $112.8 billion in July, the highest since February’s $192.6 billion but down from $149.2 billion in July 2015.For the first 10 months of the budget year, which ends Oct. 1, the deficit was $513.7 billion, up from $465.5 billion a year earlier.The Congressional Budget Office predicts the 2016 deficit will total $590 billion, up from last year’s budget gap of $439 billion, largely because of lower-than-expected revenue.AdvertisementAccumulating budget deficits add to the federal debt, now nearly $19.4 trillion. That figure includes $5.4 trillion that the government owes itself, mostly from borrowing from Social Security.A version of this article appears in print on August 11, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: More Jobs Beckon in U.S.; Hiring Rises.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.