By SAM ROBERTSNOV. 24, 2015
Charles M. Cawley, who founded MBNA Corporation in a supermarket basement, transformed the company into the world’s largest independent credit card issuer, and sold it two decades later to Bank of America for nearly $35 billion, died on Nov. 18 at his home in Camden, Me. He was 75.His death was confirmed by his family, who did not specify a cause.Mr. Cawley was running Maryland National Bank’s credit card division in Baltimore in 1982 when, frustrated by the refusal of legislators there to lift a cap on interest rates (he called them “some of the dumbest people I have ever known”), he opened a subsidiary in a converted A&P store in Ogletown, Del., about four miles across the state line.The future of the subsidiary, called the Maryland Bank National Association, was so iffy that in its first year he signed a dozen 30-day leases for the space occupied by his 150 employees.But within five years, the company had 1,000 employees and $2 billion in loans, its phenomenal growth set off by its introduction of 24-hour customer service and, crucially, so-called affinity credit cards.AdvertisementThe cards are tied to sports teams, universities, professional associations and other organizations and are aimed at consumers who are loyal to them and willing to retain the cards despite competition from rival issuers that offer lower fees and interest rates.AdvertisementMr. Cawley theorized that consumers were more likely to apply for a card affiliated with their favorite team or school than an impersonal bank and less likely to default.MBNA became one of America’s 50 most profitable companies, making $2.34 billion in 2003. That was also the third consecutive year that Mr. Cawley’s total compensation, including cash, stock and options, was around $50 million. He retired late that year after the board refused his recommendations for bonuses and future compensation.Mr. Cawley spent profusely, building a 16-car garage to house his classic cars (beginning with a blue 1947 Cadillac convertible) and supporting cultural and educational institutions, including Georgetown University and the University of Delaware. He helped Maine’s economy by employing thousands of its residents and supported its nonprofit institutions through his own philanthropy.He also cultivated political connections; in one instance he and MBNA donated $1 million to the foundation that built the elder George Bush’s presidential library in Texas.Mr. Cawley was so intent on motivating his employees that he named the company’s stock symbol KRB, after Kenneth R. Bowman, MBNA’s first director of service quality.“We don’t have a culture, we have an attitude,” he told The New York Times in 1997. “Our attitude is every customer gets satisfied.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Charles Michael Cawley was born on Aug. 15, 1940, in Beverly, Mass., to Charles Sr. and the former Ruth Walsh. (The younger Mr. Cawley did not use the “Jr.” with his name.) He was raised in New Jersey and spent summers in Maine, where his grandfather once ran a dress factory.After graduating from Georgetown in 1962, he married the former Julie Murphy.Mr. Cawley was hired by Maryland National Bank in 1972. After he opened the subsidiary in Delaware, he persuaded the alumni association of Georgetown, his alma mater, to sponsor a credit card for its members, and the concept of affinity cards was born.AdvertisementThe National Education Association and the American Dental Association soon signed up, followed by 5,000 other groups.MBNA went public in 1991. When it was acquired by Bank of America in 2005, 50 million customers held MBNA credit cards.Alfred Lerner, a Cleveland financier and the one-time owner of the Cleveland Browns, oversaw MBNA’s finances and was its chairman and chief executive until he died in 2002.Mr. Cawley is survived by his wife along with their son, Dr. C. Michael Cawley III; their daughter, Maureen C. Rhodes; four grandchildren; and a sister, Constance Devanney.The couple lived in Vero Beach, Fla., Wilmington, Del., and Camden, Me.Mr. Cawley monitored MBNA’s operations fastidiously. He once knelt in a company flower bed to cull a bloom that he deemed the wrong color. Perhaps not surprisingly, one of the company’s yachts was named Impatience.A version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Charles M. Cawley, Founder of MBNA Corp., Dies at 75.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.