AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaRobert A. Iger, the chief executive of the Walt Disney Company, finally got back to playing offense in TV.The media conglomerate unveiled plans on Tuesday to develop a streaming service for its sports network ESPN as part of its $1 billion investment in BamTech, which is Major League Baseball’s streaming technology firm. After a year of being on the back foot over cord-cutting, the move helps Disney take a step into the future.Last August, Mr. Iger spooked investors when he said ESPN was losing viewers as consumers ditched expensive cable bundles. Nielsen estimates that since February 2011, more than 11 million customers have abandoned the flagship network, which is home to “SportsCenter” and “Monday Night Football.” That leaves it with about 89 million viewers.The revelation from Mr. Iger kicked off a rout in media stocks. Disney has lost 20 percent of its market value since then, lagging rivals like Time Warner and CBS, as well as the broader stock market. ESPN also became a distracting focal point for investors, overshadowing success in the film studio, theme parks and consumer products, and irritating Mr. Iger.Concerns were justified, however. “The Force Awakens” and a new Shanghai Disneyland are impressive achievements, but it is the cable network’s division that houses ESPN that accounts for the biggest slug of Disney’s earnings. For the quarter that ended July 2, it represented nearly half of the company’s $4.5 billion in operating profit. It also was one of the slowest-growing businesses, at just 1 percent, with the rising cost of programming eating into gains in advertising and subscriber revenue.That makes the new investment in BamTech all the more important. It acknowledges in more than mere words that consumer habits are changing in a move that should strengthen and accelerate its streaming options. Disney is buying one-third of the operation and will have the option to take control someday.The long-serving Mr. Iger has won acclaim for big acquisitions, including Marvel’s superheroes and George Lucas’s Star Wars franchise. He may yet come to find that less-sexy internet plumbing can deliver as much value as attention-grabbing characters.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement