AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangHillary Clinton had her first opportunity to give a detailed rebuttal to Donald J. Trump’s economic proposals and used it to say that the idea that he was on the side of the “little guy” was a “myth.” She also called for infrastructure investment, aggressive spending on green energy and free tuition for in-state middle-class families at public colleges and universities.Mrs. Clinton tried to contrast her own middle-class upbringing with Mr. Trump’s personal wealth, referring to his tax cuts and contending that his policies would “work for him and his friends, at the expense of everyone else.”Even without enforcing his policies, Mr. Trump may not have paid any federal income tax in some years, James B. Stewart writes. Real estate and tax professionals told Mr. Stewart that Mr. Trump could pay “little or no income tax” because he could take advantage of some of the most generous tax breaks in the federal tax code to reduce his reported income to near zero.U.S. Stocks Hit a High The Dow Jones industrial average, the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index and the Nasdaq composite index rose to record highs on Thursday — the first time that all three had peaked since December 1999. As central banks have used stimulus to stoke economic growth, sovereign bond yields have dropped and pushed investors into American stocks, The Financial Times reports.But the party is still to come. Some traders are expecting another surge once investors return from vacations, according to The Wall Street Journal. On Thursday, the Dow rose 0.6 percent to 18,613.52. The S.&P. 500 gained 0.5 percent to reach 2185.79, and the Nasdaq added 0.5 percent to 5,228.40. The Dow Jones industrial average is expected to pass 20,000 this year.On the agenda The University of Michigan will publish its latest consumer confidence survey at 10 a.m.More Universities Sued Over Retirement Plan Fees First it was M.I.T., N.Y.U. and Yale. Now employees at Duke, Johns Hopkins, the University of Pennsylvania and Vanderbilt are suing the schools, saying their retirement plans charged them excessive fees. The class-action suits have been brought by Jerome J. Schlichter, a lawyer known for his pioneering litigation over 401(k) retirement plans.The plaintiffs say the retirement plans overpaid millions of dollars each year because the universities used more than one provider to operate and administer the plans. The suits also suggest that the plans offered too many investment options, many of which were too expensive.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement