AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersSoft economic data weighed on the dollar and Treasury yields on Friday and pressured stock prices, but Wall Street’s losses were softened by continued gains in oil prices.Retail sales were unexpectedly flat in July as Americans cut back on purchases of clothing and other goods.“That was certainly the headline; I think it spooked a lot of investors this morning,” John Traynor, chief investment officer of People’s United Wealth Management in Bridgeport, Conn., said of the retail sales report.“But the underlying news is still very positive,” Mr. Traynor said. “Wages are growing, employment is growing and that’s key.”The Dow Jones industrial average fell 37.05 points, or 0.2 percent, to 18,576.47, The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index lost 1.74 points, or 0.08 percent, to 2,184.05.The Nasdaq composite index added 4.50 points, or 0.09 percent, to 5,232.90 — setting another record high.Shares of the chip maker Nvidia shares rose 5.6 percent after its results helped bolster the Nasdaq.All three indicators ended at record highs on Thursday, the first time they have done so simultaneously since 1999, and they posted slim weekly gains.Also among the day’s bright spots, the department store chain Nordstrom rose 8 percent to $51.38 after it reported better-than-expected comparable sales and quarterly profit.J. C. Penney shares jumped 6.1 percent to $10.55, also after upbeat results. The S.&P. retail index gained 0.3 percent.Energy shares were the best-performing S.&P. sector, rising 0.7 percent and mitigating broader declines as crude prices gained.Exxon Mobil rose 1.3 percent to $87.85 and gave the biggest boost to the Dow and S.&P. 500, while Chevron added 0.75 percent to $102.16.The recent “strength in crude has both lifted equity prices and also tended to assuage that fear that we are going into a season of protracted anemic consumer and global demand,” said Peter Kenny, senior market strategist at Global Markets Advisory Group in Berkeley Heights, N.J. “Crude oil is an enormously important factor right now in the global market.”Oil rose after a short-covering rally was triggered by comments from Saudi Arabia’s oil minister in the previous session about possible action to help stabilize the market.Brent crude futures settled 2 percent higher at $46.97 a barrel. In the United States, crude settled up $1 at $44.49.The dollar fell 0.1 percent against a basket of currencies.“The U.S. retail sales data in particular is causing the dollar to weaken,” said Nick Bennenbroek, head of currency strategy at Wells Fargo Securities in New York.Benchmark Treasury yields fell to their lowest in nearly two weeks after the economic data, with 10-year Treasury notes last rising 18/32 in price, pushing the yield down to 1.51 percent, from 1.56 percent on Thursday.Analysts said that cooling consumer spending and tame inflation suggested that the Federal Reserve would probably not raise interest rates any time soon, despite a robust labor market.“The relationship is pretty straightforward: with low inflation and low growth comes lower interest rates,” said Guy LeBas, chief fixed-income strategist at Janney Montgomery Scott in Philadelphia.European shares edged back after setting a fresh seven-week high on Friday. The DAX index in Germany fell 0.3 percent, and in France, the CAC 40 lost 0.1 percent. In Britain, the FTSE 100 ended with a slight gain.Advertisement