AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Christa Quarles, chief executive of OpenTable, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant. Q. Tell me about your early years.A. I’m the sixth of seven kids, and we lived outside Pittsburgh. Mom was originally a schoolteacher, but then stayed at home to raise seven kids. Dad was an engineer at U.S. Steel. For me, as the sixth, there were no firsts left for me to accomplish, both good and bad. It had all happened before I came about. One of the big challenges for me was, “How do I stand out? How do I even get noticed in this giant family?”My mom appreciated humor, though, so I learned that a quick wit was a way to get noticed. I also felt like I had to do something more or succeed exceptionally to make it even matter, because everybody in my family was expected to get all A’s and go to college.I’ve interviewed so many C.E.O.s over the years who come from large families.You certainly learn to be comfortable with a fair amount of chaos. There’s always something getting thrown at you and you just learn to become like Teflon. I always felt, bring it on.My parents were also fascinated by psychology, and they did marriage counseling for our church. So we were always getting psychology tests growing up because I think they were also fascinated by how seven kids could be so different. So I was an early student of psychology, because they were always giving us the latest test. There was just an interest in the family around the questions of why you behave the way you do and why you think the way you do.Do you see strands of your parents’ influence in the way you lead today?A little bit, but slightly more with my older siblings. I gained some wisdom early on just by watching what worked for my older siblings, what didn’t work, watching their failures.There are three kinds of people — the people who never learn from mistakes, the people who learn from their own mistakes and the people who learn from other people’s mistakes. I put myself in that last category because I had all these examples before me, and I never felt like I had to fail as often because there was so much I could learn from. People have always called me an old soul, and it was just more that I had lots of examples in front of me.Early leadership lessons for you?The first time I had to fire someone whom I had specifically hired, I was truly sick to my stomach. I fought the idea for a long time, and thought I could mitigate the problem.And then you start realizing it’s actually better for that person too. The kind thing is saying that you’re not going to be successful here for these reasons, and you want that person to find their better path.I’ve had to terminate lots of different kinds of people in different roles, and I would say that the minute you know it’s not right should be the minute you do it. And you never regret doing it too soon. You always regret waiting too long. When somebody’s not right, there is addition by subtraction sometimes.Other lessons?The importance of embracing vulnerability. Early on, especially when I worked on Wall Street, God forbid that you declare any granular weakness, because people would pounce on it.But the paradox of owning what you know and what you don’t know is that you actually seem more powerful as you expose more vulnerability. I’ve become more comfortable with exposing my vulnerability and not being afraid to go there.When I give criticism now, I’ll talk about how I failed in a similar situation. I try to humanize the criticism in a way that says this is about an action, it’s not about you as a person. I want to make you better. If somebody feels like they’re in a safe place and they can hear the message, they’re more likely to change.This is your first C.E.O. role. Any surprises?The thing that’s always surprising to me, because I’m such an open, candid, frank person, is how my words can carry 10 times the weight they used to. I don’t want to lose that authenticity, so I am still kind of unvarnished most of the time. But I realize that some people are going to go off and actually build a product feature because I said something in a meeting. So I do follow up afterward to make sure we are all on the same page.The other surprise was that people were afraid to share things early on. Teams were trying to perfect something before they would show it to me, and they’d waste a ton of time trying to get it to be perfect to show to the C.E.O. So I said, “Early, often, ugly. It’s O.K. It doesn’t have to be perfect because then I can course-correct much, much faster.” No amount of ugly truth scares me. It’s just information to make a decision.How do you hire?I don’t always have a specific set of questions, but I am looking for whether your eyes light up when you’re talking about 80 percent of what the job requires. And I always ask, “What kind of work do you avoid doing?” Because there’s always a part of your job that everybody hates. I want to understand what part that is, and I also want to understand what makes your eyes light up. The person who enjoys their job is going to give you 20 times the effort.What career and life advice do you give to new college grads?It’s about finding your space and not being afraid to shift around to find that thing that truly brings you joy. I don’t think there’s any shame in changing jobs, especially early on, to find that groove. But then once you’ve found it, you really have to put in the time to become an expert in that thing.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement