AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — Retail sales were unexpectedly flat in July as Americans cut back on discretionary spending, pointing to a moderation in consumption that could temper expectations for stronger economic growth.Other data on Friday showed that producer prices recorded their biggest drop in nearly a year in July as a result of declining costs for services and energy goods. Cooling consumer spending and tame inflation suggest the Federal Reserve will probably not raise interest rates anytime soon despite a robust labor market.“Fed members are afraid to come out from under their rocks until growth is sustainably solid and inflation in, near or at their target, and today’s reports don’t provide them with any comfort that will happen soon,” said Joel Naroff, chief economist at Naroff Economic Advisors in Holland, Pa.Retail sales were unchanged in July, coming off a revised 0.8 percent increase in June, the Commerce Department said. Retail sales in June were previously reported to have increased 0.6 percent. Sales rose 2.3 percent from a year ago.Motor vehicle sales increased 1.1 percent last month. Rising demand for autos is pulling spending away from discretionary items.Retail sales excluding automobiles, gasoline, building materials and food services — so-called core retail sales — were also unchanged last month after rising 0.5 percent in June. This figure corresponds most closely with the consumer spending component of gross domestic product.Economists had forecast overall retail sales rising 0.4 percent and core sales climbing 0.3 percent last month. Some cautioned against reading too much into the July data, citing a labor market that is at or near full employment.“You have had two months of very strong job growth. It just seems very odd that spending would be weak. I will wait for the revisions before declaring July retail spending means anything more than random volatility,” said Steve Blitz, chief economist at M Science in New York.There was another jump in online sales last month as they continued to grab market share from traditional retailers.Macy’s said on Thursday it would close an additional 100 stores as it tries to turn around its business after six quarters of falling sales. Like other department stores, Macy’s has been squeezed by stiff competition from online retailers such as Amazon.com.Separately, the Labor Department said its Producer Price Index for final demand dropped 0.4 percent last month, the first decline since March and the largest since September 2015. It increased 0.5 percent in June.In the 12 months through July, the P.P.I. slipped 0.2 percent. That was the biggest drop since December 2015 and followed a 0.3 percent increase in the 12 months through June.A strong dollar and cheaper oil continue to keep price pressures muted, leaving inflation running persistently below the Fed’s 2 percent target. Fed officials have repeatedly expressed concern about low inflation.A third report showed consumer sentiment was stable in early August, though households had a softer outlook on income. Most of the weakness was among younger households who cited higher expenses than anticipated, according to the University of Michigan’s preliminary consumer sentiment survey.Advertisement