AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonFor years, state pension funds have invested money earned by teachers, firefighters and other government employees with private equity firms without  having a full picture of how much they were earning and what they were paying in expenses.On Tuesday, the California Public Employees’ Retirement System disclosed for the first time that it had paid $3.4 billion since 1990 to the biggest private equity managers on Wall Street, including like firms like Carlyle, Blackstone and Apollo. Calpers also said it had made $24.2 billion in profits from private equity firms over the same period, according to its new data-collecting program, called Private Equity Accounting and Reporting.The move by Calpers, the country’s biggest state pension fund, to disclose the details of its investment profit — called carried interest — could help to pave the way to more transparency in the private equity industry, historically one of the most secretive corners of the financial world.“Private equity is a complicated asset class and the board and investment office staff will now have even more insight into our program,” Henry Jones, Calpers’s board vice president and the chairman of its investment committee, said in a statement on Tuesday.The pension industry, under public scrutiny and faced with ballooning deficits and disappointing performance, is beginning to push for more transparency. For the first time, this year Calpers will pay more money to retirees than it receives from its investments and contributions.Other state pension funds have fared far worse. In Pennsylvania, the state pension fund is facing a $50 billion shortfall, for example.In the face of the broader turmoil, the private equity industry has been criticized for the lack of transparency over its fees. The Securities and Exchange Commission has started to look more closely into various practices of private equity firms, including how they charge fees.Private equity firms, which pool money from partners to buy companies in the hope that they make more money when the company is sold publicly, typically charge investors a management fee of 1 to 2 percent of assets and about 20 percent of any gains. But many firms also charge other fees related to transactions, costs for monitoring investments and legal fees — all of which can be hard for investors to ferret out. Missing from the Calpers report on Tuesday is a breakout of these fees, J. J Jelincic, a member of the Calpers board, said.“We certainly know more than we did before,” Mr. Jelincic said. “But it’s not the complete story yet,” he added.Concerns about these fees have become more acute in recent years. Scott M. Stringer, the New York City comptroller, recently commissioned a study of the city’s five pension funds and found that external money managers had fallen $2.5 billion short of benchmark returns over a 10-year period, in part because of high fees and poor performance.And last week, the New Jersey State Investment Council voted unanimously to review the fees and performance for the New Jersey Pension Fund’s investments over a five-year period, according to a report by Pensions and Investments, an industry publication.Calpers has moved over the last year to simplify its external investments. Ted Eliopoulos, the chief executive of Calpers, announced this year that Calpers would cut by more than half the external money managers it invests with for private equity, real estate and broader equity funds. Last year, Calpers said it would liquidate its $4 billion in hedge fund investments.But Calpers will continue to invest in private equity, which it said on Tuesday was its most lucrative investment group.“Private equity has the highest net returns in our portfolio,” Mr. Eliopoulos said. Its private equity investments have yielded a return of 11.1 percent since 1990, compared with a 9.4 percent annualized total return across the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index over the same period.Advertisement