AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter EavisAs an important deadline looms in Congress, the Obama administration signaled on Tuesday that it would push back hard against any legislation that substantially loosens the sweeping 2010 overhaul of the financial system.Republicans in Congress are backing legislation that would soften certain parts of the reforms, which were accomplished through the Dodd-Frank Act five years ago. They are now seeking to insert the changes into a spending bill that has to be passed by Dec. 11 to avoid a government shutdown.Last year, Congress attached a provision to a wider spending bill that ended up gutting an important part of the law regulating instruments known as swaps. The victory for Wall Street indicated that big banks still had sway in Washington, but it also helped reinvigorate the campaigns of those who want to do more to rein in large financial institutions.On Tuesday, Jacob J. Lew, the secretary of the Treasury, sought to underscore the administration’s opposition to any meaningful concessions on Dodd-Frank.“I have publicly made clear that my recommendation to the president would be that if there are legislative measures that will roll back the clock, that would take us back toward where we were before the financial crisis, I would recommend a veto,” Mr. Lew said via email.Still, such declarations may not deter those in Congress who may believe that the Obama administration is more likely to give ground on financial regulation than on its signature health care overhaul or other policies it holds dear.While they may achieve smaller concessions this year, the critics of Dodd-Frank may also hope to establish a track record of chipping away at the overhaul each year. Their cause may also be helped by the relatively complex nature of the changes they want to make. Their victory last year was over a regulation that governed swaps, financial instruments that Wall Street uses to hedge risks and speculate.But Mr. Lew said attaching financial regulation amendments to spending bills was a stealthy effort to erode important parts of Dodd-Frank.“The idea that something that amends Wall Street reform at the last minute on a must-pass bill is unacceptable,” he said in another email. “We have said that we’re open to conversations about technical changes or improvements in Dodd-Frank, but frankly, there are a lot of things masquerading as technical changes that are not.”In response, Jennifer Hing, a spokeswoman for the House Committee on Appropriations, which is helping put together the spending bill, said in an email, “The committee does not comment or speculate on funding levels or policy items that may or may not be included in future legislation.”Dodd-Frank’s critics in Congress are homing in on new rules that aim to bolster the ability of regulators to spot risks in the financial system. In the lead-up to the financial crisis, regulators failed to properly appreciate the weaknesses of financial firms and to foresee where crippling losses might occur.To help address that failing, Dodd-Frank said that banks had to be subjected to annual regulatory tests that would assess their ability to withstand extreme stress in the markets and the wider economy. If financial firms fail the test, regulators can place restrictions on them. Legislation introduced by Senator Richard Shelby, Republican of Alabama, and chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, could effectively exempt many large banks from such tests.Right now, banks with assets worth $50 billion or more are automatically subject to the so-called stress tests. Mr. Shelby’s legislation could raise that threshold to $500 billion, which could exclude a midsize bank like Capital One, for example. Defenders of this legislation say that it still gives regulators the opportunity to designate banks that are smaller than $500 billion as “systemically important,” and thus subject to stress tests.And they contend that the legislation would take a more nuanced approach. “There is wide bipartisan agreement that some elements of Dodd-Frank warrant a second look,” Jeff Sigmund, a spokesman for the American Bankers Association, said in an email. “Regulation based solely — and arbitrarily — on asset size ignores careful risk management by banks, creating unnecessary costs and reducing services available to bank customers.”But critics of Mr. Shelby’s idea assert that firms that are far smaller than $500 billion, and carry out relatively simple activities, can still cause big problems for the wider system. For instance, Countrywide Financial, whose mortgage portfolio suffered enormous losses during the housing crash, had assets of about $200 billion heading into the financial crisis.Still, there might yet be room for a compromise on the threshold. Daniel K. Tarullo, a governor of the Federal Reserve who has helped devise relatively stringent new regulations, suggested in March that he might support raising the threshold to $100 billion. Members of Congress also have their cross hairs trained on the Financial Stability Oversight Council, a new regulatory entity that was set up by Dodd-Frank.Before the crisis, certain regulators missed problems that were amassing under their noses. To help keep that from happening again, the council was established to give a range of financial regulators the ability to come together to assess whether dangerous risks were building up in the system. The council can take steps to designate financial firms that are not traditional banks as being important to the financial system — and then subject them to new regulations. Such a process might have stopped the American International Group from making the gargantuan loss-making bets that prompted a taxpayer bailout in 2008.But some members of Congress assert that the council lacks accountability and transparency when designating nonbanks as important to the financial system. As a result, they have introduced legislation that would require the council to apply a raft of new procedures early in the process of deciding if a firm is important to the system.Critics of this effort contend that the designation process already gives firms opportunities to respond to the council during the process. And they assert that the legislation would double the length of the designation process to as long as four years, noting that A.I.G.’s bets swelled to a dangerous level within less than four years.For now, consumer advocates say they are optimistic. They say they do not expect a big compromise like the one on swaps last year. “It’s not going to be anything serious,” said Dennis Kelleher, president of Better Markets, a group that lobbies for tough financial regulation. “I think the lesson of swaps was that it was not only incredibly bad policy but also bad politics to give an early Christmas gift to Wall Street.”Advertisement