By LANDON THOMAS Jr.AUG. 11, 2016
Bill Miller, the veteran stock picker whose market-beating wisdom defined an earlier era of mutual fund dominance, split ways on Thursday with Legg Mason, his professional home for 35 years.He has been managing $2.1 billion of assets in funds through a management company called LMM, including the Legg Mason Opportunities Trust, Miller Income Opportunities Trust and other investments. Legg Mason, which is based in Baltimore, said Thursday that Mr. Miller had agreed to purchase the entirety of the firm’s interests in LMM, giving him full ownership of the entity.In the 1990s and the early part of the 2000s, Mr. Miller was the Joe DiMaggio of mutual fund investors, achieving fame for beating the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index for 15 consecutive years, from 1991 to 2005.But with the advent of exchange-traded funds and the investing public’s embrace of passive, low-cost investing as opposed to active stock picking, Mr. Miller’s style has fallen out of favor.AdvertisementA deep-value investor who made big, concentrated bets on a select number of companies and then stuck with them through their worst days, Mr. Miller embodied the active style of mutual fund investing that prevailed in the earlier era.AdvertisementAnd even though stocks of technology companies are not typically what value investors buy, he was an early booster of AOL and Dell and was among the first mutual fund managers that bet big on Amazon.In its heyday, Legg Mason Value Trust was one of the biggest, most popular mutual funds around, and Mr. Miller regularly graced the covers of the many personal finance magazines that flourished during this period.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Mr. Miller’s stubborn style of investing hurt him during the 2008 financial crisis, when he accumulated big positions in Bear Stearns, Freddie Mac, the American International Group and other struggling financial stocks.Although he recovered from these depths, the assets he managed at Legg Mason were of a considerably smaller size.In recent years, Legg Mason has branched out aggressively into E.T.F.’s, investment vehicles that track an index or mimic a style of investing and that have attracted billions of dollars in investor money — much of which has come from underperforming, actively managed mutual funds.“Bill has been an important part of the growth and success of Legg Mason over the years and we appreciate his many contributions,” Joseph A. Sullivan, Legg Mason’s chairman and chief executive, said in a statement on Thursday.Terms of the transaction were not disclosed. “I am excited about the future of LMM, and our team is dedicated to our long-term, value-driven approach and to true active management. I am thankful to Legg Mason for our 35-year relationship and to the many great people I’ve worked with along the way,” Mr. Miller said in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on August 12, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Investor Who Recorded Famous Winning Streak Will Leave Mutual Fund.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.