By AMIE TSANGAUG. 15, 2016
Credit card debt among Americans under 35 has fallen to its lowest level since 1989. Having racked up a pile of student loans, young people want to avoid the kind of pressure that they saw their family and friends under during the financial crisis. And laws passed after that crisis make it harder for them to secure credit cards anyway.Their reluctance could have lasting consequences. It is harder to take out a home mortgage without a substantial credit history, so they are likely to buy property later in life. “I don’t want to go out and buy, buy, buy, even though that’s what society wants me to do,” one millennial said. “I want to save and invest for the long term.”Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bids for Gawker, and a Tussle Over Tronc Final bids for Gawker Media are due on Monday at 5 p.m. Ziff Davis, a digital media company, has put a figure — $90 million — on its level of interest, but it may be outbid at an auction if that’s its limit. Univision is also looking to build its online portfolio, but it has already splashed out on other companies recently. New York magazine is another possibility, but it may not be able to muster up enough money. Find out who the other contenders are here.For its part, the investment firm Oaktree Capital Management, a large shareholder in Tronc — the company previously known as Tribune Publishing — is questioning the motives of Michael W. Ferro Jr., an investor and chairman of the company. Oaktree questioned the price at which Mr. Ferro bought his shares, his failure to signal plans to overhaul the board and management, and the company’s decision to reject Oaktree’s recommendation for a committee to evaluate an offer from Gannett. Mr. Ferro has responded by suggesting to editors and executives at the company that they investigate Oaktree and one of its founders, according to people with direct knowledge of the meeting.Examining Trump’s Links Outside the U.S. Ukraine’s National Anti-Corruption Bureau is investigating handwritten ledgers that show that the pro-Russian political party of Ukraine’s former president, Viktor F. Yanukovych, made $12.7 million in undisclosed cash payments to Paul Manafort, the chairman of Donald J. Trump’s campaign. Investigators claim that the disbursements were part of an illegal off-the-books system whose recipients also included election officials. Mr. Manafort’s lawyer said his client had not received “any such cash payments.”The Financial Times also reports that although Mr. Trump has said that he has “zero investments in Russia,” he has formed alliances with businessmen connected with the country, who would position him to profit from capital pouring from the former states of the Soviet Union. Mr. Trump became the public face of Bayrock, a developer with roots in the Soviet Union. The company’s top officials included a convicted criminal and its biggest project ended in foreclosure.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.