
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

NOV. 24, 2015
Even in these grim times, deal makers have descended into silliness.Perhaps it is end-of-the-year exhaustion as we sputter toward the finish of a five-year market rally, but normally sober-minded business executives seem to have thrown over sound decision making for flights of fancy.The prime example of silly deal-making has to be Pfizer’s $152 billion tie-up with Allergan. Pfizer, the largest drug maker in the United States, is the acquirer in all but name. Its chief executive remains at the top, and Allergan’s stockholders receive a premium.But the deal is structured to give it the tax benefit that would come with an inversion. Technically, Allergan will be the acquirer and in the transaction Pfizer, based in New York, will relocate its place of organization — and tax domicile — to Ireland.Pfizer wants to acquire Allergan not to build a better business by bringing together the makers of Botox and Viagra, but because the move will lower its taxes.AdvertisementAllergan and Pfizer, which together employ more than 100,000 people, are engaging in a risky business. Washington has been furiously playing catch-up, enacting rules aimed at curbing inversions to try to stop a tax exodus.AdvertisementNothing suggests that Washington will not examine this transaction and enact new regulations to block it.Pfizer has also kept $74 billion abroad to avoid paying taxes on it. The company has reduced its earnings by reserving the money to pay the taxes on these funds, despite the lack of any apparent attempt to repatriate the funds. This has allowed Pfizer to claim that its tax rate is 27.5 percent instead of the actual amount of about 12 percent.Pfizer says its taxes are too high, yet it never even paid those taxes.This is Pfizer’s second attempt at a deal to lower its tax bill. Last year, the company sought to acquire the British drug maker AstraZeneca, dropping that bid when the Treasury Department adopted its first set of anti-inversion regulations.And so we are left to shake our heads, or perhaps giggle nervously, because a $152 billion deal is being done largely for tax reasons, highlighting how absurd our tax laws have become. Treasury has been begging Congress to change the laws, but of course Congress hasn’t obliged.The next example is Mylan, another drug company, which successfully relocated to the Netherlands from Pennsylvania earlier this year. Its silly season began when it started a takeover effort with a $26 billion hostile bid for Perrigo, which itself had successfully moved its tax domicile to Ireland from Michigan.It appeared that Mylan was trying to eat Perrigo rather than to be eaten by an Israeli competitor, Teva Pharmaceuticals, which had offered to acquire Mylan. This was because if Mylan acquired Perrigo it would be too big to to be acquired by Teva. Yet again, a business was acting for reasons other than building a better business, instead preferring to play a kind of “Pac-Man” defense.Mylan asserted that it would never agree to a combination with Teva, not exactly the most reasonable position.AdvertisementSome of Mylan’s shareholders looked on in horror as the company turned to the laws of its new Dutch home to adopt an impregnable takeover defense known as a stichting, or a Dutch trust. The stichting was allowed to acquire a majority voting interest in Mylan, also taking the position that it too would never permit a Teva bid to succeed.The shareholders complained that Mylan had not coherently disclosed these new corporate governance changes, nor had it made clear that Mylan would use a stichting in such an aggressive manner, at the time Mylan moved to the Netherlands.Mylan won that fight and staved off Teva, but Mylan continued to pursue its Perrigo bid.As Mylan sought to win over shareholders of Perrigo, Mylan’s chairman, Robert J. Coury, pledged that if Mylan won, it would make unspecified corporate governance changes to placate shareholders.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, Perrigo shareholders, many of whom were also shareholders of Mylan, rejected the offer — a rare victory for a target in Ireland.It leaves Mylan in an awkward position. Mylan has arguably pulled a corporate governance fast one, by moving to the Netherlands and bolstering its takeover defenses in disregard of shareholders’ interests.Will Mylan now make the changes it promised to if it won? Most likely not, but it still doesn’t look good for the pharmaceutical company.Our next bout of inanity was the Square initial public offering. To be sure many, if not most, unicorns are wildly overvalued, but the drama surrounding Square’s $2.9 billion valuation at its I.P.O. price, well below its last round of financing at $5 billion, was manufactured.Many overlooked the fact that in just a few years, Square had gone from zero to $2.9 billion. Sure, $2.9 billion was a long way from Square’s last valuation, but getting to that point was the real milestone.Moreover, Square was required to compensate the investors in the last round to make them whole, meaning that only its earlier investors were hurt. After the I.P.O., everything changed when Square’s stock price popped more than 50 percent on its trading debut. Suddenly Square was again a darling and the unicorns would live to gallop another day.AdvertisementOur final entry from the recent strangeness is Valeant Pharmaceuticals. After questions arose about Valeant’s business model, the value of the company’s stock fell by more than half as shareholders fled.The company had been a favorite of hedge funds, and the fall in the share price heaped destruction on a fair share of them. One of the biggest hits to a hedge fund was to William A. Ackman’s Pershing Square Capital Management, which now owns 9.9 percent of Valeant.Mr. Ackman, who did not take the fall lightly, held a long conference call to extol Valeant’s business model, asserting that “stuff happens.” His fund is down substantially, so clearly he was worried. But perhaps Mr. Ackman has been a billionaire too long if he thinks that holding a call like that will stop a panic.In the middle of his conference call, Valeant fell another 19 percent. It all brings to mind another Pershing Square investment — Herbalife.More than two years ago, Mr. Ackman shorted Herbalife stock, saying he would ride it to zero and that the company was a Ponzi scheme, something the company heatedly denied. We are still not sure who is right, though Herbalife is still standing and Mr. Ackman’s bet is under water.Is there any unifying theme to this? It may very well be that the market is punch drunk with exhaustion after a long rally, but there may be another explanation.I was struck by the fact that Pfizer’s chief executive, Ian C. Read, had called Washington officials before the announcement of the deal to tell them that the company’s moving abroad would be good for the United States because it would provide more money for the combined company to invest. This type of obtuse thinking typifies the deal-making going on today. Safe in their cocoons, business leaders seem to have perhaps slightly lost their touch with reality. What we may see as silliness, to them is rational business.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.A version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Telltale Signs That Deal Makers Swallowed the Silly Pills .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »