AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere’s what to expect in the week ahead.ECONOMYConsumer prices for July will be announced on Tuesday, with no significant change from June expected. Data on housing starts in the United States will also be announced on Tuesday. Those numbers are expected to show little change in July from a month earlier, indicating slow progress in residential construction. Zach Wichter On Wednesday, the Federal Reserve will release the minutes from its July policy meeting. During that meeting, the Fed announced that it would not change its benchmark interest rate but gave a positive economic assessment, hinting that the rate could go up later this year. Fed officials have given differing signals, however, on exactly when that move will come, leaving some to wonder whether it will be before the presidential election in November. Zach WichterMERGERS AND ACQUISITIONSThe Treasury Department issued rules this year that thwarted several deals known as tax inversions, which involve an American company combining with a foreign one to create a lower tax bill. One large inversion that managed to get through was the $16 billion deal involving the acquisition of Tyco, which is based in Ireland, by Johnson Controls in Milwaukee. The last hurdle for the deal is a vote by both sets of shareholders that is scheduled for Wednesday. Johnson Controls shareholders are to vote in Dallas, while Tyco’s shareholders will do so in Dublin. Leslie PickerRETAILINGTwo of the country’s largest retailers will release earnings this week. Target reports its second-quarter results on Wednesday, followed by Walmart on Thursday. With both retailers in the throes of the back-to-school season, analysts are eager to see what progress the two have made to improve their e-commerce businesses as the industry gears up for its busiest shopping months. Rachel AbramsEUROPEAN UNIONThe European Central Bank will publish an account of its July 21 monetary policy meeting. The summary of the discussion by the bank’s Governing Council may provide insights into how concerned members were about the economic impact of Britain’s vote in June to leave the European Union. The account of the meeting could also offer clues about how the central bank will react to any fallout from the so-called Brexit vote. Jack EwingAdvertisement