AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie Picker and Sydney EmberIn early summer, after the company formerly called Tribune Publishing had rejected two takeover offers from Gannett, two of its biggest investors found themselves in an escalating dispute. The investment firm Oaktree Capital Management was publicly questioning the motives of Michael W. Ferro Jr., an investor and the new chairman of the publishing company, in his decision to rebuff Gannett.Mr. Ferro formulated his own pointed response: During a meeting in July at his estate in Lake Geneva, Wis., he suggested to top editors and executives that their journalists investigate Oaktree and Bruce Karsh, co-chairman and co-founder of the firm, according to two people with direct knowledge of the meeting.No damaging article about Oaktree was published, but the episode provides a glimpse into the combative business style of a relatively unknown technology entrepreneur who has become one of the country’s most significant and unpredictable media moguls. Since taking a $44 million stake in Tribune Publishing in February, Mr. Ferro has installed himself as chairman, fired the chief executive and replaced him with a longtime associate, overhauled the senior executive ranks, and reshaped the company’s board so that a majority is aligned with him.He has also taken aggressive steps to transform one of the most storied publishers in the country, pushing a technology-driven approach to journalism that includes concepts like artificial intelligence. And most visibly, he shed the well-known Tribune name, changing it to Tronc, for Tribune online content — a move that drew instant mockery on the internet.Mr. Ferro declined to be interviewed for this article. A spokesman for Mr. Ferro, Dennis Culloton, denied that Mr. Ferro suggested that Tronc’s papers should investigate Oaktree.But in conversations with more than two dozen current and former employees, Chicago businessmen, and others who know him — most of whom spoke on the condition of anonymity citing fear of retribution or continuing business connections — he emerges as an audacious businessman whose wealth of ideas can by turns impress and alienate his associates and employees.Once a teenager who outsourced his house-painting jobs to others, Mr. Ferro, 50, has never been afraid to push boundaries. He created one of the first business-to-business internet companies, which he later sold for nearly $300 million. Emboldened by the support of Chicago billionaires, he has made moves to buy some of the city’s most iconic institutions, including the Chicago Cubs and The Chicago Sun-Times.Over the last six months, he has appeared intent on keeping Tronc, whose papers include The Los Angeles Times and The Chicago Tribune, away from Gannett, but his resolve has continued to vex Oaktree, the publisher’s third-largest shareholder. In a sign of the growing distrust between Oaktree and Mr. Ferro, the firm is now conducting a review into whether he has been acting out of self-interest rather than doing what is best for shareholders.At the same time, Mr. Ferro must contend with anxious employees who are stuck in ownership limbo as Gannett continues to circle the company, with a potential deal looming in the next few weeks.Born in 1966 in Merrick, N.Y., Mr. Ferro displayed an entrepreneurial spirit from a young age.He graduated from high school in Naperville, Ill., and attended the University of Illinois at Chicago. In his early 20s, he started a company called Chem-Roof that made coatings to treat wood, which he sold to the Pettibone Corporation, a supply and equipment company, when he was 25.Things soured, however. In 1995, after Mr. Ferro had left Pettibone, the company sued him, saying he had not repaid a $31,000 loan. Mr. Ferro filed his own complaint, arguing that the chairman of Pettibone’s parent company had falsely accused him of stealing cases of thigh cream. The suits were ultimately settled.In 1996, Mr. Ferro founded Click Commerce, which used the internet to streamline buying and selling between businesses. He took the company public in 2000, at the height of the dot-com bubble, and sold it six years later to Illinois Tool Works for $292 million. The transaction was Mr. Ferro’s golden ticket: His new wealth gained him entry into a group of Chicago business elites who were enamored with Mr. Ferro’s idea to turn the city into the next Silicon Valley.“Chicago is founded on older-school businesses,” said Matt Maloney, a friend of Mr. Ferro’s and a founder of GrubHub, the Chicago-based online food-ordering service. “There’s an element of respect in our community for the technologists because I think it’s more novel here than in other places.”When Mr. Ferro started a fund called Merrick Ventures to invest in tech companies, he attracted millions of dollars from Chicago business stalwarts, including John Canning, a founder of the buyout firm Madison Dearborn Partners, and Andrew McKenna, chairman emeritus of McDonald’s.“I have a great deal of trust in him,” Mr. Canning said. “It’s never a smooth ride with Michael, but it usually ends up successfully.”Among the fund’s first investments was a stake in Merge Healthcare, a struggling medical imaging company. In a pattern that presaged his actions at Tribune, Mr. Ferro became chairman of Merge and replaced almost half the board. He also installed as chief executive his colleague Justin C. Dearborn, who would later become the chief executive at Tronc. (IBM bought Merge last year for $1 billion.)In late 2011, Mr. Ferro and other members of the Chicago community, including some who were investors in Merrick, formed a holding company to buy The Sun-Times and about 40 other media properties for roughly $20 million.Boyish, with thick-rimmed glasses and a fondness for model trains, Mr. Ferro knew little about the media business, but he did have a barrelful of ideas.Shortly after the new management took over, Mr. Ferro held a meeting in the newsroom and said he wanted to create a game room and outfit the office with couches to make it seem more like a start-up, according to several former employees. He brought in candy dispensers and his own pool table and told some reporters he wanted the paper to focus more on celebrity coverage.Plans for The Sun-Times under Mr. Ferro were ambitious, but several failed to gain much traction. He created a weekly business magazine called Grid, for instance, that closed about a year later. A culture and lifestyle magazine that he started, Splash, endured. The Sun-Times introduced a daily newscast video that was discontinued after only a few months. Around the same time, the newspaper laid off all of its photographers, saying the move was part of a restructuring as the company focused more on digital video. It later hired several of them back.“He seemed to have a management style of throwing everything against the wall and seeing what sticks,” said David Roeder, a former business reporter and columnist at The Sun-Times who worked at the newspaper from 1996 to 2013.Several former employees said they thought Mr. Ferro had influenced the newspaper’s coverage to align with his personal agenda. The Sun-Times, for example, ran a front-page obituary of the chief executive of Illinois Tool Works, the company that had purchased Click Commerce. The paper also ran a photo of Mr. Ferro’s family attending a Cubs game. Mr. Culloton, Mr. Ferro’s spokesman, acknowledged that Mr. Ferro had encouraged the obituary, but he said that Mr. Ferro did not instruct the paper to run the photo.When Mr. Ferro’s fund, Merrick Ventures, invested $44 million in Tribune Publishing in early February, he received a stake worth nearly 17 percent and the title of nonexecutive chairman, traditionally an honorary role. (To assuage antitrust concerns, he donated his stake in The Sun-Times to a charitable trust.)A news release announcing the investment originally quoted Mr. Ferro saying how excited he was to work with Tribune’s chief executive, Jack Griffin, and his management team, according to two people briefed on the drafting process. An hour before the announcement, however, Mr. Ferro requested that Mr. Griffin’s name be removed, and instead he was quoted saying that he was “excited to be working with the company’s award-winning brands.”Mr. Culloton said any changes Mr. Ferro suggested would have been made “after consulting with his advisers to communicate a strong message to the market.”Less than three weeks later, Mr. Griffin was fired and replaced by Mr. Dearborn. Mr. Ferro assumed the position of chairman and was running the company.Tronc has since rejected both takeover offers from Gannett — the latest, in May, at a 99 percent premium. Mr. Ferro brought on another investor, Patrick Soon-Shiong, a billionaire doctor in Los Angeles, to help fend off its suitor.Mr. Ferro’s vision for Tronc has excited some and befuddled others at the company, several current and former employees said. He has combined the role of editor and publisher across his newspapers, blurring the lines between the traditionally separate business and news sides. He said in June that he wanted Tronc to produce 2,000 videos a day, a staggering number for a newspaper publisher, using artificial intelligence.Some current and former employees said they were impressed by his enthusiasm. “He’s got a lot of energy and a lot of ideas,” said Anne Vasquez, chief digital officer at Tronc. “That excitement — I can feed off that excitement. The sparks begin to fly. You start to think about the possibilities as opposed to the obstacles.”Tronc also purchased the domain name LA.com for $1.2 million, a regulatory filing shows. The site, according to an editorial plan reviewed by The New York Times, would “use social influencers as contributors” and “harness viral talent.” It would also publish profiles of celebrities and influencers, but “they must agree to push out via their social channels to be featured.”A mock webpage for LA.com featured an image of a woman bending at the hip and sucking a red lollipop, overlaid with the words “Suck it.” An email sent on Feb. 29, reviewed by The Times, said that the site was going for a “stylish, young, fun vibe” and that “Michael has approved this image.” Two people who received the email confirmed its contents.Mr. Culloton said Mr. Ferro did not approve the image. Plans for LA.com have been paused.Even as he has pushed ahead energetically with initiatives at Tronc’s publications, Mr. Ferro’s actions have mystified and irritated executives at Oaktree.Oaktree had been a large shareholder in the Tribune Company when it emerged from bankruptcy in late 2012, and retained a significant stake after Tribune Publishing was spun off two years ago. Saddled with $350 million in debt and experiencing steep drops in print advertising, Tribune Publishing’s stock dropped 65 percent from the time it was spun off to the day before news surfaced of Gannett’s bid.Gannett, long known for cost cutting but seeking to expand its national footprint, had somewhat remarkably emerged as a lifeline for struggling newspapers.When Gannett began its pursuit of Tribune, Oaktree urged Tribune to seriously consider what it perceived to be a generous offer. Now, concerned about Mr. Ferro’s resistance, Oaktree has hired two law firms to conduct a review of Tronc’s nonpublic documents, including minutes from board meetings and proof of Mr. Ferro’s qualifications, including his academic and work history.In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission in June, Oaktree questioned the price at which Mr. Ferro purchased his shares, his failure to signal plans to overhaul the board and top management, and the company’s decision to reject Oaktree’s recommendation that it form a committee to evaluate Gannett’s offer.Oaktree declined to comment for this article.Mr. Ferro has remained committed to his plans. An employee video released in June described how Tronc would use artificial intelligence and machine learning to “allow journalists to do their jobs more efficiently.”“The role of Tronc,” the video said, “is to transform journalism, from pixels to Pulitzers.”The video received widespread attention online, though perhaps not in the way Mr. Ferro had hoped: It was viciously mocked for its self-importance.Alain Delaquérière contributed research.Advertisement