By AMIE TSANGAUG. 16, 2016
Why does anyone want the Olympics in their home city? The last time the Games were profitable was in Los Angeles in 1984 — that is more than 30 years ago. But for whatever reason, government officials, businessmen and bankers are in a bidding war for the 2024 Summer Games that could rival anything seen on Wall Street. Some are competing on costs, but potential losses are a major concern — is it all a poisoned chalice?There are plenty of unconventional solutions being floated. Whether it is permanently keeping the Olympics in its birthplace, Greece, or holding the Games at different places simultaneously, some people are thinking outside the box. But what about giving a city the chance to host it twice, 12 years apart? That would allow it to reap the economic benefits twice, and force cities to create a more long term infrastructure plan, Andrew Ross Sorkin argues.Roadblocks Ahead for Volkswagen Owners of diesel Volkswagens in the United States will be receiving compensation of about $20,000 a car as part of a settlement for the company’s fuel emissions deception. As for customers in Europe? All they get is a software upgrade and a piece of plastic tubing. The company has been shielded by European laws that prevent class-action suits.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But a group of online legal start-ups are trying to challenge that by recruiting clients en masse and getting around restrictions on consumer lawsuits.AdvertisementTheir success could cost Volkswagen dearly. The company’s settlement in the United States cost it $15 billion but only covered about 500,000 diesels. Representatives for owners in Europe — where there are 8.5 million tainted diesels — are seeking about $5,600 a car.AdvertisementBack in the United States, the carmaker is not out of the woods. The Justice Department has found evidence of criminal wrongdoing and has held preliminary discussions with Volkswagen over a settlement, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing people familiar with the matter.ValueAct Bets on Morgan Stanley Investors are missing the forest for the trees when it comes to Morgan Stanley, according to Jeffrey Ubben, the chairman and chief of ValueAct, which has taken a $1.1 billion stake in the bank. Unlike with other companies, like Microsoft and Valeant, ValueAct is not yet pushing for a change in strategy. Mr. Ubben told The Financial Times that he was supportive of Morgan Stanley’s strategy of diversification.A letter to ValueAct investors said that the shares were undervalued and that the market, not the company, had it wrong. “We believe there is a disproportionate amount of time and energy spent overanalyzing Morgan Stanley’s trading and lending business and fretting about its Fed oversight,” it said in the letter, according to The Wall Street Journal.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.