AUG. 14, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.28 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.43 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.27 percent.The following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Board of Education, $175 million of debt securities. Competitive.Florida Department of Environmental Protection, $185 million of debt securities. Competitive.Sheldon Independent School District, Tex., $54.8 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementThree Village Central School District, N.Y., $54.2 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementAnaheim Elementary School District, Calif., $61.5 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Louisville and Jefferson County, Ky., $138.6 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Los Angeles Unified School District, $455.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Brooklyn Area Local Development Corporation, N.Y., $482 million of debt securities. Goldman Sachs.Clifton Higher Education Finance Corporation, Tex., $61.7 million of education revenue and refinancing bonds. Robert W. Baird.Durham County, N.C., $95 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Fort Myers, Fla., $50 million of capital improvement revenue bonds. Raymond James.Grapevine Colleyville Independent School District, Tex., $160.5 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Hilltop Securities.Honolulu City and County, $382 million of wastewater system revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Irvine Ranch Water District, Calif., $117.5 million of certificates of participation. Goldman Sachs.Memphis, $110 million of water, gas and electric system revenue bonds. Raymond James.Michigan Strategic Fund, Detroit Edison Company, $141.5 million of adjustable-rate demand-limited obligation refinancing revenue pollution control bonds and variable-rate limited-obligation refinancing revenue-exempt facilities project bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets.AdvertisementNew Haven, $117.6 million of general obligation bonds. Raymond James.New Hope Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, Tex., $60.1 million of retirement facility revenue bonds. Ziegler.New Jersey Health Care Facilities Financing Authority, $243.4 million of St. Joseph’s Healthcare System revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Port of Tacoma, Wash., $108.7 million of limited tax general obligation refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Port of Tacoma, Wash., $150.7 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Southwestern Community College District, Calif., $86 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Successor Agency to the Tustin Community Redevelopment Agency, Calif., $60.5 million of tax allocation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Washington State Housing Finance Commission, $132.6 million of nonprofit housing revenue and refinancing bonds. Ziegler.Wentzville R-IV School District, Mo., $54.7 million of refinancing and improvement lease certificates of participation. Stifel Nicolaus.A version of this schedule appears in print on August 15, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Auctions of Treasury Securities Set for the Week of Aug. 15.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.