By ELIZABETH OLSONAUG. 15, 2016
An increase in revenue for law firms in the first half of this year came largely from higher lawyer billing rates rather than greater demand for services, according to Citi Private Bank’s quarterly report on the legal industry.The 4.1 percent average revenue increase was surprisingly strong, considering the continuing consolidation among law firms and the sharper scrutiny that corporations are giving the customary high levels of legal billing. It compares with the 3.3 percent growth for the first half of 2015, according to the report by Dan DiPietro, the chairman of Citi Private Bank’s law firm group, and Lauren Harsha, an analyst with the group.The growth was primarily driven by an average billing rate increase of 3.2 percent, the report said. “The results so far are similar to four out of the last five years, when law firms experienced modest growth in demand, revenues and single-digit profit growth,” Mr. DiPietro said.Law firms kept expenses in line with a year ago, but recent  increases in junior lawyers’ salaries, which many of the big firms instituted in July, will raise firm expenses in the second half of this year, the report found.AdvertisementThe good news for law firms, and especially for partners, was that revenue growth and more static expenses in the first half of this year resulted in somewhat higher net income and profit per equity partner than a year ago. The top 50 firms had the most significant growth in revenue, an average of 5 percent, underscoring the continuing segmentation of the industry.None of the new data, however, changed Mr. DiPietro’s previous forecast for low single-digit profit growth for the year. He said his group at Citi Private Bank is receiving “mixed signals” from clients, with firms specializing in bankruptcy or litigation, or both, more upbeat about their overall prospects for the year. Firms with clients strongly involved in capital markets and corporate transactional work, which face uncertainty from Britain’s vote to leave the European Union and from the outcome of the American presidential election in November, are less optimistic, he said.AdvertisementThe findings were based on answers from 180 law firms, including 80 of the largest 100 American firms, 50 firms in the next largest tier and 50 smaller firms.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.