AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Kevin AllisonLyft, the No. 2 American ride-hailing service, recently rebuffed takeover interest from General Motors, its 9 percent owner, according to the news service The Information. There are reasons for Lyft to steer clear of Detroit, despite a shared vision for autonomous cars. But cash-flush rivals could still force the Silicon Valley start-up into G.M.’s lane.It was probably only a matter of time before G.M. made a move, after it paid $500 million in January for a stake in Lyft and took a seat on Lyft’s board. In March, the companies unveiled a deal to lease G.M. vehicles to Lyft drivers. They also plan to collaborate on building a fleet of autonomous on-demand vehicles.Speculation about Lyft’s future heated up in June when information emerged that the company had hired the Silicon Valley investment bank Qatalyst Partners, which was founded by Frank Quattrone. Qatalyst is known for helping clients find lucrative exits.A recent agreement by Uber, the market leader, to merge its China operations with its rival Didi Chuxing, freeing up some $1 billion a year to spend elsewhere, could make Lyft’s fight for market share in America even harder.Despite the mounting pressures, it’s understandable that Lyft’s founders, Logan Green and John Zimmer, would want to try to stay independent, at least for a while longer. G.M. has been investing heavily in driverless technology, but so have many of its peers, as well as the likes of Alphabet, Google’s parent company, and Apple. So there is no guarantee the carmaker will come up with a winning product.With software, rather than powertrain, a valuable component of autonomous vehicles, Lyft has little incentive to sell for anything other than top dollar. It would also presumably find it easier to recruit top programming talent as an independent company.Lyft may run out of road eventually. Being second to the much-larger Uber is a major disadvantage in an industry where drivers and riders prefer the largest, most active network. An expensive battle for ride-hailing supremacy would distract from the bigger prize: a chance to fundamentally disrupt car ownership with driverless technology — an opportunity Mr. Zimmer estimates is worth over $2 trillion per year in the United States alone, including the cost of buying, maintaining and insuring cars. That may ultimately direct Lyft to seek an off-ramp that leads to G.M. It just has to hope that when it does, G.M. is still willing to take the wheel.Advertisement