
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

AUG. 15, 2016
Insider trading can be prosecuted by the Justice Department, and it can be pursued in a civil enforcement action by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The S.E.C. used to handle the bulk of these cases, but lately it seems that more cases result in criminal charges along with a parallel lawsuit.An interesting question is why there has been a push to turn cases that once might have resulted only in civil charges into criminal prosecutions, which carry a much more significant social stigma along with the threat of prison time. What makes a particular instance of insider trading so wrongful that the government’s most powerful law enforcement weapon — a criminal conviction — is used on defendants who pose little threat to society beyond their own avarice?Some cases almost demand criminal prosecution because they reflect serious misconduct. The hacking of newswires to trade in advance notice of the disclosure of corporate developments in “a sophisticated and brazen scheme” resulting in more than $100 million in profits was the kind of market abuse that almost demands that the Justice Department seek substantial punishments.But other recent cases involving smaller amounts, and less-organized passing of information, are a bit more puzzling to figure out why criminal charges have been filed.AdvertisementLast week, the United States attorney’s office in Brooklyn filed charges against a Long Island investment adviser, Tibor Klein, and a lawyer from Virginia who was one of his clients, Robert M. Schulman, accusing them of illegally trading in advance of the acquisition of King Pharmaceuticals in 2010.AdvertisementMr. Schulman represented the company in patent litigation and is accused of telling Mr. Klein about the deal. He made more than $300,000 for himself and his clients — including $15,000 in Mr. Schulman’s account — along with tipping another broker who gained in excess of $100,000 from trading.The oddity in the case is that Mr. Klein and the other broker were named by the S.E.C. in a lawsuit filed in Florida in 2013. In the suit, Mr. Schulman is mentioned as the source of the information. But that agency’s complaint paints a different picture of how the information got out. It states that Mr. Schulman had a few glasses of wine and let spill about the King Pharmaceuticals acquisition by saying that “it would be nice to be King for a day,” which Mr. Klein then misappropriated from him to trade.The S.E.C.’s case was delayed until the conclusion of the criminal investigation, and it appears the Justice Department has a different view of Mr. Schulman’s role. A news release issued by the Justice Department asserts that the defendants violated the law “to satisfy their appetite for money,” portraying Mr. Schulman as a perpetrator rather than a victim. His lawyer said that “evidence at trial will show that my client is innocent.”The involvement of a lawyer and investment adviser may have been the impetus to pursue criminal charges because both have a fiduciary duty to maintain the confidentiality of client information.The challenge is that a one-time trading event involving questionable conduct during an evening of revelry that took place six years ago may be much more difficult to prove in a criminal case, which carries a higher burden of proof than the S.E.C. action.Earlier this month, federal prosecutors in Connecticut filed criminal charges, along with civil charges filed by the S.E.C., against a cardiologist, Edward J. Kosinski, accusing him of selling 40,000 shares in Regado Biosciences before it announced in 2014 the suspension of a drug trial on which he was a principal investigator. He was able to avoid a loss of roughly $160,000 when the stock dropped, and later bought put options before the company announced it was terminating the drug trial that generated $3,000 in profits. Dr. Kosinski is contesting the charges, his lawyer told Reuters.The case sounds similar to the prosecution of Mathew Martoma, a former trader at Steven A. Cohen’s hedge fund firm, whose well-timed recommendation to sell a pharmaceutical stock after receiving advanced notice about problems in a drug trial helped SAC Capital Advisors avoid more than $260 million in losses. A doctor conducting a drug trial had clear confidentiality requirements, so taking advantage of that position may be enough to push the case to the criminal side of the ledger.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But there is quite a difference between Mr. Cohen’s firm avoiding millions in losses through Mr. Martoma’s information and the $160,000 in losses avoided — along with a $3,000 gain — in Mr. Kosinski’s case.AdvertisementA case filed by the S.E.C. in June in Indiana accuses a former executive at SAP America with taking kickbacks for tipping a friend about an impending acquisition that resulted in profits of more than $545,000 when others received the information and traded on it. No criminal charges have been filed yet, although it is possible that prosecutors are taking their time before seeking an indictment.If a criminal case does not occur, however, then it raises the question about what criteria differentiates a case in which the S.E.C. acts alone against a corporate official accused of tipping others and one in which the Justice Department pursues a conviction. Figuring out why some cases result in criminal charges is made more difficult by the fact that prosecutors have broad discretion in deciding whether — and when — to file charges, and need not explain why one set of circumstances results in a criminal action.The amount involved could be one means to distinguish between more serious violations and those that usually result in a civil action. But if the real wrongdoing in insider trading is the damage to the investing public’s perception of the fairness of the markets, then the size of the trading seems to be irrelevant when the average daily volume on the major exchanges is billions of dollars and many cases are for trades generating far less than a million dollars in profits.One could look to the abuse of a professional position, like that of a lawyer or broker, as the reason that prosecutors might pursue criminal charges rather than just rely on the S.E.C. to police this area. Yet, insider trading requires proving a breach of a duty of trust and confidence to establish that there was a fraud to make it a violation of the securities laws. Showing that the defendant acted dishonestly by misusing access to confidential information is going to occur in virtually every case, so that hardly seems to be a workable basis to distinguish between those cases that deserve criminal prosecution and ones handled in only a civil proceeding.It could just be that federal prosecutors pursue insider trading because they make a splash in the media when they involve people one does not normally see having a brush with the law, like bankers, lawyers and even the occasional famous athlete. These types of cases are, if you will, sexy, grabbing public attention while not requiring a significant resource commitment from the Justice Department. The appeal of these cases is they can help show the government is policing the market for ordinary investors while punishing greedy traders, regardless of whether the transactions have any direct impact on investors.The cost of a criminal prosecution on the defendants can be significant, from the legal fees required to defend a case to the public opprobrium and collateral consequences that attach to a conviction. What makes one case more susceptible to a prosecution than another remains something of a mystery, which may be the best deterrent the Justice Department has to try to prevent insider trading.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »