AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra AlterRonald D. Boire, the chief executive of Barnes & Noble, is leaving the company after a tumultuous tenure that lasted a little less than a year, the bookstore chain announced on Tuesday.Mr. Boire is the third chief executive to leave the troubled company in just three years, after Michael P. Huseby, who resigned in July 2015 and became executive chairman of Barnes & Noble Education and received $10.5 million severance payment, and William Lynch, who stepped down in July 2013.In a terse statement that lacked any attempt at corporate spin, the company said that “the board of directors determined that Mr. Boire is not a good fit for the organization and that it was in the best interest of all parties for him to leave the company.” A spokeswoman declined to provide additional comment.Leonard Riggio, the company’s founder and executive chairman, who had planned to retire next month, is postponing that, and will lead the company along with other members of the executive management team until a successor to Mr. Boire is appointed.Mr. Boire’s sudden departure comes at a critical moment for Barnes & Noble, the country’s largest bookstore chain. In recent years, the company has been battered by Amazon’s rise as a leading bookseller and crippled by losses from its Nook e-reader division. Its fleet of retail stores has shrunk to 640 from 720 in the last six years.Mr. Boire, who previously worked in top posts at Sears Canada, Brookstone and Toys “R” Us, tried to transform Barnes & Noble by expanding its selection of games, toys, art supplies and music and by offering coding and 3D printing workshops. On corporate earnings calls, Mr. Boire often talked about how strong sales of coloring books and vinyl records were bolstering revenue.“Everything we do around learning, personal growth and development fits with our brand,” he said in an interview with The New York Times in December.There were some encouraging signs of stability. The company announced plans to open four new retail stores in the 2017 fiscal year.But the chain has still struggled to recover from its heavy investments in its Nook e-reader, a device that was meant to give it a foothold in the digital marketplace but ended up hemorrhaging money instead. Mr. Boire’s attempts to turn the company’s fortunes around have largely fallen short. In an earnings report for the final quarter of the current fiscal year, Barnes & Noble reported a loss of $30.6 million, or 42 cents a share, compared to losses of $19.4 million, or 37 cents a share, in the same period the previous year. Revenue dropped 3.7 percent to $876.7 million during the period, while Nook sales tumbled 20 percent.Perhaps most troubling, Barnes & Noble’s troubles have persisted even as many other physical book retailers, particularly independent bookstores, have flourished. Sales of books in physical stores grew 1.8 percent, to $4.15 billion, in 2015 compared to 2014, according to the Association of American Publishers. Print book sales have rebounded as well: revenues from hardcover books rose by 8.3 percent last year, while e-book unit sales fell by 9.7 percent.Advertisement