By AMIE TSANGAUG. 17, 2016
Is it the end of an era? The bids are in, and it looks as if Gawker has been sold to Univision, a Spanish-language network with an appetite for online offerings in English. If a bankruptcy judge approves the sale this week, Gawker will come under outside ownership.The gossipy, freewheeling company will join a much larger stable of publications at Univision that includes The Onion and The Root.Univision beat Ziff Davis with a $135 million bid, according to three people with direct knowledge of the deal. It will not assume the $140 million judgment that led to Gawker’s bankruptcy, and it is unclear whether the founder, Nick Denton, will remain with the company. (There have been indications he may be ready to step away.)Arrest of ‘Fixer’ May Expose Scandal Tied to Och-Ziff Samuel Mebiame was brazen and always made sure he got his cut of a deal. But his days as a “one-man show” securing mining concessions thanks to bribes to African officials are likely to be at an end after the F.B.I. arrested him in Brooklyn on Tuesday.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Mebiame, the son of a former prime minister of Gabon who worked as a consultant for a joint venture involving Och-Ziff Capital Management Group, is charged with bribing officials in at least three African countries. Och-Ziff had already disclosed that it was under investigation over whether it paid bribes in several countries, and told investors that it had set aside more than $400 million toward a potential settlement. Any enforcement action taken against it would be the most prominent in the hedge fund industry.AdvertisementBut that might not even be the last you’ll hear of the scandal. The Justice Department has promised a crackdown on foreign bribery cases and the criminal complaint against Mr. Mebiame referred to co-conspirators. There may well be more charges to come.AdvertisementOn the agenda The Federal Reserve will publish minutes from the Federal Open Market Committee’s July meeting at 2 p.m. Target and Cisco announce their quarterly results.Calls for Independence Ring Louder in Puerto Rico “We never controlled our own country,” says Rafael Cancel Miranda, a nationalist who opened fire on Congress in 1954 and is now a legend among young people at independence events. Puerto Rico’s financial woes and the mainland’s appointment of a board to oversee the island’s spending have done nothing to sway his belief.But now, other Puerto Ricans are increasingly coming around to his point of view.Politicians are questioning the island’s status as an “associated free state” with some even calling for a process of decolonization and accusing the federal board of being a “dictatorship.”Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.