By LIZ MOYERAUG. 16, 2016
A former senior trader at Goldman Sachs has agreed to pay $400,000 and be barred from the securities business for at least two years for misleading customers into paying more for residential mortgage-backed bonds in the years after the financial crisis.The former trader, Edwin Chin, was fired from Goldman in 2012, when he was running its residential mortgage-backed securities trading desk and was its most active trader in the securities.In his work, Mr. Chin negotiated transactions for hedge funds and other clients that were buying and selling the bonds, sometimes out of Goldman’s own holdings. Bonds like the ones Mr. Chin traded are not publicly listed, so transactions between buyers and sellers are negotiated with the help of a dealer. The bank makes money by selling bonds for more than it buys them, but a dealer can make that spread wider by taking advantage of the lack of pricing information in the market.In a civil settlement announced on Tuesday, the Securities and Exchange Commission said that Mr. Chin had repeatedly abused his duty as an intermediary to increase Goldman’s trading profits, and thus, indirectly, his own compensation. The S.E.C. said his activity reaped an extra $1.5 million in trading profit for the company. The S.E.C. said its investigation was continuing.AdvertisementFrom 2010 to 2012, according to the agency, Mr. Chin concealed the price at which Goldman bought various mortgage-backed bonds and resold them at higher prices, with the company keeping the difference.Advertisement“Investors purchasing these securities rely on dealers to be honest about the purchase price they paid,” said Michael J. Osnato Jr., the chief of the complex financial instruments unit of the agency’s enforcement division.A Goldman spokesman said the company fired Mr. Chin for the reasons stated in his regulatory records. Those records, kept by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, said he sold certain securities with the agreement of his manager and two weeks later repurchased some of them from another party without telling his manager.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Chin reached the settlement without admitting or denying wrongdoing. The monetary settlement includes a penalty of $150,000. His lawyer was not immediately available for comment.Prosecutors in Connecticut have tried to bring criminal cases tied to mispricing of bond sales but have had setbacks. In a prominent case, a federal appeals court in December overturned the 2014 conviction of a former Jefferies trader, Jesse C. Litvak.That case was returned to Federal District Court in New Haven for a new trial on securities fraud charges.Last year, the S.E.C. also accused a group former traders from Nomura Securities with misleading customers about bond prices.Mr. Chin joined Goldman in 2003 as an analyst and rose to prominence at the firm as a trader of residential mortgage-backed securities by 2011. He has the right to apply for re-entry after two years, according to the settlement.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.