
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

AUG. 17, 2016
Intel and Cisco Systems are facing divergent futures. Intel is swallowing its pride and licensing intellectual property from its chip-making rival ARM. Cisco is planning to cut 7 percent of its workers. Intel may have the strong hand.The outlook for last-generation tech companies is often grim as their products become commonplace, rivals find alternatives to problems and margins shrink.That is largely what ails Cisco. Virtual-networking software may be eroding demand for high-end hardware. Chinese rivals are competing fiercely. And revelations about American spying programs could be damaging sales of Cisco switches and routers overseas. Despite new investments, the company’s revenue is stagnant – often a sign of incipient problems, considering that hardware prices tend to fall steadily.Cutting workers is one way to forestall pain but, as IBM’s travails show, it is a temporary fix. Investing in other areas, as Cisco is in security, for example, has a chance of success, but it is hard to do enough to offset declines in a big core business.AdvertisementIntel may have the better recipe. Its problem is that PC and laptop sales are shrinking, while mobile device sales are on the rise. Nearly all phones and tablets use ARM chips, because they tend to be cheaper and use less power. Many servers run powerful Intel chips behind the scenes, but even that unit of Intel reported only pedestrian 5 percent annual growth in the second quarter.The big advantage for Intel, though, is that making chips requires enormous investment, and prices are still rising steadily. The company spent nearly $20 billion last year on research, development and capital expenditure. Making chips for other companies means it can reap more from these investments by operating its factories at closer to full capacity. Licensing ARM’s technology achieves that and gives Intel a slice of the growth in mobile devices.AdvertisementIntel probably will not maintain the margins from when it had a de facto monopoly on microprocessors for PCs. But the scale needed for chip making has reduced competition. There were about a dozen companies capable of making high-end microprocessors a decade ago. Now there are just four. Intel will probably still be inside for many years to come.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »