By AMIE TSANGAUG. 18, 2016
Who made money off Britain’s vote to leave the European Union? Funds that bet on drops in stocks and currencies (particularly the pound), that’s who. The rewards were high — for those willing to make a wager — and bets on the decision to leave, or “Brexit,” were dirt cheap.Many funds, however, knew they would have been skewered by investors had they lost money, so they avoided making outsize bets.After all, hedge funds have struggled with poor performance this year — Bridgewater appears to have slowed hiring, and Pershing Square recently fired a dozen employees.Investors are worried enough that they are pushing hedge funds to commit to a set rate of return before they can earn incentive fees, as The Financial Times reports. Some have to generate returns of 4 to 10 percent before they are paid.AdvertisementMystery Shoppers and Home Loans  The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has been raising eyebrows with its tactics, which involve sending “mystery shoppers” into a bank, according to The Wall Street Journal. These types of undercover operations are used much less in civil law enforcement cases than criminal investigations because government officials are supposed to identify themselves if seeking information from individuals.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The agency argues that it is seeking information that would be available to any member of the public and is not eliciting personal information. But critics continue to question its methods.AdvertisementIt would not be the only case where the bureau has been seen to overstep boundaries. Republican lawmakers have clashed with the agency over its efforts to impose federal standards on the payday loans market and limit the use of mandatory arbitration clauses. The party platform even refers to the bureau as a “rogue agency.”On the agenda The European Central Bank will publish the minutes from its last monetary policy meeting. Walmart will announce its quarterly earnings.Former Health Care Banker Convicted of Insider Trading In a twist on typical father-son relationships, a former banker at Perella Weinberg claimed in a trial that his father used him for insider trading. The former banker, Sean Stewart, said he merely discussed his work with his father, never realizing that he planned to trade on the information, as The F.T. reports.“My dad made some terrible mistakes,” he said. “He used me.”The jury in his insider trading trial, though, was not persuaded, and Mr. Stewart was found guilty on nine counts, including securities fraud. He passed tips about pending health care deals to his father, who traded on the information.This is the first criminal case to go to trial since the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan overturned the conviction of two hedge fund managers. At the time, it found insufficient evidence that the defendants knew about the benefits of the information they were providing.Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, had lamented that this raised the bar for conviction, but it seems that, at least in the case of Mr. Stewart, the bar has been reached.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.