By NATHANIEL POPPERAUG. 19, 2016
A troubling call came in to Morgan Stanley’s internal hotline in May 2010.One of the company’s top financial advisers in Mississippi, Steve Wyatt, was struggling with medications and was “not sleeping, coming in 3 and 4 a.m.,” his assistant said on the call, according to notes taken by the person who answered the phone. Mr. Wyatt, a broker, was also trading client money “erratically,” the assistant said.Morgan Stanley is one of the top banks on Wall Street, operating one of the most sophisticated financial advisory businesses in the world. But when the call came in, there was little effort to help fix the problems, Mr. Wyatt’s colleagues — and Mr. Wyatt himself — testified in arbitration.This was not the only time Morgan Stanley did not heed warnings about Mr. Wyatt, who managed tens of millions of dollars of customer money, according to a settlement this week and documents from arbitration cases against him and the company.During Mr. Wyatt’s five years at the company, supervisors and compliance officers noted his problematic behavior and business patterns many times and failed to step in, documents show. Lawyers for his former clients claim that they lost about half their money, or around $50 million.AdvertisementMr. Wyatt’s case, while involving just one broker, reveals the difficulty that even sophisticated companies can encounter in supervising their far-flung networks of brokers, who manage the retirement savings of millions of people nationwide.AdvertisementWall Street companies have been expanding into wealth management and brokerage services, as profits from other businesses have been under pressure from regulations imposed after the 2008 financial crisis. Morgan Stanley now has nearly 16,000 financial advisers, one of the largest such forces of any company.Mr. Wyatt, who oversaw more than $100 million in client money, was fired in 2012, more than two years after that phone call and after more concerns were raised.In an interview, Mr. Wyatt, now 44, described falling into depression and having suicidal feelings, set off by the chaos of the financial crisis and its aftermath. He said his supervisors never offered help or expressed concern. “If they thought I was suicidal, if they thought I was depressed, nobody mentioned anything to me — concerned or otherwise,” he said.This week, the Mississippi secretary of state said in a settlement with Morgan Stanley that it had “failed to reasonably supervise” Mr. Wyatt. “Clearly, they had warning signs — they had indications of personal issues,” Delbert Hosemann, the Mississippi secretary of state, said of Morgan Stanley. “All of those were either dealt with in a cursory manner or not dealt with at all.”The settlement barred Mr. Wyatt and his immediate supervisor from the securities industry for life. Morgan Stanley was also instructed to create a $4.2 million fund to reimburse clients, a small part of what customers claim they lost with Mr. Wyatt.Morgan Stanley did not admit or deny the accusations in the state settlement.The company is fighting dozens of Mr. Wyatt’s former clients in arbitration. It has said in legal documents that the clients were “negligent” for not following Mr. Wyatt more closely. In the three arbitration cases that have been decided so far, Morgan Stanley has had to pay about $3 million.James Wiggins, a spokesman for the company, said this week that many of Mr. Wyatt’s losses had resulted largely from the turmoil caused by the financial crisis.Advertisement“We take extremely seriously our responsibility for placing our clients’ interest first,” Mr. Wiggins said.The state settlement provides few details about the behavior that got Mr. Wyatt and Morgan Stanley into trouble. But closed testimony and thousands of pages of documents from the arbitration cases reviewed by The New York Times shed light on how the matter played out at the company.At one point, Mr. Wyatt’s behavior raised enough concern that Morgan Stanley supervisors stopped him from trading in his personal accounts. At the same time, the company allowed him to continue trading money he managed for clients.One of his colleagues in Mississippi said in closed arbitration testimony that she and others in the office were suffering from a “basic shock that nothing was happening to help Steve, help the clients, help the firm, help the office with what was going on,” according to a transcript.“The broker is a problem in this case,” said Joseph Peiffer, a lawyer representing some of Mr. Wyatt’s clients. “But the real problem is that he was allowed to do what he did by Morgan Stanley.”When Mr. Wyatt was brought to Morgan Stanley in 2007 by Fred Brister, the manager of the Ridgeland, Miss., branch, there were no black marks on his regulatory record from more than a decade at Smith Barney. Jessica Clarke, one of Mr. Wyatt’s customers at Morgan Stanley, said he was a gregarious salesman who won her account with his confidence. A “boy genius,” Ms. Clarke, 84, said.“I WILL MAKE YOU A PILE OF MONEY,” he wrote in an email to another client in 2007. “It ain’t gonna be easy and it may seem unorthodox at times but stay with me and do what I say.”The evidence now being used against Mr. Wyatt in arbitration began to pile up soon after he joined Morgan Stanley.AdvertisementIn his first year, he took the money in some of his clients’ accounts and put it in just two stocks — BlackBerry, the cellphone maker, and Valence, a battery maker that later went bankrupt. Four clients who went to arbitration last year saw their investments in both stocks fall more than 60 percent, according to their records.Morgan Stanley has said in legal documents that those stock trades were made in accounts that customers controlled. The customers said Mr. Wyatt rarely consulted them before trading and did not ask for approval on the big holdings of BlackBerry and Valence — behavior the Mississippi secretary of state also noted.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Less than a year after Mr. Wyatt arrived, the Morgan Stanley risk officer in the Mississippi branch had made a handwritten list of “Triggers on Steve” with 10 problems, including trade errors, high fees and significant losses.Fran Finch, another broker in the office, merged some of her clients with Mr. Wyatt’s when he joined Morgan Stanley, because of his apparent success in bringing in revenue. But she testified that in 2010 she took her clients away from Mr. Wyatt as his behavior and financial returns grew more erratic.Morgan Stanley’s compliance officials were also taking notice. “He’s obviously not paying attention to what he’s doing in his client’s accounts,” a compliance official from the company wrote in April 2010.It was two months later that Mr. Wyatt’s assistant, Debbie Dotson, called the human resources hotline to express her concerns.When Ms. Dotson did so, “management responded appropriately and discussed those concerns with Mr. Wyatt,” Mr. Wiggins, the Morgan Stanley spokesman, said. “That discussion had the desired results, and no subsequent concerns were raised.”Mr. Wyatt said in an interview and in arbitration testimony that he had no memory of his supervisors approaching him about his mental state or behavior.Two months after the call, Ms. Finch, the fellow broker, wrote to Mr. Brister, the branch supervisor, telling him he was not doing enough to manage the problems created by Mr. Wyatt. She wrote in the email that Mr. Wyatt was “incapacitated for reasons you are well aware.”AdvertisementA few months later, Mr. Wyatt bypassed Morgan Stanley’s controls and bought 60 percent of the outstanding shares of a small Israeli computer cable company, RiT, for his clients. The heavy concentration in a single stock set off a warning from Morgan Stanley’s compliance department.But despite email conversations about the need to crack down on Mr. Wyatt, he continued to buy shares of RiT for clients for months. Ultimately he acquired nearly all the company’s publicly available shares — which soon lost much of their value.“This was an unfortunate situation where it was missed by two layers of checking,” the local compliance manager testified in arbitration.In 2011, Morgan Stanley began an investigation of Mr. Wyatt’s behavior. That ended with a reprimand for buying stocks on behalf of customers without checking with them first, the Mississippi settlement said.Mr. Wyatt was fired in June 2012 when a lawyer representing one of his clients presented Morgan Stanley with evidence that he had been using a personal email address to push clients to buy investments that he held in his own private accounts.Since then, Mr. Wyatt said, he has been trying to restart his life outside the financial industry. His lawyers did not respond to questions about whether he could face liability in remaining arbitration cases.Mr. Brister continued as a supervisor at Morgan Stanley until this year. The Mississippi settlement says he retired last month. He could not be reached for comment.Ms. Clarke, the 84-year-old client of Mr. Wyatt, said she had assumed Morgan Stanley would reimburse her when she provided it with evidence of how Mr. Wyatt had, in just a few years, lost half of the money her husband left to her when he died.AdvertisementInstead, the company said in arbitration documents that it had “acted in good faith and without knowledge of any wrongdoing or improper activity” in Ms. Clarke’s account. Morgan Stanley said in the documents that Ms. Clarke and others knowingly signed up for an aggressive portfolio with Mr. Wyatt and bore the losses that come with that sort of strategy.Ms. Clarke said she did not remember being asked about what sort of investing strategy she wanted to pursue. She says she left that up to Mr. Wyatt.The settlement this week said that Morgan Stanley did little to check whether Mr. Wyatt’s trading strategies were consistent with his clients’ needs, or to verify the information about them that he put in the company’s database.Looking back, Ms. Clarke said she now recognizes that her mistake was to trust Mr. Wyatt, and to trust Morgan Stanley to monitor him. “I just never questioned that there’d be any monkey business,” she said in an interview. “I knew they were a well-known firm. It was a terrible shock to me.”The arbitration panel overseeing Ms. Clarke’s case — the first case to move forward against Mr. Wyatt — awarded her $150,000. Her account statements show a decline in value of about $700,000.A version of this article appears in print on August 21, 2016, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: Morgan Stanley Neglected Warnings on Broker.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.