AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerA firm that gathered intelligence inside the Washington Beltway for the benefit of its hedge fund customers agreed to pay a $375,000 penalty to the Securities and Exchange Commission over compliance failures.The agency said the firm, the Marwood Group, obtained potentially material nonpublic information twice in 2010 on policy issues or pending regulatory approvals from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and the Food and Drug Administration and failed to adequately guard against its distribution to clients.Marwood agreed to admit wrongdoing in the settlement, the S.E.C. said Tuesday. It will hire an independent compliance consultant.Michael McKeon, a spokesman for Marwood, said the firm cooperated in the four-year investigation.“We are pleased that this settlement finally puts this matter behind us,” he said. He added that the firm had taken steps to fix the issues. “As we look forward, we expect nothing less than to continue to provide the highest quality work to our clients.”The S.E.C. said the firm did not properly inform compliance officers about instances when its analysts received potentially material nonpublic information from government employees. Clients, including hedge funds, could use such information to make trades.“When political intelligence firms like Marwood Group obtain information from government employees, they must take the necessary steps to prevent the dissemination of potentially material nonpublic information obtained in the course of their research,” said Andrew J. Ceresney, the director of the S.E.C.’s enforcement division, in a statement on Tuesday.Edward Kennedy Jr. , the son of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, co-founded Marwood in 2002. He left the firm last year and is now a state senator in Connecticut.Marwood had internal policies that prohibited the dissemination of material nonpublic information, but its procedures for notifying compliance officers did not work.The S.E.C. said Marwood’s analysts failed to notify compliance officers when they thought they had information that needed to be vetted.Advertisement