
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

AUG. 18, 2016
Uber is steering its driverless vehicle technology toward a crash between robots and jobs. The private ride-hailing company, which was worth s $66 billion on Thursday, said that it had bought the autonomous big-rig start-up Otto and that it was unleashing driverless taxis in Pittsburgh. Putting computers instead of humans behind the wheel could save lives, but it would automate a task that employs millions of American workers. America’s safety net is ill-prepared for such a job-destroying juggernaut.Travis Kalanick, Uber’s chief executive, has made no secret of wanting to replace its chauffeurs with cars that can ferry passengers without driver input. Uber is not alone. From old-school car and truck manufacturers and parts makers to Silicon Valley interlopers like Tesla, Apple and Alphabet, dozens of companies are racing to develop driverless technology.Along with saving valuable time, fully autonomous vehicles could reduce traffic accidents by 90 percent or more, the Boston Consulting Group has estimated. That would avoid hundreds of billions of dollars in injuries, vehicle damage and lost productivity caused by traffic accidents, which kill more than 30,000 Americans each year.There is a big downside, though. Heavy trucking employs nearly two million people across the United States, with a median salary of over $40,000, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. That is about double what hundreds of thousands of others employed as taxi and limousine drivers make. Both industries are now firmly in Uber’s cross hairs.AdvertisementThe jobs might not disappear completely, of course. Moreover, shifting from today’s limited autonomy features like automatic braking and lane correction to truly self-driving vehicles across the country is a huge technology challenge that could take years and draw serious political resistance. Even in a fully autonomous world, freight haulers and livery services would still need mechanics and tech specialists to keep fleets rolling.Still, the threat is clear. And America’s threadbare social safety net and worker-retraining programs may struggle to support a mass retooling of skills. That would heap further pressure on working-class communities already reeling from the loss of more than five million manufacturing jobs over the last two decades.AdvertisementUber’s new partnerships are the latest sign that the push to driverless is accelerating. Policy makers and politicians should consider themselves forewarned.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »