By SYDNEY EMBERAUG. 18, 2016
In early 2014, The New York Times introduced an app called NYT Now that would provide a curated list of stories — for a lower price than a full digital subscription — to what it hoped would be a younger, mobile-savvy audience. Jill Abramson, then the executive editor of The Times, unveiled the app at the South by Southwest conference in Austin, Tex.On Thursday, The Times announced it was officially shelving NYT Now. The app will no longer be available to download starting the week of Aug. 29.NYT Now was among the first attempts by The Times to enhance its appeal to mobile users as it looked for new revenue sources that would offset drops in print advertising and circulation. By giving readers a curated subset of daily articles in a mobile-friendly, lower-priced package, The Times hoped to attract a broader audience that might otherwise not subscribe. The subscription price for NYT Now, $8 a month, was roughly half the price of the least expensive digital subscription.But the app never quite took off as The Times had hoped, and last year, it transitioned from subscription to free in the hopes that the new model might give The Times more of an opportunity to expand its audience.AdvertisementKinsey Wilson, the executive vice president for product and technology, said the decision to do away with NYT Now was driven in part by a shift in how the company thinks about broadening its audience. The Times, with the help of its audience development team, now looks more to third-party platforms like Facebook and Twitter to expand its reach among younger readers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That gave us a different ability to tap into younger audiences and to provide exposure to a much, much wider audience,” Mr. Wilson said.AdvertisementMany features of NYT Now — including morning and evening news briefings, bullet-point lists and a more conversational tone — have also been incorporated into The Times’s main news products, including the core mobile app, he said.At its peak, in May 2015, NYT Now had 334,000 total unique users. The app averaged 257,000 unique users in the last three months.NYT Now is not the first app The Times has retired. In 2014, it shut down NYT Opinion because it failed to gain much traction. (Among The Times’s other apps are its main news app, the popular free food app NYT Cooking and The Scoop, a Times guide to New York.)A version of this article appears in print on August 19, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Times Shuts Down the Curated News App NYT Now.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.