By SAM ROBERTSAUG. 19, 2016
Ronald DeLuca, who orchestrated the advertising campaign that spared the Chrysler Corporation from insolvency in the 1980s and transformed Lee Iacocca, the ailing automaker’s voluble chief executive, into a national brand himself, died on Tuesday in Oneonta, N.Y. He was 91.The cause was complications of myelodysplastic syndrome, his grandson Mark Lotto said.Mr. DeLuca and Mr. Iacocca forged a bond in 1967, when Mr. Iacocca was in the last phase of his 32-year career with the Ford Motor Company and Mr. DeLuca was a creative director at Kenyon & Eckhardt. Almost exactly the same age — Mr. DeLuca was 13 days younger — both men were born in Pennsylvania, sons of Italian immigrants.In 1978, when Mr. Iacocca joined Chrysler at a salary of $1 a year to salvage the company, which was nearly bankrupt, he wooed Kenyon & Eckhardt away from its $75 million account with Ford.“There was a certain amount of risk involved,” Mr. DeLuca told The New York Times in 1992. “The risk was that our company would go down the drain.”AdvertisementLeo-Arthur Kelmenson, the Kenyon & Eckhardt chairman, conceived an advertising campaign that persuaded Congress to approve a $1.5 billion federal loan guarantee package for Chrysler in 1980. It made Mr. Iacocca America’s most famous car salesman.AdvertisementMr. Kelmenson gave credit to Mr. DeLuca.“Ron has been running all of the automotive and is the guy most responsible for Chrysler’s success, Mr. Kelmenson said in 1984. He died in 2011.As Mr. Iacocca recalled, “It was time to advertise our cause instead of our cars.” He and Mr. DeLuca worked together on what he called a “paid P.R.” campaign.“We exposed some of the more prevalent myths about Chrysler,” Mr. Iacocca wrote (with William Novak) in his best-selling 1984 memoir, “Iacocca.” “We were not building gas guzzlers. We were not asking Washington for a handout. Loan guarantees for Chrysler did not constitute a dangerous precedent.”He continued: “The ads were unusually straightforward and frank. Ron took an aggressive approach, which I liked very much. We knew all too well what the man on the street was thinking about Chrysler, so we tried to put ourselves in his place and anticipate his questions and doubts.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In all, scores of ads — in print and on television — were produced for the company’s K-car line and other models. In television commercials, Mr. Iacocca sported aviator glasses as he walked the factory floor, wagging his finger and challenging viewers with the lines, “Would America be better off without Chrysler?” and “If you can find a better car, buy it.”His campaign for Chrysler included a star-studded cast. Frank Sinatra, Gregory Peck, Bill Cosby, Angie Dickinson, Ernest Borgnine, Johnny Cash and Sally Struthers were among those who reminded prospective customers that Chrysler was desperately competing with foreign carmakers. “America’s not going to be pushed around any more,” they would declare, working for scale, $275 a day.“We had to register our message in a hurry,” Mr. DeLuca said. “We think celebrities help make our pitch more emotional, more immediate.”Cono DeLuca was born on Oct. 28, 1924, in Reading, Pa., the son of Nicholas DeLuca, a foreman for the Reading Railroad, and the former Grace Carabello. His mother spoke no English, and when she accompanied him on his first day of school, his teacher wrote down his name as Ronald.AdvertisementAfter attending Pratt Institute in New York, he graduated with a bachelor of fine arts degree from Syracuse University in 1950. He married the former Lois Hall. Besides his grandson Mr. Lotto and his wife, Lois, he is survived by his daughters, Diane, Patricia, Maria and Lisa DeLuca and Christine DeLuca Lotto; his son, Nick; his brothers, Nate and Tony; 10 other grandchildren; and four great-grandchildren.Mr. DeLuca was later an art director at Bozell Inc. before rising to vice chairman. He retired in 1991, though he continued to be a Chrysler consultant. After he retired, he helped found the Hancock Education Foundation, based in Hancock, N.Y. Serving the state’s Southern Tier, it runs academic programs and awards scholarships.Mr. DeLuca once recalled that when Mr. Kelmenson decided to abandon the Ford account in 1978, some Madison Avenue competitors were stunned. “But Leo and the rest of us believed in Iacocca,” Mr. DeLuca said. “It turned out to be a good deal.”An obituary on Saturday about the advertising executive Ronald DeLuca misspelled the name of the city in Pennsylvania where he was born and the railroad for which his father worked. They are both Reading, not Redding.A version of this article appears in print on August 20, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Ronald DeLuca, 91; Helped Revive Iacocca’s Chrysler.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.