AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Kevin AllisonIgnoring an approach from a pipeline rival could stir an activist hornets’ nest at the Williams Companies. The company, a $21 billion pipeline operator fresh off a failed merger with Energy Transfer, chose not to respond to an offer from the larger Enterprise Products Partners this summer, Reuters reported on Thursday. The rebuff all but invites two investors who joined a board exodus in June to lobby again to oust Alan Armstrong, the Williams chief executive.The value and precise timing of the Enterprise approach remain unclear. But the interest comes during a period of upheaval at Williams, which agreed to be taken over by Energy Transfer last year. The would-be buyer got cold feet after oil prices crashed, and it walked away on a technicality in June.Shortly afterward, six of Williams’s 13 directors, including the chairman, quit the board after an effort to topple Mr. Armstrong failed. Among the departures were two activists, Keith Meister of Corvex Management and Eric Mandelblatt of Soroban Capital. They held onto their stakes in the company and between them own almost 7 percent.Mr. Armstrong, who has since revealed a new go-it-alone strategy for Williams, might have had good cause to ignore an opportunistic, possibly lowball, bid. Williams’s shares have rallied 35 percent since early July during a recovery in oil prices, presumably wiping out any premium the $55 billion Enterprise may have offered. Its new suitor’s stock has fallen 8 percent, which may well limit its appetite to engage further.Williams’s shares rose nearly 8 percent on Thursday after the approach came to light, though, suggesting shareholders are at least excited by the prospect of Williams ceasing to be an independent company. Crucially, they have until next week to nominate new director candidates before the company’s annual meeting at the end of November. A more receptive board might stand a better chance of persuading Enterprise to return to the table.Corvex has already urged Williams to revamp its board with a majority of new directors within a year. The Enterprise revelations, combined with the activists’ history with the current boss, mean it would not be a huge surprise if Mr. Armstrong ended up facing another fight for his own survival.Advertisement