AdvertisementSupported byLettersTo the Editor:I was left wanting more by the article on the travails of NRG in moving to more renewable energy (“The Messy Business of Clean Power,” Aug. 14).There was no mention of the wind power potentially available off our coastlines. Did NRG bid on any of the leases that were available? If not, why not?Additionally, descriptions of the profitability of oil and gas made no mention of government subsidies, which solar and wind do not enjoy. Perhaps if those subsidies were dropped and like-to-like cost comparisons were done, the investors would change their tune.Continued pollution is not a growth model for the power companies, nor is it sustainable for our survival.Robert KellerArlington, Va., Aug. 15To the Editor:NRG’s new chief executive, Mauricio Gutierrez, claims, “Our industry is going through massive transformation, the likes of which we’ve never seen.”But we actually have seen an energy transformation before, in the 19th century. Fossil-fuel-powered engines replaced animal (including human) labor during the Industrial Revolution.In the 21st century, this time facing climate change and species extinction (including our own), we need to be smart and clean up two messes: the planetary earth atmosphere and the global market economy. The smartest start: a progressive price on carbon.Katheryn VenturelliPasadena, Calif., Aug. 15To the Editor:Re: “When Your Life Insurance Gets Sick” (Aug. 14):As a financial adviser of 49 years, I feel that you shortchanged your readers with your “Woe is me, can’t do anything about my situation” attitude toward universal life policies and long-term care policies.Yes, premiums are being raised and nobody likes that. But with universal life you can normally decrease the face amount of a policy to have some coverage last longer. You may be able to get a quote from a different company, using the cash value of your old policy. On the long-term care side, you can increase your waiting period, reduce your daily room rate or reduce or remove the inflation feature of your policy to keep your premium tolerable.Talk with a good agent. “Woe is me” won’t get you anywhere, and you’ll end up without the coverage you need.Bruce WoodruffWinter Park, Fla., Aug. 17Letters for Sunday Business may be sent to sunbiz@nytimes.com.Advertisement