By CHRISTINE NEGRONIAUG. 21, 2016
Your plane reached its destination along with your checked bags.But that doesn’t mean the luggage will necessarily proceed swiftly to the baggage carousel — as Delta Air Lines travelers recently found on a Saturday night at the domestic terminal at Kennedy International Airport in New York.While people from various incoming flights milled around at Carousel 10, those from Flight 2262 from Los Angeles waited an hour for their bags to appear.Despite all the improvements in the way checked bags are tracked, various factors can still cause delays.Electrical storms around the airport, for example, will keep bag handlers indoors until the lightning subsides, slowing delivery of bags to the terminal. That, in turn, can cause backups in unloading newly arriving planes.Advertisement“We still have to have the crews on the ground to move bags,” said Ashton Morrow, a Delta spokeswoman. She said irregular operations because of weather were responsible for the holdup on moving the bags from Flight 2262.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Normally, passengers can expect to see their checked bags anywhere from 15 to 45 minutes after arrival, according to Nick Gates, a director at SITA, an aviation technology company. An airport’s size, passenger capacity and the degree of modernization in its bag handling all play a role.AdvertisementDelta promises that checked bags will be delivered to the carousel in 20 minutes on all domestic flights, or the airline will pay affected customers with frequent flier miles.Travel apps offered by Delta, as well as American Airlines, are linked to their baggage-tag tracking systems. But while an app can eliminate uncertainty about a bag’s whereabouts, when something goes wrong after arrival, it can’t eliminate the wait.“We’re trying to avoid that feeling standing at bag claim and the last bag goes by, where you’re saying, ‘Where is my bag?’” Ms. Morrow explained. “It really does take out a little of the stress when you know where your bag is.”A version of this article appears in print on August 23, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: The Plane’s on Time. Why Isn‘t the Bag?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.