AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere’s what to expect in the week ahead:TECHNOLOGYHewlett-Packard is a much smaller company than it was a year ago because management split off its corporate computing businesses. But it is still the world’s second-largest maker of personal computers (after Lenovo of China), and the biggest PC printer company. On Wednesday, HP will disclose financial results for the first nine months of the fiscal year, a time when it has struggled to come out with innovative new PC designs. There are signs it is succeeding: Last month, consultants at the research firm IDC said HP shipped 5 percent more personal computers in the first six months of 2016 than it had a year earlier, despite an overall declining market for PCs. HP’s stock, however, has barely budged from last November. If PC and printer sales don’t pick up, leadership may soon announce moves into adjacent markets. Quentin HardyECONOMYOn Wednesday, the National Association of Realtors will report the figures for existing home sales in July. Economists expect a slight decline in the pace of transactions, with the rate of annual sales falling slightly to 5.53 million from 5.57 million in June. Over all, the real estate market remains healthy in most parts of the country, buoyed by low mortgage rates and steady hiring. Nelson D. SchwartzAUTOMAKERSParties involved in a settlement between Volkswagen and car owners affected by its emissions cheating scandal will update a federal judge on Thursday on the progress of their discussions over the deal’s details. Volkswagen, which is also under criminal investigation by the Justice Department, is expected to provide further details on plans to fix hundreds of thousands of diesel vehicles as part of its $14.7 billion settlement. Hiroko TabuchiECONOMYOn Thursday, the Commerce Department will release the latest data on durable goods orders in July. Economists are looking at an increase of 3.5 percent over all, led by increased demand for aircraft and stronger defense orders. The core durable goods category, which excludes the volatile transportation sector, is expected to show a rise of 0.2 percent. Business investment has been weak, which has depressed durable goods demand, although the manufacturing sector has been showing signs of life lately. Nelson D. SchwartzRETAILThe high-end jewelry retailer Tiffany & Company will report second-quarter earnings on Thursday, and analysts are expecting sales to be down as the company has been struggling to attract younger shoppers in a challenging luxury environment. Net earnings fell 17 percent to $87 million last quarter, which was the company’s first quarter of 2016. Rachel AbramsECONOMYJanet L. Yellen, chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, is scheduled to speak on Friday at the Fed’s annual symposium in Jackson Hole, Wyo. — a meeting that she missed last year. Listeners will be parsing her words attentively as they determine whether the central bank will perhaps raise interest rates in September, with some economists saying that strong employment reports offer a solid basis for action. Others say that a wider and more mixed view of the economy argues in favor of waiting. The Fed last raised rates in December, after leaving them low for almost a decade. Phyllis KorkkiAdvertisement