By WILLIAM GRIMESAUG. 22, 2016
George E. Curry, who turned Emerge into a provocative, must-read newsmagazine for black readers in the 1990s and who, as the editor in chief of the National Newspaper Publishers Association, wrote a weekly column carried by more than 200 black newspapers, died on Saturday in Takoma Park, Md. He was 69.The cause was a heart attack, his sister Charlotte Purvis said.Mr. Curry, a longtime reporter for The St. Louis Post-Dispatch and The Chicago Tribune, became editor in chief of Emerge, founded in 1989, after Black Entertainment Television acquired a majority interest in the magazine in 1993.He immediately shifted the emphasis from entertainment to news, hired new staff members with journalism backgrounds, attracted contributors from top newspapers and magazines, and came up with a new motto: “Black America’s Newsmagazine.” He told Washington City Paper that he wanted readers to “think of us as a black Time or Newsweek, or, better yet, think of them as a white Emerge.”Emerge covered subjects like policing in the black community, the effect of the Nafta trade agreement on black Americans and Supreme Court cases involving affirmative action. It printed “Kemba’s Nightmare,” Reginald Stuart’s 17-page article about a young black college student, Kemba Smith, whose romance with a drug dealer led to a 24-year prison sentence for conspiracy to traffic in cocaine. President Bill Clinton pardoned Ms. Smith in 2000.AdvertisementThe magazine caused an uproar in 1993 when it depicted Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court justice, on the cover wearing an Aunt Jemima-style kerchief on his head. Unrepentant, Mr. Curry returned to the same subject in 1996, this time showing Justice Thomas on the cover as a lawn jockey and, on an inside page, shining the shoes of Justice Antonin Scalia. In an editor’s note, he accused Justice Thomas of turning back the clock on civil rights.George Edward Curry was born on Feb. 23, 1947, in Tuscaloosa, Ala. His father, Homer Lee Curry, was an alcoholic who abandoned the family when George was 7. He was raised by his mother, Martha Brownlee, who worked as a domestic, and his stepfather, William Henry Polk, who drove a dump truck for the University of Alabama.He became interested in journalism early on, inspired, in a perverse way, by the local paper, The Tuscaloosa News. “In the eighth grade, I knew I could write better than that,” he told Presstime magazine in 1988.AdvertisementHe was the sports editor of the school newspaper at Druid High School and at Knoxville College, a historically black school, where he was quarterback of the football team. He graduated from Knoxville with a degree in history in 1970.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Curry worked for Sports Illustrated for two years before The Post-Dispatch hired him as a general-assignment reporter in 1972. One of his colleagues and close friends at the newspaper was Gerald M. Boyd, who later became the managing editor of The New York Times. In 1977, Mr. Curry and Mr. Boyd founded the Greater St. Louis Association of Black Journalists.Mr. Curry became the Washington correspondent for The Chicago Tribune in 1983 and was later the newspaper’s New York bureau chief.Under his editorship, Emerge reached a circulation of 170,000, more than respectable for a public-affairs magazine, but it struggled to turn a profit and printed its last issue in 2000.After the magazine shuttered, he was named editor in chief of the National Newspaper Publishers Association, a trade association for black newspapers, for which he wrote a weekly syndicated column on current events, public affairs and the press.He left the association in 2007 but returned in 2012 and served three more years. At the time of his death, he was raising money to start an online version of Emerge.In addition to his sister Charlotte, Mr. Curry, who lived in Laurel, Md., is survived by his companion, Elizabeth Ragland, known as Ann; his mother; two other sisters, Sylvia Polk and Susan Gandy; a son, Edward; and a granddaughter.He was the author of “Jake Gaither: America’s Most Famous Black Coach” (1977), about the celebrated football coach at Florida A&M University, and the editor of the anthology “The Best of Emerge Magazine” (2003).A version of this article appears in print on August 23, 2016, on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: George Curry, 69; A Pioneer of Print Media.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.