AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.3 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.44 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.27 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Board of Education, $175 million of refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida, $158 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Connecticut Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $53.9 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Kane County Forest Preserve, Ill., $65.9 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Beaumont Independent School District, Tex., $140.1 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Portland First Lien Sewer, Ore., $155.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Portland Second Lien Sewer, Ore., $165.8 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Illinois, $150 million of sales tax A revenue bonds. Competitive.Illinois, $60 million of sales tax B revenue bonds. Competitive.Illinois, $164.3 million of sales tax C revenue bonds. Competitive.Illinois, $198.6 million of sales tax D revenue bonds. Competitive.Massachusetts, $284.6 million of general obligation limited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Massachusetts, $550 million of general obligation limited tax bonds. Competitive.North Texas Municipal Water District, $95.9 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Pennsylvania Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $273.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.California Health Facilities Financing Authority, $270.8 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler.California Health Facilities, $497.8 million of Providence St. Joseph Health debt securities. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Commerce City, Colo., $60 million of sales and use tax revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Community Development Administration, Maryland Department of Housing and Community Development, $328.3 million of residential revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan.Dallas County, $170 million of general obligation bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Eastern Municipal Water District, Calif., $131.5 million of water and wastewater revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Eugene, Ore., $116.5 million of electric utility system revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Florida Housing Finance Corporation, $100 million of homeowner mortgage revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Fort Myers, Fla., $50 million of capital improvement revenue bonds. Raymond James.Illinois Finance Authority, $115.9 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Johnson County Unified School District No. 233, Kan., $60.7 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Judson Independent School District, Tex., $329 million of unlimited tax building and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Laredo, Tex., $51.6 million of tax and revenue certificates of obligation, property finance contractual obligations, international toll bridge system revenue refinancing bonds and sports venue sales tax revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Laredo, Tex., $80.4 million of waterworks and sewer system revenue improvement and refinancing bonds. Jefferies L.L.C.Lee County, Fla., $66.9 million of solid waste system revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Long Beach Community College District, Calif., $71.8 million of 2016 election general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.New Hope Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, Tex., $50.7 million of retirement facility revenue bonds. Ziegler.New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $189.2 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Northern Illinois Municipal Power Agency, $249.8 million of power project revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Phoenix, $232.2 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Premier Health Partners, $300 million of hospital revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Public Finance Authority, $113.4 million of education revenue bonds. BB&T.Public Utility District No. 1 of Clark County, Wash., $101.4 million of electric system revenue and refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Redwood City School District, Calif., $60 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.San Mateo Union High School District, Calif., $136 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Texas Public Finance Authority, $52.6 million of Texas Southern University revenue financing system bonds. Mesirow Financial.Texas Public Finance Authority, $83.3 million of revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. Loop Capital Markets.The Hospital Facility Authority of Deschutes County, Ore., $111.9 million of hospital revenue bonds. Wells Fargo.The Water Works Board of Birmingham, Ala., $423.9 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Toledo, Ohio, $65.7 million of water system revenue improvement and refinancing bonds. William Blair.Advertisement