By LESLIE PICKERNOV. 24, 2015
It took a sweetened $2.5 billion cash-and-stock bid, representing more than a 77 percent premium, for the chip maker Microsemi Corporation to finally convince PMC-Sierra to be acquired.PMC’s board saw the latest Microsemi proposal as more superior to the $2 billion all-cash offer that Skyworks proposed Oct. 5, enabling PMC to break its agreement with Skyworks.The love triangle between PMC and larger players, Microsemi and Skyworks, is part of a sweeping consolidation in the semiconductor industry. Chip makers are needing to scale up for customers that want to cut down on the number of suppliers. The mergers have also enabled chip makers to cut costs – in Microsemi and PMC’s case, they anticipate synergies of more than $100 million annually.In May, Avago Technologies agreed to acquire Broadcom for $37 billion, one of the biggest deals for a chip maker. Several months earlier, NXP Semiconductors spent almost $12 billion for Freescale Semiconductor.AdvertisementMicrosemi agreed to acquire PMC for $9.22 in cash and 0.0771 of a share of Microsemi stock for each share of PMC, a 77 premium to the stock price on Sept. 30. The raised offer came after PMC-Sierra rejected Microsemi’s original offer of $8.75 in cash and 0.0736 of Microsemi stock for each share of PMC, representing a $2.4 billion transaction value.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As we integrate the team and drive profitability, our combined company will benefit from increased scale, industry-leading margins, diversified market exposure, consolidated infrastructure and substantial cost savings,” said James J. Peterson, Microsemi’s chairman and chief executive.Microsemi offers semiconductor products for the communications, military, aerospace and industrial markets, while PMC makes chips and software for networks that connect and store big data.The deal is expected to close in the first quarter of 2016.AdvertisementMicrosemi received financial advice from Stifel and legal advice from O’Melveny & Myers. Qatalyst Partners and Needham served as financial advisers to PMC, while Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom were legal advisers. Morgan Stanley is providing financing for the transaction to Microsemi.A version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Chips Consolidation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.