By BEN SISARIOAUG. 24, 2016
Last fall, Questlove, of the Roots, visited Pandora Media’s headquarters in Oakland, Calif., for what he assumed would be a perfunctory outreach meeting. Pandora, the internet radio giant, was one of several digital music outlets then trying to curry favor with him, Questlove said.But the meeting turned surprisingly productive once Tim Westergren, Pandora’s co-founder, showed him the company’s Music Genome Project, its system for categorizing songs by hundreds of precise musical attributes. Intrigued by a technology company that was as obsessive about the fundamentals of music as he was, Questlove immediately began discussing new projects with Mr. Westergren, who later brought him on as a strategic adviser and Pandora’s first artist ambassador.“I went in there to talk about playlists, and I ended up with a job as an equity partner,” Questlove, whose real name is Ahmir Thompson, said in an interview.The first fruit of the partnership is “Questlove Supreme,” a weekly radio show that will debut on Sept. 7. A three-hour program with wide-ranging playlists and guests including the actress Maya Rudolph and the singer Kimbra, “Questlove Supreme” shows off its host’s eclectic tastes; he describes the show as an extension of the music courses he teaches at New York University and “the black nerd version of NPR.”AdvertisementFor Pandora, which has clashed with the music industry in the past, the involvement of an authority like Questlove — whose group is the house band on NBC’s “The Tonight Show” — is an important endorsement as the company embarks on its biggest challenge yet: expanding its service beyond radio to compete directly with Spotify, Apple Music and Tidal.“We are entering into a new phase for the company,” Mr. Westergren said. “We are working more directly with labels and artists. We really want to invest a lot in that nexus, and having someone like him bridge that and speak on our behalf is really powerful.”Pandora, which began in 2005 and went public in 2011, has long been the most popular internet radio service, and it is one of a handful of digital music brands that have become household names. But its growth has slowed as it has faced more pressure from streaming competitors. Pandora’s number of average monthly listeners reached its peak at the end of 2014, at 81.5 million.AdvertisementTo turn itself around, Pandora made a string of acquisitions last year, including the data analytics firm Next Big Sound, the ticketing company Ticketfly, and the assets of Rdio, a bankrupt on-demand streaming service. With its stock price slumping, in March the company replaced its chief executive, Brian P. McAndrews, with Mr. Westergren, and for much of the year the company faced steady pressure from investors to sell.“Pandora is in a difficult chapter,” said Mark Mulligan, a digital media analyst with Midia Research. “Wall Street doesn’t like mature growth stories in young tech companies. It expects to see a dynamic growth and expansion story.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pandora plans to introduce a multitiered new service that, in addition to its basic radio version, will add levels of on-demand access — the ability for customers to listen to any song they want — for prices of up to $10 a month. The company is expected to introduce these levels in the fall, when it may also face new competition from Amazon.To stand out, services like Apple and Tidal are competing for exclusive content from stars like Beyoncé and Frank Ocean, and Apple has also set up an internet radio station, Beats 1. On Pandora, Questlove will play the part of the expert curator, selecting songs for his show and expounding on them at length in the casually professorial style that fans have come to expect from his social media posts and appearances in music documentaries.For his first show, with Ms. Rudolph — the former “Saturday Night Live” cast member whose mother was the singer Minnie Riperton (“Lovin’ You”) — Questlove led a brief but enlightening conversation on the perhaps overlooked history of children in inspirational 1970s soul songs. To prepare for each show, Questlove said, he goes through about 200 songs.“This is a commitment deeper than any girlfriend I’ve ever had,” he said, “or any diet I’ve tried to stick to.”The other side of Questlove’s involvement with Pandora is his role as ambassador, which will include evangelizing for the service among fellow artists. In its earlier days, Pandora stayed largely independent of the music industry, relying on statutory licensing processes rather than dealing with record labels, which has sometimes resulted in ill will over royalties. Last year, Pandora reported that it paid $610 million, or about 52 percent of its revenue, in royalties and related costs.These days, Pandora is eager to promote the marketing platforms it makes available to artists, such as audio messages that can be delivered to fans and detailed data about the popularity of particular songs. When asked, Questlove said he initially had some hesitation about working with Pandora given its past conflicts with music world, but said he was confident that the company paid its royalty obligations properly and that part of his job would be to speak up for musicians in the company.Mr. Westergren said he was “very open to a candid assessment of how artists think about it.”Questlove said he was most excited about the possibilities of producing a radio show that would open listeners’ eyes to more than just the biggest and most heavily promoted pop. That plan, he said, was clear from when Pandora first asked what his dream radio show would be.“I want a world in which Drake’s ‘One Dance’ can also live with Frank Zappa’s ‘Uncle Meat’ can live with James Brown’s ‘Talkin’ Loud and Sayin’ Nothing,’” Questlove said, “and all stops in between.”A version of this article appears in print on August 25, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Pandora Seeks a Way Out of the Internet Radio Doldrums. Cue Questlove.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.