AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangThe Securities and Exchange Commission has been scrutinizing private equity for several years, concerned that firms are not always transparent with their investors.They’ve had plenty to chew on, but it seems the misbehavior has continued nevertheless.On Tuesday, the S.E.C. fined Apollo Global Management about $53 million over accusations the firm misled investors on two issues and failed to supervise a senior executive suspected of misconduct. The executive was caught “improperly charging personal items and services” to Apollo funds, the S.E.C. said. The Financial Times identified the executive as Ali Rashid, a former partner.It seems to fit a pattern.“A common theme in our recent enforcement actions against private equity firms is their failure to properly disclose fees and conflicts of interest to fund investors,” said Andrew J. Ceresney, the S.E.C.’s head of enforcement.Apollo now joins a list of around 10 private equity firms that have faced S.E.C. action, including Blackstone and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company.Is there anything worse than a once-promising relationship falling apart?It was a different world when Lyondell Chemical and Basell AF merged. A more innocent time, before the financial crisis. The merger market was still bubbly, and Basell borrowed the entire $12.5 billion it paid to buy out Lyondell shareholders, as well as pay for fees and debt refinancing.What was the harm? After all, together, they would create the world’s third-largest chemical company.The shareholders, thinking the deal was done, took their money and went on their way.But barely a year into their new relationship, disaster struck.LyondellBasell entered bankruptcy just 13 months after the purchase was completed and the bankruptcy trustee is pursuing everyone in sight.The banks were sued, accused of mistreating junior creditors. The founder of Basell’s owner who orchestrated the deal was also sued. And now the trustee is demanding repayment from shareholders, too.As far as Deal Professor Steven Davidoff Solomon is concerned, asking innocent shareholders to repay money the banks lent is a bit absurd. But there could be longer-term consequences for future buyouts, possibly making it harder for private equity firms to buy companies.Turing Pharmaceuticals just cannot seem to escape controversy.The company attracted public fury when it sharply raised the price of a decades-old drug. Then its unrepentant founder, Martin Shkreli, stepped down as chief executive after being arrested on securities fraud and wire fraud charges. Turing itself is under scrutiny from the New York attorney general and the Federal Trade Commission.Now, Nancy Retzlaff, its chief commercial officer, has filed a federal complaint in which she accuses another Turing founder of sexual assault. Edwin Urrutia, the co-founder, resigned after an internal investigation, but Ms. Retzlaff says company leaders retaliated against her.Ms. Retzlaff said she had been a candidate for chief executive and had been promised restricted stock in the company. But after Mr. Urrutia left, she says that she was told she would not be eligible for either. She also accuses Mr. Shkreli of sexist and vulgar behavior that set the tone for the office.HP announces quarterly results and the National Association of Realtors publishes data on existing home sales for July.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement