By BROOKS BARNESAUG. 23, 2016
LOS ANGELES — A leadership change at the 20th Century Fox movie studio will happen sooner than expected, with Jim Gianopulos stepping down as chairman and chief executive on Sept. 1 instead of next June, as previously announced.To his displeasure, Mr. Gianopulos, 64, was effectively edged aside this spring by the studio’s corporate parent, 21st Century Fox. The media conglomerate said in June that Stacey Snider, 55, the studio’s co-chairwoman, would succeed Mr. Gianopulos when his contract expired on June 30, 2017.Now, the succession plan has been expedited, which could affect other movie studios. Mr. Gianopulos, an experienced and well-regarded film executive who is known to want to continue his career, is considered a candidate to run or help run one of several troubled film companies.He was traveling on Tuesday and unavailable for an interview, Chris Petrikin, a Fox spokesman said. In a news release from 21st Century Fox announcing the new timeline, Mr. Gianopulos said, in part, “I will miss the place where I have spent the majority of my career, and I wish everyone at Fox the best of success, health and happiness.”Mr. Gianopulos spent 25 years at the studio, 16 of them in the corner office.His departure frees Ms. Snider, an experienced movie executive who came to Fox in 2014 after leaving Steven Spielberg’s DreamWorks Studios. A long transfer of power may have made sense on paper, but movie industry players — agents, in particular — do not like not knowing precisely who calls the shots. Fox also has a stable of strong-willed movie executives who, at times, have tried to undercut Ms. Snider, who can now begin building a management team.Fox has had a difficult run at the box office. While “Deadpool” was a smash hit early this year, summer films like “Independence Day: Resurgence,” “Ice Age: Collision Course” and “X-Men: Apocalypse” have been duds. Coming up, Fox has high hopes for “Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children,” set for release on Sept. 30, and “The Birth of a Nation,” due in theaters on Oct. 7 from its art house label.A version of this article appears in print on August 24, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: 20th Century Fox Expedites a Change of Leadership.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.