AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonLyondell Chemical and Basell AF completed their merger nearly nine years ago. Yet today, former shareholders of Lyondell face the possibility that a new court ruling could force them to pay back money — all $12.5 billion of it.Several such clawback cases over buyouts that were hammered out in the years before the financial crisis but later failed have resulted in thousands of shareholders now fighting to keep the money that was paid out to them.It had seemed so different at the time. In July 2007, with the merger market still a bit bubbly, the more than $20 billion leveraged buyout of Lyondell was announced. Basell borrowed the entire purchase price to create the third-largest chemical company in the world, paying $12.5 billion to shareholders and the rest in fees and debt refinancing.But the chemical industry soon spun into a decline, and in the financial crisis the combined company could simply not shoulder its debt. LyondellBasell entered bankruptcy in January 2009, only 13 months after the purchase was completed.With all that money at stake, the bankruptcy proceedings have been bitterly fought with the bankruptcy trustee — the person appointed to oversee the debtor’s estate — pursuing everyone in sight.The big banks — Citigroup, Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch — were sued, accused of mistreating junior creditors. They settled for $450 million in cash and notes. Len Blavatnik, the Russian-born founder of Basell’s owner who orchestrated the deal, was also sued. Not content with big fish, the bankruptcy trustee turned on Lyondell’s old shareholders.In three lawsuits, the trustee argued that the sale of Lyondell was a fraudulent transfer. Dating to England in the 1500s, this is a principle that tries to prevent a debtor from simply transferring their assets to avoid payment of a debt. In its various forms, the doctrine voids transfers made with the intent to defraud creditors like the banks and others who lent over $20 billion to finance this debacle.The doctrine has had a rebirth in the wake of the financial crisis, with a particular vengeance for leveraged buyouts. In the years before the financial crisis, private equity was king, accounting for over 20 percent of takeovers. Debt was piled onto companies, as was the case with Lyondell, which was financed entirely with debt.This debt became an enormous dead weight in the wake of the financial crisis, dragging companies down as they struggled to keep up with payments. More than a few went bankrupt.In the bankruptcy cases that followed, claims of fraudulent transfer were sometimes brought, most prominently in the bankruptcy of the Tribune Company, which had been bought by Sam Zell in an $8.2 billion buyout.Such claims have come as a bombshell to the former shareholders of these companies. They thought the deal was long done. The money was paid out, and shareholders reinvested it in new stocks or perhaps a new kitchen. But like a ghost from the past, a bankruptcy trustee knocks on the door years later, demanding repayment.Even if the trustee does not succeed, the shareholders face legal costs to try and prevent repayment. In the Lyondell case, the trustee sued shareholders who received more than $100,000. He then included everyone, down to a grandparent in Florida who owned 10 shares. And in a lawsuit you need to hire a lawyer.So far, some of the larger shareholders have been paying for the defense. And the old Lyondell shareholders have had success in fighting off the bankruptcy trustee’s charge. The trustee initially brought two claims. The first was a claim for constructive fraudulent transfer; the second for actual fraudulent conveyance. The difference between the two is intent. The first is the easier to bring since it allows the court to look at the surrounding circumstances, while an actual fraudulent conveyance needs a finding that the sellers — here Lyondell — had “actual intent to hinder, delay or defraud” creditors, a high standard.In a decision involving the Tribune case, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit threw out the constructive fraudulent conveyance claims on a technicality, holding that those claims were barred by another section of the bankruptcy code that prohibited suits against security holders. The case applied to the Lyondell case and other leveraged buyouts equally, at least those litigated in New York.This left Lyondell’s former shareholders with hope that the actual fraudulent intent claim could be thrown out. Success was had in the bankruptcy court, but bankruptcy court rulings are subject to review in the district court, and that is where the Lyondell shareholders met Judge Denise L. Cote.The plaintiffs claimed that there was actual intent here as a result of the actions of Lyondell’s chief executive at the time, Dan F. Smith. In the hasty negotiations of the Basell deal that unfolded in a week, Mr. Smith was accused of updating projections that the plaintiffs said were overly optimistic.But that is not enough — the plaintiffs had to show intent. Here the chief executive was harmed by some language he had used before the buyout. At a convention in Las Vegas two months before the deal with Basell, Mr. Smith said, “If you’re a bondholder, I am not sure you get enriched” in a buyout of Lyondell. He continued, “If you think you are going to have a down cycle in the chemical markets, don’t think you want to add $8 billion, $10 billion debt to this and live through that.” Oops.Judge Cote found that the facts alleged by the plaintiffs were enough to be “badges” of actual intent sufficient to allow the claim to proceed against the thousands of old Lyondell shareholders.The shareholders have not given up, filing a motion last week for reconsideration or to have the Second Circuit hear the case. The shareholders’ basis for reconsideration is that there is no “actual” intent to defraud here. Instead, it was the Lyondell board that had agreed to sell the company to Basell.The argument can be summed up to an “Oh, really?” Or to put it another way, are you really going to hold innocent shareholders liable when it was another party that sold the company? And let’s not forget all those sophisticated banks that willingly lent that money and have not claimed to be defrauded.It’s unclear what should happen. The law seems to be on the defendants’ side, but more so because Delaware law is rather clear that it is the board here that makes these decisions.In other words, we are down to technicalities on whether the shareholders should pay back the $12.5 billion paid to them.That should give you an answer on whether any of this makes sense. Does anyone really think that in these cases the board actually is defrauding everyone? What about the buyer here who knew exactly what they were doing?The banks here were also the most sophisticated of the sophisticated. To say that the innocent shareholders of Lyondell should repay the amount these banks lent is a bit absurd. And of course, this will affect future buyouts, possibly making it harder for private equity firms to buy companies.When a lawsuit doesn’t make sense but the legalities are cited, one has to wonder: Is the law really right here?Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.Advertisement