AdvertisementSupported byBy Neal E. BoudetteThe race to build self-driving cars is becoming an increasingly crowded field.There are carmakers like Ford Motor intent on doing it themselves. There are ones like General Motors that are acquiring the technology companies they hope can make it happen.And then there are suppliers, like Delphi Automotive and Mobileye, that intend to develop turnkey self-driving systems that automakers could build into their vehicles.Delphi, formed out of the former parts division of General Motors, and Mobileye, a rising Israeli company known for producing the sensors and other technology that help cars recognize obstacles in the road, said on Tuesday that they had formed a partnership to provide self-driving components to automakers by the end of 2019.Mobileye and Delphi said they expected to demonstrate an early version of their system in January at the 2017 International CES, the annual consumer electronics show, in Las Vegas and to begin production of a commercial version within two years.Mobileye is already a vendor of computer-vision technology and other related systems to carmakers. For Delphi, the partnership is an extension of its other efforts to develop self-driving cars, including a project with the government of Singapore to field a test fleet of driverless taxis. In 2015, a driverless car built by Delphi completed a 3,400-mile trip from San Francisco to New York in nine days.The Mobileye-Delphi collaboration “will accelerate the time to market” and enable carmakers to produce vehicles capable of driving themselves “without the need for huge capital investments,” Amnon Shashua, chairman and chief technology officer of Mobileye, said on Tuesday in a conference call with reporters.Delphi’s chief executive, Kevin Clark, added, “We believe this reshapes the automated driving landscape.”Not so long ago, it seemed that Google and, separately, the electric carmaker Tesla Motors had clear leads over the traditional auto industry in developing technology for autonomous vehicles.Google has been testing its self-driving cars for a few years. Tesla grabbed the spotlight for a time after introducing its Autopilot feature last fall, although a fatal accident in May of a driver using the system has made clear that Autopilot is still far from being a self-driving car technology.But efforts to create self-driving cars are evolving so rapidly that traditional carmakers see an opening.Ford said last week that it would have a fully autonomous vehicle — with no steering wheels or pedals — operating in a ride-hailing service like Uber within five years. It expects to have 30 self-driving test cars on public roads by the end of this year and up to 90 by the end of 2017.Uber said last week that it was intent on developing its own autonomous vehicles; it plans soon to start on-the-road tests of adapted Volvo sport utility vehicles in Pittsburgh.The conventional car companies, with millions of vehicles already on the road, are trying to create a transition from driver-assistance and collision-avoidance systems already in their most advanced vehicles to a future of fully self-driving vehicles.BMW in July said it was partnering with Mobileye and Intel, the chip maker, in plans to offer a self-driving model by 2021.G.M. and Audi expect to offer enhanced cruise control and collision-avoidance systems in some 2018 models that they say will be the equals of, or more capable than, Tesla’s Autopilot.Tesla’s position is also uncertain because of the fatal crash in which Autopilot failed to recognize a truck crossing a road. Since news of that crash emerged, the company has emphasized that Autopilot is not intended to be a fully autonomous system and that drivers must keep their hands on the steering wheel and eyes on the road while using it, although YouTube videos show that some drivers do not follow the company’s instructions.Autopilot uses Mobileye’s sensor and processing technology. But the companies have recently parted ways. In a conference call, Mr. Shashua said Mobileye was unhappy with the way Tesla was using its technology.Not all carmakers predict that self-driving cars will proliferate rapidly. Honda Motor argues that more advanced technology is needed beyond the cameras and radar systems that are in use for the current driver-assist and collision-prevention systems, said Jim Keller, chief engineer at Honda’s research center in Southfield, Mich.“Sensing technology is getting better and better, but it’s not perfect,” he said. Honda also says it believes cars need vehicle-to-vehicle, or V2V, communication devices that allow them to transmit their position and speed to other vehicles.“Radar or a camera can only see what it can see,” he said. “But what’s around the corner or behind a building? You need V2V for that.”Delphi, in the partnership with Mobileye, plans to provide automated driving software it has developed, as well as technology that uses cameras, radar and lidar, a type of radar based on laser beams. Delphi’s current radar and sensing technology is used by many automakers for collision-avoidance, lane keeping, cruise control and automatic braking systems.The system the partners produce is intended to go first into automobiles that have steering wheels and gas and brake pedals, and it will be meant to assist, rather than replace, drivers.But the aim is to adapt those systems for fully self-driving cars.Mr. Shashua said the companies were relying on advances in sensing and “a new class of machine intelligence” to be successful. Fully autonomous vehicles “need sensing capable of recognizing moving objects and merging into traffic in a way that mimics human behavior,” he said.Mr. Clark, the Delphi chief, said the companies would spend “hundreds of millions of dollars” on the partnership without giving a more precise estimate.Mr. Shashua added that Mobileye’s work with Delphi would complement the collaboration his company announced this summer with BMW and Intel.Advertisement