By BEN PROTESSAUG. 23, 2016
Federal regulators on Tuesday delivered the latest blow to a giant private equity firm, announcing an enforcement action against affiliates of Apollo Global Management for an array of securities law violations.The Securities and Exchange Commission issued a roughly $53 million punishment to Apollo, one of Wall Street’s most prominent private equity firms, and Apollo agreed to settle the case.The settlement resolves accusations that Apollo misled its investors — about two different issues — and separately failed to supervise a senior executive suspected of misconduct. The executive, who was not named or charged in the S.E.C. case, was twice caught “improperly charging personal items and services” to Apollo’s funds and, by extension, its investors, the S.E.C. said.The case represents a continuation of the S.E.C.’s crackdown on private equity misdeeds. Over the last few years, the agency has taken action against nearly 10 private equity firms, including such prominent players as the Blackstone Group and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company.AdvertisementAt its core, the S.E.C. scrutiny stems from a concern that private equity firms are not always transparent with their investors, even as those investors reap significant returns. In some cases, the S.E.C. says, the firms hid crucial details that would have revealed conflicts of interest.Advertisement“A common theme in our recent enforcement actions against private equity firms is their failure to properly disclose fees and conflicts of interest to fund investors,” Andrew J. Ceresney, the S.E.C.’s head of enforcement, said in a statement on Tuesday announcing the case against Apollo.In its own statement, Apollo said that it “seeks to act appropriately and in the best interest of the funds it manages at all times.” Apollo, which neither admitted nor denied the accusations, added, “Long before the S.E.C. inquiry began, Apollo had enhanced its disclosure and compliance relating to these matters.”In particular, Mr. Ceresney explained, Apollo failed to fully inform its investors about so-called monitoring fees. Apollo charges monitoring fees to some of the companies it owns, arguing that it is entitled to collect on the consulting and advice it provides these companies.The fees might extract crucial resources from a company, but they also theoretically benefit a private equity firm’s investors. For example, monitoring fees might help offset the roughly 2 percent fees private equity firms charge their investors, which include some of the world’s biggest pension funds.However, the S.E.C. found that in Apollo’s case the firm was “accelerating” the monitoring fees when one of its companies was sold or went public. In other words, upon the sale or I.P.O., Apollo would accelerate the remaining years of monitoring fees into lump-sum payments.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The accelerated lump-sum payments, the S.E.C. said, effectively reduced the “amounts available for distribution to fund investors.” And compounding the problem, Apollo failed to fully disclose its practice of accelerating monitoring fees before clients invested in the firm.The S.E.C. also discovered that an Apollo affiliate failed to accurately disclose details about a loan it took from some of Apollo’s private equity funds. Under the loan agreement, the Apollo affiliate was supposed to pay interest to the funds — and yet that interest was “instead ultimately allocated solely” to the Apollo affiliate itself.In its statement, Apollo explained that the loan represented the firm’s share of profits from certain investments, and that it was designed as a loan only for tax purposes. In effect, then, Apollo was arguably entitled to the interest. “At no time were fund investors any worse off as a result of the loan,” Apollo added.AdvertisementSeparately, the S.E.C. took aim at Apollo for “failing to supervise” the senior executive who it said was charging personal items to Apollo investors. The misconduct, which began in early 2010 and continued until June 2013, included the executive submitting “fabricated information to Apollo in an effort to conceal his conduct,” the S.E.C. said.While executive misdeeds cannot always be pinned on an employer, Apollo in this case knew about the misconduct and failed to act, the S.E.C. said. Instead, it said, the firm simply issued a verbal reprimand and prompted the executive to repay the expenses. Apollo did not discipline him in any other way.Eventually, after hiring an independent firm to audit the expenses, Apollo cut ties with the executive.Although the executive was not named or charged on Tuesday, the S.E.C. said its investigation was continuing.“As the S.E.C. acknowledges, Apollo itself discovered and remediated the expense account misconduct committed by a partner several years ago as part of a periodic compliance review of expenses,” the firm said in its statement. “Apollo reimbursed its funds for any improper expenses, voluntarily reported the matter to the S.E.C. and cooperated fully with the agency’s review.”A version of this article appears in print on August 24, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Apollo Global Settles Securities Case as the S.E.C. Imposes a $53 Million Fine.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.