AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Kevin AllisonThe Williams Companies, the American pipeline operator, is getting the proxy fight it deserves.Keith Meister, an aggressive investor who recently quit as a director, is back challenging the board with a whole new slate. Because of a deadline, however, his hedge fund’s nominees are merely stand-ins until real candidates can be found. The year of merger and acquisition helter-skelter for Williams makes this new madness somehow fitting.Mr. Meister, the Carl Icahn protégé whose Corvex Management owns about 4 percent of the $21 billion Williams, said on Monday that he planned to put forward 10 of his employees to serve on the Williams board. If voted in, they would be replaced by independent directors whom Corvex intends to identify before shareholders submit their ballots on Nov. 23.This bizarre — and maybe even unprecedented — maneuver seems par for the course at Williams, which recently announced plans to add three new independent directors. Under its chief executive, Alan S. Armstrong, the company tried to collapse its byzantine financial structure by absorbing its master limited partnership. Then Energy Transfer Equity came along with a takeover bid that Williams resisted for some time. Ultimately, Mr. Armstrong caved and accepted the $33 billion offer last year.The deal quickly devolved into farce as oil prices collapsed. Energy Transfer twisted its way out, first by undermining its own transaction and then winning on a courtroom technicality this year. Mr. Armstrong, who was forced to back a sale he had opposed, found himself under siege but ultimately prevailed. For good measure, he resisted another, more recent takeover entreaty from a rival, Enterprise Products Partners.Corvex’s proxy by proxy only complicates matters further. As a director, Mr. Meister was in position to push for change from the inside. What is more, his position means he should have been well aware of the filing deadlines and lined up suitable board replacements in time.This unconventional method instead will require Corvex to produce worthy candidates and for shareholders to trust that the hedge fund employees will abdicate as they say they will. Given the odd nature of the approach, there is also the chance for a legal challenge.For Williams these days, nothing — not even a proxy fight — is straightforward.Advertisement