
Standard Deduction By                     
VICTOR FLEISCHER

NOV. 24, 2015
Pfizer’s proposed merger with Allergan is a blockbuster deal in the pharmaceutical industry. History may remember the deal instead for finally killing off the United States’ outdated approach to taxing multinational corporations.Pfizer will shed its identity as a United States corporation in the deal, notwithstanding the fact that it, not Allergan, is the larger merger partner. Allergan itself is an expatriate; it is nominally based in Ireland, but the bulk of its operations are still in Parsippany, N.J.Our tax system is premised on taxing United States-based multinational corporations on 35 percent of worldwide income, with a credit for foreign taxes paid. This “worldwide” approach is often identified as anachronistic; most of our global trading partners have adopted some form of a “territorial” approach.In theory, there’s not anything wrong with taxing American corporations on their worldwide income. The most vexing problem of international tax — trying to figure out the source of income within a multinational operation — would only be exacerbated by a territorial approach.AdvertisementIn practice, our approach has been a failure. One problem is that we allow the deferral of foreign-source income: the profits of foreign subsidiaries are not generally subject to United States tax until “repatriated” in the form of a dividend. Thus, to minimize taxes, multinationals use transfer pricing, cost sharing and other tax planning techniques to shift as much income as possible overseas.AdvertisementPfizer mastered this game early on, and its expertise in tax-shifting continues today. For example, Pfizer takes in about 40 percent of its revenue from sales in the United States and 60 percent from foreign sales. Yet, according to its 2014 annual report, Pfizer had about $17 billion in pretax income from overseas, and almost a $5 billion pretax loss here in the United States. By shifting profits overseas, Pfizer pays relatively low cash taxes compared with the nominal United States tax rate of 35 percent. Instead, much of its American tax liability is illusory, taking the form of an obligation to pay taxes in the future if it repatriates cash to the United States.As of the end of 2014, Pfizer had $74 billion of foreign earnings “indefinitely reinvested” overseas, and another $63 billion in foreign earnings that have not been indefinitely reinvested. Repatriating $137 billion in earnings would generate a United States tax liability of about $48 billion.Pfizer’s deal means that the United States will never see that $48 billion in tax revenue.This isn’t Pfizer’s first visit to the circus. In 2004, Pfizer successfully lobbied Congress for a tax holiday. The American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 temporarily allowed companies to bring back foreign earnings at a tax rate of only about 5 percent instead of the usual 35 percent. Pfizer brought back $37 billion, paying less than $2 billion in taxes.Just 11 years after cleaning out its overseas coffers, Pfizer now finds itself with $137 billion of new earnings “trapped” overseas.This year, Pfizer did more than just lobby Congress for relief. Like most of its pharmaceutical industry peers, Pfizer has also been exploring merger techniques to find a permanent solution to the problem of overseas cash, eventually culminating in the proposed merger with Allergan.The Treasury Department continues to put up an admirable fight on tax inversion deals, but it will not be able to shut down the Pfizer deal. Last year, Treasury issued Notice 2014-52, which cracked down on many of the strategies companies were using to repatriate cash after finding a smaller foreign merger partner, typically resulting in the shareholders of the United States buyers owning just shy of 80 percent of the combined entity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Just last week, the Treasury issued another notice of proposed rule-making, aimed at tightening even further the rules for these inversion deals where American shareholders make up 60 to 80 percent.The Pfizer deal will probably avoid these new rules. After the merger, Pfizer shareholders will own only about 56 percent of the combined entity, escaping the reach of the Treasury’s anti-inversion rules. If it succeeds, Pfizer will be able to use its offshore cash for anything it likes without paying United States tax, whether than means returning cash to shareholders, making new investments or even using the cash to help finance the Allergan deal itself.AdvertisementThere are limits to Treasury’s legal authority, and Treasury most likely cannot shut down the merger with Allergan. Congress could step in, but it may not get its act together quickly enough.Congress should reflect on the fact that over the last 20 years, Pfizer has successfully sheltered more than $137 billion in earnings from the United States tax authorities.Taxing those earnings in full would have generated $48 billion in revenue. But it would be folly to expect anything close to that amount out of Pfizer with the system we have. The 2004 tax holiday legislation eked out $2 billion from Pfizer. As bad as that result looks, it’s better than the status quo, which may result in no United States tax revenue from those $137 billion in offshore earnings.A system that imposes — and actually collects — a tax on overseas earnings at a lower rate would be better than our current approach. The real possibility of bipartisan consensus on international tax legislation has been simmering for months, and Pfizer-Allergan merger may be the deal that finally nudges the tax-writing committees into action. My next column will describe what the legislative options look like and what approach Congress is most likely to adopt.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »