By LIZ MOYERAUG. 24, 2016
The ride-hailing service Uber told drivers in four large American cities on Wednesday that it had teamed up with the robo-adviser Betterment to offer individual retirement accounts.Drivers in Boston, Chicago, Seattle and New Jersey can sign up for accounts through their Uber apps or online. The accounts are free of fees for the first year.The I.R.A. product is being added to a rewards program Uber has for its drivers, who are self-employed. The program includes discounts at auto maintenance retailers and wireless communications carriers.A week earlier, a federal judge tossed out a proposed $100 million settlement of class-action lawsuits by Uber drivers in California and Massachusetts, saying the settlements were not fair. The workers had argued that Uber should treat them as employees and reimburse them for expenses such as gasoline. For Uber, however, changing the designations of drivers to employees from freelancers could raise costs for payroll taxes and benefits.AdvertisementSenator Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia, has been analyzing the sharing economy and its effects on worker access to savings and social insurance programs such as disability coverage. “I am encouraged that Uber is taking steps to be part of these conversations, and I look forward to continuing to engage with other on-demand companies and state and local leaders who want to be a part of this discussion,” he said in a statement in reaction to the Uber-Betterment announcement.AdvertisementThe arrangement gives Betterment direct access to many thousands more potential customers. It has been competing with rivals such as Wealthfront for retirement plan business, rolling out a 401(k) savings plan for small businesses last year that now has more than 200 enrolled sponsors. Both robo-advisers have been offering I.R.A.s and Roth I.R.A.s, but this is Betterment’s first formal partnership with a company on behalf of workers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is a realization of our mission to bring retirement planning and advice to millions of Americans,” Jon Stein, Betterment’s founder, said in an interview.Betterment uses computer algorithms to sort account holders into various baskets of low-cost exchange-traded funds that are weighted for their answers to various questions to gauge their risk tolerance. For regular accounts under $100,000, customers pay an annual management fee of up to 0.35 percent. The fee drops as the accounts get bigger. There is no minimum.Individual retirement accounts are something Ubers drivers have been talking about, said Rachel Holt, the company’s regional general manager for North America. Many Uber drivers work only a few hours a week or drive as a second job but want retirement planning just like full-time workers at companies.“We consistently hear that this is a product that they would be interested in,” Ms. Holt said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.