By AMIE TSANGAUG. 25, 2016
What a difference a couple of years of weak economic growth have made.When it first appeared at the annual Federal Reserve conference in 2014, the “Fed Up” campaign was just an amusing diversion. Now, it has a place at the table.The group, which wants the Fed to extend its economic stimulus program, will meet with the policy-making committee at the Jackson Hole conference, which opens today.Fed officials had applauded the protesters on their educational efforts but had not really engaged with their economic arguments. Now, they will hear from people struggling to make ends meet.Whether “Fed Up” manages to persuade the Fed to change its decisions is still up for debate. They could, however, have more success pushing for diversity on the policy-making committee, which includes no black or Hispanic members.Advertisement“Having a diverse set of policy makers — including African-Americans and Hispanics — will influence the Fed’s decision-making,” Andrew Levin, an economist at Dartmouth College, noted. “And it should. The public should have confidence that the public is well represented at the F.O.M.C. table.”AdvertisementAs if the furor over Mylan raising the price of its EpiPen wasn’t enough, it turns out it was utilizing a common tactic in the industry.Drug companies often raise their prices sharply before a generic competitor reaches the market to milk the profits while they can. Insurers and pharmaceutical benefit managers tolerate this because they know lower prices are on the way.In this case, Mylan had settled a lawsuit in 2012 agreeing to allow a generic competitor to its EpiPen — which injects a drug to save people from life-threatening allergy attacks — into the market. The company had already been lifting the price of the EpiPen, but after the settlement it pushed even harder.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mylan has refused to comment on why it has repeatedly increased the price.Anger directed toward the company, however, has continued to bubble. Hillary Clinton piled in on Wednesday to say the price increase was “outrageous.”But the target for the anger has made things a little awkward for at least one Democrat: Senator Joe Manchin III is the father of Heather Bresch, the chief executive of Mylan.Is the European Commission becoming a “supranational tax authority”? The Treasury Department certainly considers it a possibility and said so, in an apparent effort to dissuade Brussels from demanding billions of euros in unpaid taxes from Apple, as The Financial Times reports.The Commission, the European Union’s executive arm, has accused Ireland of granting Apple a sweetheart tax deal and has been investigating it in the biggest crackdown on corporate tax avoidance across the 28-nation bloc.AdvertisementA ruling is expected next month, but in the meantime, the Treasury has warned that Brussels is threatening international agreements on tax reform.At the same time, Britain is toughening up its own penalties for tax evasion ahead of a new transparency initiative that will help it track down individuals who have hidden money offshore.It is proposing new legislation that would require taxpayers with outstanding tax liabilities to come forward by September 2018, or be subject to harsher punishments. The safe havens for tax evaders are getting fewer and fewer.• Parties involved in the settlement between Volkswagen and car owners affected by the company’s emissions cheating scandal will update a federal judge on the progress of their discussions.• The Commerce Department will release data on durable goods orders for July.• Tiffany will publish its latest quarterly earnings.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.