By DANIEL E. SLOTNIKAUG. 24, 2016
Morton Schindel, who turned beloved children’s books into animated films narrated by actors like Meryl Streep and James Earl Jones while preserving the spirit of the original illustrations, died on Saturday at his home in Weston, Conn. He was 98.His death was confirmed by Scholastic, which acquired his company, Weston Woods Studios, in 1996.Animated children’s movies are often designed to entice them to buy toys, attend theme parks or watch sequels. Mr. Schindel approached his films with a different goal.“A film should bring kids back to the book,” he told The New York Times in 1985.Mr. Schindel founded Weston Woods in 1953, inspired by a trip to the children’s room of the New York Public Library, where he read classics like Robert McCloskey’s “Make Way for Ducklings” and Ludwig Bemelmans’s “Madeline.” But he did not want to sacrifice the books’ lush illustrations to animate them.So he invented a camera technique he called “iconographic,” which involved mounting images from the original book on a movable stand in front of a camera. The images remained stationary, but the filmmaker could introduce cinematic elements by carefully moving the stand, manipulating the camera and adjusting the amount of light on the image being filmed.AdvertisementThe first movie Mr. Schindel made using this technique was a version of James Daugherty’s “Andy and the Lion,” a retelling of “Androcles and the Lion.”Weston Woods Studios later embraced more traditional animation, with sequential images providing the illusion of movement. The studio distributed its films to classrooms and libraries. They were shown on the CBS children’s show “Captain Kangaroo” and, decades later, the Nick Jr. show “Eureeka’s Castle.”Mr. Schindel pored over children’s books, especially those that received awards like the Caldecott and Newbery Medals, to find new material. Weston Woods produced more than 350 motion pictures and 450 recordings.Some of the studio’s best-known adaptations were Maurice Sendak’s “Where the Wild Things Are,” Ezra Jack Keats’s “The Snowy Day” and William Steig’s “Doctor De Soto,” which was nominated for an Academy Award for best animated short in 1985. Actors who narrated the stories, in addition to Ms. Streep and Mr. Jones, included Sarah Jessica Parker, John Lithgow, Chevy Chase and Mia Farrow.Mr. Schindel produced each movie painstakingly, often with input from the writers, illustrators and publishers. “The book was always our director,” he told The Los Angeles Times in 2002.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Morton Schindel was born on Jan. 29, 1918, in Orange, N.J. He received a bachelor’s degree in 1939 from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania and founded a machine-manufacturing company in 1941.AdvertisementAfter contracting tuberculosis, he spent a few years convalescing in Saranac Lake, N.Y. By then he was already an amateur photographer, so he decided that production work for a film company would be better for his health.Mr. Schindel joined an educational film company in New York City, and in 1949 he received a master’s degree from Teachers College at Columbia University. In 1951 he got a job at the United States Embassy in Ankara, Turkey, making films to show European countries how to rebuild after World War II.Returning to the United States, he started Weston Woods. The business struggled at first, but Mr. Schindel spread the word about his movies by contacting schools and libraries.He also created actual promotional vehicles: buses modified to act as rolling movie theaters. They were dispatched around Connecticut and other states to show films and hold events with live storytellers.After Scholastic bought Weston Woods, Mr. Schindel continued to work as a consultant for the company. One of many awards he received was the Regina Medal, given annually by the Catholic Library Association for distinguished contributions to children’s literature.Mr. Schindel’s survivors include his wife, the children’s book writer Cari Best; and a sister, Elaine Martens. He also had children and grandchildren, but his family declined to provide information on them.A version of this article appears in print on August 25, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Morton Schindel, 98; Children’s Filmmaker.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.