By JONATHAN SOBLEAUG. 25, 2016
TOKYO — In the first reported death in Japan linked to the Pokémon Go craze, a man who was playing the popular smartphone game while driving struck two pedestrians, killing one, the police said on Thursday.Nintendo and Niantic, the companies behind the game, expressed condolences to the families of the victims.Pokémon Go uses what is known as augmented reality technology, which puts images of digital monsters in real-world environments for players to hunt with a flick of their fingers. Distracted Pokémon Go players around the world have been involved in numerous mishaps, including less serious car crashes and falls.In the United States, several people were reported to have been attacked or robbed while playing the game, though the connection between the violence and the fact that the victims were using Pokémon Go at the time has not always been clear.The death in Japan occurred Tuesday evening in rural Tokushima Prefecture, on the island of Shikoku in the south of the country.AdvertisementThe police in Tokushima said they had arrested the driver, Keiji Go’o, a 39-year-old farmer who they said was behind the wheel of a small cargo van when he struck the two pedestrians — Sachiko Nakanishi, 72, and Kayoko Ikawa, 60 — at an intersection.AdvertisementMs. Nakanishi died of a broken neck, the police said; the extent of Ms. Ikawa’s injuries was not disclosed. Mr. Go’o remained in custody on Thursday, but the police said he had admitted being distracted by the game when the accident occurred. Photographs and video taken by the Japanese news media showed what they said was the van driven by Mr. Go’o, with a smashed windshield.Niantic, a spinoff of Google that is responsible for the design of Pokémon Go, has added in-game warnings against playing while driving or in other potentially dangerous situations, and a spokesman said the company prioritized safety. Nintendo, which is based in Japan and owns part of the company that manages the Pokémon franchise, said it was working to “create an environment where people can play the game safely.”More than 10 million people in Japan downloaded the game on the day it debuted here last month, after a similarly huge reception in the United States and elsewhere. Distraction on the roads is not the only potential danger; some train stations have begun broadcasting warnings against playing while walking along crowded platforms.Follow Jonathan Soble on Twitter @jonathan_soble.A version of this article appears in print on August 26, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Driver in Japan Playing Pokémon Go Kills Pedestrian.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.