
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

AUG. 24, 2016
It is not just coincidence that after 147 years of serving institutions and the ultra-wealthy, Goldman Sachs has decided that it will start catering to the common man: It is opportunism borne of necessity.The years since the financial crisis have not been particularly kind to Goldman Sachs’s moneymaking machine – not that anyone is weeping for the company or the people who work there — despite an improving economy and record numbers of corporate financings and mergers and acquisitions. In the last three fiscal years, Goldman has made a cumulative pretax profit of about $33 billion. By contrast, JPMorgan Chase, the nation’s biggest bank by assets, has had cumulative pretax profit of $87 billion, nearly three times more. In 2007, Goldman and JPMorgan were much more evenly matched when it came to profitability. Goldman made $17.6 billion in pretax profit in 2007; JPMorgan made nearly $23 billion.Of course, the two Wall Street behemoths have never been particularly comparable. JPMorgan has a huge retail banking presence, a huge credit card business and an enormous asset management business attached to an increasingly important investment bank. It also has 236,000 employees. Goldman has always been first and foremost an investment bank — the world’s premiere — onto which it has tried with varying degrees of success to append, among other things, a wealth management business, an asset management business and a private equity business. It has 36,500 employees.That formula worked magnificently for Goldman for its first 138 years. But things have been much more of a struggle since 2008 for Goldman, thanks to regulators and lawmakers in Washington, who are intent on making sure that Wall Street never again takes the kinds of risks that turned into the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. Washington wants Wall Street banks to become more like highly regulated utilities with profit capped. We can debate whether this is a good thing or a bad thing — personally, I am convinced that Washington’s regulators have become arbitrary and capricious and are hurting Main Street by tying down Wall Street — but one thing is clear: The kind of clever risk-taking that Goldman specialized in — making big, and extremely profitable, bets with its own money — is outlawed for now (and probably for the foreseeable future).AdvertisementAs it has done many times in its past to survive and to thrive, Goldman is in the process of reinvention. This explains Marcus, its new online lending business named after the company’s founder, Marcus Goldman, along with GS Bank, its online savings account business with no minimum balance requirements. After all these years, Goldman Sachs has suddenly discovered retail banking. But it is not out of altruism or charity, nor is it nefarious. It is all about making money from money, which has always been Goldman’s specialty. In fact, GS Bank and Marcus fit together elegantly in helping Goldman find new sources of profitability.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And here’s why: In the zero-interest-rate environment that the Federal Reserve has carefully curated for eight years, Goldman and other banks can gather up money — the raw material they use to make more money — at virtually no cost. By opening an online bank, Goldman can gather up billions of dollars in consumer deposits without the cost of a physical branch and pay its customers close to nothing for their money. Goldman is offering to pay savers 1.05 percent annually. That may sound like close to zero, and it is, but the rate is also nearly 17 times more than the 0.06 percent annual interest rate that JPMorgan pays me on my savings account.AdvertisementGoldman’s idea is to get people like me to move my money, of course. Sure, the 1.05 percent is a teaser rate, created to attract billions of dollars to Goldman’s new venture. And it will no doubt work. Since April, GS Bank has collected $1.8 billion in deposits, essentially by word of mouth.Goldman will then take that raw material and use it to make more money, in large part by lending it out through its online lender Marcus, which aims at consumers looking to borrow around $20,000. Goldman will charge plenty more in interest for these loans than the 1 percent it is paying savers at GS Bank. Although its terms will not be known until Marcus rolls out officially in October, assume for the moment that the going rate for consumer loans of this nature – if both Lending Club and Prosper are useful guides – is around 12 percent. That difference – the 11 percentage points – is what Goldman will largely rake in as profit.Once upon a time, individuals needed a minimum of around $10 million in liquid assets, or cash, to be a client of Goldman Sachs’s private bank. According to Quora, in the entire world, there are about one million people at that elite level of wealth. With Marcus and GS Bank, Goldman is hoping that millions more ordinary people will be a new source of riches. So if it floats your boat to be a client of Goldman Sachs, this is your big chance. Just remember that Goldman has never been, and will never be, a charitable organization.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »