By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 24, 2016
United States markets closed lower on Wednesday, led by declines in mining and materials companies, giving back a modest increase from the day before.KEEPING SCORE The Dow Jones industrial average ended the day 0.35 percent lower and the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index fell 0.5 percent. The Nasdaq composite index dropped 0.8 percent.MINING TROUBLES Metals and mining stocks took hefty losses after disappointing results from the European mining giant Glencore. The company reported a loss, and it continues to sell off billions in assets to pay down its huge debt load. Shares of Freeport-McMoRan slumped 7.5 percent, and Newmont Mining stock was down 7.7 percent.ON SALE Shares of the young adult clothing retailer Express plunged 25 percent after the company slashed its full-year forecast and said same-store sales and traffic were down compared with the same period last year.AdvertisementTAXED Shares of Intuit, which makes TurboTax and QuickBooks software, fell 3.5 percent after the company’s full-year forecasts came in below analysts’ estimates.AdvertisementQUIET Stocks remained in a slow, narrow trading band as they have for the last two weeks. Many traders are on vacation, and with little economic data and company news being released, investors are hesitant to move any large positions one way or another.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.EUROPEAN MARKETS In Germany, the DAX gained 0.3 percent, and in France, the CAC 40 rose 0.3 percent. The FTSE 100 was down 0.5 percent in Britain.FED WATCH Investors are awaiting a speech on Friday by the Federal Reserve chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, at an annual conference of central bankers in Jackson Hole, Wyo. The Fed is expected to hold off on raising interest rates at its September meeting, but Ms. Yellen’s comments will be dissected for clues on the likelihood and timing of a future increase.ASIA’S DAY The Nikkei 225 rose 0.6 percent in Japan on rising hopes for more monetary stimulus from the Bank of Japan and a raft of government stimulus. In Hong Kong, the Hang Seng lost 1 percent. The Shanghai composite index edged down 0.1 percent in China. The Kospi fell 0.3 percent in South Korea. In Australia, the S. & P./ASX 200 added 0.1 percent.OIL Prices rose overnight after Iran signaled it might support other OPEC members in production freezes. But they fell back Wednesday on news of rising inventories. Benchmark United States crude oil fell $1.33, to $46.77 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Brent crude, used to price oil internationally, lost 84 cents, to $49.12.CURRENCIES AND BONDS The yield on the benchmark United States 10-year Treasury note was unchanged from the day before at 1.55 percent. The dollar rose to 100.41 yen from 100.22 yen, while the euro fell to $1.1262 from $1.1305.A version of this article appears in print on August 25, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Wall St. Drops on Drug Makers’ Slide.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.