
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

AUG. 24, 2016
Viacom has one good reason to keep its interim chief executive, Thomas Dooley: a breakup of the media company.Mr. Dooley, the company’s former chief operating officer, who has close ties to his predecessor, Philippe Dauman, makes an odd choice if the $17 billion company plans to do anything else. A veteran who has been at Viacom on and off since 1980, though, Mr. Dooley may be well suited to finding the best value for Viacom’s various assets.Mr. Dooley emerged from Viacom’s most recent boardroom drama as Mr. Dauman’s replacement through Sept. 30, when Viacom’s fiscal year ends. Beyond that, he needs to convince five new board members of his usefulness atop a group that controls the cable networks Nickelodeon and MTV and a Hollywood studio, Paramount Pictures.That comes down to what sort of strategy the new board, in conjunction with the Redstone family, which controls Viacom through National Amusements, wants to pursue. They could try to turn around their lackluster properties, like Comedy Central, on their own, but that would be a Sisyphean task. Ratings for Viacom’s networks are in the dumps. At MTV, for example, viewership among 12- to 34-year-olds declined from the end of June through August, mostly in double digits, from the same period last year, according to Nielsen. Paramount’s operating loss for the nine months ending in June tallied $316 million.AdvertisementA sale of the company in whole or in parts is perhaps a better outcome. As it is, Mr. Dauman is hanging around until Sept. 13 so he can pitch a plan to sell a minority stake in Paramount Pictures. He indicated that stake could unlock $4 billion for shareholders. Wedbush Securities estimates that Viacom’s cable networks are worth $26 billion, or about seven times 2017 earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.Mr. Dooley’s tenure is yoked to Mr. Dauman’s performance. Though Mr. Dooley joined Viacom in 1980, he left 20 years later to form a private equity venture with Mr. Dauman. The two came back in 2006 to run the show with the blessing of the chairman, Sumner Redstone. Since breaking off from Viacom a decade ago, CBS has seen its shares double, and Viacom’s have appreciated barely 1 percent.AdvertisementMr. Dooley is a known quantity with Viacom’s outside shareholders and on Wall Street, and he has experience buying and selling businesses, including Blockbuster, CBS and Paramount. He also has the respect of Viacom’s new directors, including Buzzfeed’s executive chairman, Kenneth Lerer. Endorsements like that merit consideration to remain in charge. But for the sake of investors not named Redstone, he would have to prove he can overcome years of status quo.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »