AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerThe Williams Companies, which recently lost a court battle to preserve a takeover by another pipeline operator, is facing a new fight. This time, it is from a former director who owns a big stake in the company and has an unconventional plan to overhaul the entire board.Keith Meister, the managing partner of Corvex Management, which holds a 4 percent stake in Williams, issued an open letter to the rest of the shareholders on Wednesday and submitted the names of 10 nominees for directors at Williams. Investors will vote on board nominees at the company’s annual meeting in November.But Mr. Meister indicated that he did not have time to come up with a full slate of independent directors before Thursday’s deadline, so he nominated himself, as well as analysts and managing directors from his hedge fund, instead. These Corvex employees will serve as “placeholder nominees” as the fund identifies its actual candidates over the next few weeks. Details about these independent nominees would be disclosed “well in advance of the annual meeting,” Mr. Meister said. The Corvex “placeholders” would resign and be replaced by the chosen independent directors if they were elected.“We simply want to empower all stockholders by implementing a process that gives stockholders the opportunity to make their own determination as to the most qualified ‘draft picks’ as Williams board members,” Mr. Meister said in the letter.Williams said in a statement on Wednesday that it would “seriously consider” candidates who were qualified to serve on the board. The company also said it was disappointed that Corvex had begun a “distracting and costly proxy contest.”The idea of nominating placeholder directors is unusual, lawyers say, and could embolden activist hedge funds. An activist has not sought to unseat every director at a large-scale company since another prominent fund, Starboard Value, took on Darden Restaurants, the parent company of Olive Garden and The Capital Grille, three years ago. Ultimately, shareholders elected all 12 of Starboard’s nominees.Mr. Meister’s strategy is a response to something called advance notice bylaws, which require a shareholder to submit director nominees to a corporation at least one month (sometimes as long as four months) before an annual meeting.“The Corvex tactic is untested and may not survive a court challenge,” lawyers from Kirkland & Ellis wrote in a note that they distributed to clients on Wednesday.Kirkland & Ellis said that corporations might want to ratify their bylaws in a way that would prevent other activists from using placeholder nominees as directors in their companies.“The continued evolution and escalation of activist hedge funds challenges requires “ companies to assess their ability to defend against potential attacks on a level playing field,” Kirkland & Ellis said.Mr. Meister’s move underscores his continued frustration with Williams, which is based in Tulsa. Mr. Meister, who was a protégé of Carl C. Icahn before starting his own hedge fund, disclosed a stake in Williams in December 2013, along with a fellow activist, Eric Mandelblatt, of Soroban Capital Partners. After threatening a proxy battle, Williams settled with the activists, giving Mr. Mandelblatt a seat on the board and promising Mr. Meister another one after its November 2014 board meeting.As that drama unfolded, Kelcy Warren, the chairman of the rival pipeline operator Energy Transfer Equity, based in Dallas, approached the Williams chief executive, Alan Armstrong, about a merger. Most of Williams’s board was opposed, but the two activists were consistent champions of a deal. In a split decision, the board voted for the $38 billion transaction last year and signed an agreement in September. Mr. Armstrong opposed the deal.But things unraveled quickly. The terms included a $6 billion cash component Energy Transfer would pay at a time when shares of pipeline and other energy companies, including Energy Transfer, were slumping. Then Energy Transfer and its lawyers found an issue with a certain outside counsel tax opinion that had to be issued for the deal to close. Williams fought to keep the deal alive. After the two sides battled it out in court, a Delaware judge sided with Energy Transfer in June and the deal was terminated.After that, Williams directors voted over whether to oust Mr. Armstrong. The decision was split, enabling Mr. Armstrong to keep his job. The six directors who voted against Mr. Armstrong, including Mr. Meister and Mr. Mandelblatt, resigned from the board on June 30.Mr. Meister said the board’s actions since then had been “extremely disappointing.” Corvex privately objected to a 10-day window that Williams set for nominating directors, a deadline that Williams changed to Aug. 25. Corvex then submitted a plan to Williams in which a majority of directors would be independent, but Williams told the hedge fund it could not commit to that proposal, according to Mr. Meister’s letter to shareholders on Wednesday.Several news reports recently indicated that another pipeline company, Enterprise Products, had sought recently to acquire Williams, but was rebuffed.“While the company does not comment on M.&A. rumors, the Williams board is open minded and evaluates all potentially value enhancing opportunities,” Williams said in its statement on Wednesday.Shares of Williams rose after Mr. Meister disclosed his plan on CNBC on Monday, although they declined about 1.3 percent in afternoon trading on Wednesday. The stock has gained about 35 percent since its deal with Energy Transfer was terminated.Advertisement