By LESLIE PICKERAUG. 26, 2016
Abbott Laboratories has announced two large acquisitions over the last year. In recent days, both deals have become major land mines.In January, it unveiled a $5.8 billion acquisition of Alere, which makes medical tests. Alere has been subjected to a series of regulatory inquiries over foreign sales practices, which caused its annual financial report to be delayed. Even though some of those investigations were known before the deal was signed, Abbott has since appeared to have buyer’s remorse.When asked in a conference call in April if Abbott was committed to closing the deal with Alere, Miles D. White, Abbott’s chairman and chief executive, declined to comment. Alere later released a statement saying that Abbott had requested the two terminate their agreement, and that Alere had rejected that request.That month, Abbott agreed to purchase St. Jude Medical for $25 billion. This deal was seen as an opportunity for Abbott to propel its position in cardiovascular devices.AdvertisementBut analysts became concerned with Abbott’s audacious plans for taking on debt to finance two huge deals at the same time.AdvertisementOn Thursday, problems within both target companies surfaced.Alere filed a complaint in Delaware Chancery Court, saying Abbott had not taken the necessary steps, including obtaining antitrust approval, to close their deal. No further details were provided, and the contents of the case will be sealed until next week.Earlier that day, an investor disclosed a report saying that St. Jude Medical’s pacemakers were vulnerable to cyberattacks, and therefore should be recalled. The investor, a so-called short-seller called Muddy Waters Research, said that half of St. Jude Medical’s revenue could disappear for two years as a result.Les Funtleyder, a health care portfolio manager at E Squared Asset Management, said that Alere was a case study in what not to do with a transaction, given a breakdown somewhere in due diligence. Mr. Funtleyder said the risks surrounding St. Jude Medical would have been more difficult to foresee, but that Abbott may have lost some clout with investors, regardless.“Maybe they did these deals out of desperation to bridge a growth gap or something, in terms of being willing to overlook things,” said Mr. Funtleyder, who also is an adjunct professor of public health at Columbia University. “Wall Street is not going to think this is an honest mistake.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The health care industry has been undergoing extensive consolidation over the last few years, driven in part by larger companies buying smaller ones to help cut costs and fuel growth. Abbott has been a key player in the flurry of deal activity.“Alere’s lawsuit is without merit,” an Abbott spokeswoman said in an emailed statement. “Abbott is compliant with its obligations under the merger agreement and continues to work toward regulatory approvals, despite Alere’s nearly six-month delay in filing its 2015 10-K.”The issues surrounding St. Jude Medical are a bit more nuanced. The report disclosing problems with St. Jude Medical’s cardiac devices came from an investment firm, which had bet on the decline of St. Jude shares. The founder of that firm, Carson Block, received the information from MedSec, which is a cybersecurity research firm. After MedSec discovered the vulnerabilities, it contacted Mr. Block. Justine Bone, MedSec’s chief executive, said on Bloomberg TV on Thursday that MedSec also benefited from the decline in St. Jude’s stock price this week.St. Jude Medical said in a statement on Friday that the Muddy Waters and MedSec report was “false and misleading.” Abbott’s spokeswoman said, “We continue to collaborate with St. Jude to advance the transaction.”AdvertisementEven if the report were true, that alone would not give Abbott a way out of the deal if it wanted one. If the devices were recalled, Abbott might be able to terminate the deal, but there would be no guarantee.The distinction analysts make between St. Jude Medical and Alere is that the issues with Alere were known before Abbott signed the deal.“It’s unusual to have these events, but it’s also unusual to have two major deals pending,” said David Toung, an analyst at Argus Research. “Abbott certainly has its hands full in deciding which way it really wants to go, which companies it wants to acquire.”A version of this article appears in print on August 27, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: 2 Deals Turn Into 2 Headaches for Abbott Laboratories.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.