AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonCall it the Bill and Carl Show.William A. Ackman and Carl C. Icahn — two Wall Street hedge fund giants — duke it out over a nutritional supplements company called Herbalife. Arguing that the company is a pyramid scheme, Mr. Ackman stakes $1 billion on a wager that the stock will go to zero. Mr. Icahn, calling him a “crybaby in the schoolyard,” buys as many shares in Herbalife as he can.The two stand their ground for years. Then they publicly make up. And now, there’s a twist: On Friday, Mr. Ackman said that bankers recently offered to sell him Mr. Icahn’s shares.In an interview, Mr. Ackman said he was contacted this month by bankers at Jefferies, the investment bank, who told him they were planning to put together a trade to buy out Herbalife’s biggest shareholder (that’s Mr. Icahn, who owns an 18.3 percent stake). The bankers asked Mr. Ackman if he was open to buying stock to “cover” his short position, which would in effect reverse some of his bet against Herbalife.“I said absolutely not,” Mr. Ackman said. But he offered to pick up a few million shares if the bankers struggled to find enough willing buyers, he said, adding that he would be willing to lose money to get Mr. Icahn out of the stock.But that wasn’t the only twist on Friday. Late in the afternoon, Mr. Icahn issued a statement denying any intention to sell his shares in Herbalife, accusing Mr. Ackman of being “blind to the facts” and wrongly speaking on his behalf. Mr. Icahn also said that he bought another 2.3 million shares of Herbalife on Friday.It is all part of the latest act in a four-year drama involving the two investors that has riveted and at times bewildered Wall Street. Such well-known investors as George Soros and Daniel S. Loeb have made cameo appearances as well.In July, it all appeared to be building to a finale. The Federal Trade Commission announced tough sanctions against Herbalife, accusing it of “deceiving hundreds of thousands of hopeful people” and calling into question its distribution practices and the ways it generates revenue by relying on customers to sell products to friends and relatives. The regulator also fined Herbalife $200 million and required it to hire an outside monitor and change its business practices in the United States.The news was a moral victory for Mr. Ackman, who has argued for years that Herbalife was deceiving customers. But it also seemed that Mr. Icahn had won the war over the future of the company because the F.T.C. stopped short of shutting it down.And Mr. Icahn wasted little time relishing the apparent victory. In a statement issued the same day, he indicated that he might even be interested in doubling down on his position.Herbalife said it would let him increase his ownership stake to as much as 35 percent. The company also said that it had been “under attack by an intransigent short-seller hellbent on a misinformation campaign designed to destroy our company.”Theatrics are not unusual for Mr. Ackman and Mr. Icahn. Both built multibillion-dollar hedge funds and their reputations by being brash and making contrarian, sometimes controversial, statements about the companies they invest in or against.Mr. Ackman specializes in making big, concentrated bets. Sometimes his investments score big, but that’s not always the case. Here’s how some of his ideas have fared.The two men have traded barbs in the past over other business disputes, too.At an investment conference in Manhattan last year, the two appeared to agree to disagree on their latest dispute, publicly embracing on stage.“It’s not about winning,“ Mr. Ackman said at the time, but quickly added, “I would love to get Carl out of this stock.”In his interview on Friday, however, Mr. Ackman said that the two of them now seemed to be in agreement about Herbalife, adding that Mr. Icahn’s public comments last month about pursuing opportunities for Herbalife was a “head fake.”Mr. Ackman also struck an optimistic tone, arguing that Mr. Icahn’s interest in selling his stake — which was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal — would send a strong message about Herbalife’s future.“Herbalife is a confidence game. Carl is the chief confidence guy. When Carl exits, it tells you something,” he said, adding, “I view it as very favorable for us.”Mr. Icahn lashed back, countering that Mr. Ackman “may be a smart guy but he has clearly succumbed to the same dangerous (and sometimes fatal) malady that afflicts many investors — he’s developed a very bad case of ‘Herbalife obsession.’”Mr. Icahn went further. “It amazes me that a guy who hasn’t any knowledge of my internal investment thinking believes he is in a position to go on television to tell the world what I AM thinking! Amazing!”In his battle against Herbalife, Mr. Ackman has pulled out all the stops and promised to go “to the end of the earth” to bring down the company. He has spent tens of millions of dollars on research and legal fees in a campaign against the company. He has walked the halls of Congress, pressing lawmakers to take action, and personally urged regulators to shut the company down.Mr. Ackman has given presentations that last hours (his first presentation in 2012 went on for more than three hours). He has even cried on stage while likening Herbalife’s practices to those of the mafia and the Nazis.All the while, Mr. Ackman has lost billions of dollars on his bet, which makes money only when the stock price falls. So far this year, Mr. Ackman has lost 15.5 percent for investors in his Pershing Square Holdings hedge fund. Some of those losses have come from his bet against Herbalife, as well as from a wrong-footed bet on Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, which has come under regulatory and public scrutiny over the last year.Mr. Icahn, on the other hand, bought Herbalife stock at an average price of $40 a share and has made quite a bit of money as the stock price has soared. Although the stock dropped 1.4 percent on Friday, it has been trading around $60 a share over the last month.Speaking on Friday, Mr. Ackman said he would continue his pursuit to shut down Herbalife and maintain his short position in the stock.“I’ve suffered through the hardest part,” he said.Mr. Icahn had a different message. In a warning directed at Mr. Ackman, he said: “Obsessions concerning the value of stocks are the undoing of many investors because they often blind you to the facts, and it becomes impossible to see the forest for the trees.”Advertisement