AdvertisementSupported byBy Mary Williams WalshCalifornia is preparing to create a mandatory state-run retirement plan for an estimated six million workers at companies that do not now offer any retirement benefits.The move could make California the first state to require companies to take part in such a system. Colorado was considering the idea but decided against it in May, and New Jersey and Washington have opted instead for programs with very limited state involvement. But Connecticut, Oregon, Maryland and Illinois are moving forward with their own state-run retirement programs and are looking to California as an example.Currently, California’s plan would require all companies in that state with five or more employees to take part in what is being called the Secure Choice Retirement Savings Program. The biggest companies will start first, and the smallest companies will have three years to get ready.Money is not expected to start flowing into the first Secure Choice accounts until sometime in 2017.The companies will not be required to contribute their own money to the program, only to enroll their workers. Nor does the measure make state taxpayers directly liable. But the financial services industry is questioning whether the program will be financially viable — and what will happen if it is not.The California State Assembly approved the measure on Thursday; next, it must be reconciled with the State Senate’s version, passed in May. Gov. Jerry Brown, a Democrat, will then have 30 days to sign the measure into law. The bill has the support of unions and the AARP, among others.Important features of the state program still need to be worked out, such as who will manage the money and what investment options will be available to workers.On Thursday, the United States Department of Labor issued a final safe-harbor rule, making it possible for California to run its program without conforming with the federal employee benefits law, known as Erisa, that now covers all nongovernment workers in California and the other 49 states. The Secure Choice program may still be subject to regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission, however, raising thorny constitutional issues.The Investment Company Institute, which represents the mutual fund industry, said the new safe-harbor rule seemed to pose a double standard, because the fiduciary standards for company retirement plans were recently tightened, and state-led plans like Secure Choice were exempt.In a statement, the institute said the Labor Department “plans to turn a blind eye on the track record of mismanagement and abuse in state-run programs, whether public employee pension plans or municipal securities disclosure.”Early proposals that called for guaranteed investment returns in Secure Choice have been scaled back in the face of longstanding troubles at Calpers, California’s big pension system for government workers. Calpers’s generous guaranteed benefits have led to grief in California cities that cannot keep up with the rising costs, and skeptics have said that at this point, it would be unwise to add any more state guarantees.A nine-member board has been working on the Secure Choice program since 2012. It plans initially to invest workers’ money in safe Treasury securities, through a federal program called MyRA, for “My Retirement Account,” according to Yvonne Walker, a board member who is also the president of a large Service Employees International Union local in the state.After the start-up, she said, the board will move on to making critical decisions about which other investment options to offer workers and who should invest their money. Ms. Walker said she could not speak for the full board, but she thought it might ultimately hire both Calpers and private firms to handle different investment options. She said the selection could take as long as three years, and if the issue of guaranteed returns were revived, that would take even longer.“We want to be sure that everything we do is deliberate and thoughtful,” she said.California’s Secure Choice measure calls for employers to enroll workers automatically, then start deducting 3 percent from each paycheck. The money is to be transferred to individual retirement accounts, where it will earn tax-free investment income. Eventually, workers will be able to increase or reduce the amount deducted from their pay.Workers will also be able to opt out of the program entirely and collect their pay in full. Lawmakers hope that by requiring companies to enroll all of their workers automatically, and leaving it to the workers to take the extra step of opting out, most people will get into the habit of saving for retirement, even those who now live paycheck to paycheck and do not think they can save.Last year, the federal government opened its MyRA retirement program — similar in some ways to Secure Choice — which also sought to promote retirement saving through automatic enrollment. But the federal program is purely voluntary, and Treasury yields appear to be too low at the moment to whip up much excitement among prospective savers. So far, MyRA has just over 10,000 participants.Proponents in California wanted to have a bigger impact, so they pushed for a mandatory program with a wider range of investment risks and potential rewards.The California business community resisted the idea when it was proposed in 2012 by Kevin de León, a Los Angeles Democrat and president pro tempore of the State Senate. The program’s cost was not the main concern, since the workers would be saving their own money and employers were not being asked to make matching contributions, keep account records or invest the funds.Instead, business groups worried that the requirement to enroll workers automatically and tell them their investment options would expose employers to liability. In bear markets, they argued, workers might look at their dwindling account balances and accuse their employers of exposing them to too much risk; in bull markets, workers in safe accounts might say their employers had made them miss out on big gains. And workers might look at the fees being deducted from their accounts and argue that their employers should have secured them a better deal. (The voluntary federal program has no fees or minimum contributions.)As now written, California’s legislation caps administrative fees at 1 percent of assets — higher than in some of the other states, according to Georgetown University’s Center for Retirement Initiatives, which has a website comparing the programs and tracking their progress. California lawmakers also added language that employers could not be held liable for disappointing investment performance.With that, California’s major business groups dropped their opposition to the bill. But opposition remains among investment firms.The Investment Company Institute has also warned that California’s program was based on rosy assumptions about how many workers would stick with the program, what their typical incomes would be and what percentage they would save.Those assumption make the program look viable, the institute says, but more realistic assumptions would show thousands and thousands of tiny accounts, many from part-time and seasonal workers or from people who drop out of the work force entirely. Small accounts with irregular activity are more expensive to administer than California lawmakers may understand, the trade group said.“California taxpayers or program participants — most likely both — will likely find themselves bearing unanticipated costs as a result of the program,” said the institute’s president, Paul Schott Stevens, in a recent letter to Governor Brown.“There exists a very real possibility that California taxpayers ultimately will need to bail out the program.”Advertisement