AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangIt’s been a tough year for Volkswagen’s car dealers. Cheered by the German automaker’s ambition to become a bigger player in America, they had invested millions of dollars into their franchises. As recently as 2014, dealers were paying premiums of $3 million to $4 million to buy franchises in the United States.And then the emissions scandal erupted.Sales plunged. Franchises were worth little more than the land they stood on and the basic inventory of cars.But Volkswagen will try to make amends by paying as much as $1.2 billion to offset the loss in value for 650 dealers in the United States — on top of whatever amount it will have to spend on buying back unsold and unfixable diesels.Uber may not own the cars chauffeuring its customers, but it has a $1.2 billion problem that it can call its own.That’s the amount of money the company lost in the first half of this year. Recruitment, marketing, and its continuing tussles with regulators and established taxi companies have added to spending. Still, its battle with Didi Chuxing in China took a major toll, and not even a fund-raising tear was able to make up for the billions of dollars it poured into subsidizing rides in the hope of gaining market share.That particular fight has come to an end, as Uber sold its China subsidiary to Didi. But Uber still faces plenty of competition elsewhere that could prove costly.The public spoke and the pharmaceutical company backed down. Sort of.Mylan has lowered the out-of-pocket costs of its EpiPen allergy treatment to some patients, like the uninsured. But it did not lower the list price.That means that Mylan’s revenue will take less of a hit — and that the cost borne by insurers, the federal government, school districts and others in the health care system won’t change. The company also blamed insurers for placing a greater burden on patients through higher out-of-pocket costs. It said that of the $608 list price for an EpiPen, it gets only $274, while the rest goes to pharmacy benefit managers, insurers, wholesalers and retail pharmacies.Robert Cyran at Breakingviews points out that eliminating direct expenses for customers can make price increases invisible, as most people have insurance. There may be middlemen making the system more complicated along the way, as Mylan argues, but with price increases falling largely on governments and insurers, society is likely to end up paying for the problems in the system.Janet L. Yellen will speak at the Fed’s annual symposium in Jackson Hole, Wyo., and may give some indication as to whether the central bank will raise interest rates in September.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement