
UPDATED December 29, 2016

Defective airbags made by Takata have been tied to 12 deaths and more than 180 injuries in the United States alone. The ensuing recall — the largest in automotive history — has turned out to be messy, confusing and frustrating for car owners.
Related Article
Defective airbags made by Takata have been tied to at least 12 deaths and over 180 injuries in the United States alone. The ensuing recall — the largest in automotive history — has turned out to be messy, confusing and frustrating for car owners. Inflaters in tens of millions of Takata airbags contain a defect that may cause them to explode and send metal fragments into cars. The defect lies in how the airbags are meant to inflate when they are activated. They use a compound called ammonium nitrate that help the bag go from its very compact form inside your steering wheel or door panel to something big enough to protect your head or body in a collision. The compound can break down and become unstable when your car is exposed to moisture or temperature swings over time, leading to a risk of explosion.No. The recalled airbags are those that have ammonium-nitrate inflaters without a chemical drying agent to counteract the moisture problem. However, the government has said that even those models that contain the drying agent could be recalled in the future if the moisture issue is still causing ruptures.To date, 42 million vehicles are being recalled to replace airbag inflaters.The Takata airbag recall involves the following manufacturers: Regulators are urging drivers of the older recalled Honda or Acura models listed below to stop driving their vehicles and check this recall lookup site to see whether their vehicle has been repaired or not. If your vehicle has not been fixed, you should call your dealer and schedule a repair — it’s free — because airbags in vehicles on this list are most at risk of rupturing during deployment. They are: For more on fatal airbag ruptures involving these models, click here.It’s the biggest recall in American automotive history and it’s very confusing. For example, some 2005 Honda Civics have been recalled and some have not. In some vehicles, only the passenger-side airbag has been recalled, leading to questions about the safety of the car’s other airbags.Most Common Places to Find Your VIN (vehicle identification number) 1234Under the hoodat the front of the engine blockDriver’s side of thedashboard, viewablethrough the windshieldDriver’s sidedoor jambOn the insideof the rearwheel wellMost Common Places to Find Your VIN(vehicle identification number) Driver’s side of the dashboard, viewable through the windshield1234Under the hood at the front of the engine blockDriver’s side door jambOn the inside of the rear wheel wellTo get the most accurate information about the airbag recall, drivers are urged do a search based on their VIN, or vehicle identification number. That’s a 17-character code that is unique to your vehicle. Your VIN can be found on your vehicle title and registration, on your insurance card, on the driver’s side of the dashboard (visible through the windshield) and on the driver’s side door jamb.Among other things, a VIN search will give you information on which of your vehicle’s airbags have been recalled, and why.Drivers can do a VIN search on the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration’s Recall Lookup site.There is no explicit federal requirement that sellers of used cars fix safety recalls or even disclose them. So buyers beware: It’s important to run the vehicle identification number through the traffic safety agency’s Recall Lookup site, ideally before you buy the car. If your used car is affected by the Takata safety recall, or any other recall, you should take it to a dealer, who is required to fix it free of charge.Contact your dealer to get your vehicle repaired, but know that you might have to wait. The government has ordered manufacturers to replace inflaters in older recalled vehicles that are most likely to have been exposed to hot and humid conditions first, because they pose the most risk. Additional factors, such as whether the inflater is in a driver or passenger side air bag, also affect how your repair has been prioritized, the traffic safety administration says. If replacement parts aren’t available yet for your vehicle, your dealer may be able to offer you a loaner car. Here are manufacturers that have agreed to provide loaner cars: The traffic safety agency has updated its schedule by which manufacturers are required to have a sufficient supply of replacement parts to conduct the required recall repairs.The agency urges drivers to check its Recalls Lookup site frequently for updates on the Takata recall and repair schedule. No, that’s illegal, and your airbag is still more likely to save you in a crash, not hurt you. If your airbag has been recalled — and it is not an older Honda or Acura listed above — regulators emphasize that the airbag should be replaced as soon as possible.Some drivers with special needs who believe an airbag would harm them in a crash can apply to disable them. See the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration’s frequently asked questions for more information.Some airbags that have been fixed will need to be replaced again in a few years, because they were given an “interim” repair of a newer version of the same Takata inflater. The safety agency says that all vehicles with interim remedies will be offered free permanent replacement inflaters when they are available.Contact your dealer, and do VIN searches regularly, for more information. It’s a good to do that anyway to stay up to date on any or all recalls affecting your vehicle.Advertisement