By EMILY STEELAUG. 26, 2016
Peace has come to the land of the Redstones, at least for now.The family feud that had persisted even after a truce was declared last week in the fight over Sumner M. Redstone’s $40 billion corporate empire appeared on Friday to be on its way to a resolution.Mr. Redstone has agreed to meet in person with Keryn Redstone, his 34-year-old granddaughter, who joined his former confidants in the bitter legal battle challenging his competence. That meeting will be part of a broader resolution that includes clarifying her role as an equal beneficiary of the trust that will control Mr. Redstone’s companies after he dies or is declared incompetent.The agreement paves the way for a conclusion to a vicious legal battle that has included court fights in Massachusetts, Delaware and California. Ms. Redstone had challenged the settlement reached last week that put an end to the battle for control of Viacom. Ms. Redstone agreed on Friday for the Massachusetts court to dismiss the claims brought by Philippe P. Dauman and George S. Abrams, two former directors of the trust, in a suit asserting that Mr. Redstone lacked the mental capacity to make decisions about his businesses.Mr. Redstone controls about 80 percent of the voting shares in Viacom and CBS through National Amusements, the theater chain company started by his father. The National Amusements trust, now valued at more than $5 billion, will gain control of his companies after he dies or is declared incompetent, and the beneficiaries include Ms. Redstone and Mr. Redstone’s four other grandchildren.In a legal filing this month, Ms. Redstone asserted that she had been disinherited of $6 million from Mr. Redstone’s personal trust and potentially $1 billion more from the National Amusements trust.The two sides agreed to mediate the dispute over the $6 million in California, where Mr. Redstone lives.A version of this article appears in print on August 27, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Another Fight in Redstone Family Feud Is Defused.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.