
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

AUG. 26, 2016
Apollo Global Management and Searchlight Capital are making a $4.3 billion bet on capitulation.Apollo, the private-equity company run by Leon Black, is leading a deal to take Rackspace, a cloud computing company, private after it struggled to compete with Amazon, Microsoft and other technology giants. If Rackspace’s strategic shift to sell services on these platforms succeeds, Apollo will have a nice payday.About 70 percent of Rackspace’s revenue comes from managing server farms for individual companies. That is a stable but relatively low-growth business. The excitement has come from its public cloud operations, where it competes against Amazon Web Services and Microsoft’s Azure, selling on-demand computing and services.The problem is this is a business of scale. Bigger companies can negotiate to buy servers and power for less, and deploy gear more effectively. So Amazon and Microsoft can offer better deals to customers without suffering a big hit to margins.Rackspace is trying a bit of jujitsu. While it is not abandoning its efforts, the company realizes it cannot effectively compete with Amazon and Microsoft. So it has become a partner, selling services and helping companies connect their data and software to Amazon Web Services and Azure. There is an additional benefit to Apollo. It takes a lot less capital to offer consulting services than to build and run server farms.There is risk. While its existing business of managing server farms for individual businesses probably will provide enough cash flow to cover costs and service debt, success will rely on its new partnerships taking off. That may not happen. Customers may wonder whether it makes sense to pay for additional support and services, especially as Amazon and Microsoft continually make their web services easier to use. The growth of cloud computing, however, may mean there’s plenty of room on the Amazon and Microsoft bandwagons.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »