AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.32 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.47 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.27 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Board of Education, $175 million of debt securities. Competitive.Florida Department of Environmental Protection, $160 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Louisiana, $169.2 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Essex County, N.J., $80 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Sequoia Union High School District, Calif., $89.9 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Arizona Board of Regents, $198.9 million of Arizona State University system revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Arizona Transportation Board, $77.6 million of grant anticipation refunding notes. Wells Fargo Securities.Arizona Transportation Board, $85.4 million of transportation excise tax revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Arizona Transportation Board, $172.4 million of highway revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.California, $2.7 billion of general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Genesee County, Mich., $54.7 million of water supply system revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Hood River County School District, Ore., $65.7 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray & Company.Illinois Finance Authority, $500 million of state clean water initiative revolving revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Miami-Dade County Expressway Authority, $97.7 million of toll system refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Minneapolis-St. Paul Metropolitan Airports Commission, $542.1 million of senior airport revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.New York Environmental Facilities Corporation, $130.2 million of state revolving funds revenue bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank & Company.Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency, $254.8 million of single family mortgage revenue bonds. Jefferies.Summit County, Ohio, $54.7 million of limited tax general obligation bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets.University of South Alabama, $83.4 million of university facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Advertisement