By THE NEW YORK TIMESAUG. 28, 2016
Here’s what to expect in the week ahead:ECONOMYOn Monday, the Commerce Department will report data on personal spending for July. Economists expect to see a 0.3 percentage point increase, down slightly from the 0.4 percentage point rise in June but a still-healthy pace. Despite economists’ worries about the direction of overall economic growth, consumer spending has been fairly robust, especially for durable goods like automobiles. Nelson D. SchwartzExpectations are not high for Canada’s second-quarter gross domestic product results, which will be released on Wednesday. The period includes the time when a huge wildfire swept through Fort McMurray, Alberta, leading to the shutdown of several major oil sands operations. Even without the natural disaster, sluggish oil prices have continued to weigh on Canada’s economy. Exports, which had been expected to rise because of the low value of the Canadian dollar, instead fell during the period. In the first quarter, Canada posted a 2.4 percent increase over the previous quarter on an annualized basis. BMO Capital Markets, a unit of the Bank of Montreal, has estimated that the economy retracted by 2 percent during the second quarter. Ian AustenAUTO INDUSTRYNew car sales have been softening in recent months, and the sales report due on Thursday is likely to confirm that the industry slipped into reverse in August. The auto researcher Edmunds.com predicts that sales of new cars and light trucks will fall 2.5 percent in August, to 1.53 million vehicles. That comes after growth of just 0.7 percent in July. The recent trend of weaker auto sales suggests that the industry reached its peak in 2015, when sales hit a record 17.4 million. A decline this year would end a streak of six consecutive years of growth. Neal E. BoudetteECONOMYOn Thursday, the Institute for Supply Management will report the latest reading of its manufacturing index. Economists expect a slight decrease to 52 from 52.6 in July. Factories and the industrial sector have not been a bright spot lately for the economy, although there are signs that manufacturing activity is finally rebounding a bit. A healthy reading from the institute of 52 or more would confirm that; a lower level would suggest the sector was still soft. Nelson D. SchwartzOn Friday, at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department is scheduled to release its report on the nation’s hiring and unemployment for August. Coming just a couple of weeks before the Federal Reserve Board’s scheduled mid-September meeting, this jobs report will be closely watched. On Friday, Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, said that “the continued solid performance of the labor market” in recent months strengthened the case for the Fed to raise its benchmark interest rate. The labor market has logged two consecutive months of strong jobs growth over the summer: Employers added 255,000 new positions in July and 292,000 in June. Analysts are not expecting payrolls to have expanded at a pace quite that heady in August. Morgan Stanley, for example, is predicting a gain of 185,000, with the unemployment rate remaining steady at 4.9 percent. Patricia CohenA version of this article appears in print on August 29, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Auto Industry Sales Data, and August’s Jobs Report.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.