AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerAnsys Inc., a Canonsburg, Pa., company that produces engineering simulation software that helps test a multitude of things including rocket launches and wearable technology, announced a new chief executive on Monday.The new chief is Ajei S. Gopal, 54, who has been on the board of Ansys for more than five years. He will assume the role of chief executive in January, succeeding James E. Cashman, who will become chairman, the company said. Mr. Gopal had been serving as the interim president and chief operating officer at Symantec, a digital security firm that recently agreed to acquire Blue Coat Inc. and combine under the management of Blue Coat’s chief executive. Mr. Gopal was named president and chief operating officer of Ansys on Monday.Ansys’s current chairman, Ronald W. Hovsepian, will become lead independent director when the transition takes place.“He brings a proven track record, expertise managing the scale and complexity of a global multibillion-dollar company and critical skills in software strategy, engineering, product management and development,” said Mr. Hovsepian in the statement about Mr. Gopal’s appointment. “Ajei has profound knowledge of our business and strategic direction, as well as significant financial discipline.”Heidrick & Struggles, an executive search firm, reviewed both internal and external candidates before deciding upon Mr. Gopal.Mr. Gopal had been an operating partner at the technology investing firm Silver Lake when it made a $500 million strategic investment in Symantec earlier this year. He helped Symantec with its acquisition of Blue Coat and in its search for a permanent chief executive. Before Silver Lake, he served as an executive at Hewlett-Packard and before that, at CA Technologies. Mr. Gopal holds 23 patents, according to the statement, and has a doctorate in computer science from Cornell University. He has a bachelor’s degree from the Indian Institute of Technology in Bombay.Ansys had a market valuation of $8.6 billion as of Monday’s close of trading.Advertisement