
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

AUG. 30, 2016
Gannett’s battle to acquire Tronc, the newspaper publisher formerly known as Tribune Publishing, raises the question of whether a board should continue to “just say no” or give in to a hostile acquirer.The battle for Tronc is entering a surprising final stage as Gannett is rumored to have raised its bid. Gannett initially bid $12.25 a share in April, raising a furious and disdainful reaction from Michael W. Ferro Jr., Tronc’s chairman and largest shareholder, who paid $44 million, or $8.50 a share, for his initial 17 percent stake in February. Mr. Ferro, an entrepreneur who hit his initial jackpot in a business-to-business internet company, said the bid undervalued the company. Instead, he sought to transform the company, the publisher of The Los Angeles Times and The Chicago Tribune, and carry out his vision of a new internet media company.So far, Mr. Ferro’s plan for independence seems to be bearing out. Gannett raised its initial bid several weeks later to $15 a share. In response, Tribune sold a 12.9 percent interest to a billionaire entrepreneur, Patrick Soon-Shiong, at $15 a share for $70.5 million, justifying the sale as needed to protect journalism and fend off the underpriced Gannett bid. The deal made Dr. Soon-Shiong the company’s second-biggest shareholder.Tribune also fought off a shareholder vote on its directors, though a significant percentage of the unaffiliated shareholder votes withheld support for Mr. Ferro. Then the company changed its name to Tronc and stated its new mission as a company focused on the internet.AdvertisementShareholders fumed, some suing in a Delaware court. The hedge fund Oaktree Capital Management, which at one point owned a 14.8 percent stake, also attacked the board, calling for negotiations on a sale and taking steps to sue. Other hedge funds also showed up. Last week, HG Vora Capital Management announced that it had taken a stake equivalent to 9.9 percent of Tronc shares, saying in a regulatory filing that it was speaking with Tronc management about a “potential sale.”AdvertisementThis last disclosure comes in the wake of reports that Gannett, which some thought would quietly go away, has raised its bid.It is up to Tronc to either spurn Gannett again or accept a bid if Gannett is willing to pay.If Mr. Ferro’s goal in resisting was to push up Gannett’s price, then he is doing a masterly job. To be sure, he is getting an assist from Gannett itself, which announced its offer after the deadline to nominate directors to Tronc’s board, removing any leverage it could have had to force Tronc to negotiate. This means that Gannett must persuade the board to accept the offer, and Tronc’s board seems willing to defy the majority of its shareholders who want to sell.It all raises the questions of when should a board say no and what shareholders can do about a “just say no” defense.The “just say no” defense was first raised in the 1980s, a time of hostile raiders and buyouts financed by Michael Milken’s junk bonds. Back then, companies lacked takeover defenses, something that suited many academics just fine. These professors theorized that the takeover market served to discipline management. If management underperformed, an acquirer would buy the company on the cheap and operate it more efficiently. The threat of a takeover would discipline poorly performing companies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The argument makes sense, but the hostile raiders ruined it all. People like T. Boone Pickens began coercive offers  intended to push companies to accept hostile bids even if underpriced, or pay the raiders to go away. Led by the prominent deal lawyer Marty Lipton of Wachtell Lipton Rosen & Katz, who together with his colleagues invented the “poison pill,” companies began to adopt takeover defenses. The argument was that boards were in the best place to decide whether to accept or reject an offer.Named after Nancy Reagan’s antidrug campaign at the time, the “just say no” defense left it up to a board’s judgment to accept or reject a bid no matter the price. The reason may have been simple dislike of the acquirer or a need by the directors to keep their jobs. Whatever the real reason, the ostensible one was based on the shenanigans of these hostile takeovers, premised in the board’s ability to judge whether a bid was underpriced.The courts validate the “just say no” defense, as one did recently in the battle of Air Products and Chemicals to take over Airgas. This means boards now have wide latitude to reject bids, and shareholders are forced to abide by the board decision or unseat the directors. Of course, in a situation like Tronc’s, where Mr. Ferro and Dr. Soon-Shiong collectively own about a third of the company, it is much harder to unseat the board and take the offer.This brings us back to Tronc itself. The “just say no” defense has had varying degrees of success. Yahoo used it to fight off a $44.6 billion bid from Microsoft eight years ago. Though some dispute how serious Microsoft was at the end, Yahoo’s initial rebuff looks like a clear mistake in retrospect, as its core business recently sold for $4.8 billion. There are success stories: Airgas fought off a bid by Air Products at $70 a share and was recently sold for $143 a share, though the stock had lagged the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index up to that time.Advertisement“Just say no” as a defense is a gamble. It depends on how steely the management and board are and what the decision means for the future. There is a negotiating element to this — adopting a “just say no” defense leaves no doubt that Tronc has succeeded in getting more potential money. The risk in this strategy is that Gannett goes away instead of acquiring Tronc, leaving the company to wither like Yahoo or find its own path to success.It is not certain whether Tronc’s resistance is a brilliant negotiating defense to push the offer higher or whether the board is saying the company is not for sale at any price. If the former, Mr. Ferro has earned his accolades from shareholders. If the latter, he perhaps has also, but we will not know the outcome for years to come.Luckily for Tronc shareholders, Gannett has stuck around. Whether inadvertently or not, Tronc’s obstreperousness has resulted in a higher bid, which would mean more money for shareholders, money that would not have come if the board had first listened to them.The “just say no” defense has lots of elements, and it is one that few companies can pull off successfully because there is so much uncertainty. We will find out whether Tronc adds new justification. But in the face of this, most companies these days sell, whether or not they can mount a defense after a few rounds of negotiations. It is perhaps better to take the money and run, provided the bid is in the range of fairness. That just may be fine, at least for shareholders.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.A version of this article appears in print on August 31, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: The Gamble Behind the Corporate ‘Just Say No’ Defense.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »