AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangA woman was killed in her home and four other people were injured when a truck carrying Takata airbag parts crashed and detonated in Texas last week. The blast demonstrated just how potent the explosives used to activate Takata airbags are, creating an explosion so immense that the victim’s remains were not found for two days.It also highlights how risky it is to transport the airbag inflater explosives — the focus of the largest auto safety recall in history. An internal document provided by a former Takata employee shows that drivers operating these trucks over their 36-hour journey are required to wear fire-resistant clothing, steel-toed boots with rubber soles, safety goggles and helmets.The company is expected to face intense scrutiny over its packaging and shipping. And this is not the first accident involving the chemical used in Takata airbags — in 2006, blasts at its plant in Monclova, Mexico, caused by the chemical forced hundreds of workers and residents to evacuate.The big day has come, and a big bill has arrived with it. The European Union’s competition authority announced its ruling on Apple’s tax dealings and demanded that Apple pay back taxes to the Irish government. How much? $14.5 billion.The ruling is unlikely to improve trans-Atlantic relations, after American officials accused their European counterparts of overstepping their reach and campaigning against American corporate success.Mondelez, the maker of Oreos, is passing on chocolate for the moment. Hershey chocolate, anyway.The company said it was abandoning its effort to buy Hershey after its $23 billion offer was rebuffed. The companies talked but were unable to work it out even after Mondelez raised its offer from $107 for each share to $115. Hershey did not want to take anything less than $125, people with knowledge of the talks said.It was a rather bitter end for investors: Hershey shares tumbled almost 12 percent in after-hours trading. Mondelez gained about 3 percent.The latest data from the Conference Board’s consumer confidence index and the Standard & Poor’s/ Case-Shiller Home Price Index will be published.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement