AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerNelson Peltz’s Trian Fund Management has acquired a $2.5 billion stake in General Electric, seeking to reboot the stock after what the activist investor called a “tough decade” of performance.Trian purchased 98.5 million shares, or about 1 percent of the G.E., making it one of the company’s largest investors. Shares of G.E.. were up 4.3 percent in morning trading on Monday.By 2018, Trian believes, G.E. could expand operating margins, commit to $20 billion more in leverage and return 40 percent of the current market value to investors through share buybacks, according to an 81-page white paper released Monday. Trian said it had not asked G.E. for representation on the board.The chief executive of G.E., Jeffrey R. Immelt, said in a statement on Monday that he welcomed “Trian’s significant investment in the company.”Broadly, the activist investor’s proposals do not differ much from the strategy initiated by Mr. Immelt, who has been focusing the company toward its industrial roots by selling and spinning off businesses.Through Friday, however, the stock has returned less than 1 percent over the last 12 months.“We invested in G.E. because it is undervalued and underappreciated by the market despite what we believe is a transformation that will allow its world-class industrial businesses to drive attractive shareholder returns,” Mr. Peltz, the chief executive and founding partner of Trian, said in a statement.G.E. announced two years ago that it planned to exit many of its financial services businesses that threatened the conglomerate during the 2008 crisis. The sale of G.E.’s appliances business is expected to close later this year in addition to the spinoff of its retail credit card unit, Synchrony Financial, which went public in 2014.Trian has not sought a breakup of G.E., but said that the company should continue to focus on its industrial business lines that span gas turbines to aircraft engines. In September, European regulators approved G.E.’s $13.5 billion acquisition of the power business of Alstom of France.Still, Trian may encourage G.E. to focus more on returning capital to shareholders through buybacks rather than deal-making, according to Nick Heymann, an analyst with William Blair.“The biggest impact Trian has on G.E. will be to perhaps put some brakes, or more aggressive hurdle rates, with regard to M.&A.,” Mr. Heymann said. “Clearly, Trian would rather them spend the money on repurchasing their stock than on adjacency acquisitions.”Trian, founded a decade ago, has taken stakes and agitated for change in a number of companies, including DuPont, Mondelez and PepsiCo.Advertisement