
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

AUG. 29, 2016
A tragic figure in American literature has an analog in modern finance. Once upon a time, the billionaire investor Edward S. Lampert was hailed as the next Warren E. Buffett. These days, his decade-plus obsession with the struggling retailer Sears resembles Captain Ahab’s with Moby-Dick.Mr. Lampert was a hedge fund star when he took the discount store Kmart out of bankruptcy in 2003 and merged it with Sears two years later. A devotee of Ayn Rand and Mr. Buffett, Mr. Lampert had parlayed $28 million of seed corn into a spot on the Forbes rich list by making savvy bets on undervalued companies.In 2003, his growing fame attracted unwanted attention when he spent a harrowing day held captive in a roadside Days Inn after being kidnapped him from his Connecticut office garage. The following year, he became the first hedge fund manager to pocket $1 billion in a single year.What Mr. Lampert once called an “enormous undertaking” to revive Sears, once America’s biggest retailer, has become an increasingly forlorn pursuit, however. Sears shares have lost nearly 90 percent of their value since 2007 as the company failed to keep pace with retailers like Walmart Stores, Target and Amazon.com.AdvertisementMr. Lampert, who became chief executive in 2013 to try to right the ship, has been breaking off pieces of the business — including its Lands’ End clothing line and some of its real estate — using exit dividends and other financial tricks to bolster cash. Sears, the original obsession, is no longer his top holding, mainly because it has fallen so much.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Turning around a retailer that was once a symbol of American commerce may have been a nobler pursuit than, say, simply collecting fees of 2-and-20 percent from investors in a hedge fund. But extending another $300 million loan last week to Sears is the latest sign that Mr. Lampert does not seem able to let go of the harpoon.As Sears’s controlling shareholder, and its captain, Mr. Lampert may have few other options but to hang on. The new loan from what remains of his investment franchise, ESL Investments, followed similar extensions of credit in April and in 2014. The extra cash should help tide the $1.5 billion retailer through the upcoming holiday season, but the medium-term prospect looks bleak.AdvertisementLike the doomed Captain Ahab, Mr. Lampert should have cut loose a long time ago.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »