By LESLIE PICKERAUG. 29, 2016
The Williams Companies appointed three new directors on Monday, two months after half the board resigned over a failed effort to oust the chief executive of the embattled pipeline operator.The new slate will be up for election at the company’s annual meeting in November. The appointments come less than a week after Keith Meister — who was among the directors who resigned in June — nominated 10 directors of his own to replace the entire board.The new directors hail from public companies within the energy sector. They are Stephen W. Bergstrom, a current director and former chief executive of American Midstream Partners; Scott D. Sheffield, chairman and chief executive of Pioneer Natural Resources Company; and William H. Spence, chief executive of the PPL Corporation.Mr. Meister’s nominees include himself as well as analysts and managing directors at his hedge fund, Corvex Management, and will serve as placeholders until he can find actual candidates over the next few weeks.AdvertisementMr. Meister indicated that Williams’s deadline for nominating directors was too tight, which is why he pursued the unusual placeholder strategy.The next set of directors will probably face pivotal decisions on the future of Williams, which is based in Tulsa. The company had intended to merge with Energy Transfer Equity in a $38 billion deal, signed last November. But since then, as energy prices plummeted, Energy Transfer wanted to sever the deal, which it was able to do after prevailing in a Delaware Chancery Court decision in June. Days later, half the board voted to fire Alan Armstrong, the chief executive, but given the split decision, Mr. Armstrong was able to keep his job.AdvertisementSince then, the company’s shares have gained about 30 percent, as the company has signed deals to sell assets and reduce costs to shore up its financials.A version of this article appears in print on August 30, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Williams  Companies  Names New Directors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.