
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

AUG. 30, 2016
A potash giant may soon emerge from the ashes of failed global matchmaking. Canadian fertilizer producers Potash Corp. and Agrium say they are discussing a merger. The potential deal follows a string of aborted industry combinations dating back to the Australian miner BHP Billiton’s $39 billion attempted buyout of Potash in 2010 — in retrospect, a dodged bullet for BHP.The world has changed considerably since Canada vetoed BHP’s hostile attempt to acquire Potash, arguing it was against the national interest. Demand for seeds, fertilizer and other agricultural materials — which flourished as rising Chinese demand and American ethanol production drove up crop prices — has slumped in the face of a global grain glut that has sapped farm income. That has spurred a wave of deals in the farming sector, such as Dow’s planned merger with DuPont and ChemChina’s recent agreement to buy the crop chemicals giant Syngenta.Fertilizer makers, which faced additional pressure after the collapse in 2013 of a global cartel that used to coordinate the supply of potash, have struggled to strike similar deals. Potash last year offered nearly $9 billion for the producer K&S, only to withdraw its offer after the German group demurred. Another merger, between CF Industries of the United States and OCI of the Netherlands, fell apart in May after changes to American rules for so-called tax inversions ate into the deal’s anticipated benefits.This time may be different. Potash shares jumped about 12 percent and Agrium shares about 6 percent after the companies confirmed preliminary discussions on Tuesday, putting their combined equity value at around $28 billion. That is less than the $39 billion BHP was willing to pay for Potash in cash just five years ago, but the lack of cross-border complications and the friendly nature of the discussions means the latest attempt at a fertilizer megadeal has a better chance of happening.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »