By AMIE TSANGAUG. 31, 2016
It’s just a drop in the bucket for Apple, with its cash pile of more than $230 billion. But the company nonetheless described the ruling by Europe that Ireland should recoup 10 years’ worth of back taxes, or about $14.5 billion, as a “devastating blow” to the rule of law.Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, defiantly scolded the competition commission of the European Union and contended that Apple was a good corporate tax citizen in Ireland. But do his arguments hold any water? We consulted the tax experts and Mr. Cook seems to have been technically truthful.But he missed the point of the European Commission’s case, which was whether Apple took advantage of loopholes in Irish tax law.Mr. Cook argues that Apple is the largest taxpayer in Ireland, the United States and the world. It is likely that is because of the company’s size, but it is hard to prove as its corporate tax information in the United States is private. And, as Steven M. Rosenthal, a senior fellow at the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center, points out, the ruling is not about how much the company has paid, but how much it should pay. “Tax systems are not a pay-what-you-want system,” he said.AdvertisementShould a board continue to “just say no,” or should it give in to a hostile acquirer?That’s the question being raised as Tronc continues to play coy with Gannett, which is rumored to have raised its offer for the company, the publisher of The Los Angeles Times and The Chicago Tribune.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Gannett must persuade Tronc’s board to accept the offer, but the board seems willing to defy its shareholders by refusing to consider. The “just say no” defense, which was validated in court and gave boards a wide latitude to reject bids, means shareholders have to abide by a board decision or unseat directors. It has been a successful approach, but it is also a gamble.AdvertisementThe risk here is that Gannett might go away, leaving Tronc to wither as Yahoo did after it fought off a bid from Microsoft, writes the Deal Professor. At least, if Michael W. Ferro Jr., the chairman, is just trying to push up Gannett’s bid price, he is doing a masterly job.Google’s parent company, Alphabet, is broadening its car-pooling program and setting up a potential challenge with ride-hailing services like Uber and Lyft. Its program, Waze, is limited to employees of companies near Google’s headquarters in Mountain View, Calif. In the fall, it will expand to users in San Francisco.The expansion, earlier reported by The Wall Street Journal, is another example of intensifying competition between the two companies. Uber has already waded into the arena of self-driving cars, an enduring area of interest for Google. And David Drummond, a longtime executive at Alphabet, recently stepped down from Uber’s board because of the overlap between the two companies.• Canada publishes its second-quarter gross domestic product results, which are expected have been affected by a wildfire in Alberta and sluggish oil prices.• Salesforce reports its latest quarterly results.• Neel Kashkari, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, will discuss the role of the Fed and its board at St. Paul.• At the Brookings Institution, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will discuss priorities for the United States at the Group of 20 Summit in Hangzhou.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.