AdvertisementSupported byBy Patricia CohenThe Education Department has been increasing pressure on the multibillion-dollar career-training industry, responding to complaints that some for-profit colleges burden students with debt and leave them without promised skills and jobs.On Tuesday, the department got a pushback. The owner of a chain of colleges, the Center for Excellence in Higher Education, filed an unusual lawsuit in federal court accusing education officials of pursuing a political agenda. The suit argues that the department is trying to put the colleges out of business by failing to classify them as nonprofit educational institutions, curbing their access to federal student aid dollars.The department declined to comment on the suit.Created in 2006 as a charity dedicated to promoting free-market principles throughout the higher education industry, the Center for Excellence bought several colleges, including Stevens-Henager, California College and CollegeAmerica, six years later from their founder, Carl B. Barney. Nearly all of the money for the $636 million purchase came from donations and loans made by Mr. Barney, an entrepreneur and ardent devotee of the capitalist evangelist Ayn Rand.In buying the for-profit chain, the Center for Excellence restructured itself as a tax-exempt, nonprofit educational corporation with Mr. Barney as chairman. The Internal Revenue Service approved the designation, but this month the Education Department refused to recognize the center’s nonprofit status for the purposes of receiving federal grants and loans, arguing that the deal was an effort to circumvent stricter government regulation.“This should send a clear message to anyone who thinks converting to nonprofit status is a way to avoid oversight while hanging on to the financial benefits: Don’t waste your time,” John B. King Jr., the secretary of education, said in a news release.The department declared that despite the sale, Mr. Barney retained control of the colleges, which have roughly 9,500 students, and continued to profit from their operation, receiving tens of millions of dollars in debt payments as well as leasing income from use of the institutions’ buildings. (Last year, Mr. Barney canceled the bulk of the debt, more than $337 million.)In addition to appealing the ruling, the Center for Excellence filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court in Utah, arguing that the Education Department was playing politics and characterizing its decision as “arbitrary and capricious.” The center is asking the court to declare that the colleges are nonprofit institutions and should be regulated as such.Unlike traditional nonprofit colleges, for-profits are prohibited from getting more than 90 percent of their revenue from federal financial aid funding. They are also subject to new “gainful employment” rules that link access to federal cash with graduates’ success in finding jobs.Mr. Barney scoffed at the Education Department’s ruling that he still profited from the deal. “I’m out of pocket about $77 million,” he said, referring to costs and lost revenue that, he said, resulted from the sale of his colleges. “It was the worst deal I ever made in my life.”As for his maintaining control, Mr. Barney, 75, said that the colleges have been “my baby.”“I built up the schools. I put my own money in,” he said, “I don’t want to just walk away. There is no reason I can’t continue to be in charge.”Todd J. Zywicki, a law professor at George Mason University and member of the Center for Excellence’s board, similarly dismissed the department’s conclusions. “I had no interest in making Carl Barney rich,” he said of the sale. “I had never met him before.”He also disputed the department’s allegations that the merger with the Center for Excellence was intended to sidestep federal oversight or that the nonprofit group wildly overpaid for the colleges and failed to solicit an independent valuation.“They had a predetermined conclusion and never got all the facts,” Mr. Zywicki addedCurrently, the Denver branch of CollegeAmerica is being sued by the Colorado attorney general’s office on accusations of deceptive advertising and faulty job placement and graduation rates. Citing that lawsuit, Education Department officials had previously demanded that the Center for Excellence guarantee credit of $42.9 million — 30 percent of the annual federal student aid that flowed to the colleges in 2013 — to protect taxpayers and students in case of financial failure.Vocational and technical college operators, which offer certificates and degrees in subjects from cosmetology to nursing, have long argued that they are more adept at responding to a changing job market and better serve some students, including the poor and minority students, and military veterans.Consumer and education advocates counter that many operators exploit vulnerable students, piling on student debt to cover outsize costs for colleges that do not deliver vaunted training and job placements. The Education Department has estimated that about 1,400 programs serving 840,000 students would not pass the new gainful employment standards; 99 percent of those students attend for-profit institutions.As the Education Department has moved to hold the industry more accountable in recent years and bad publicity about for-profits spread, a handful of for-profit colleges have either converted or explored changing to nonprofit entities, which are defined as providing a public benefit and are, therefore, exempt from paying taxes as well as from certain regulatory restrictions.Last week, the department barred one of the nation’s largest for-profit education companies, ITT Technical Institute, from enrolling new students who receive federal aid, a move that analysts say could lead to the company’s collapse.Follow Patricia Cohen on Twitter: @PatcohenNYTAdvertisement