By ANDREW POLLACKNOV. 25, 2015
The Environmental Protection Agency, in a surprising move, has decided to revoke the approval of a herbicide that was made to be used on a new generation of genetically modified crops.The agency’s decision could delay the introduction of corn, soybeans and cotton developed by Dow Chemical to be resistant to the herbicide 2,4-D. But Dow said it did not anticipate a significant delay.In a court filing on Tuesday, the E.P.A. said it had discovered new information suggesting that the herbicide, which Dow calls Enlist Duo, could be more toxic than previously believed.“E.P.A. can no longer be confident that Enlist Duo will not cause risks of concern to nontarget organisms, including those listed as endangered, when used according to the approved label,” the agency said in its filing to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco.AdvertisementMost of the corn, soybeans and cotton grown in the United States are genetically engineered to be resistant to the herbicide glyphosate, also known by the brand name Roundup. That allows farmers to spray the chemical on their fields to kill weeds without hurting their crops.AdvertisementBut because of overuse of glyphosate, many weeds have evolved to be resistant to it, so that strategy does not work so well any more. Dow’s new crops, which are resistant to both glyphosate and the older herbicide 2,4-D, were eagerly awaited by some farmers, who would be able to spray 2,4-D over their crops to kill weeds that are not killed by glyphosate alone.“There’s been a lot of optimism around this, particularly in light of the fact that we have widespread resistance we’re dealing with,” said Jason Norsworthy, a professor of weed science at the University of Arkansas. He said farmers were calling him on Wednesday worried that introduction of the technology would now be delayed.But 2,4-D is prone to drifting, and some vegetable farmers in the Midwest worried that the chemical would drift and kill their crops, which would not be engineered to withstand it. To assuage those concerns, Dow developed Enlist Duo, which contains a new formulation of 2,4-D that is less prone to drifting. It also contains glyphosate.Groups opposed to genetically modified crops hailed the E.P.A.’s decision. “This is a roadblock to the entire next generation of corn and soy in this country,” said Andrew Kimbrell, executive director of the Center for Food Safety.But Dow said in a statement that the concerns of the E.P.A. could be resolved in time for the 2016 growing season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We continue to prepare for commercial sales of Enlist Duo for the 2016 growing season with enthusiastic grower adoption,” said Tim Hassinger, the president of Dow AgroSciences, the company’s agricultural division.The E.P.A. had approved Enlist Duo in October 2014 for use in six of the top corn-producing states, and in March of this year for use in nine more states. The crops themselves have been approved by the Agriculture Department.Dow has been planning to begin selling at least the Enlist corn seeds in 2016, pending regulatory approval from China, a major export market. Some environmental and consumer groups, including the Center for Food Safety, had sued the E.P.A., seeking to reverse the approval of Enlist Duo. The E.P.A. filing saying that it would vacate its approval came in this lawsuit. The court must still accept the E.P.A.’s request, and Dow will have a chance to comment before that decision.AdvertisementThe agency said that it had initially concluded, based on information from Dow, that the two herbicides in Enlist Duo were not synergistic, meaning the toxicity of the two ingredients combined was not greater than expected based on the properties of the individual chemicals.But the agency said it had found a patent application from Dow claiming just such a synergy. That could mean the measures included in Enlist Duo’s label to prevent damage from herbicide drift were inadequate, the agency said.“Here, E.P.A. has learned that it did not have all relevant information at the time it made its registration decision,” the agency said in its court filing.Shares of Dow fell nearly 3 percent on Wednesday. Dow’s chief executive, Andrew N. Liveris, has said that the company is evaluating the future of Dow AgroSciences, meaning it might be sold to another company.The setback to Enlist Duo could be good news for Monsanto. It is developing its own next generation of crops resistant to dicamba, another old herbicide. Monsanto shares rose 4 cents on Wednesday to $95.60.This week’s setback is the second recent one for Dow AgroSciences and the E.P.A. The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit vacated in September the E.P.A.’s approval of a Dow pesticide called sulfoxaflor, after beekeepers and others said the agency had not adequately studied the risk of the chemical to bees.A version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: E.P.A. Revokes Approval of Herbicide for Gene-Altered Crops.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.