
Breakingviews By                     
DOMINIC ELLIOTT and


GEORGE HAY

AUG. 31, 2016
The stars are aligning for an era of German banking consolidation. Commerzbank and Deutsche Bank held discussions in August about a possible merger, Reuters reported on Wednesday. While these did not work out, the wider logic of banking mergers is becoming increasingly compelling.Germany’s banking market is very fragmented. Assets of the top five banks represent only 32 percent of the market, according to European Central Bank data, well below the European average. Germany still has a lot of cooperative-owned and public sector savings banks.Without the benefits of scale, persistently low interest rates bite. The sector’s net interest margin — which shows the difference between the interest banks earn and what they receive — was only about 1.25 percent last year, according to Moody’s Investors Service, the rating agency, less than the eurozone average. Costs relative to revenue are higher at German banks than at their Continental peers. And in a case where rates fell 100 basis points by 2019, net interest income could fall by 32 percent, Bundesbank research indicated in June.Given that, a merger of the 7.7 billion euro Commerzbank and 17.8 billion euro Deutsche Bank would make some sense. Even stripping out just 10 percent of Commerzbank’s costs might add about €5 billion to the value of the combined business, on a net present value basis, and should bump up returns. As it is, neither bank is earning a return greater than its cost of equity, the minimum a shareholder ought to require.Seen from a broader perspective, a union of Commerzbank and Deutsche Bank would encounter difficulties. Commerzbank still has a minority government stake, so Deutsche Bank shareholders would be signing up for unwanted oversight. Being bigger in Germany might mean higher capital requirements under global too-big-to-fail guidelines. And both banks have faced fines for bad behavior in the past.That does not stop either of them from sniffing around elsewhere. BNP Paribas of France is expanding in Germany. And UniCredit of Italy has a big German arm, HVB, the Bavarian strength of which might complement operations at Commerzbank. Even if Deutsche Bank and Commerzbank do not belong together, other combinations may not be long in the making.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »