By AMIE TSANGSEPT. 1, 2016
“Women are no longer going to be cowed into believing that they have to stay silent or suffer the label that says ‘undesirable colleague.’ ” — Michele Coleman Mayes, chairwoman of the American Bar Association’s commission on women in the profession.Unequal pay for women has been an issue in Hollywood and Silicon Valley as well as for the United States soccer team, and now lawyers are increasingly pushing back — challenging their employers and accusing them of favoring men.When Kerrie L. Campbell approached the management at her law firm, Chadbourne & Parke, and said that other colleagues with a similar client revenue were being paid more than her, they responded by telling her that her 2014 revenue was a “fluke.”In February, the managing partner told her that her practice no longer fit the firm’s goals. She said she was given a departure deadline and her pay was reduced to that of an entry-level associate with no benefits.AdvertisementNow she is suing, asking for a total of $100 million on behalf of herself and other female partners who she says receive less pay than male partners even when they bring in more revenue. This comes after other major suits against firms like Sedgwick and Mintz Levin Cohn Ferris Glovsky and Popeo. Chadbourne says that Ms. Campbell’s suit is baseless.AdvertisementEurope’s banks have become more secure since the finanical crisis, but also less profitable. So what’s the solution? According to the chief of Deutsche Bank, John Cryan, it’s more consolidation.Although Mr. Cryan responded to reports that Deutsche Bank had considered a potential merger with Commerzbank by saying that his bank was not considering large mergers any time soon, he said that more mergers were needed across Germany and Europe to improve profitability.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Germany’s banking market is indeed fragmented and without the benefits of scale, low interest rates will bite. Even if Deutsche Bank and Commerzbank do not belong together, other combinations may not be long in the making, Breakingviews contends.After plenty of finger-pointing from both sides, the fate of Abbott Laboratories’ $5.8 billion acquisition of Alere rests with a judge.Alere filed a lawsuit saying Abbott had suffered from buyer’s remorse. It accused Abbott executives of vowing to make life difficult unless Abbott was allowed to walk away.Abbott had also signed a deal to buy St. Jude Medical for $25 billion — a deal that, with the acquisition of Alere, would put a huge strain on its balance sheet. It blamed Alere for filing its annual report late, thus preventing Abbott from reviewing its finances and delaying regulatory approval attempts.Alere is now asking to speed up proceedings for the case, which Abbott has called a publicity stunt.Another tiny start-up bites the dust in Silicon Valley. It should be just another failure that illustrates the reality of trying to make it as an entrepreneur. And yet, Silicon Valley is gripped by the implosion of the start-up, WrkRiot, which aimed to help people find jobs online.AdvertisementThe unraveling has been documented by its former head of marketing, who wrote about how she was “scammed,” describing the internal chaos and accusing the founder, Isaac Choi, of forgery. Mr. Choi’s credentials are also being questioned.Mr. Choi said his company was like any company. “If you want to talk start-ups, all start-ups have problems,” he said. But people are still fascinated to hear about the struggle to survive in the tech industry’s dysfunctional underbelly. And so are we. If you have a start-up story, share it with us here.• The latest report on car sales is expected to show some softening in recent months.• Economists expect the Institute for Supply Management’s manufacturing index to slip slightly.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.