By NIRAJ CHOKSHIAUG. 31, 2016
It is perhaps only fitting that a president who rose to power by harnessing the internet would guest-edit one of the nation’s leading technology and science magazines on the way out.President Obama will take on that duty in the November issue of Wired, the magazine announced on Tuesday. It will be available on newsstands nationwide on Oct. 25, two weeks before Election Day.By Wired’s estimation, it will be the first time a sitting president has guest-edited a magazine, a move the editor, Scott Dadich, described as a natural choice, given the nation’s history of innovation.
            I’m honored to announce that @POTUS is guest-editing November's issue of @WIRED https://t.co/gU41urXfxl #WIREDxPOTUS pic.twitter.com/85P3odjafw “When the founders wrote the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, they were at the bleeding edge of enlightenment philosophy and technology,” Mr. Dadich said in the announcement. “Franklin was talking about crazy stuff like electricity and communications networks. Paine gave up the copyright to Common Sense so it could get wider publication. Jefferson was radically rethinking design and land use.”AdvertisementAt Mr. Obama’s direction, the issue will focus on the future, the magazine said. Its theme will be frontiers: personal, local, national, international and beyond. (Think precision medicine, urban planning, civil rights, climate change and space travel.)What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That theme will also serve as the subject of a White House conference, a convening of innovators, to be held in Pittsburgh earlier in October and to be co-hosted by the University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon University.AdvertisementThe president is no stranger to science, technology and Silicon Valley, subjects central to Wired’s coverage.His first presidential campaign is often credited to an effective use of big data and the internet. and he has championed several ambitious initiatives while in office, including plans to map the human brain and to get 20 million people subscribed to high-speed internet by 2020.Last year, Mr. Obama famously dined late into the night at the White House with 13 guests, including Reid Hoffman, LinkedIn’s co-founder; John Doerr, a Silicon Valley venture capitalist; and Vinod Khosla, a founder of Sun Microsystems — part of a broader effort to prepare an infrastructure and endowment that would be used for, among other things, a “digital first” presidential library.Mr. Obama also courted support from Silicon Valley professionals, some of whom were rewarded for their efforts. John V. Roos, a major fund-raiser and a former law firm partner there, was appointed ambassador to Japan after Mr. Obama first took office.The Wired arrangement won’t be the president’s first foray into editing, either. In 1990, he  became the first black editor in the history of the Harvard Law Review.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.