AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressUnited States markets closed lower on Wednesday, wrapping up a quiet month, as energy companies fell with the price of oil and as makers of chemicals and other materials took losses. A survey of private employers showed that hiring continued at a solid pace in August.KEEPING SCORE The Dow Jones industrial average ended the day 0.3 percent lower and the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index lost 0.2 percent. The Nasdaq composite index dropped 0.2 percent.JOBS DATA Private American businesses added 177,000 jobs in August, according to a survey by the payroll processor ADP. After weak hiring this spring, results from July and August suggest employers are bringing on workers at a healthy clip. The federal government will release its own jobs figures on Friday, and analysts expect a gain of 180,000 jobs. Investors think the Federal Reserve is more likely to raise interest rates later this year if hiring stays solid.TAXED The tax preparer H&R Block reported a bigger first-quarter loss and less revenue than analysts had expected. The company recently sold its bank business, which reduced revenue. H&R Block stock dropped 10.5 percent.SOUR LIQUOR SALES Shares of Brown-Forman, the maker of liquors including Jack Daniel’s whiskey and Finlandia vodka, slumped after its sales fell short of estimates. Brown-Forman said its results were hurt by weak sales in emerging markets and the strong dollar, which makes American goods more expensive overseas. The stock declined 3.5 percent.ENERGY Energy prices slumped after the government said that crude oil stockpiles increased by 2.3 million barrels last week, a bigger gain than analysts had expected. Gasoline stockpiles shrank, but not as much as investors had hoped.Benchmark United States crude oil fell $1.73, to $44.62. It fell 63 cents on Tuesday. Brent crude, used to price oil internationally, fell $1.37, to $47 a barrel.Chevron stock gave up 1.1 percent, and shares of Exxon Mobil lost 0.5 percent. Schlumberger declined 2 percent.DOG DAYS OF SUMMER Stocks closed out the month of August declining five consecute days, but they are still not far from record highs. The S.&P. 500 has risen for five months in a row but may end August down slightly. The biggest losses have gone to phone and utility companies, while concerns over drug prices have affected health care stocks. Banks have risen the most as investors grow more optimistic that interest rates will increase.EUROPEAN MARKETS In Germany, the DAX closed down 0.6 percent, and in France, the CAC 40 lost 0.4 percent. The FTSE 100 dropped 0.6 percent in Britain.EUROPEAN VIEW Economic data out of the eurozone was relatively downbeat, suggesting that the currency bloc’s central bank could soon do the opposite of the Fed: produce more stimulus, rather than tighten rates. Inflation in the eurozone was stuck at a low 0.2 percent annual rate in August, and unemployment also showed no improvement at a high 10.1 percent.ASIA’S DAY The Nikkei 225 gained 1 percent in Japan, while in Hong Kong, the Hang Seng lost 0.2 percent. The Shanghai composite index added 0.4 percent in China. The Kospi was down 0.3 percent in South Korea.BONDS AND CURRENCIES Bond prices were little changed. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note remained at 1.57 percent. The dollar rose to 103.44 yen from 102.97 yen. The euro fell to $1.1144 from $1.1139.Advertisement