By LESLIE PICKERAUG. 31, 2016
When Abbott Laboratories’ $5.8 billion acquisition of Alere was announced on Feb. 1, the two companies lauded the transaction. Miles D. White, the chairman and chief executive of Abbott, said the combination would create the “world’s premier point of care testing business.” Namal Nawana, president and chief executive of Alere, said Abbott’s broad portfolio would achieve its goal of “improving patient care.”These days, the mutual praise seems like a distant memory.In a lawsuit filed last week in Delaware Chancery Court, Alere portrayed Abbott as suffering from “buyer’s remorse,” saying its executives had vowed to make life difficult unless Abbott was allowed to walk away from the deal. Alere contends Abbott stalled on obtaining crucial regulatory approvals to close the transaction. A redacted copy of Alere’s complaint was released Wednesday, the same day Abbott filed its legal response, calling the complaint “nothing but a publicity stunt.”Here is a summary of Alere’s complaint, as it seeks a judge’s help in forcing the deal to close, as well as Abbott’s response.WHAT CHANGEDAbbott signed a deal in April to acquire St. Jude Medical, which makes cardiovascular devices, for $25 billion. Completing that transaction, coupled with Alere’s, would put a tremendous amount of stress on Abbott’s balance sheet, tripling its debt and increasing the likelihood of a credit-rating downgrade. Abbott would also need to issue billions of dollars worth of equity to pay for both deals.AdvertisementAbbott, in its response on Wednesday, blames Alere. Abbott said that accounting and tax issues caused Alere to file its annual report late and prevented Abbott from reviewing “critical financial information.” That, Abbott said, delayed its attempts to obtain regulatory approvals.AdvertisementAlere said that Abbott was aware of Alere’s financial issues and government investigations at the company in January and chose to sign their deal regardless.NO WAY OUT?One week before Abbott announced a deal with St. Jude Medical, two of Abbott’s top executives told Alere that it was no longer interested in completing their transaction, according to Alere’s complaint. Abbott offered to pay Alere as much as $50 million to end their agreement, an offer that Alere promptly refused.When that tactic did not work, Abbott’s Mr. White told Alere executives that he would make life a “living hell” for everyone at Alere if they did not mutually agree to end their arrangement, according to the complaint. Because Alere refused, Abbott sought interviews with about 33 Alere employees all over the world and demanded that Alere produce one million pages of documents. Additionally, Alere argued that Abbott tried to run down the clock by dragging its feet on antitrust-related requests.Abbott responded by saying that Alere had held up regulatory approval because it was unable to file its 2015 annual report on time. Abbott said it was “not in any way refusing to perform any of its obligations under the antitrust provisions of the merger agreement.” Darcy Ross, an Abbott spokeswoman, said in a statement on Wednesday, “Alere’s complaint is nonsense and without merit.”WHAT HAPPENS NOWAlere is seeking to expedite the case, pressing to have a judge hear it within a few months. Abbott argues that such “breakneck proceedings” should be denied because the two still have eight months to obtain regulatory approvals, according to their merger agreement.So now the timing of the case and eventually the fate of their merger are in a judge’s hands.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.