AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinOne of the final cooperating witnesses in the federal government’s long-running investigation into insider trading at SAC Capital Advisors is soon to be sentenced.In a court filing on Wednesday, federal prosecutors said that the witness, Richard Choo-Beng Lee, would have been an important one if Steven A. Cohen had mounted a legal challenge to the securities fraud indictment that his former hedge fund, SAC Capital, pleaded guilty to almost two years ago.Authorities said that Mr. Lee, a former analyst at SAC who is known as C.B., would have testified at a trial about the “widespread nature of insider trading at the hedge fund.” He also would have “provided compelling evidence that SAC Capital’s leadership fostered an environment that, at minimum, tacitly encouraged illegal insider trading.”The discussion about Mr. Lee’s value as a potential witness against Mr. Cohen’s former hedge fund was disclosed in a letter to Judge P. Kevin Castel of the Federal District Court in Manhattan outlining Mr. Lee’s “substantial assistance” with the investigation of SAC and a number of people who pleaded guilty to insider trading charges.Mr. Lee, 59, is scheduled to be sentenced on Tuesday. A United States citizen who was born in Malaysia, he has been cooperating with the government’s investigation for six years and pleaded guilty to insider trading charges.Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for Manhattan, has all but wound down the investigation into insider trading in the hedge fund industry after an appeals court ruling led to the dismissal of charges and convictions against nine people, including two former employees of SAC Capital.The appellate ruling and dismissals have taken some of the luster off Mr. Bharara’s record in pursuing insider trading cases. But the guilty plea of SAC Capital and the firm’s agreement to pay $1.8 billion in fines and restitution to federal authorities, including the Securities and Exchange Commission, still stands as one of Mr. Bharara’s most prominent achievements.SAC Capital, which managed more than $14 billion at the time it agreed to plead guilty, was also forced to cease managing money for outside investors. Before the guilty plea, SAC Capital had been one of the hedge fund industry’s most profitable firms for nearly two decades.Arlo Devlin-Brown, an assistant federal prosecutor in Manhattan who oversaw a number of Mr. Bharara’s insider trading prosecutions, praised Mr. Lee’s level of cooperation in the letter to Judge Castel.The United States attorney in Manhattan oversaw a sweeping crackdown on insider trading in the hedge fund industry, but a federal appeals court upended the campaign.“While numerous individuals have cooperated in the government’s insider trading investigation, few have cooperated with the combination of timeliness, thoroughness and secrecy as Lee,” Mr. Devlin-Brown said.Mr. Lee pleaded guilty on Oct. 13, 2009, just days before the government’s undercover investigation became public with the arrest of Raj Rajaratnam, the former Galleon Group co-founder, and five others. Mr. Lee never testified at an insider trading trial but he has been an important source behind the scenes for the government, at one point secretly recording 171 phone calls with 28 people.Mr. Cohen was one of the people Mr. Lee surreptitiously recorded on the phone. The call took place in spring 2009 before the investigation became public but after agents with the Federal Bureau of Investigation had confronted Mr. Lee about accusations of insider trading at a hedge fund he then ran with his former partner, Ali Far. Mr. Lee agreed to work with the authorities and provide them with evidence about those working who had either provided him with inside information about technology companies or traders at other hedge funds with whom he had shared that information.In the call with Mr. Cohen, Mr. Lee tried to get a job at SAC, where he had worked from 1999 to 2004. Mr. Lee, according to the government’s filing, told Mr. Cohen that “he was obtaining information from insiders with access to quarterly earning information and other confidential data.”Mr. Cohen did not hire Mr. Lee and was never charged with any wrongdoing by prosecutors.Shortly after that phone call with Mr. Lee, Mr. Cohen called a friend at another hedge fund and told him to be careful about talking to the former trader, The New York Times previously reported. Mr. Cohen warned his friend that Mr. Lee might be cooperating with federal authorities in an inside trading investigation, even taping telephone calls with people he knew in the hedge fund industry.Jonathan Gasthalter, a spokesman for Mr. Cohen, declined to comment.The government’s investigation of SAC Capital, however, has not had much impact on Mr. Cohen’s life as a trader. Today, Mr. Cohen, a 59-year-old Connecticut resident, remains one of the richest men on Wall Street and oversees an $11 billion family office called Point72 Asset Management. It employs over 800 people. The firm now manages just Mr. Cohen’s personal fortune, but speculation is strong on Wall Street that he would like to manage money for outside investors again one day.Before then, Mr. Cohen must deal with a civil administrative “failure to supervise” case brought by the S.E.C. Securities regulators are seeking to bar him permanently from managing money for outside investors, but the case has been weakened by the dismissal of criminal charges against two former SAC employees.On Monday, Mr. Bharara’s office must notify the administrative judge assigned to Mr. Cohen’s case whether it will continue to seek a stay on that legal proceeding.Mr. Lee, a graduate of Duke University, has not worked in the securities business since pleading guilty in 2009. He now owns a home investment business, according to his lawyer, Jeffrey Bornstein.“This has been a long and stressful part of his life,” Mr. Bornstein said of his client, adding that he was gratified that the government “has so forcefully recognized” the value of Mr. Lee’s six years of cooperation. Advertisement