AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressUnited States markets closed higher on Friday, even though employers added fewer jobs in August than investors had expected. The monthly jobs report made it a bit less likely that the Federal Reserve would raise interest rates later this year. Shares of energy companies made the biggest gains as the price of oil increased for the first time this week.KEEPING SCORE The Dow Jones industrial average ended 0.39 percent higher and the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index gained 0.42 percent. The Nasdaq composite index gained 0.43 percent.ECONOMY The United States added 151,000 jobs last month, compared with expectations for 180,000 and July’s 275,000 gain. The unemployment rate remained at 4.9 percent.Compared with the last few months, job gains slowed in most major industries and wages only rose a little. While the United States is on a long streak of job growth, reports over the last few months have been inconsistent. Growth was weak in April and May, then picked up in June and July. That has made investors somewhat worried about the health of the economy and the job market.FED EXPECTATIONS The weakening jobs figures made it less likely that the Federal Reserve will raise rates at its remaining meetings this year. Because investors are uneasy about the state of the economy, that was something of a relief.HOME SWEET HOME Household goods makers traded higher. Shares of Colgate-Palmolive, which makes toothpastes, soaps and pet foods, rose 0.8 percent. Shares of meat and poultry processing company Tyson Foods gained 1.3 percent. Cigarette makers also did well. Reynolds American stock rose 1.9 percent, and Altria Group stock picked up 0.8 percent.VERIFONE SINKS Shares of VeriFone Systems, which makes terminals used in electronic payments, slumped after it reported disappointing revenue and cut its forecast for the year. The company said the adoption of chip payment cards continued to go more slowly than expected. The stock dropped 16.4 percent.LULULEMON TUMBLES Shares of the athletic apparel maker Lululemon fell after it reported disappointing sales. Its forecast for the rest of the year also failed to inspire investors, and the stock lost 10.6 percent.BIOGEN RISES Shares of the drug maker Biogen added 2.5 percent after the company said its early Alzheimer’s disease treatment aducanumab would get a faster review from the Food and Drug Administration. That could help Biogen bring the drug to the market sooner, assuming it meets its goals in clinical studies.CRUISE COMPANIES DROP Carnival Corporation and Royal Caribbean Cruises took the biggest losses in the S.&P. 500 index. The Morgan Stanley analyst Jamie Rollo said demand for cruises seemed to have weakened in August and bookings for late 2016 and early 2017 had slowed down. He downgraded Carnival shares to underweight. Carnival stock fell 4.7 percent and Royal Caribbean stock lost 3.7 percent.EUROPEAN MARKETS In Germany, the DAX rose 1.4 percent, and in France, the CAC 40 gained 2.3 percent. The FTSE 100 was up 2.2 percent in Britain.ASIA’S DAY The Nikkei 225 was unchanged in Japan, while in Hong Kong, the Hang Seng gained 0.5 percent. The Shanghai composite index added 0.1 percent in China. The Kospi was up 0.3 percent in South Korea. In Australia, the S.&P./ASX 200 lost 0.8 percent. Benchmarks in Taiwan, Singapore and Thailand fell while indexes in the Philippines, Indonesia and New Zealand rose.ENERGY United States benchmark crude oil rose $1.18, to $44.32 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Brent crude, the benchmark for international oil prices, added $1.29, to $46.73 a barrel in London.CURRENCIES AND BONDS Bond prices fell. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note rose to 1.61 percent from 1.57 percent. The dollar rose to 104.17 yen from 103.32 yen, and the euro edged down to $1.1162 from $1.1197.Advertisement