AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangWhen you think of the Waldorf Astoria, you may think of its iconic architecture, its long history or even the salad invented in its kitchens. You probably don’t think of villagers and rice paddies in eastern China. But The New York Times has uncovered that some small-time merchants and villagers in Pingyang County control multibillion-dollar stakes in Anbang Insurance Group, the company that bought the Waldorf and has been making waves with its enormous deals.If you have some questions about this, so do the American regulators responsible for approving the company’s deals. And Anbang could come under further scrutiny as it prepares to sell shares in its life insurance business on the Hong Kong stock exchange, a move that has already stirred some debate among bankers considering working on the deal, according to Bloomberg.The one thing that does seem to link Anbang’s many shareholders through a byzantine network of holding companies is their connection with Wu Xiaohui, Anbang’s chairman and a native of Pingyang County, who married into the family of Deng Xiaoping. About 100 people seem to have stakes in Anbang through different companies, one in an empty, dusty office building and another above a post office. Read more about these mysterious shareholders here and the company that seemed to come from nowhere to go on a global takeover binge here.It does good for others while doing well for itself, the pharmaceutical company Mylan maintains.But that argument just does not hold up, Gretchen Morgenson writes in Fair Game.Proxy filings show that top executives received a windfall when the company incorporated overseas. And they will be further rewarded if the company meets earnings and stock price goals by the end of 2018 — partly on the back of price increases on the EpiPen. Mylan is just the latest company that allowed executives to reap bounties from activities that wound up harming other stakeholders, Ms. Morgenson contends.Still, public shaming goes only so far. It may be that the outrage over the EpiPen will put greater pressure on Congress to change policy to help patients with medication bills. The question is whether the industry’s lobbying money is greener, according to Breakingviews.Start-ups in Silicon Valley have plenty on their plate, dealing with the competing interests of their founders, investors and employees. Now add bankers to that list.Good Technology, a maker of mobile security software, was bought by BlackBerry last year for $425 million, and its shareholders are suing J. P. Morgan, accusing it of having so many conflicts of interest that it ended up selling the company for less than it was worth. The plaintiffs say J. P. Morgan used the sale of Good, once valued at $1 billion, to win business with BlackBerry.It is hardly new for a bank to be accused of conflicting interests, but it seems that with fund-raising slowing down and a sleepy market for initial public offerings, it is becoming a more salient issue for start-ups looking to sell.The Labor Department will publish its report on hiring and unemployment during August. After the numbers rose sharply in June, analysts expect payroll expansion to have slowed slightly.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement