By CHAD BRAYAUG. 31, 2016
LONDON — The chief executive of Deutsche Bank on Wednesday called for more consolidation in the banking industry in Germany – and across Europe – and action by central banks as the region’s lenders struggle to navigate an environment of historically low interest rates.The chief executive, John Cryan, said that the European Central Bank helped stabilize Europe after the financial crisis, but that monetary policy had since weighed on bank profits – by cutting into net interest income – and had hurt savers and their pension investments.He said that lenders must become more efficient and improve their technology, but that central banks also needed to act if the financial sector was to become more stable and secure.“It is undeniable that Europe’s banks are stuck in a fundamental dilemma,” Mr. Cryan said in his prepared remarks at a conference in Frankfurt. “We have become significantly more secure since the financial crisis. We maintain more capital and liquidity with fewer risks in our balance sheets. However, we are also far less profitable today.”AdvertisementMr. Cryan’s remarks came after Germany’s Manager Magazin reported that Deutsche Bank had internally considered a potential merger with Commerzbank, which is partially owned by the German government.AdvertisementReuters reported on Wednesday that Mr. Cryan said during a question-and-answer session at the conference that Deutsche Bank was not planning any large mergers “any time soon.”Deutsche Bank, one of Europe’s largest banks, has been under pressure from investors as Mr. Cryan tries to turn it around.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lender posted a huge loss last year after it took 5.2 billion euros, or about $5.8 billion, in charges related to legal costs for past wrongdoing and endured a 58 percent plunge in profit in this year’s first quarter.The Federal Reserve also gave a failing grade to its United States subsidiary in stress tests in July.Deutsche Bank’s share price has dropped by nearly half in the past year.Shares of Deutsche Bank rose about 3 percent in midday trading in Frankfurt on Wednesday.That said, Mr. Cryan said on Wednesday that there were “too many banks in Germany” and that has resulted in fewer economies of scale, more competition and higher price pressures.He noted that many banks in Germany were under no pressure to generate attractive returns because they were de facto owned by the German government or did not have to compete in the capital markets.And Germans are particularly price sensitive when comes to banking products, Mr. Cryan said.“We need more mergers, at a national level, but even also across national borders,” Mr. Cryan said. “Only then can we be profitable in the long run. And only then can we compete internationally.”Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @ChadbrayA version of this article appears in print on September 1, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Chief of Deutsche Bank Says Industry Is Too Crowded.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.