By DIANE CARDWELLSEPT. 2, 2016
NLand Surf Park, with its Wavegarden lagoon in the midst of 160 acres of disused, cactus-studded ranch land near Austin, Tex., is seeking to become a surfer destination.As a surfer whose enthusiasm still far outweighs her talent and skill, I was eager to try an artificial wave.In nature, the creation of surfable waves depends on a near-mystical interplay among winds gusting far out at sea, cycles of the tides and the moon, the shifting contours of the ocean floor and coastline, and the weather and light at the break.Trying to interpret so many variables tends to turn surfers into amateur meteorologists, obsessively checking the path of storms and low-pressure systems as well as an online network of surf forecasts to discern what they may face come dawn: line after line of pristine waves or a mess of blown-out mush.So I could see the advantages of a surfing wave pool, which removes much of the guesswork from the equation. And I was all the more willing to give it a try, once I learned that NLand Surf Park in Austin, Tex., featured an array of waves and takeoff points for all levels.AdvertisementI was pretty sure I couldn’t handle the advanced wave that, with a five- to six-foot face, was twice the height I felt comfortable riding. But NLand’s surf lagoon is designed with an intermediate wave that forms out of the white water rushing forward once the big one breaks.AdvertisementI thought it sounded perfect: It would be a real wave, not just foam, but with an easygoing entry point rather than a steep, scary drop.And yet, even though I’d come across similar setups in the waters of Hawaii, Southern California and the beach near my home on the Rockaway Peninsula, I was skeptical that this simulacrum could replicate the intoxicating swoosh that had encouraged my addiction to surfing in the first place. But as it turned out, my NLand session was exactly — and nothing — like ocean surfing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The wave itself felt no different from a real ocean wave — and a fun one at that, with sufficient push to get going and a mellow, clean face that stood up long enough for me to get a very good ride. And since it ran in both directions, I could just keep coming back to the same spot to catch it, letting me go to the right or left, which isn’t always so easy to find in open water.I came out of the lagoon, crossing the slippery white plastic lip and beige mesh that create a shoreline of sorts, convinced that I could significantly up my game with even a few hours at the park. Knowing precisely where the wave will be — and not having to fight through strong currents or a crowd of other surfers to get there — meant that I could focus on a few skills, such as getting into the right position on the board, turning and following a line of energy in the water. If I’d had more time that day, I might have worked up the courage to try the advanced level.Back home a few days later, frustrated as I sat in the water hoping for a wave, squinting into the unchanging horizon, I began to worry that the smooth predictability of NLand’s offerings had somehow ruined me for surfing. I’m usually fairly patient — a characteristic that’s something of a survival mechanism given Rockaway’s fickle nature — and happy to enjoy the beauty of my surroundings and the company of my friends and neighbors, but not that morning.Just as I was about to give up in a huff, I noticed two sharply curved fins emerging only a few yards in front of me. I stared out to where they’d been and a couple of seconds later, they reappeared, along with some others, attached to a pack of gray zeppelin-shaped bodies glistening in the sun.It was a group of dolphins making their way along the peninsula, as they so often have this summer, and they reminded me that getting to be among them — or whales or turtles or other sea life — is one of the great benefits of being on a board in the water. The real water. I felt all the frustration begin to dissipate.And then I caught a wave.A version of this article appears in print on September 3, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Waves, and Little Else, in an Artificial Lagoon.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.