SEPT. 1, 2016
WASHINGTON (Reuters) — Factory activity contracted in August for the first time in six months as new orders and production tumbled, the Institute for Supply Management said on Thursday, but a low level of layoffs continued to point to a pickup in economic growth in the third quarter.While manufacturing remained constrained by the lingering effects of a strong dollar and lower oil prices, sustained labor market strength could push the Federal Reserve closer to raising interest rates this year.“Today’s disappointing number further weakens the case for a rate hike later this month, but we currently see no reason to change our Fed call and continue to anticipate a rate hike at the December meeting,” said Harm Bandholz, chief United States economist at UniCredit in New York.The institute’s index of national factory activity fell 3.2 percentage points to a reading of 49.4 last month. That was the first contraction since February.AdvertisementThe index remains above the 43.2 threshold that is associated with a recession. Manufacturing accounts for about 12 percent of the United States economy.AdvertisementThe dollar’s surge from June 2014 to December 2015 and weak global demand have crimped export growth. A collapse in oil drilling after a plunge in petroleum prices has also squeezed manufacturing by undermining business spending, leading to weak demand for heavy machinery.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In addition, an inventory correction has resulted in factories receiving fewer orders.While surveys including the index of factory activity and several regional reports have pointed to manufacturing weakness, so-called hard data on oil drilling rigs, durable goods orders and industrial production have offered tentative signs of stability in the sector.Data on consumer spending and housing suggest the economy has regained speed after growing only 1 percent in thefirst half of the year, though manufacturing is lagging.In a separate report, the Labor Department said initial claims for state unemployment benefits increased 2,000 to a seasonally adjusted 263,000 for the week ended Aug. 27. It was the 78th consecutive week that claims remained below the 300,000 threshold, which is associated with a robust labor market — the longest stretch since 1970, when the labor market was much smaller.The four-week moving average of claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends because it irons out week-to-week volatility, fell 1,000 to 263,000 last week.“Despite some seeming trouble in the manufacturing sector, the overall outlook for employment is positive,” said Michael Gapen, chief United States economist at Barclays in New York.A version of this article appears in print on September 2, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Activity Dips at Factories, but Signs Say Growth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.