By PAUL MOZURSEPT. 2, 2016
HONG KONG — The authorities in China are investigating Uber’s planned sale of its Chinese operations to a local rival, complicating a deal intended to bring the American ride-share operator’s costly venture there to an end.At a daily news briefing on Friday, Shen Danyang, a spokesman for the Chinese Commerce Ministry, said the inquiry was prompted by local concerns about Uber’s plan to sell the business to Didi Chuxing, of China. The deal, announced last month, would create a company worth about $35 billion that would hold a strong position in the Chinese market for hailing cars via smartphone apps.The ministry “will protect fair competition in the relevant market and safeguard the interests of consumers and the public,” Mr. Shen said, according to an official transcript of the news conference.Uber declined to comment on the investigation. Didi Chuxing did not respond to requests for comment.The acquisition is the latest attempt by Didi to consolidate control over the ride-hailing market. Just last year, Didi merged with what was then its largest rival, Kuaidi Dache, which raised competition concerns. Those worries were short-lived, however, as Uber grabbed market share from the new company shortly after it was formed with the introduction of People’s Uber, which let regular Chinese chauffeur passengers around for a fee.AdvertisementUber and Didi ratcheted up competition starting last year, spending increasing amounts of money to subsidize drivers and expand into more Chinese cities. Uber said last week that it lost $1.2 billion in the first half of this year, with China accounting for a significant portion.AdvertisementSuch market-distorting incentive payments, which Didi also plowed into the market, may further complicate the investigation.For the ministry to have jurisdiction, the revenue of each company must be greater than 400 million renminbi, or about $60 million, and the combined revenue must exceed 2 billion renminbi, or about $300 million, according to lawyers.With Didi and Uber, that calculation may not be straightforward. Their subsidies to drivers reduce the amount of money they record as revenue, for example.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, the ministry reserves the right to rule on prominent deals. And in this case, the acquisition is likely to cut down on incentives for drivers. That could mean higher costs to users, who have become accustomed to rides across China’s traffic-soaked cities that — thanks to subsidies — can cost much less than a regular taxi fare.“Since there’s been considerable popular concern — because this is an industry that affects ordinary people — it wouldn’t be surprising if the Ministry of Commerce will feel an obligation to scrutinize the transaction very carefully and possibly impose conditions,” said Lester Ross, a partner at the Beijing office of the law firm Wilmer Hale.The investigation comes as China looks to bolster its antitrust enforcement. The country’s antitrust law is only eight years old, but local experts say it is an essential part of nurturing a stronger consumer culture and greater competition in business. Overseas companies have sometimes complained that antitrust authorities unfairly focus on them, an accusation that China denies.In his statement, Mr. Shen of the Commerce Ministry said that Didi did not initially notify the agency that it had struck the deal. He said the ministry held two subsequent interviews with Didi, asking the company for further explanations for the reasons behind the deal and to broadly describe industry trends.The stakes are high for Didi and Uber. The ministry could put conditions on the deal or even block it outright.Although a rejection is unlikely given the buyer is a Chinese company, there is little precedent for the merger. And the ministry has held up transactions, sometimes for years, to extract the terms it desires. In this case, Chinese regulators could push for pricing controls or find other ways to slow the pace of expansion of the new Didi-Uber company. Drivers who bought cars expecting a steady payout of subsidies could also be affected.Follow Paul Mozur on Twitter @paulmozur. A version of this article appears in print on September 3, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: China Opens Antitrust Investigation Into Uber’s Deal With Its Rival Didi.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.