AdvertisementSupported byBy Jackie CalmesWASHINGTON — President Obama, reaching Asia on Friday, will reassure allies of his determination to win congressional approval of the far-reaching Trans-Pacific Partnership trade accord, but back home in congressional races, his party is on the air and online slamming it as a bad deal — and hitting Republicans for supporting it.The friendly fire from Democratic candidates and committees speaks to the formidable challenge that Mr. Obama now faces in getting Congress to endorse the 12-nation agreement that was the signature economic goal of his second term.So dicey are the politics that Republican congressional leaders have been unwilling to commit to a vote even in the postelection lame duck Congress. Without approval by the United States, the accord liberalizing trade among Pacific Rim countries representing 40 percent of the global economy cannot take effect. Both major-party candidates to succeed Mr. Obama oppose it.On Thursday, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. circulated on social media the words of its president, Richard Trumka, about the Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton, at a news event hosted by the Christian Science Monitor: “I’ve looked her squarely in the eye and we’ve talked about T.P.P. I’ve known her for 30 years, and there’s never been one time when Hillary Clinton gave me her word that she didn’t follow through on.”White House officials insist that Democratic efforts against the trade pact are misguided. “It’s apparent that some members of Congress might be a little behind the curve when it comes to the politics of the president’s strategy around trade policy,” Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said on Wednesday.Typically, most Democrats, pressed by organized labor, reject trade agreements as threatening, especially to manufacturing jobs; presidents of both parties have relied on Republican votes for trade pacts. But more Republicans have become skeptics over time, a trend intensified lately by their protectionist nominee, Donald J. Trump, who has called the T.P.P. “a rape of our country.”Especially in several manufacturing states that are crucial to the Democrats’ quest to recapture the Senate, Republicans are caught in a vise between Democrats’ attacks and fear of alienating Mr. Trump’s antitrade, working-class voters — damned if they endorse the T.P.P. and damned as flip-floppers if they oppose it.“I’m seeing Democrats use it as an attack almost across the board,” said Jennifer E. Duffy, a senior editor for the nonpartisan Cook Political Report. “So I think you’ve just seen Republicans get spooked.”Democrats have had Republican senators on the defensive on trade in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Illinois, Wisconsin and Missouri. The Senate race in Pennsylvania recently has been a prime example.Senator Patrick J. Toomey of Pennsylvania, one of the most endangered Republicans, in mid-August announced his opposition to the trade accord, after long being considered a supporter. Last year Mr. Toomey voted to give Mr. Obama the “fast track” negotiating authority that expedited final talks on the T.P.P., by giving Congress only a yes-or-no vote on the agreement, without the power to amend it. Mr. Toomey also had lauded its potential for creating jobs in Pennsylvania.This week the Senate Majority PAC, which supports Democrats, bought television time for an ad that “hits Toomey’s T.P.P. flip-flop,” as Senate Democrats’ campaign committee described it in an email. The ad attacks Mr. Toomey’s votes back to 2000 on “seven separate trade deals that crippled our economy.”Several of those deals were the work of Democratic presidents, Bill Clinton and Mr. Obama. And Mr. Toomey’s switch from early support for the Pacific trade accord, like that of some other Republicans, was not unlike Mrs. Clinton’s change of heart once she was a political candidate.Mr. Toomey’s Democratic challenger, Katie McGinty, wrote a column this week on trade for a Pennsylvania newspaper and called the Trans-Pacific Partnership “an agreement that even its supporters admit will cost Pennsylvania tens of thousands of jobs.”In Illinois, where Senator Mark S. Kirk is fighting for re-election, his Democratic rival, Representative Tammy Duckworth, has a new television ad on trade that does not mention T.P.P. specifically and focuses on China, which is not a party to the agreement. She is shown telling steelworkers at a union hall: “Mark Kirk describes himself as an ‘ardent free-trader,’ and that is a fundamental difference between us. I am a fair trader.”While Senator Roy Blunt of Missouri has not rejected the Pacific nations agreement, the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee this week seized on his ambivalent comments to a local newspaper to suggest he could become the “latest Republican” to perform an “election-year flip-flop on T.P.P.” The committee email to media said Mr. Blunt has been “a reliable vote for job-killing trade deals.”His Democratic opponent, Missouri’s secretary of state, Jason Kander, told the paper that “deals such as T.P.P. have the potential to devastate local economies across the state, replacing well-paid manufacturing jobs with low-paying jobs.”On his first full workday in office, President Trump delivered on a campaign promise by abandoning the enormous trade deal that had became a flashpoint in American politics.In Wisconsin’s rematch between Senator Ron Johnson, a Republican, and former Senator Russ Feingold, a Democrat, Mr. Feingold is berating Mr. Johnson for declining to take a position “on the disastrous trade deal.”The Republican incumbent who had perhaps the most to fear from the trade issue was Senator Rob Portman of Ohio, whose portrait hangs in the Washington office of the United States trade representative, the job he held under President George W. Bush, who began negotiations toward the Pacific trade deal. Soon after it was concluded in October, Mr. Portman announced his opposition, despite his trade pedigree.Democrats “were landing some blows,” said Nathan L. Gonzales of the nonpartisan Rothenberg and Gonzales Political Report. But, he added, citing recent polls showing Mr. Portman ahead of the Democratic candidate, former Gov. Ted Strickland, “they weren’t winning the overall fight.”Mr. Portman’s lead is not the only evidence that a pro-trade stance is not necessarily perilous — as the president has argued.With the victory on Tuesday of Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz in Florida’s Democratic primary elections, all 28 House Democrats who last year supported trade promotion authority for the president have come through party primaries with little or no competition, despite threats from liberal antitrade groups.Mr. Earnest pointed that out to reporters aboard Air Force One on Wednesday, as the president began the trip that will take him to the summit meetings in Asia where T.P.P. will be a main topic.Democratic campaign committees do tend to attack Republicans’ flip-flops on trade rather than the agreement itself. “Republican senators are hitting the panic button and flip-flopping on T.P.P. in a blatant and desperate effort to cover up their records,” said Sadie Weiner, communications director at the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.Yet Republicans see a contradiction, too — between the president’s legacy-minded promotion of the economic and geopolitical benefits of the Pacific accord and the attacks by some in his party on “job-killing trade agreements.”“They’re trying to have their cake and eat it, too,” said Andrea Bozek, communications director at the National Republican Senatorial Committee.Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.Advertisement