By KATIE BENNER and LESLIE PICKERSEPT. 1, 2016
Silicon Valley start-ups often have to grapple with the competing interests of their founders, investors and employees. Now add one more to the list: their bankers.The extent to which start-ups can be influenced by investment banks was highlighted on Thursday by the case of Good Technology, a mobile security software maker that was acquired last year by BlackBerry for a fire-sale price of $425 million.In an amended suit in Delaware Chancery Court, Good’s shareholders said that J. P. Morgan, the start-up’s banker, had faced so many conflicts of interest in its dealings with the company that it led to Good selling itself for less than it was worth.Even as J. P. Morgan was advising Good on its sale, the complaint said, it was also advising BlackBerry in late 2013 and pursuing future business with the company. J. P. Morgan’s need to maintain a business relationship with BlackBerry, which was the larger company, ultimately spurred the bank to put that relationship above the one with Good, according to the amended complaint.AdvertisementIn the end, Good, which was at one time valued at about $1 billion by its private investors, sold to BlackBerry for only $425 million even though documents obtained by The New York Times show that other suitors had made higher offers. The plaintiffs said that J. P. Morgan used the Good deal to win future business with BlackBerry.AdvertisementWhile it is not new for banks to be accused of conflicts of interest, the issue is more salient now for start-ups. As the market for private fund-raising has slowed and the initial public offerings market has remained relatively dormant, sales have become more popular — and the potential for banks to influence how start-ups act in those transactions is set to increase.Walmart recently agreed to acquire Jet.com, the year-old online bulk retailer, for $3.3 billion. General Motors this year said it would purchase Cruise Automation for more than $1 billion, people with knowledge of the terms said at the time, to help it expand into autonomous vehicles. In January, the Gilt Groupe agreed to be sold to Hudson’s Bay Company, the department store retailer, for about $250 million.“When a major bank advises on an acquisition, there’s always this odd risk,” said Max Wolff, chief economist at Manhattan Venture Partners. “The relationship that matters going forward is probably with the acquirer.”A J. P. Morgan spokesman declined to comment on Good, and a representative for BlackBerry did not immediately return a request for comment.In the amended complaint, Good shareholders said, “In 2014 and 2015, J. P. Morgan’s lead banker on the Good transaction and his colleagues were engaged in full court press to gain business from BlackBerry. This included a series of meetings and pitches with BlackBerry executives, even after it was clear that BlackBerry was a potential acquirer of Good.”Randall Baron, a lawyer for Good’s shareholders, said in an interview, “On many fronts J. P. Morgan was using Good Technology, and the dire straits its conflicted directors put it in, to benefit the bank immediately and in the future.” He added that the bank was “able to make substantially more money on a sale to BlackBerry than on a transaction that would have been better for the company, like a public offering.”In recent years, several companies have accused investment banks of unfairly swaying the sale price in a deal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 2011, for instance, Royal Bank of Canada had been hired by Rural/Metro, an ambulance services company, looking to sell itself. The Delaware Chancery Court found that R.B.C. altered its fairness opinion, or a bank’s assessment of what an offer price should be, to make a bid by Warburg Pincus to buy Rural/Metro look more attractive. R.B.C. had also provided Warburg Pincus a financing arrangement in conjunction with the deal.AdvertisementThe court ruled that R.B.C. had steered both clients together at the expense of other bidders and shareholders. It became the first case where an investment bank was liable for damages over banker conflicts.Two years earlier, Delaware also ruled on a conflict-of-interest case related to a $21 billion acquisition of the El Paso Corporation by Kinder Morgan. At the time, Goldman Sachs owned about 19 percent of Kinder Morgan stock, held two board seats, and a prominent banker on the deal had failed to disclose that he held about $340,000 of Kinder Morgan stock. The bank was concurrently advising El Paso on the sale.Kinder Morgan eventually settled with El Paso shareholders, and Goldman was not paid its $20 million advisory fee for working on the deal. Chancellor Leo E. Strine Jr. of the Delaware Court of Chancery allowed the deal to go through, but scolded Goldman over the conflicts in one of his most famous opinions.Thursday’s amended complaint from Good’s shareholders is part of a suit that they originally filed last October, in which they said that the Silicon Valley company suffered “an extraordinary governance breakdown.”The defendants “pushed incompatible self-interested agendas about how or when to obtain desperately needed financing for Good, and how or when to sell Good,” according to the amended complaint.The suit has already named Good’s directors and senior executives as defendants, stating that the board and executives had breached their fiduciary duties because they had conflicts that led them to act in their own best interests rather than in the best interests of the company.Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about a lawsuit filed against J.P. Morgan, accusing the financial services firm of conflicts of interest in advising Good Technology on its acquisition by BlackBerry, a company that J.P. Morgan also had a business relationship with, misstated the year Royal Bank of Canada was hired by Rural/Metro, an ambulance services company, looking to sell itself. (In that deal, Royal Bank of Canada was found liable for damages over banker conflicts.) It was 2011, not 2014.A version of this article appears in print on September 2, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Good Technology Shareholders Sue J.P. Morgan, Claiming Conflicts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.