
Another View By                     
STEVE LIPIN and


ADAM ROSMAN

SEPT. 1, 2016
Why are many financial news releases and publicly filed documents written so poorly?How many times in reading a deal, initial public offering or financial news release have you seen phrases like “pursuant to which,” “whereby” or a document that starts out with a disclaimer in BOLDFACED ALL CAPS that often seems as if it requires a Ph.D. to comprehend?We — one of us is a communications adviser (and former Wall Street Journal reporter) and the other is a general counsel — have come together to raise the torch for good writing. The investing public deserves better.As insiders, we need to stop writing solely for lawyers and professional investors (many of whom do not understand this stuff, either) and start writing so that anyone with an interest in the topic will understand the news or information.As Warren E. Buffett wrote in the introduction to the Securities and Exchange Commission’s “Plain English Handbook,” published in 1998, in describing how he writes his famous shareholder letters, “I pretend that I’m talking to my sisters.”AdvertisementThe S.E.C. is often blamed for all the legalese that gums up these documents, but it shouldn’t be. The S.E.C. (note, we did not write “hereinafter the ‘S.E.C.’ or ‘the Commission’) has actually tried hard to improve the clarity of writing. In 1998, it issued its white paper on plain English writing under the leadership of Arthur Levitt Jr., then the S.E.C.’s chairman. This document has stood well the test of time and would make Strunk and White proud.AdvertisementCongress got into the act and passed the Plain Writing Act of 2010 to make it easier for the general public to understand government documents. Of course, read an actual piece of legislation and you realize Congress may be violating its own laws.So how can we start writing better?Here’s a cheat sheet for financial professionals everywhere:1) Start by deleting the hereins, heretos, hereunders and herebys, as well as the occasional aforementioned or witnesseth. Another gem: “Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein.” Huh?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.2) Minimize the abbreviations and acronyms. After you write “the Securities and Exchange Commission,” there is no need to follow it with “hereinafter, ‘the S.E.C.’ or ‘the Commission’.” If you’re writing a document that mentions the S.E.C., your readers can figure out the abbreviation. Ditto for “the company” or “the agreement.”3) Avoid long, confusing parenthetical phrases. Lawyers love to be specific, but it gets in the way of clean writing and reading. Break your sentences in two. And no footnotes.4) Avoid all caps. Nowhere in law school, or at the S.E.C., does it say that to make something seem really important, you should put it in all caps. It’s the same with underlining. If something is really important, start the section by saying: “Important information to follow” or “Pay attention to this section.”5) Remember Mr. Buffett’s sisters. We know the legal disclaimers may be required and some of the issues are highly technical. But if the writing is straightforward and to the point, it enhances a company’s credibility and will not require doubling back with definitions and footnotes.If you abide by these suggestions, your prose will be cleaner, more readable and less dense. (Debate over the serial comma abounds: is it cleaner, more readable, and less dense?)Whether Shakespeare would ever consider a news release good writing is an open question, but we can all at least try to do better.Steve Lipin is the United States senior partner at the Brunswick Group and the former finance editor at The Wall Street Journal. Adam Rosman is the executive vice president—general counsel at First Data Corporation.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »