AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanDespite the fallout from the 2008 financial crisis, Wall Street still has a tendency to dismiss as frivolous some of the ethical issues it faces daily.But at a Nov. 5 symposium on ethics at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York — the second on the topic two years — regulators suggested that Wall Street executives who continue to ignore the various cultural flaws at their firms do so at their own peril.It seems that this time really is different: If Wall Street doesn’t take steps to prevent some of the behavior that has led to $230 billion in fines against American and European banks in the last six years, principal regulators appear quite determined to do it for them, promising to break up the big investment banks if they need to. And that will not be an outcome that will appeal to anyone running a powerful Wall Street firm.William C. Dudley, the former Goldman Sachs partner who has been president of the New York Fed since January 2009, organized the event as a follow-up to his October 2014 closed-door session on the same subject.During that meeting, he told the assembled bankers and executives that changing Wall Street culture was “imperative” because Wall Street had lost the “public trust.” He threatened to break up the big banks if bank executives failed to do their part “in pushing forcefully for change across the industry.”He also gave a speech in November 2013 at the Global Economic Policy Forum, where he argued that the scandals in the financial sector — such as the excesses by a trader known as the London Whale, the manipulation of the benchmark London interbank offered rate, and troubles in the foreign exchange and commodities markets — were evidence of “deep-seated cultural and ethical failures.”In truth, though, the Federal Reserve has been behind the curve on this topic. Most of the pressure to change practices on Wall Street has been coming from regulators such as Mark J. Carney, the governor of the Bank of England (also a former Goldman partner), and Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund. In February 2013, Mr. Carney said in a speech in Ontario that the sacred trust between bankers, their clients and the public had been broken in the aftermath of the financial crisis.“Virtue cannot be regulated,” he said. “Even the strongest supervision cannot guarantee good conduct. Essential will be the rediscovery of core values, and ultimately this is a question of personal responsibility. More than mastering options pricing, company valuation, or accounting, living the right values will be the most important challenge” for Wall Street.In a speech in London in May 2014, in the wake of continuing financial scandals, Ms. Lagarde berated the industry. “While some changes in behavior are taking place, these are not deep or broad enough,” she said. “The industry still prizes short-term profit over long-term prudence, today’s bonus over tomorrow’s relationship. Some prominent firms have even been mired in scandals that violate the most basic ethical norms.”Mr. Dudley picked up her thread during his speech at the conference on Nov. 5. “The banking scandals that followed the financial crisis are evidence that something fundamental is wrong,” he said. “I would encourage each of you to consider not just specific examples of misconduct, but the patterns within them that point to underlying causes. I suspect we will see a strong overlap with those factors that contributed to the financial crisis. I think your focus should be less on the search for bad apples and more on how to improve the apple barrels.”But the spotlight belonged to Ms. Lagarde. She spoke in Greek. She quoted Immanuel Kant, Seneca, Warren E. Buffett and two Nobel laureates in economics, George Akerlof and Robert J. Shiller.She spoke of the importance of individuals taking responsibility for their actions and of being held accountable for them. She spoke of the necessity of leadership from the top, where chief executives and boards can reward ethical behavior that benefits the collective good, not just the deals of an individual rainmaker.She lamented the fact that banks in the United States and Europe had paid $230 billion in fines with nary an individual at any firm being held responsible for what went wrong.She spoke of the need for a Wall Street culture of “greater virtue and integrity” and for banking to revive the idea of telos: “Its purpose and broader responsibility to society.” After all, she continued, “the goal of the financial sector must be not only to maximize the wealth of its shareholders, but to enrich society by supporting economic activity and creating value and jobs — to ultimately improve the well-being of people.”Her prescriptions for how to improve Wall Street’s culture only seem the slightest bit fantastic, or idealistic, because the industry seems to have lost its way in recent decades. The fact is that Wall Street chiefs need to seize the day. Not a single one has suggested a new approach to running a financial firm that takes into account some of the ethical considerations that Ms. Lagarde, Mr. Carney and Mr. Dudley have been advocating.Why is it so hard for Wall Street to behave as Kant recommended? “Act in such a way that you treat humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, never merely as a means to an end but always at the same time as an end.” It’s inspiring advice.Advertisement