AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonThe lawyers have grabbed control of the merger between Tesla Motors and SolarCity. They are blanketing the deal with legal process to try to smooth over the conflict of interest stemming from Elon Musk’s ownership interest in both companies. But will it be enough?Tesla filed what is called a Form S-4 Registration Statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission this week. The document contains the information necessary for Tesla to issue shares to acquire SolarCity, as well as for the separate votes from the shareholders of Tesla and SolarCity. In this document, Tesla and SolarCity are required to detail the negotiations with Tesla and other parties that led to this transaction. And in 13 pages, Tesla and SolarCity did this, describing all the top meetings and negotiations that led to this deal. (The disclosure starts on Page 55, if you want to read it yourself.)The background to the transaction is probably the most important, and certainly will be the most scrutinized, part of the document. In this case, three new disclosures were quickly seized upon, none of which were actually the most important disclosure in the document.The first was that Mr. Musk had discussions in February 2016 with the chief executive of SolarCity about an acquisition. These discussions were not disclosed in a subsequent $1.4 billion stock offering in May before the acquisition offer was made public.The failure to disclose this information led some to ruminate that Tesla had violated federal securities laws and its requirement that all material information be disclosed when stock is sold. Tesla’s stock dropped about 15 percent after the offer, showing a necessary element for a securities fraud claim for nondisclosure, namely a large stock price drop.This claim of nondisclosure, though, is unlikely to go far. A singular discussion about an acquisition among chief executives without the board being involved is not likely to be enough to establish a disclosure requirement. The securities laws adopt a materiality test to determine whether disclosure is mandated about takeover negotiations. The test looks at the probability of the transaction and the magnitude to determine whether disclosure is necessary.In this case, although this was a big transaction, the probability of it happening was highly uncertain at that time, with only one discussion having occurred. Tesla’s lawyers sought to highlight this fact by noting in the filing that “this discussion never progressed beyond a high-level, conceptual stage, and no proposal was made at such time” — an important caveat.The second disclosure was that Lazard had made a $400 million mistake in its valuation of SolarCity. Oops. The adviser had become aware that SolarCity’s indebtness was double-counted in its spreadsheets, undervaluing the company in its calculation by $400 million. That is a big number by any measure, even in a $2.6 billion deal.This is the second time in recent years that an investment bank has made a multimillion-dollar spreadsheet error. Goldman Sachs made a $100 million mistake when Vista Equity Partners acquired Tibco Software. That led to a lawsuit and a settlement of about $30 million.Luckily for Tesla and SolarCity, the error was caught before this filing. The way to fix this error is to add on more process, to make sure that it counts for nothing in the final calculus.And so the lawyers worked to clean it up, adding new board signoffs. Lazard redid its analysis, raising the company’s valuation by $400 million, but still came in the range of a fair price. That’s not so hard because SolarCity is a bit of a moving target in terms of valuation and its value is highly dependent on future events.Lazard found a value that ranged from $18.97 a share to more than $40 a share in its original, flawed analysis (the error moved the range up by $3 to $4 a share). With a range that wide, no wonder Lazard could find fairness.The boards of both companies ratified the changes, still finding the deal fair. And if shareholders approve the deal, SolarCity will argue that under Delaware law, the issue will resolve itself because of a recent decision that shareholders waive their right to bring lawsuits around mergers when there is disclosure before the shareholder vote and a takeover is approved. The plaintiffs’ lawyers are not buying this, and one suit has already been filed in Delaware over this issue.But still — is this a problem for shareholders? Perhaps the price would have been higher if SolarCity had this information. But on the other hand, this valuation analysis was not likely to have been used in negotiations but for an after-the-fact justification of a price given in a fairness opinion. Given the wide range of values, it is doubtful that Lazard’s analysis had much of a role in the actual price negotiation. And it highlights how meaningless valuation can sometime be, particularly with technology companies.The third piece of information everyone focused on in this filing was the enormous amount of cash both companies were burning. Tesla disclosed that $422 million would soon be due to debt holders, which may require a new equity issuance. SolarCity is burning cash and is down to $146 million. This is important, but it is probably not materially new to anyone. It is common knowledge that these companies burn cash and need more.The most important disclosure was missed — that the sale of SolarCity was scripted to textbook precision by the company’s lawyers at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom. The lawyers arranged the formation of a special committee that met on an almost daily basis since the approach by Tesla. I counted 25 meetings of the special committee in the six weeks between the announcement of Tesla’s proposal and the deal.Not only did the SolarCity lawyers focus the decision-making on the special committee, they even negotiated for bells and whistles. Tesla proposed that there be no “go-shop” period, a time for the target to solicit competing bids. SolarCity opposed this and successfully negotiated a go-shop provision, as well as a lower termination fee if a competing bid were accepted. And Mr. Musk signed a voting agreement, to boot.Reading this section, it’s hard not to ask yourself one question: Who else was really going to bid? You can even imagine Tesla arguing against the go-shop provision, knowing that it would be nice to give up its stance so that the record could show heavier bargaining. But that is mere speculation.On the Tesla side, things were not so neat. No special committee was formed, and instead, Mr. Musk and Antonio J. Gracias, who served on the boards of both companies, were simply excluded from crucial parts of meetings. The reason given was their expertise. That is true. But one could also see how Mr. Musk might be a bit headstrong about being excluded.To be sure, Tesla’s lawyers at Wachtell Lipton Rosen & Katz were careful to disclose in this document that any price discussion took place outside of Mr. Musk’s presence. And there was vigorous negotiation of the deal price — at least on paper. For example, at one point the filing states that “Mr. Elon Musk then left the meeting, and the Tesla Board (with Messrs. Elon Musk and Antonio Gracias recusing themselves) discussed the negotiating strategy to be employed to obtain the acquisition price for SolarCity common stock most favorable to Tesla and its stockholders.” And so on. The Tesla lawyers also tried to highly script the process through multiple meetings.It all seems like a pretty Japanese gift. The packaging is nice, but what is inside? The inside, of course, seems to be a deal where there is no other buyer and where Mr. Musk stands heavily on both sides of the deal, appearing to bail out a flailing solar company in which he happens to own a 21.9 percent stake. Or perhaps this is a deal where, once again, some just do not understand Mr. Musk’s genius.Either way, the lawyers have done their best — kudos to them, I suppose. The document should be required reading for merger and acquisitions disclosure scripting.Now it’s up to Tesla’s shareholders, because in spite of the pretty process, SolarCity does not have anywhere else to go.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.Advertisement