By KATIE THOMASSEPT. 2, 2016
The drug company Mylan has profited richly from its exclusive right to sell EpiPen, the severe allergy treatment. Recent price increases on the product have rendered it unaffordable for many, leading to a public outcry.But despite its monopoly on the product, Mylan has been telling an American agency for years that EpiPen is a generic, federal officials say, most likely leading state Medicaid programs to overpay for the product by tens of millions of dollars. If a medicine is considered a generic instead of a brand-name drug, the company can give a smaller discount to the states.The classification of the EpiPen added a new wrinkle to the intense scrutiny Mylan faces over its pricing of the device. It also raised questions about how closely the federal government was overseeing the pricing of drugs paid for through government health programs.Since Mylan bought the drug in 2007, it has raised the price sixfold — to about $600, from $100. The price increases have led to widespread criticism and inquiries from a number of elected officials. Hillary Clinton, the Democratic presidential nominee, cited the product as she unveiled a proposal on Friday to curb excessive price increases on drugs, in part by setting up a special team of federal officials to monitor prices.AdvertisementMylan has sought to address the criticism by saying it will offer more financial assistance with out-of-pocket costs and will expand the number of uninsured patients who can get free EpiPens. It also said it would introduce a generic version with a lower list price, an unusual move since Mylan is still the only company that can sell the product.AdvertisementThe latest development, first reported by Politico Pro, prompted a fresh round of outrage on Friday, as some wondered how a company benefiting from its lock on the product could also be calling it a generic.“You can’t have it both ways,” said Matt Salo, the executive director of the National Association of Medicaid Directors, who estimated that the overpayments could total tens of millions of dollars. “You’re either a brand or a generic.”He said the issue emerged after his organization began polling its members over the effect of the EpiPen price increases on state Medicaid programs, which serve poor people. Around the same time, a handful of senators sent a letter to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the federal agency that oversees Medicaid, asking similar questions.The classification is significant because owners of generic drugs pay rebates of 13 percent of the average manufacturers’ price. But manufacturers of brand-name drugs must offer discounts of about 23 percent off that average price, or the difference between the average price and the best price they have negotiated with any other American payer, whichever gives the bigger discount. In addition, brand-name manufacturers must pay more in rebates if their products’ prices rise faster than inflation, as EpiPen’s did.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.EpiPen’s designation as a generic dates back decades to when it was owned by Dey Laboratories and a Medicaid services official reasoned that it was “entirely fitting and proper” to consider EpiPen a generic, according to a 1997 letter that was cited in the Politico story. EpiPen contains epinephrine, a drug that is available as a cheap generic, but Mylan has the exclusive right to sell the drug as part of a patented auto-injector.Mylan said in a statement that it had done nothing wrong and that it believed longstanding federal guidelines supported its conclusion that EpiPen was a “non-innovator” product, but it declined to provide details of its reasoning.Shares in the company fell 4 percent on Friday. In the last two weeks, when the attention on EpiPen’s pricing has been most intense, the shares have fallen a total of about 15 percent.This year, the federal government issued a rule that requires all companies with drugs that have been approved under what the Food and Drug Administration calls a new drug application to either reclassify them as brand-name drugs or seek a waiver. In its statement, Mylan said it planned to seek such a waiver.AdvertisementMylan was one of several companies that objected to the proposed rule before it was completed, arguing that it was a reversal of longstanding policy and that many older products did not benefit from the same patent protections and market exclusivity as other branded products.How many other drugs are similarly being misclassified is unclear. The Medicaid agency did not respond to a question on the topic.Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, was one of the senators who wrote a letter asking the Medicaid agency for more information. Her daughter has severe allergies and relies on the EpiPen. If many other drugs are similarly misclassified, she said, the financial impact could be huge.“It just seems like we opened up a powder keg here, potentially, if in fact this is not only with Mylan but is just par for the course,” Ms. Klobuchar said. “The government has to go back and review all these drugs, and the practice has to stop.”A version of this article appears in print on September 3, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Is EpiPen a Brand-Name or a Generic Drug? Mylan Describes It Both Ways.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.