AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Kevin AllisonYum Brands has added some spice at a price. The company, which owns KFC and Pizza Hut, is selling part of its China business to Alibaba’s mobile-payments affiliate and a private-equity firm run by Fred Hu, the former chairman of Goldman Sachs China. They bring valuable technology skill and connections. It is a better deal than usual for so-called cornerstone investors, but may pay off for Yum’s coming spinoff.Mr. Hu’s Primavera Capital and Jack Ma’s Ant Financial, which operates Alipay, are investing $410 million and $50 million in Yum China. In return, they will together receive 4.3 percent to 5.9 percent of the company. That implies a wide valuation of $8.5 billion to $11.6 billion for the enterprise. Their final stakes will depend on where Yum China’s shares trade when they are listed separately, a flotation planned for next month.However things shake out, the new owners will buy in at an 8 percent discount to other shareholders. Standard anchor investors usually come in at a fixed value rather than a floating one linked to the market price. To secure brand names like Mr. Ma and Mr. Hu, after losing other potential backers, Yum was a little more flexible, throwing in warrants for more shares, too.After several setbacks for the company, including a food scare in 2014, influence and expertise will be important to its success. These new investors offer both. Mr. Hu, who will become Yum China’s nonexecutive chairman, may not have the same pull in Beijing as, say, China Investment Corporation, the sovereign wealth fund that walked away from buying a stake in Yum in May. His contacts could be useful, though.Ant’s e-commerce knowledge could help Yum compete in a market where consumers increasingly make transactions on phones. The two companies already are talking about collaborating, with Ant touting its big data capabilities and ways to shorten lines at KFC.Yum also secured other beneficial restrictions. For example, Primavera and Ant are not permitted to own more than one-fifth of Yum China. The new investors may have secured a tasty deal for themselves and may also give the coming sale a little extra flavor.Advertisement