AdvertisementSupported byHistorySourceBy Michael BeschlossForty years ago next month, the two major-party nominees, President Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter, the former governor of Georgia, were almost tied in the polls. Mr. Ford’s media team, Doug Bailey and John Deardourff, argued for taking a chance on a television commercial that would infuse the Ford campaign with the vote-getting power of emotion and history.But the result proved to be so unsettling, even shocking, to some of its sample viewers that Mr. Ford’s handlers made sure it stayed in the vault.Mr. Deardourff and Mr. Bailey had worked for Nelson A. Rockefeller, the former governor of New York, and, in those bygone days, proudly called themselves “liberal Republicans.” (Mr. Bailey went on to establish the political newsletter The Hotline in 1987.) They decided that what made Mr. Ford extraordinary was that he had brought a close to 11 years when Americans grew estranged from their presidents.President Lyndon B. Johnson’s Vietnam War escalation made him so unpopular that by the end of his time in office, he stayed away from university campuses. Richard M. Nixon’s presidency smashed up with Watergate and cries of “Jail to the Chief!” As Mr. Bailey said during a 2009 oral history for the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library by the historian Richard Norton Smith, it had been “just an incredible period of time where the emotions of the country had been rubbed raw,” and Mr. Ford, his “calm guy,” turned back the clock to a more tranquil time.Mr. Bailey and Mr. Deardourff hired a San Francisco adman, Robert Gardner, who quickly wrote a catchy, upbeat campaign anthem that (appropriately, since Mr. Ford had been a University of Michigan football star) sounded like a college fight song: “There’s a change that’s come over America/ A change that’s great to see .… We’re living here in peace again, we’re going back to work again/ It’s better than it used to be!” As Mr. Bailey recalled, “Everybody loved it.”By late October, Mr. Ford was rebounding from his roughly 30 percent deficit of the summer to come within striking distance of Mr. Carter, his Democratic opponent. This was in spite of a gaffe in their second debate in which Mr. Ford had implied that the Soviet Union did not control Eastern Europe.Mr. Bailey planned to crown the campaign with a four-and-a-half-minute television spot. At a time when television was dominated by only three major networks, such a lengthy commercial would have been a major event. Mr. Bailey wanted his ad to be “so powerful that it could reach out and grab hold of you and shake you and turn people’s votes around” and “to reinforce emotionally with people what they had been through” in the previous 11 years.Mr. Bailey recalled that during a Ford rally at the University of Michigan stadium, “a shot rang out and the president looks up and looks down, and he keeps speaking,” but “everybody was scared to death.” He also noted that twice in 1976, the president had gone to Dallas, where President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963, and waved from the roof of his limousine, “wearing a very thick bulletproof vest.” He told his film editors to make a spot showing how Mr. Ford had “calmed the waters of this country.”The ad opens with marching bands and the Ford campaign song, as well as the president, wearing a mid-1970s open-collared, tomato-red shirt, greeting voters in the Oval Office. Cut to the University of Michigan. “How long has it been since we’ve seen it on our college campuses?” asks the narrator. “The people believe in their president again.” Before the roaring crowd, Mr. Ford derides Mr. Carter, saying, “Trust is not having to guess what a candidate means.”Suddenly his sentence is interrupted by what sounds like rifle fire — unnerving during any presidential public appearance, but especially in Mr. Ford’s case, because a year earlier, in Sacramento and San Francisco, he twice escaped assassination by gunfire.We see Mr. Ford flinch. Then he bravely resumes, declaring, “Trust must be earned!” With the president wiping his forehead in obvious relief and the theme song full up, the narrator intones, “Neither the cherry bombs of a misguided prankster, nor all the memories of recent years, can keep the people and their president apart.”So far, so good. But then, given the acute sensitivities of the time, Mr. Deardourff and Mr. Bailey went over the top. Mr. Ford is seen in his Dallas motorcade, reminding viewers of the national tragedy of 1963. “When a limousine can parade openly through the streets of Dallas,” concludes the narrator, “after a decade of tension, the people and their president are back together again.” By Mr. Bailey’s later account, in the finished commercial, he “morphed” the Dallas footage “into another scene” in the Deep South, where Ford was “getting out of the car and diving into the crowds.”Making such a direct reference to the still-fresh national trauma of Dallas in 1963 packed an emotional punch that the two auteurs expected would strengthen their candidate’s chances. As Mr. Bailey recalled, however, “I showed it for the people in the campaign, and they just went crazy.” He said that the Secret Service thought it was “a nightmare” and that it would invite “the nut cases to come forward.”As Mr. Bailey remembered, Ford’s campaign manager, James A. Baker III (a Texan who later served as President George H. W. Bush’s secretary of state) found the commercial “nutty, absolutely screwy” and said, “You can’t make a reference to Dallas that way without losing the state of Texas.” A similar argument was made by Mr. Ford’s most prominent Texas champion, ex-Gov. John Connally, who had been badly wounded in President Kennedy’s car.When Robert Teeter, a pollster for Mr. Ford, showed the ad to a focus group, there were gasps. As Mr. Bailey recalled, these viewers “absolutely hated” it. Mr. Bailey explained to his colleagues that “it was designed to shake them up,” but he did not prevail. As he noted in 2009, the risky commercial had been “designed for a campaign we felt pretty sure we were going to lose,” and by the end of October, Mr. Ford and Mr. Carter were nearly tied. As for Mr. Ford, Bailey said, “I don’t know to this day whether he ever saw this ad.”In his narrow defeat of November 1976, Mr. Ford lost the Lone Star State anyway. In retrospect, his never-broadast commercial demonstrates how the power of the moving image can, at least slightly, stretch an implied fact. Yes, in Dallas, Mr. Ford emerged from the roof of his presidential car, but both President Johnson, in 1968, and President Nixon, in 1970, were driven through the city’s streets on the way to make speeches. Ultimately, it was, of all people, President Carter who ratified the premise of Mr. Ford’s unseen ad when he started his inaugural address by thanking his predecessor “for all he has done to heal our land.”Michael Beschloss, a presidential historian, is the author of nine books.Advertisement