By DANIEL VICTORSEPT. 2, 2016
Jared Fogle, the former Subway pitchman who pleaded guilty last year to sex acts with minors and distribution of child pornography, is blaming the parents of one of his victims, arguing that their divorce and lack of supervision led to the girl’s emotional distress that they attributed to him.In a motion filed on Thursday in United States District Court in Indiana, Mr. Fogle requested that the parents be made liable for part or all of their lawsuit against him, which was filed in March and is pending. The parents’ suit against Mr. Fogle and Russell Taylor, who set up hidden cameras and shared images with Mr. Fogle, contends that the men caused their daughter emotional distress and seeks at least $300,000, according to The Indianapolis Star.In return, Mr. Fogle’s complaint places blame on the parents, who are divorced and had joint legal custody of the girl. It claims the parents “maintained a hateful and abusive relationship toward each other,” including physical abuse. Their fighting, arguing and alcohol use caused the girl to suffer from emotional distress, anxiety and depression, Mr. Fogle claims.That distress resulted in the girl’s “engaging in destructive behaviors, including, but not limited to alcohol abuse, substance abuse, self-mutilation, and suicidal ideation,” he claims, adding that her “ability to engage in harmful behaviors” was the “direct result” of her parents’ “failure to properly supervise” the girl.A lawyer for Mr. Fogle, Ronald E. Elberger, declined to comment when reached by phone.In November, Mr. Fogle, 39, was sentenced to 15 years in prison and fined $175,000. He has paid $100,000 to each of 12 victims, as well as two he had sex with at New York City hotels, according to The Associated Press.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He rose to prominence as a spokesman for the Subway sandwich chain, boasting in advertisements beginning in 2000 that he lost 200 pounds by eating the sandwiches and exercising. In 2004, he formed a nonprofit organization, the Jared Foundation, to fight childhood obesity.Mr. Taylor, the executive director of the foundation, was sentenced to 27 years in prison in December. The authorities found more than 400 videos of child pornography in Mr. Taylor’s home in Indianapolis.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.