AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The British hedge fund manager Man Group said on Friday that it would shuffle its senior management less than two months after announcing its chief executive was departing for the bond giant Pimco.The shake-up came a day after Luke Ellis took over as chief executive of the British hedge fund manager, succeeding Emmanuel Roman, who will join Pacific Investment Management Company, or Pimco, this year as its chief executive. Mr. Ellis, who most recently served as Man’s president, has been with the company since 2010.Man Group, based in London, is one of the world’s largest publicly traded hedge fund managers, and it had watched its business stabilize under the leadership of Mr. Roman, a former Goldman Sachs banker who joined the company in 2010 and took the chief executive’s role in 2013.As part of the moves announced on Friday, Jonathan Sorrell will step down as chief financial officer, and he will take on an expanded role as Man’s president, including responsibility for sales, corporate strategy, and mergers and acquisitions.Mark Jones, the co-chief executive of Man GLG, will succeed Mr. Sorrell as chief financial officer and executive director, after approval from regulators.“The firm has changed a great deal in the past few years,” Mr. Ellis said in a news release, “and, with my own role also changing it made sense to look at the way we are organized and where different responsibilities should lie, so that we have the optimal structure in place to serve our clients and assist me in leading the firm through the next phase of development.”Sandy Rattray will become Man’s chief investment officer and remain chief executive of Man AHL, the firm’s quantitative investment manager. Robyn Grew will take on the new role of chief administrative officer after serving as Man’s general counsel and global head of legal and compliance.Man Group began as a barrel maker along the Thames in London in 1783 and evolved into an investment manager. It has offices in 16 countries and had $78.6 billion in assets under management as of the end of March.Under Mr. Roman, Man made several acquisitions as it looked to expand the geographic base of institutional investors and increase the scope of its operations in the American market.Mr. Roman is poised to succeed Douglas Hodge as Pimco’s chief executive on Nov. 1 and is set to join Pimco at a pivotal time for the company, owned by the German insurer Allianz.Nearly two years ago, William H. Gross, Pimco’s co-founder, known as the “bond king,” was forced out and joined its rival, Janus Capital Group.Pimco has struggled to regain its stride, and client trust, since the departures of Mr. Gross and Mohamed A. El-Erian, a former chief executive who left abruptly in January 2014.The company has watched hundreds of billions of dollars in client assets go since Mr. Gross’s departure. It is also facing a lawsuit by Mr. Gross accusing the company of wrongful termination and seeking $200 million in damages.Pimco has called the lawsuit “legally groundless” and is seeking its dismissal.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.Advertisement