AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy David ZaringFew executives have faced the punishment of prison and fines for misdeeds stemming from the financial crisis. The Securities and Exchange Commission’s recent decision to throw in the towel in its civil case against Daniel H. Mudd, the chief executive of Fannie Mae in the go-go years immediately preceding the crisis, helps explain why.Law enforcement officials have often protested that it is not easy to win cases against senior executives at financial firms, who are often far away from low-level wrongdoers on the organizational chart, and whose work product is usually filtered through compliance officers, risk managers and lawyers.Maybe so. The outcome of the Mudd case certainly looks like a loss. Last week, Mr. Mudd settled the case, which has been pending since 2011, for $100,000 – which Fannie Mae will pay. That is small change, given the $24 million he earned from Fannie Mae from 2006 to 2008.Five years of litigation in pursuit of $100,000 does not bespeak a particularly efficient allocation of law enforcement resources.Mr. Mudd and Fannie settled cheaply because of a feature of financial crisis enforcement cases. Although the headline allegations of malfeasance can look straightforward, wading through the proof has been, for the government, much harder.This dynamic might look surprising. The government should be happy to tell a simple story to a jury unlikely to be interested in accounting nuances. It leaves the defendant with the job of trying to win by raising the complications.And the basic business case against Mr. Mudd is easy to grasp. Fannie Mae was a publicly traded company, and so he and his subordinates owed the shareholders candid and comprehensive disclosures about the businesses the firm was in, and the risks it was taking.During the period that he was chief executive, the company expanded its subprime and Alt-A, or low disclosure, mortgage businesses. The value of those businesses collapsed in 2008, as did the housing market more generally. Fannie required a government takeover and, ultimately, an injection of $187 billion into the firm and its peer, Freddie Mac.Could Fannie’s officers really have been accurately disclosing the risks the firm was taking shortly before its sudden collapse? It is here where the case got complicated.While he was chief executive, Mr. Mudd said that subprime mortgages accounted for about 2 percent or less of the mortgages Fannie Mae was insuring. The commission’s case largely rested on the fact that this percentage did not include the insurer’s longstanding programs for low-credit score borrowers, Expanded Approval and MyCommunityMortgage.The theory about the Alt-A loan disclosures was also not that Fannie had not disclosed that it was in the business. It classified a number of its loans as Alt-A, and told investors as much. But it did not disclose that it had instructed lenders not to classify certain other loans as Alt-A, even though they were also supported by low documentation.That does not sound great, but it is not as if Mr. Mudd was hiding the fact that Fannie was getting into subprime and Alt-A mortgages.Moreover, Fannie did tell investors about its credit metrics for its entire book of business, which included all of the mortgages it insured: prime, subprime and other.None of Fannie’s regulators indicated that they disagreed with the way that Fannie described its loan exposure. Indeed, Mr. Mudd claimed that, long after he left, Fannie was still disclosing its exposures the way it did when he was chief executive.So Mr. Mudd had a no-harm, no-foul defense.Moreover, securities fraud requires not just that the disclosures be inaccurate, but also that there is also some intent to mislead. That is why the government likes to quote cynical or boorish emails from financial executives in its complaints and news releases. But it did not find any of this sort of “smoking gun” awareness in the executive’s records.As a general matter, the government’s handling of the financial crisis suggests that it has changed its approach from one visiting pain on individuals to one satisfied with corporate fines, often extracted through settlements paired with so-called deferred-prosecution agreements, or their civil equivalent, which are commitments by the companies that settle to change their internal practices in a way that limits the potential for future lawbreaking.The government has largely shied away from trying to draw blood against the senior executives who presided over the institutions that crashed during the financial crisis. The problems and outcome of the Mudd case exemplify some of the reasons for the change.David Zaring is associate professor of legal studies at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.Advertisement