By SAPNA MAHESHWARISEPT. 4, 2016
When Judy Balint, the chief marketing officer at SmartBiz Loans, read a freelance article that her company’s president contributed to Entrepreneur.com last month, she was startled to see that  a promotion for a rival lender had been added to the beginning — a lender with a partnership with Entrepreneur.“Get the working capital your business needs from Entrepreneur Lending, powered by CAN Capital,” it read, with a link to more information.To Ms. Balint, it looked as though SmartBiz was endorsing Entrepreneur Lending in the article, which was titled “How Silicon Valley Is Changing the Fintech Space.”“It looks like it’s part of our content,” Ms. Balint said in an interview. “It’s not disclosed to the reader that it’s an advertisement, either, and that’s a real concern.”When she complained, she said, she received an apology but was told the lines could not be removed or altered because of the way the post was tagged in the publishing system. The same promotional message was added to a slew of articles by journalists and contributors, some dating back as far as 2001, in a bid to draw readers to Entrepreneur’s new lending venture.AdvertisementLate last week, after The New York Times contacted Entrepreneur about the promotion, the tagline was removed, and in some cases replaced with a more recognizable ad for Entrepreneur Lending at the bottom of the articles.AdvertisementPublishers, under growing financial pressures in recent years, have increasingly blurred the lines between their organizations’ editorial and business sides to generate more money, whether through sponsored content that mimics the look and feel of reported work or by supporting conferences that feature leaders of businesses that their journalists cover. Entrepreneur Media, which owns Entrepreneur.com and Entrepreneur magazine, has entered new territory by joining the lending business, which it reports on, and using its editorial coverage to subtly promote its lending group.Entrepreneur Media, which started in the 1970s and is based in Irvine, Calif., has always targeted people who own, or aspire to own, a small business, mostly with “how to” information through its monthly magazine, books, website and events.The company, which is known for suing or threatening to sue anyone who infringes on its United States trademark for the word “entrepreneur,” says its flagship magazine has an advertising rate base of 600,000, compared with 700,000 at Inc.com and 900,000 at Forbes. Online, Entrepreneur.com had 5.7 million unique visitors in July, a 10 percent decline from the same month last year, compared with 74 million at Yahoo Finance and 9.7 million at Inc.com, according to comScore.Last month, Entrepreneur Media introduced Entrepreneur Lending, which allows it to profit as it directs readers to short-term, high-rate loans from CAN Capital. It added taglines promoting the business at the start of a wide range of stories related to raising capital, which are either edited contributions from freelancers or produced by its own writers.Ryan Shea, head of Entrepreneur Media, assured readers in an Aug. 16 post announcing the partnership that its publications would continue to provide “unbiased insights about loans from other banks, crowdfunding, personal assets and more.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Covering the spectrum of accurate and relevant information is an important part of our mission to support the small-business community and integral to the integrity of our brand,” wrote Mr. Shea, whose father was one of three men who took  control of the company in 1987.Mark Vamos, a professor of business journalism at Southern Methodist University, in Dallas, and a former editor of Fast Company magazine, said the potential for conflicts of interest was obvious. “How can you continue to be neutral when you’ve got skin in the game?” he said.Before the original text was deleted from the stories, he said its placement was troubling for readers because it was not clearly distinguishable from the editorial content.Advertisement“It’s positioned at the top of the article in a way that makes it look very important and integral to the article in some way,” he said. “There are certainly visual things they could do to make it clearer that this is an e-commerce link.”Bill Shaw, the chief revenue officer of Entrepreneur Media, declined to discuss the ads or terms of the company’s deal with CAN Capital. He pointed to Mr. Shea’s post from Aug. 16 as an example of the company’s “continued transparency” and said a similar note would be shared in the October issue of Entrepreneur magazine.Those at Entrepreneur Media take “the separation of editorial and commerce very seriously and hold the trust of our audience in the highest regard,” he wrote in an email. He said Entrepreneur Lending “is an alternative financing option for small-business owners, not an editorial product; therefore, our editorial staff is not affiliated with the service.’’Mr. Shaw did not return messages seeking comment on why Entrepreneur removed the promotional tagline from the top of the stories.Ms. Balint of SmartBiz said the promotion crossed a line.“If they put it in a box and said ‘sponsored’ or ‘ad’ or something, it would certainly help, and then simply allowing the contributors to not have that right in front of their article,” she said.Mr. Vamos said the company was taking the risk of losing contributors and eroding the value of its core business, which is ultimately the editorial product.“People do try to blur the lines between editorial and advertising, because editorial has more credibility,” he said. “But if a publication starts going too far and blurring those lines and damages its credibility with readers, it also in the long term damages its value for advertisers.”A version of this article appears in print on September 5, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Entrepreneur Media Joins the Lending Industry It Covers, Blurring Lines.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.