SEPT. 4, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes regular weekly auctions of new three- and six-month bills, rescheduled to Tuesday this week because of the Labor Day holiday, and an auction of four-week bills, also on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.33 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.46 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.25 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Brookhaven, N.Y., $51.9 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District, Calif., $85 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Washington, $134.4 million of series B general obligation bonds. Competitive.Washington, $90.1 million of series C general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementDormitory Authority of the State of New York, $618.2 million of series A income tax revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementDormitory Authority of the State of New York, $65.5 million of series C taxable revenue bonds. Competitive.Orange County, Calif., $56.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Ashland, Ky., $73.2 million of medical center revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Austin, Tex., $187.4 million of public improvement and refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.California Health Facilities Financing Authority, $306 million of health system revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.California Infrastructure and Economic Development Bank, $53 million of Salvation Army Western Territory revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.California Institute of Technology, $120 million of taxable bonds. Morgan Stanley.Hamilton County, Ohio, $139.2 million of health care improvement and refinancing revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Illinois Housing Development Authority, $146.9 million of homeownership mortgage revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Indiana Finance Authority, $234.3 million of first-lien wastewater utility revenue bonds and second-lien wastewater utility refinancing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Indiana State University Board of Trustees, $82.1 million of student fee bonds. Barclays Capital.Irvine, Calif., $115.5 million of Community Facilities District No. 2013-3 Improvement Area No. 4 special tax bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.AdvertisementMetropolitan Transportation Authority, N.Y., $54.5 million of dedicated tax fund refinancing bonds. Jefferies.Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District, Calif., $57.3 million of green bonds. Morgan Stanley.Modesto Irrigation District, Calif., $94 million of electrical system refinancing revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York Counties Tobacco Trust VI, $292.2 million of tobacco settlement pass-through bonds. Jefferies.Port St. Lucie, Fla., $125.6 million of special assessment refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Scranton-Lackawanna Health and Welfare Authority, Pa., $53.8 million of university revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Stephen F. Austin State University Board of Regents, Tex., $60.6 million of revenue financing system revenue refinancing improvement bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Texas Transportation Commission, $90 million of state highway fund revenue refinancing put bonds. Jefferies.Texas Transportation Commission, $615.3 million of state highway fund revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Wyoming Community Development Authority, $80 million of housing revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.A version of this schedule appears in print on September 5, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.