AdvertisementSupported byBy Gregory SchmidtHeavy Metal magazine, which will celebrate its 40th anniversary next year, is harking back to its past.The publication, a science-fiction and fantasy illustrated bimonthly anthology that made its debut in 1977, is known for its provocative covers and mature content. But executives at the magazine felt it had strayed from its roots as a showcase for high-quality avant-garde art.“It took a hard left at a certain point,” said Jeff Krelitz, a co-owner and co-chief executive of Heavy Metal. Too much attention was focused on the magazine’s cover, he said, which had “a kind of cheesecake, soft-core feel to it.”“We are taking things back to basics and putting a current spin on it,” he said.The overhaul was done for both creative and business reasons, Mr. Krelitz said. Focusing on newsstand sales, the magazine has bolstered its circulation, which is about 250,000 a year and supported by a strong subscriber base.“Magazines are in decline, but we are on the rise,” Mr. Krelitz said. “That just doesn’t happen in this market.”Part of the effort to reinvigorate Heavy Metal included hiring a new editor in chief, Grant Morrison, who has written Batman, Superman and X-Men comic books.“I’m more known from mainstream comics,” Mr. Morrison said. “Hopefully, having my name on Heavy Metal will bring that audience.”The magazine, which made its name by featuring works from artists like H. R. Giger, crossed over into pop culture in 1981 with an animated movie, also called “Heavy Metal,” based on its content. But that transition led to more sexualized covers, Mr. Morrison said.“In the ’80s, it became the equivalent of a Mötley Crüe video, with huge breasts and spaceships,” Mr. Morrison said. “I wanted to make sure we were not falling into that trap.”Still, to honor the 35th anniversary of the movie, the magazine’s latest issue features Taarna, a scantily clad female warrior from the film on its cover.“That character is one of the most famous and well-liked images the company has,” Mr. Krelitz said. “We didn’t want to alienate the fan base that had been loyal for the last two decades.”Mr. Morrison has been steadily putting his stamp on the magazine’s content, bringing in a diverse selection of artists from around the world. The latest issue, due on newsstands on Wednesday, features work from artists like Enki Bilal of France, Leonie O’Moore of Ireland and Jakub Rozalski of Poland.“In any creative endeavor, you need to keep the voice fresh,” said Mr. Krelitz, a television producer and director who bought the magazine in 2014 with David Boxenbaum, a co-founder of A&M/Octone Records, now a unit of the Universal Music Group. The seller, Kevin Eastman, one of the creators of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, ran Heavy Metal for more than two decades and remains a minority investor and the magazine’s publisher.“The U.S. market has really started to grow up and is on par globally with the great range of material,” Mr. Eastman said. “But the U.S. market still relies on superhero-based material.”Mr. Krelitz added, “Heavy Metal is what you graduate to when you are done playing with superheroes.”Advertisement