AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere’s what to expect in the week ahead:CORPORATE FINANCINGAs Congress returns on Tuesday from a seven-week recess, the White House will press for action to end a 14-month impasse that limits the Export-Import Bank’s financing authority. The administration included the bank matter on a must-do list for Congress’s abbreviated election-year calendar. But the chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, Richard C. Shelby, an Alabama Republican who is an opponent of the bank, still refuses to allow a vote to confirm an Obama nominee to the bank board. Lacking a quorum, it cannot finance export deals over $10 million. Senators of both parties are considering ways around Mr. Shelby, but no resolution is likely until a lame-duck session in December. Jackie CalmesTECHNOLOGYApple is set to unveil updated versions of the iPhone and the Apple Watch at the company’s annual product introduction on Wednesday at the Bill Graham Civic Auditorium in downtown San Francisco. The iPhone, still the company’s most important product, is expected to lose its headphone jack and gain improved cameras. The latest watch is set to include a GPS device. Katie BennerLike Apple, Sony plans to make tech news on Wednesday, staging an event in New York devoted to the PlayStation game console. The company is widely expected to announce a new, more powerful version of the PlayStation 4 that is capable of displaying games in ultrahigh definition, though players will need 4K televisions to take advantage of the better graphics. Sony executives have already said such a system is coming and will be sold alongside a less expensive PlayStation 4 model. Nick WingfieldDell Technologies Inc. is expected on Wednesday to close its roughly $60 billion merger with EMC Corporation, a company best known for data storage and its majority ownership of VMware, which makes software for data centers. It is the largest acquisition ever in tech, but it’s unclear whether it represents the creation of a new giant or the management of a declining sector of the industry. Quentin HardyECONOMYOn Wednesday morning, the Labor Department will release its latest figures on job openings and labor turnover in July. The survey, known as the Job Openings and Labor Turnover survey, offers a window into the health of the labor market because it includes people who voluntarily quit, and thus reflects workers’ confidence in their ability to find a new job. In June, the number of people quitting held steady at 2.9 million while the number of layoffs and discharges hit 1.6 million. Patricia CohenInvestors will be watching closely as the European Central Bank announces the results of its latest monetary policy meeting on Thursday. Most economists expect the central bank to maintain its benchmark interest rate at zero, where it has been since March. It is charging a negative interest rate of minus 0.4 percent on money that commercial banks keep at the central bank, to encourage banks to lend that money rather than hold it.Some investors expect the central bank to announce an extension of its stimulus program to purchase 80 billion euros, or about $89 billion, a month in bonds. The bond buying program, known as quantitative easing, is currently meant to end in March. The meeting comes as the bank has faced increasing criticism over its monetary policy in recent months, particularly in Germany, where historically low interest rates have hurt savers and pension investments. Chad BrayAdvertisement