By JONATHAN SOBLENOV. 25, 2015
TOKYO —  Toyota Motor said on Wednesday it would replace potentially dangerous airbag inflaters in 1.6 million vehicles in Japan that it had previously judged were safe, further expanding the world’s biggest auto safety recall.The decision to replace more airbags made by the embattled supplier Takata followed an incident last month in which a Takata-made airbag in a sport utility vehicle made by the rival automaker Nissan burst, injuring an occupant. It was the first injury in Japan linked to a fault in Takata airbags, which have been blamed for eight deaths and more than 100 injuries elsewhere, mostly in the United States.The 22 Japanese models recalled by Toyota on Wednesday were cited by the automaker earlier this year as requiring airbag repairs.But with replacement parts in short supply, Toyota had said the cars were safe enough to stay on the road for a while.AdvertisementIn the October incident, an airbag inflater burst and sent shards flying into the cabin of the vehicle. The vehicle had previously been recalled and inspected, and no leaks or other obvious defects were found. Nissan recalled about 310,000 vehicles after the episode.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Toyota, too, had been prioritizing models with more clearly diagnosed problems, mostly older ones from the early 2000s.The recall order on Wednesday involved vehicles produced more recently, from 2004 and later.In the last month, Toyota, Nissan and other automakers have dropped Takata as a supplier of airbag inflaters after concluding that the ammonium nitrate propellant favored by Takata could destabilize, in extreme cases causing the inflaters to explode with excessive force. But the question of what to do with cars already on the road and equipped with ammonium nitrate inflaters has been vexing.AdvertisementAmerican safety regulators have effectively barred Takata from continuing to use ammonium nitrate. A consent order accompanying a $70 million fine imposed by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration requires that the company phase out inflaters containing the compound unless it can prove they are safe.A version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Toyota Expands Airbag Recall in Japan by 1.6 Million.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.