By GRETCHEN MORGENSONSEPT. 5, 2016
Sean X. McKessy, the founding director of the whistle-blower program at the Securities and Exchange Commission, is joining a law firm in Washington, where he will be an advocate for individuals coming forward with information about fraud or improprieties in their workplaces.Mr. McKessy, 49, began overseeing the S.E.C.’s whistle-blower program in 2011, a year after the Dodd-Frank law ordered the agency to create the unit. Since it was set up, the S.E.C. has dispensed over $100 million in awards to individuals who have brought the agency information that led to enforcement actions.Just last week, a lawyer announced that his client received $22 million for bringing information to the S.E.C. about accounting improprieties at Monsanto, the agribusiness company.Tips from whistle-blowers have resulted in orders for more than $500 million in financial remedies, much of which has been returned to harmed investors, the S.E.C. said.Advertisement“I feel I’ve established that I honor the work whistle-blowers do,” Mr. McKessy said in an interview. “I am hoping to convince many people who are on the fence witnessing fraud to come forward.”AdvertisementHis new employer, Phillips & Cohen, is one of the nation’s most prominent law firms specializing in whistle-blower cases. It represented the informer who in 2014 received $30 million under the S.E.C.’s program, its largest award. The firm also represents individuals who identify fraud at government agencies. It has recovered more than $11.6 billion from civil settlements and criminal fines related to its cases.“As chief of the S.E.C.’s whistle-blower office, Sean was a tireless advocate for whistle-blowers and the S.E.C.’s whistle-blower program,” said Erika A. Kelton, a partner at Phillips & Cohen. “He played a pivotal role in transforming the S.E.C.’s culture into one that enthusiastically welcomes whistle-blowers and appreciates their critical role in advancing the S.E.C.’s enforcement agenda.”Other government agencies have whistle-blower programs but few are as successful as the S.E.C.’s. The program at the Internal Revenue Service, for example, has been routinely criticized for an apparent reluctance to pursue leads and pay awards.Mr. McKessy said that whistle-blowers under the S.E.C.’s program had prospered because the S.E.C. guaranteed anonymity to those who come forward. “The S.E.C.’s devotion to maintaining the confidentiality of whistle-blowers is the biggest factor in the program’s success,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The agency’s system has also worked well, Mr. McKessy said, because its leaders were committed to the program from the start. “This wasn’t a mandate foisted upon an agency,” he said. “When I walked in the door, it was very clear that the S.E.C. chair and head of the enforcement division were dedicated to making the program work.”One reason for this commitment may stem from the beating the agency took for its dismissal of a whistle-blower who had warned that Bernard L. Madoff’s longtime money management business was a Ponzi scheme years before Mr. Madoff’s fraud emerged.Directing the S.E.C.’s program was Mr. McKessy’s second job at the agency. From 1997 to 2000, he was senior counsel in the enforcement division. Then he moved to the private sector, holding senior legal or governance positions at Caterpillar, Altria Group and AOL.When he headed the whistle-blower office, he said, he made it a point to tell corporations that whistle-blowers were not the enemy. “I wanted to let companies know these people have a role to play,” Mr. McKessy said. “When somebody comes forward, the first question should not be, ‘Who told you?’ Instead it should be, ‘What is the problem and how can it be addressed?’”AdvertisementMr. McKessy left the S.E.C. on July 31 and is subject to a one-year ban on appearing before the agency on behalf of clients.For many whistle-blowers, Mr. McKessy said, bringing fraud to light held many perils including retribution and job loss. As a result, he said, one of his goals in overseeing the S.E.C.’s program was to make it easier for people to participate.“I’m hoping we can change the dynamic so it’s not so dangerous to come out and say you did this work,” Mr. McKessy said. “It’s disturbing to me how many whistle-blowers have told me that had they known what they would go through they would never have come forward.”A version of this article appears in print on September 6, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: S.E.C.’s First Whistle-Blower Chief Will Join a Washington Law Firm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.