By AMIE TSANGSEPT. 6, 2016
How much influence does your boss have over how you vote? You’d probably like to think you’re fairly independent, but that may not be the case.A new study shows that chief executives of companies have an unsettling amount of power over their employees, and it is not just down to colleagues having similar values.The study showed that when a chief executive contributed to different political candidates from the ones supported by the preceding chief executive, employees tended to follow their leader and redirect their own donations.The influence of a boss’s political leanings should not be underestimated and, indeed, should be scrutinized, Andrew Ross Sorkin writes. But for this election cycle at least, it seems that many chief executives are avoiding public endorsements, possibly because they do not want to face reprisals against their business or industry down the line.AdvertisementIt’s a case study for business schools and an example for Wall Street law firms.Airgas could have been sold off for a fraction of the initial offer price, just as Yahoo was. And, at the time, the company’s founder, Peter McCausland, was accused of being too entrenched.AdvertisementBut he has come out on top with a $10 billion sale.All he had to do was:• Fend off a hostile takeover from Air Products & Chemicals.• Win a court battle to preserve the company’s ability to defend itself against hostile takeovers without input from shareholders.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.• See off a challenge from the activist investor, Elliott Management.• Find a better offer from another company.That was easy enough, right?Now Airgas is an argument for the management’s right to defend a company. The deal itself has upended the industry, potentially spurring more consolidation.Still, it was hard for Mr. McCausland to let go.“Would I have been happier just becoming nonexecutive chairman and staying involved with Airgas? I think I probably would,” he said. “But under the circumstances, we got the best result.”BTG Pactual was once a highflying investment bank with global aspirations, with some even joking that its acronym is in fact short for “Better Than Goldman.”But a brush with scandal has left it reinventing itself with more modest aims.Since its former chief executive, André Esteves, was arrested in relation to the Petrobras corruption investigation, the bank’s share price has taken a beating and clients have withdrawn billions from their accounts.AdvertisementThis ship has steadied somewhat since then, but BTG has nevertheless returned closer to its mission in 2012, when it was guided by the distinctly less aggressive motto — “Latin America’s business and investment hub.”It still will not be easy for the bank to turn a profit in its newly-slimmer form. But for now, many are just giving it credit for surviving.• John Williams, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, will discuss the economic outlook and what it means for monetary policy at the Hayek Group’s monthly dinner in Reno, Nev.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.