AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressNAPA, Calif. — Margrit Biever Mondavi, the widow of the California wine pioneer Robert G. Mondavi and for many decades his company’s cultural affairs director, died at her home here on Friday. She was 91.The cause was cancer, said Keith Roberts, her son-in-law.The Mondavis were among the producers who helped turn the agricultural Napa Valley area, northeast of San Francisco, into a world-renowned wine region. “She and her husband invented the modern wine business in California, and the United States,” Mr. Roberts said.Ms. Mondavi, an accomplished painter, was the Robert Mondavi Winery’s vice president of cultural affairs and, the winery said in a statement, worked to combine wine with fine art, music and food by creating “a showplace for painters, sculptors, photographers, jazz and classical musicians, and the great chefs and winemakers of the world.”She founded the winery’s Summer Music Festival in 1969 as a benefit for the local symphony. Performers who have appeared at the festival over the years include Ella Fitzgerald, Harry Belafonte and Tony Bennett. A winter classical music series was begun in 1984 to benefit local music organizations.Ms. Mondavi also introduced cooking classes at the winery, which evolved into a “Great Chefs” series, and curated its art exhibitions.She continued to work for the Robert Mondavi Winery after it was sold to Constellation Brands in 2004.Margrit Kellenberger was born in Appenzell, Switzerland, on Aug. 2, 1925. She and her first husband, Philip Biever, a captain in the United States Army, moved to the Napa Valley in 1960, and she went to work at the Robert Mondavi Winery in 1967, a year after it was founded.She married Robert Mondavi in 1980, after both their marriages ended in divorce. Mr. Mondavi died in 2008.Ms. Mondavi is survived by two daughters, Annie Roberts, with whom she wrote the 2003 book “Annie and Margrit: Recipes and Stories From the Robert Mondavi Kitchen,” and Phoebe Holbrook; a son, Philip Biever; six grandchildren; and three great-grandchildren.Advertisement