By CHAD BRAYSEPT. 5, 2016
LONDON — James E. Staley, the Barclays chief executive, has turned to another executive from his former employer, JPMorgan Chase, to fill out his new bank’s executive ranks.Barclays said on Monday that Tim Throsby, JPMorgan’s global head of equities, would join the British lender in January as president of its corporate and international business and as chief executive of its corporate and investment bank.Mr. Throsby’s hiring comes at an important time for Barclays. Mr. Staley, who joined the bank in December, has accelerated the sales of businesses that Barclays no longer considers core operations and is focusing its strategy on two divisions: the British consumer bank and a slimmed-down corporate and investment bank.In his new role, Mr. Throsby would become a member of the executive committee at Barclays and would report directly to Mr. Staley. His appointment is subject to regulatory approval.AdvertisementMr. Throsby has been with JPMorgan since 2010. He has a lengthy career in banking and private equity, with stints at Credit Suisse, Macquarie Group, Goldman Sachs, Lehman Brothers and Citadel Investment Group. At Barclays, he will succeed Thomas King, who is retiring this year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Tim is an exceptionally talented and experienced professional, qualities he will bring to leading Barclays Corporate & International, and to our Corporate and Investment Bank, as we continue to pursue our strategy, complete our structural changes, and carry on providing world-class service to our customers and clients,” Mr. Staley said in a news release.Mr. Staley spent more than 30 years at JPMorgan, serving as the top executive in its investment banking and asset management units. He left JPMorgan in 2013 to join the hedge fund BlueMountain Capital Management and joined Barclays in December.AdvertisementMr. Throsby is the latest in a series of executives that Mr. Staley has recruited from JPMorgan. In January, Barclays announced that it had hired C. S. Venkatakrishnan, the former head of operational risk at JPMorgan, to join the British bank as its chief risk officer. In February, Barclays said that Paul H. Compton, who had served as JPMorgan’s chief administrative officer, would join as chief operating officer.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.A version of this article appears in print on September 6, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: JPMorgan Banker Goes to Barclays.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.