AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangWilliam A. Ackman’s hunger for fast food just cannot be satiated.After investing in McDonald’s, Burger King and Tim Hortons, Mr. Ackman now wants in on burritos. His Pershing Square Capital Management acquired the option to purchase a 9.9 percent stake in Chipotle, worth about $1.2 billion. Mr. Ackman is now the second-largest shareholder after Fidelity Investments.A regulatory filing said Pershing Square planned to hold discussions with the company about a number of issues, including Chipotle’s governance and board makeup. The burrito restaurant chain’s shares plummeted after hundreds of people got sick from eating at its restaurants.This is Mr. Ackman’s first big investment in 2016, after two years of tough performance and moves to pare back his portfolio.Some jeered when Elon Musk proposed creating a solar power juggernaut by having Tesla buy SolarCity. Many saw it as Mr. Musk bailing out his own investment.Now, we get to see whether Tesla’s shareholders will buy into Mr. Musk’s vision.But the process by which they deliberate and cast their votes is opaque.There is little indication of how the different shareholders will decide on their votes, highlighting the often arbitrary and mysterious nature of these ballots.The high stakes, combined with the secrecy of the vote, is a nice commentary on the pros and cons of today’s shareholder democracy, writes Steven Davidoff Solomon.Are these divergent investors willing to challenge Mr. Musk’s empire?How can we combat white-collar crime? Start by calling it stealing, plain and simple.That’s the recommendation of Alison Levitt, a partner at the London law firm Mishcon de Reya. Ms. Levitt, who oversees the company’s business crime group, said harsher measures were needed to fight the war on white-collar crimes which, it seems, is being lost.According to Ms. Levitt, financial crimes needed to be associated with the same sort of stigma as rape.But is it a losing fight?Many certainly seemed pessimistic about it at the 34th international symposium on economic crime in England.“We have lost most of the major battles and all of the wars,” said John W. Moscow, the former chief of the frauds bureau and the deputy chief of the investigations division at the New York County district attorney’s office. “The number of people benefiting from large-scale, economic crime is immense, the number of victims is immense, but the number of prosecutions is limited by small and declining budgets.”• Apple fans can expect updated iPhones and Apple Watches. Follow our live analysis of the Apple event. Sony is also staging an event in New York devoted to the PlayStation console.• The Labor Department will publish the latest figures on job openings and labor turnover in July, giving a view into the health of the labor market. The Federal Reserve, meanwhile, publishes the Beige Book.• The House Financial Services Committee will hold a hearing on the governance of Federal Reserve Banks.• Hewlett Packard Enterprise will publish its third-quarter earnings.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement