AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerWilliam A. Ackman has a craving for fast food.The billionaire investor’s latest target is Chipotle Mexican Grill, the burrito restaurant chain whose stock has been battered over the last year because of a string of food safety issues. The fast-food industry is a familiar one for Mr. Ackman, who has invested in McDonald’s, Burger King and Tim Hortons.Mr. Ackman’s Pershing Square Capital Management acquired the option to purchase 2.9 million shares, which represents a 9.9 percent stake in Chipotle, according to a regulatory filing on Tuesday. With the investment, worth about $1.2 billion at Tuesday’s closing prices, he becomes the company’s second-largest shareholder after Fidelity Investments.Pershing Square said in the filing it would hold discussions with Chipotle over issues related to “governance and board composition, business, operations, cost structure, management, assets, capitalization, financial condition, strategic plans and the future of the issuer.”A representative from Chipotle did not immediately respond to a request seeking comment.This is Mr. Ackman’s first big investment in 2016, after two tough years of performance. Pershing Square Holdings lost 20.5 percent in 2015, and this year he is down 14.3 percent as of the end of August.He has been paring back his portfolio lately, selling some of his holdings in Zoetis, the former animal health arm of Pfizer and Mondelez International, the maker of Oreos. He also exited the remaining stake in the railroad Canadian Pacific. Mr. Ackman resigned from Canadian Pacific’s board, the company said in a statement on Tuesday.Mr. Ackman specializes in making big, concentrated bets. Sometimes his investments score big, but that’s not always the case. Here’s how some of his ideas have fared.Shares of Chipotle have plummeted more than 40 percent over the last year after hundreds of people got sick after eating in its restaurants. A majority of the illnesses stemmed from norovirus contamination and strains of E. coli and salmonella.The scandal has caused sales to slump, as customers stayed away from Chipotle restaurants out of fear of getting sick. Revenue during the quarter through June declined 17 percent, while comparable restaurant sales decreased 24 percent, the company said in its earnings report on July 21.To make matters worse, the executive in charge of cleaning up the crisis, Mark Crumpacker, was put on administrative leave in July after he was charged with drug possession and named in an indictment as one of 18 buyers of cocaine.Chipotle has been embarking on costly marketing campaigns to bring customers back to its 2,100 restaurants. Chiptopia is a three-month loyalty program (beginning July 1) that rewards customers with free food based on how many times they visit the restaurants.The news of Mr. Ackman’s investment sent the stock 6 percent higher in after-hours trading, on the prospect that he could help fix the company.Pershing Square purchased 554,213 shares, then entered into a contract to give it the option to purchase an additional 2.3 million shares for a net price of $974 million, the filing showed.Advertisement