
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

SEPT. 6, 2016
Investors in 21st Century Fox, the media company controlled by Rupert Murdoch, are once again paying a price for poor governance.The company settled a high-profile lawsuit against its former TV boss, Roger Ailes, as accusations of his sexual peccadilloes snowballed. Like the phone-hacking scandal in Britain a few years ago, it is another example of lax oversight abetted by a dual-class share structure.The former Fox News anchor Gretchen Carlson asserted that Mr. Ailes, the chief architect of the 20-year-old news network, fired her because she never returned his advances. Worse, she accused him of long fostering an atmosphere hostile to women.After Fox hired an outside law firm to investigate, more women who work at the company came forward with their own stories. Ms. Carlson “was not treated with the respect and dignity that she and all of our colleagues deserve,” Fox said about the settlement, which is worth $20 million.AdvertisementThat Mr. Ailes was allowed to run Fox News as his own mini-empire — issuing his own settlements and having his enemies followed, according to news reports — highlights the perils of allowing one shareholder to effectively control the entire operation. Mr. Murdoch controls nearly 40 percent of the voting stock through a trust.Such structures make it far too easy for directors to ignore warning signs or fail to act on them. That’s especially true at Fox, where Mr. Murdoch is also the chairman. Think, for example, of how the directors at Hewlett-Packard, which has no controlling shareholder, in 2010 summarily sent packing their chief executive, Mark Hurd, after he engaged in conduct deemed inappropriate with a female contractor.AdvertisementFox did act swiftly to address Ms. Carlson’s lawsuit. It was only a matter of weeks before Mr. Ailes was forced out, albeit with $40 million. More settlements like the one reached with Ms. Carlson look inevitable. They may amount to far less than the nearly $500 million that Mr. Murdoch’s News Corporation paid in fees related to the hacking scandal. But with talent bolting, including Greta Van Susteren, the mistake of letting Mr. Ailes run amok is adding up.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »