By LESLIE PICKERSEPT. 6, 2016
Carl C. Icahn’s investment firm has agreed to take the Federal-Mogul Holdings Corporation private, continuing his quest to buy suppliers to the auto industry.Icahn Enterprises will buy the remaining 18 percent of Federal-Mogul it does not already own for $9.25 a share in cash, according to a statement released Tuesday by Federal-Mogul, which is based in Southfield, Mich. The deal values Federal-Mogul around $1.6 billion.The acquisition of Federal-Mogul comes after Mr. Icahn’s deal to take private the auto parts retailer Pep Boys, which closed for about $1 billion in February. Mr. Icahn engaged in a hotly contested bidding war against the Bridgestone Corporation of Japan, eventually prevailing. A year earlier, Mr. Icahn acquired many of the assets of Uni-Select USA, another auto-parts distributor.The deal announced on Tuesday carried a higher premium than the $7-a-share offer Mr. Icahn made in February. In mid-June, Mr. Icahn raised his offer to $8 a share in cash.AdvertisementFederal-Mogul appointed a special group of independent directors to evaluate the offers. That committee unanimously recommended that shareholders accept Mr. Icahn’s $9.25-a-share deal, according to the statement on Tuesday. It represented an 86 percent premium above Federal-Mogul’s trading price the day before Mr. Icahn’s original proposal surfaced.AdvertisementThe company’s largest shareholders other than Mr. Icahn include Gamco Investors, Staley Capital Advisers, Dimensional Fund Advisors and the Vanguard Group, according to data compiled by S&P Capital IQ. Federal-Mogul’s board is encouraging the remaining shareholders to tender their shares to Mr. Icahn, the statement said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Taking Federal-Mogul private will give Mr. Icahn the ability to make operational changes without needing to appease its public shareholders. His history at the company goes back more than a decade.Mr. Icahn acquired bonds in the company before its bankruptcy, over liabilities from litigation over asbestos claims, in 2001. After the company restructured, Mr. Icahn’s investment was exchanged for equity, and he took a position as nonexecutive chairman in 2008. When he acquired the American automotive parts distribution assets of Uni-Select, he decided a year ago to resign as a director and nonexecutive chairman of Federal-Mogul.Federal Mogul shares, which had been trading near Mr. Icahn’s final offer price, dipped slightly in midday trading Tuesday to about $9.22 a share. The company makes products for vehicles, such as pistons, combustion and exhaust gaskets, wipers and brake parts. It was founded in 1899 – before cars became mainstream – to sell mill supplies and rubber goods. Since then, Federal-Mogul has produced components for boat propellers and a NASA space shuttle.The company generated about $7.4 billion in revenue last year, but it has been producing net losses for the last two years. The company’s debt load of about $3 billion is almost double the value of its equity.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.