By LESLIE PICKERSEPT. 6, 2016
Two pipeline companies agreed on Tuesday to merge in a deal that could create the largest energy-infrastructure company in North America.The companies, Enbridge and Spectra Energy, signed a stock-for-stock deal, where Enbridge shareholders will own about 57 percent of the combined company and Spectra’s will own 43 percent, according to a statement released by the companies on Tuesday.Spectra shareholders will get 0.984 shares of the combined company for each share they own, valued at about $40.33 a share, based on share prices on Sept. 2. The transaction values Spectra’s common stock at about $28 billion.Pipeline companies help transport oil, natural gas and other liquids across the country. Pipeline companies had traditionally been seen as an energy investment relatively immune from the price swings of the commodities they carry because they lock in long-term contracts. But after a plummet in energy prices last year, investors became skittish about pipelines as well because many of their customers were on the brink of bankruptcy.AdvertisementThe pipeline industry’s stock prices have been recovering, but the ability to combine gives these companies the chance to bulk up and diversify their offerings. Enbridge and Spectra will also have a utility portfolio and midstream energy business after they combine. Their customer base is largely low risk, the companies said, with 93 percent of customers holding investment grade or equivalent ratings.Advertisement“Bringing Enbridge and Spectra together makes strong strategic and financial sense, and the all-stock nature of the transaction provides shareholders of both companies with the opportunity to participate in the significant upside potential of the combined company,” Al Monaco, president and chief executive of Enbridge, said in Tuesday’s statement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the transaction closes, Mr. Monaco will continue in that role, while Gregory L. Ebel, Spectra’s president and chief executive, will serve as nonexecutive chairman. The headquarters will be in Calgary, where Enbridge is based.The transaction will also give shareholders a 15 percent annualized dividend increase in 2017 and an annual 10 percent to 12 percent dividend growth through 2024, according to the statement.The companies are expecting to save about $415 million in costs, most of which will be achieved toward the end of 2018. Enbridge said it would divest $2 billion of noncore assets over the next 12 months to improve its balance sheet.The companies expect the deal to close in the first quarter of 2017, although it is subject to shareholder approvals from both companies as well as regulatory clearance.Credit Suisse was the lead financial adviser to Enbridge, along with RBC Capital Markets. BMO Capital Markets and Citigroup were joint-lead financial advisers to Spectra. Sullivan & Cromwell and McCarthy Tétrault were legal advisers to Enbridge, while Spectra worked with Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz and Goodmans. Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom provided tax counsel to Spectra.A version of this article appears in print on September 7, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Merger Creates Largest Pipeline Operator in North America.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.