AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinSullivan & Cromwell, a big law firm known for advising major financial institutions, is taking steps to bolster its work in an area of particular concern to large banks: online security.The law firm announced on Tuesday that it had hired as special counsel Nicole Friedlander, a former Manhattan federal prosecutor who had most recently overseen online crime prosecutions. Ms. Friedlander, 40, was previously co-chief of the complex frauds and online crime unit for the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan.As a federal prosecutor for a little over eight years, Ms. Friedlander had helped oversee the investigation into an attack against JPMorgan Chase that resulted in the contact information for 83 million of the bank’s customers being compromised. The investigation led to the filing of criminal charges in 2015 against five men in a complex scheme that involved hacking and securities fraud.Steven R. Peikin, a managing partner in the law firm’s criminal defense and investigations group, said that the firm’s “footprint has been a little light” in digital security and that Ms. Friedlander’s hiring would help build that practice area.Online security has become a big issue for large corporations, in particular financial institutions, given the growing sophistication of hackers who breach computer networks and gain access to sensitive information about customers and corporate strategies.Ms. Friedlander said her experience in law enforcement should prove instructive to corporate clients in learning how to deal with authorities during an investigation into a breach of a company’s network.“Companies can be in a very difficult position when they have been hacked,” she said in an interview. “While law enforcement may see them purely as victims, other arms of the government may not. As a lawyer for a company, you want to give a coherent message, and I believe my experience will be helpful.”Ms. Friedlander, during her tenure as a prosecutor, also worked on a number of money laundering and more traditional white-collar criminal cases.She graduated from New York University Law School in 2001 and worked at Simpson Thacher & Bartlett before becoming a federal prosecutor in Manhattan.Advertisement