AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — General Electric said on Tuesday that it had offered to buy two European suppliers of additive manufacturing equipment for a combined $1.4 billion as it looks to push further into 3-D printing.The industrial giant said the acquisitions of the two suppliers, Arcam of Sweden and SLM Solutions Group of Germany, would bolster its materials science and additive manufacturing operations. Additive manufacturing describes the process of 3-D printing, whereby layers are added on top of one another to build objects.G.E. has been trying to focus on its industrial roots after years of expansion into finance. The company said last year that it would sell the bulk of its finance arm, GE Capital.G.E. said it had invested about $1.5 billion in manufacturing and 3-D printing technology since 2010, and added that it expected its new additive manufacturing business to achieve $1 billion in revenue by 2020.“Additive manufacturing is a key part of G.E.’s evolution into a digital industrial company,” Jeffrey R. Immelt, the G.E. chairman and chief executive, said in a news release.G.E. did not publish a breakdown of how much it had offered for each company, but Arcam said in a news release that G.E. had offered to pay 285 Swedish kronor, or about $33.26, a share for the company, a 53 percent premium to the closing price on Monday. Arcam’s board of directors unanimously recommended that shareholders accept the offer.Arcam, based in Molndal, Sweden, is a provider of metal-based 3-D printing technology, primarily for the aerospace and health care industries. It had $68 million in revenue in 2015 and about 285 employees.SLM Solutions, which went public two years ago, said in a news release that G.E. had offered to pay 38 euros, about $42.40, a share for the company, a 36.7 percent premium to its closing price on Monday.G.E. already reached agreements to acquire 31.5 percent of its stock from major shareholders, SLM Solutions said.SLM Solutions, based in Lübeck, Germany, produces laser machines used in metal-based additive manufacturing, with customers in the aerospace, energy, health care and automotive sectors. It had $74 million in revenue in 2015 and about 260 employees.If the acquisitions are completed, the companies would report to David L. Joyce, president and chief executive of GE Aviation. G.E. said it would keep the headquarters and key operating sites of Arcam and SLM, as well as their management teams and employees.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.Advertisement