By NICOLA CLARK and LIAM STACKSEPT. 6, 2016
British Airways said its flights were gradually returning to normal on Tuesday after a still-unexplained computer problem disabled the airline’s self-service check-in kiosks for several hours at a number of international airports, causing significant delays.The extent of the computer problem, which first emerged late Monday in North America, was not immediately clear. The airline said the issue had been resolved by technicians early Tuesday morning in London. It advised passengers booked on Tuesday flights to check in online or via the airline’s mobile applications before reaching the airport, to minimize further delays.“The check-in system is now working and customers are being checked in as normal in London and overseas, although it may take longer than usual,” the airline said in a statement.“We apologize to our customers for the delay and we appreciate their patience,” it added. “Our colleagues are doing everything possible to check in customers for their journeys.”AdvertisementChicago O’Hare International Airport, San Francisco International Airport and Seattle-Tacoma International Airport were among those affected. Travelers said that bottled water and snacks had been distributed at some airports as frustrated customers faced long lines to check in.AdvertisementThat did not stop customers at United States airports from expressing their frustration on Twitter.
@British_Airways @flySFO almost 2 hours waiting to check in due to apparent global system failure. pic.twitter.com/YPB0v2WpMT 
@British_Airways systems down @flySFO. Snacks have just been ordered on our behalf. #NotTheNewsWeWanted #LaborDay pic.twitter.com/udKgGk6dR6 
@British_Airways systems down @flySFO. Apparently computers are taking the #LaborDay2016... pic.twitter.com/dbHEc5I9S1 
            .@British_Airways still no movement in the check-in queue... Is there any update on what's happening in Seattle? pic.twitter.com/L6FD0wexM2 The airline responded to each Twitter post with some version of its statement to the news media.The troubles at British Airways were not the only ones to cause travel headaches on Tuesday.Dozens of flights to and from London City Airport, near the heart of the British capital’s financial district, were canceled or diverted after a small number of activists from the group Black Lives Matter staged a sit-in, blocking the airport’s only runway for several hours.The protest, which began before dawn, is the latest in a series of demonstrations across Britain by the group against social injustices like police brutality and reported increases in discrimination against migrants since the country’s vote to withdraw from the European Union.In a statement, the Metropolitan Police said that officers had arrested nine protesters who had erected a tripod-shaped structure on the runway and locked themselves to it.It was not immediately clear how the group had managed to breach the perimeter of the airport, part of which borders the Thames. The police said that those arrested would be charged with aggravated trespassing, being unlawfully in a restricted zone and breaching the airport’s bylaws.London City Airport, which serves close to 12,000 passengers a day, announced shortly after midday that the runway had reopened and that flights were resuming. It advised passengers to check with airlines on the status of flights.This has been a difficult summer for airlines, many of which have had to contend with technical problems that lead to delays, cancellations and thousands of angry customers.Last month, Delta Air Lines canceled more than 1,500 flights after the failure of a piece of equipment in Atlanta led to the worldwide shutdown of its computer systems. A similar malfunction affected Southwest Airlines in July, forcing it to cancel about 2,300 flights over four days.Amie Tsang contributed reporting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.