

      By SYDNEY EMBER

UPDATED September 9, 2016

When Gretchen Carlson sued Roger Ailes, the chairman of Fox News, claiming sexual harassment, many of her on-air colleagues discounted the accusations and defended Mr. Ailes.Now Mr. Ailes has been forced out. And Ms. Carlson has reached a $20 million settlement with Fox News’s parent company and extracted a rare apology — “for the fact that Gretchen was not treated with the respect and dignity that she and all of our colleagues deserve.” On Thursday night, the tide apparently started to turn for some of the colleagues who were initially skeptical of Ms. Carlson. Geraldo Rivera apologized in a Facebook post for casting doubt on her claims, saying he was “filled with regret.” And on Friday morning, Greta Van Susteren, who also defended Mr. Ailes after the lawsuit was filed, published a post on Facebook expressing her own regrets. “I read Geraldo’s FB post in which he said he regretted not believing Gretchen Carlson’s claim of sexual harassment,” wrote Ms. Van Susteren, who left Fox News on Tuesday. “We all regret it.”She also assigned blame to Mr. Ailes’s superiors at Fox News and its parent, 21st Century Fox, writing, “I regret that Roger Ailes was not supervised by those in a public corporation who had the duty to supervise him.” Mr. Rivera, who said on Twitter at the time, “I stand with Roger Ailes,” and Ms. Van Susteren, who said Ms. Carlson’s claims didn’t “have any ring of truth to me,” have reversed their positions. But other well-known Fox personalities have not.Shortly after Ms. Carlson filed her suit, Sean Hannity, the Fox prime-time host, dismissed the claims as “BS.” Other popular personalities also defended Mr. Ailes, including Neil Cavuto, Maria Bartiromo, Brit Hume and Kimberly Guilfoyle.Here are some of the more prominent defenses of Mr. Ailes offered by Fox News on-air personalities after the lawsuit was filed in July. The New York Times has asked the network for any updated comments and will post them as they are provided.GERALDO RIVERA, Fox News senior correspondent, in a Twitter post defending Mr. Ailes. Mr. Rivera renounced his support of Mr. Ailes in a Facebook post on Thursday. He had previously defended the former Fox News chairman against accusations of sexual harassment. “I apologize for my skepticism,” Mr. Rivera wrote on Thursday. “Like victims of sexual assault, those alleging harassment deserve the presumption of credibility.” Mr. Rivera also said he lost a book deal as a result of his “uninformed support.” Greta Van Susteren, who announced on Tuesday that she was leaving Fox News, in an interview with People magazine. Ms. Van Susteren later said in a blog post: “I did not defend Roger Ailes nor did I condemn him. I just stated what I knew or did not know.” And in a Facebook post Friday she expressed regret for not believing Ms. Carlson. Sean Hannity, host of “Hannity,” on Twitter.Neil Cavuto, senior vice president, managing editor and anchor, in an op-ed on Business Insider.Jeanine Pirro, host of “Justice with Judge Jeanine,” in an interview with TheWrap.Kimberly Guilfoyle, co-host of “The Five,” in an interview with TVNewser.Ainsley Earhardt, co-host of “Fox & Friends,” in an interview with People.Brit Hume, senior political analyst, in a Twitter post the day after the suit was filed.Maria Bartiromo, anchor, “Mornings with Maria,” in an interview with Variety.Sandra Smith, co-host of “Outnumbered,” in an interview with The Hollywood Reporter.Martha MacCallum, co-anchor of “America’s Newsroom,” in an interview with Mediaite.Niraj Chokshi contributed reporting.Advertisement