By SAM ROBERTSSEPT. 7, 2016
Philip Kingsley, a British-born authority on healthy hair and scalp who effectively fluffed his thinning mane to its fullest while unabashedly evincing, as he put it, “a vital link between sexuality and hair,” died on Saturday at his home in London. He was 86.His daughter Anabel Kingsley, the director of communications for Philip Kingsley Products, said the cause was a stroke.Mr. Kingsley started a clinic in London in 1957, opened another in Midtown Manhattan 20 years later and boasted of an A-list clientele, including Audrey Hepburn, Laurence Olivier, Jane Fonda, Mick Jagger, Jerry Hall, Candice Bergen, Gwyneth Paltrow, Cate Blanchett, Sienna Miller, Blaine and Ivana Trump and British royalty.He also published four books on hair care and wrote regular advice columns for Style, the magazine of The Sunday Times of London.Advertisement“It is impossible to understand the importance of human hair without appreciating its role as a sexual object,” Mr. Kingsley wrote in “The Hair Bible: A Complete Guide to Health and Care” (2003).“Hair is the single most important part of the anatomy affecting our psyche,” he continued. “Hair is the only part of the human anatomy that can be sexually flaunted at will.”Concluding that a consumer’s chances of finding the perfect over-the-counter shampoo are only one in 100, Mr. Kingsley synthesized dozens of products manufactured under his name — most famously his Elasticizer, described as a preshampoo hair masque.He developed this creamy treatment to restore Hepburn’s hair, which, he said, was damaged as a result of excessive styling and coloring during the production of the 1976 film “Robin and Marian.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 1984, he created the Swimcap conditioning treatment, a formula to be used on damp hair to thwart the impact of chlorine and sun and as a substitute for a bathing cap, for the United States Olympic synchronized swimming team.He also claimed credit for coining the phrase “bad hair day” — which is indeed attributed to him in Peter E. Meltzer’s “The Thinker’s Thesaurus,” although it has also been traced to the 1992 film “Buffy the Vampire Slayer.”AdvertisementPhilip Kingsley was born on June 4, 1930, in the borough of Bethnal Green (now part of metropolitan London), to Barney Kingsley, a tailor, and the former Dora Silver, who sewed button holes. To help support his parents and four siblings, Philip left school at 14 to apprentice at his uncle’s hairdressing salon, then enrolled in a correspondence course at Britain’s Institute of Trichologists. (Trichology is a dermatologic specialty dealing with hair and scalp.)While he did not claim to have cured genetic baldness, he believed that he could slow hair loss that resulted from nutritional, hormonal, psychological or other factors. He would reassuringly explain that some hair loss is natural, that the average hair grows a half-inch a month and then falls out, after which the follicle begins to grow a new hair.He also developed products for women who lose their hair because of chemotherapy and other medical treatments.Besides his daughter Anabel, from his second marriage, he is survived by his second wife, the former Joan Maizner, with whom he had lived in New York and London; another daughter from their marriage, Kate Kingsley; and two daughters from his first marriage, Sue and Helen Kingsley.A version of this article appears in print on September 8, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Philip Kingsley, 86, Treater of the Tresses of the Famous.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.