
In Debt By                     
STEPHEN J. LUBBEN

SEPT. 7, 2016
As a boy growing up in Southern California, sick days meant staying home from school and watching reruns of “Mission Impossible” while my parents went to work. Each episode started with Peter Graves as Mr. Phelps accepting his mission and was punctuated with plenty of advertisements for the ITT Technical Institute.In those days, the tech institute was part of the larger ITT conglomerate that operated a wide range of products, including hotels and telephones, while sometimes dabbling in foreign policy.Now, the ITT Technical Institute (or more formally, ITT Educational Services Inc.)  is no more, and the litigation seems to be just getting underway. The school itself has not yet filed for bankruptcy, but that seems like the obvious move if its business is going to make the transition from teaching to suing the federal government. (If it has any hopes of resuming operations, however, it will want to stay clear of bankruptcy court, because educational institutions lose their access to federal student funding if they file.)One piece of litigation already underway is a suit against ITT claiming violations of the federal WARN Act (for Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification) and its state counterparts. The federal law requires notice before mass layoffs, and failure to provide the requisite notice puts employers on the hook for the pay that employees would have received during the notice period. But a sudden bankruptcy filing is often an exception to the federal law, if not always the state law. The WARN Act is a tangential issue in a case pending before the Supreme Court.But the bigger issue is going to be the likely litigation that ITT will bring against the Department of Education. The school, like many other for-profit institutions, has been under investigation by state and federal authorities for a while, as concerns rose that such schools represent a poor cost-benefit proposition for students. But the immediate cause of ITT’s shutdown was the Department of Education’s decision last month to prohibit ITT from enrolling new students in federal aid programs.ITT has already telegraphed its intent to sue the department over its actions, calling them “unwarranted” and “unconstitutional.” Such a lawsuit might form the basis for any payout to ITT’s creditors, and perhaps even shareholders, because it is hard to believe that its other assets will result in real value. Its 10-Q securities filing in July showed assets of $584.9 million, stacked against total liabilities of $419.8 million, but some of those assets include about $52 million in student loans and $134.4 million in “property and equipment.”A Chapter 11 bankruptcy plan based on the outcome of this litigation would seem to be the mostly likely next step.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »