AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jeffrey GoldfarbTwo notable mergers and acquisitions achievements hang in the balance for 2015, but even with a couple of giant deals on the rocks, 2015 is set to retain the global crown. A year will come someday, though, that surpasses its $4.4 trillion of action. The volume and scale of withdrawn deals in 1999, however, are more likely to stand the test of time.If, as investment bankers like to say, the best deals are the ones clients don’t make, then corporate chieftains have been on a roll. More than $750 billion worth of acquisitions proposed last year have been abandoned, according to Thomson Reuters, whose data include spinoffs and initially double-count competing offers for the same target.Another $84 billion worth are in jeopardy as American competition authorities seek to block Anthem’s takeover of Cigna and Aetna’s of Humana. Also awaiting various approvals are Anheuser-Busch InBev’s $110 billion purchase of SABMiller and Dow Chemical’s $68 billion marriage to DuPont. With Dell closing its $66 billion union with EMC on Wednesday, however, even the failure of all four big deals should leave 2015 ahead of 2007.Last year could still test another, less happy mergers and acquisitions record: The year’s tally of deals withdrawn could approach $1 trillion.Exceeding that would be astonishing. It probably would require an epic corporate buying binge, replete with multiple bidding wars and aggression that tests the limits of consolidation. That happened at the turn of the century, when WorldCom’s $125 billion effort to buy Sprint fell afoul of regulators, while Pfizer, AT&T and Olivetti outlasted American Home Products, Comcast and Deutsche Telekom in contested takeovers for Warner-Lambert, MediaOne and Telecom Italia.Failures can be a blessing. Ask Barclays about ABN Amro, or Energy Transfer, which recently preserved $6 billion of much-needed cash by wriggling out of its far larger purchase of the rival pipeline operator Williams. Rest assured, though, that if the volume of withdrawn deals scales new heights again, plenty of value-destructive ones will be made, too.Jeffrey Goldfarb is the United States editor of Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement