AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersShares fell on Friday as investor nervousness increased after a nuclear test by North Korea, and comments from officials at the Federal Reserve led investors to think that interest rates might be raised sooner.North Korea conducted its fifth and biggest nuclear test and said it had mastered the ability to mount a warhead on a ballistic missile, increasing a threat to its rivals.Stocks on Wall Street were also hit after Eric Rosengren, the Boston Federal Reserve president, said the central bank faced increasing risks if it waited too much longer to raise interest rates. He indicated that while a slowdown overseas remained a concern, the United States economy had proved resilient and could even overheat if Fed policy remained unchanged for too much longer.The tone was softened by Daniel Tarullo, a Fed governor, who said he wanted to see more evidence of sustained growth in inflation before raising rates.Still, the Dow Jones industrial average fell nearly 400 points, or 2.13 percent, to 18,085.45. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index lost 53.49 points, or 2.45 percent, to 2,127.81 and the Nasdaq composite dropped 133.58 points, or 2.54 percent, to 5,125.91.It was the second-largest weekly drop for the Dow this year, and the largest for the S.&P. 500 since early February.“There are lots of reasons for people to get nervous, particularly with the market at all-time highs. There’s enough negative to tip things over to people taking some profits there,” said Eric Kuby, chief investment officer at North Star Investment Management Corporation in Chicago.The Fed holds its two-day policy meeting on Sept. 20-21. The perceived chances of a September rate increased climbed to 24 percent after the Fed comments, according to CME’s FedWatch tool, from 18 percent the previous day.The dollar rose after Mr. Rosengren’s remarks raised expectations of a near-term increase in interest rates. The dollar index, which tracks the United States currency against a basket of six other currencies, rose 0.3 percent to 95.31. The euro fell 0.2 percent against the dollar to $1.12.“This is more about central banks than anything else; there’s a rising expectation of inflation as well as what seems to be a modest shift within central banks for a little bit steeper yield curve,” said Jason Pride, director of investment strategy at Glenmede in Philadelphia.Kroger was the latest grocery chain to give a disappointing outlook, though its shares pared losses late in the day to end up 0.6 percent. Outlooks from Sprouts Farmers Market and Supervalu this week also disappointed investors.Utilities were down 3.8 percent and telecommunications shares fell more than 3.4 percent. The sectors have been strong performers on the year as investors have been drawn to their high dividends because of low interest rates.German exports fell sharply in July, shrinking the overall trade surplus for the fourth consecutive month — something not seen since 1992 in the eurozone’s largest economy.The yield on benchmark German debt turned positive for the first time since July 22 and ended at 0.02 percent.Oil prices pulled back after surging more than 4 percent on Thursday. Brent crude oil fell 4.4 percent to $47.80 a barrel, still up 2 percent this week, and American crude retreated 4.2 percent to $45.63.Gold, at $1,327 an ounce, was down 0.8 percent for the day.Advertisement