By DAVID JOLLY and CHAD BRAYSEPT. 9, 2016
Three former Tesco executives have been charged with fraud in connection with an accounting scandal that rocked the British supermarket giant two years ago, investigators said on Friday.The charges stem from a criminal investigation dating to October 2014, after the company announced that it had overstated its first-half profit by 263 million pounds, about $420 million at the time, and that it had suspended several executives for accounting irregularities.Christopher Bush, the former head of Tesco’s British business, and two former executives in that unit, Carl Rogberg and John Scouler, face charges of fraud by abuse of position and false accounting, the Serious Fraud Office, which investigates fraud in Britain, said in a statement.The fraud office said the possible wrongdoing took place between February and September 2014. The men are to appear in court on Sept. 22, and the investigation is continuing, it said.AdvertisementMr. Bush’s lawyers said in a statement that he was not guilty and would “vigorously contest these allegations.” Lawyers for Mr. Rogberg and Mr. Scouler did not immediately respond to requests for comment.AdvertisementTesco said in 2014, just weeks after Dave Lewis joined the company as chief executive, that it had identified accounting irregularities. The company booked profits prematurely and delayed logging expenses to pad results.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Though the company said at the time that it did not believe that any of the executives implicated in the accounting irregularities had benefited personally, eight executives were ultimately suspended and the ensuing scandal prompted the departure of its chairman, Richard Broadbent.Tesco said on Friday that it was cooperating with the investigation.“The last two years have seen an extensive program of change at Tesco,” the company added, “but given this is an ongoing legal matter, we are unable to provide any further comment at this time.”Tesco holds the largest share of the British grocery market, more than 25 percent, with 3,500 stores and more than 310,000 employees. But it faces growing competition from aggressive low-cost competitors, including the German chains Aldi and Lidl, as well as traditional rivals like Sainsbury’s, Asda and Morrisons.Mr. Lewis, a former Unilever executive, said in April that the company was turning around its business, swinging to a pretax profit of £162 million in its latest financial year, after booking a £6.4 billion loss a year earlier — the largest in its history — when Mr. Lewis dragged the company’s skeletons out of the closet.He moved quickly to shore up the company by closing underperforming stores, cutting thousands of jobs and selling other assets, including its South Korean business. He is also borrowing a page from his rivals, trying to reinvent Tesco with more of a focus on low-cost service and simpler product lines. He has warned, however, that the path ahead will not be “smooth.”David Jolly reported from London and Chad Bray from Paris.A version of this article appears in print on September 10, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Three Former Tesco Executives Charged With Fraud.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.