AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Aron Ain, chief executive of Kronos, a maker of work force management software, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant. Q. What were your early years like?A. I’m one of five kids, and my parents were just phenomenal people.When you’re No. 4 out of five, you’re always chasing your siblings around and doing things. With my friends, I would take leadership roles where it made sense to do that. I’m not sure why. It just worked out that way, and I never shied away from it. It was something that seemed to come naturally to me, and I liked doing it.Tell me more about your parents.My mom grew up in New York City and graduated from high school when she was 14, from Hunter College when she was 17, and from Columbia Law School at 19.She would say it wasn’t a big deal because, back then, if you did well in school, they would just move you ahead. She passed the bar and had to wait until she was 21 to practice law. She did that until she was about 25, got married and had five kids, and gave it up until she was in her 50s, and then started practicing again until she was 83.My dad took over a neighborhood plumbing supply on Long Island that my grandfather had started. I stopped going to day camp when I was around 12 to work there over vacation and every summer. It wasn’t a paid job. He just said he needed me to help, so I did.My parents cared deeply about people, particularly people who needed a little bit of help getting on in life. They were community activists in a very quiet way. They didn’t have a child with developmental disabilities, yet they were involved for more than 50 years with the Association for the Help of Retarded Children. They just weren’t a little bit involved; they were neck-deep involved.Did you have an idea what you wanted to do for a career when you went to college?No idea. It was simpler back then. I studied economics and government. If I could do it again, I would have taken more creative courses, like art and music.And after you graduated?I went right to work where I work today. This is my 38th year at Kronos. I was one of the first employees, but the company was started by my brother and two other founders. I just worked my way up. In the beginning, I did everything — cleaned the bathrooms, answered the phones, sold what we sold, and installed what we sold.What are the some important leadership lessons you’ve learned?I think managing and leading people is a privilege. And I don’t think we always understand the impact that we have as managers on the people on our teams. I talk to our managers all the time about this. Do you really understand the impact you have? And if you really understand the impact, then how do your actions reflect that you understand that?I believe that people would rather have a lousy job working for a great person than a great job working for a bad manager. And I believe very strongly that the single largest component of a business that adds to shareholder value is great management, and the single largest destroyer of shareholder value is bad management.Now, being a good manager is really, really difficult. And the sooner people who are managers recognize that, the sooner they’ll start being a good manager. It takes unbelievable courage to be a good manager. It is hard to have difficult conversations with people when they’re not doing well. Who likes to do that? That takes courage. You can’t slide out of the way and hope it’s going to take care of itself.We’ve also just introduced a new component to annual employee surveys. We’ve added about 15 new questions that are focused specifically around manager effectiveness. How does the staff truly feel about how effective their manager is at creating great teams?Any surprises about the C.E.O. role?I took over from my brother when he retired in 2005. Before that, I was the C.O.O., and I was used to having to go to him for final decisions. And when I became C.E.O., I kept trying to do that, but there was no one for me to ask. So I was too slow. I wasn’t being crisp.There was a moment about six months into the job when I said to myself, “Aron, you are the C.E.O. You have to make decisions. Act like you’re the C.E.O.” And I see this with other people who are new C.E.O.s who are struggling with decisions. I tell them, “The sooner you can start acting like the C.E.O., the sooner you’ll start having the chance to be a great C.E.O.”How do you hire?I view my role as the keeper of the culture, and so I spend my time in a relaxed way getting to know the person. If, for example, they know someone I know professionally, I’ll say, “Let’s compare notes on that person. What’s your take?” And I’ll listen for whether they judge that person the same way I do, and whether we share the same values.I’ll also ask about their families, about work-life balance, about the successes that they’ve had, both personally and professionally. I want to hear how they like to work, and the expectations they have of the people who work for them.What advice do you give to college grads?I tell them that they shouldn’t get too locked in on what they think they want to do. It’s O.K. to be uncertain. It’s O.K. to try different things.We have an intern program, and sometimes people come back for a second or third year. I’ll tell them, “You can come back, but you have to work in a different function.” They may say, “But I love my function.” And I’ll say, “Well, I want other people to have a shot at your function. If you worked in marketing, go work in customer service. Explore different things.”Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement