By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSSEPT. 8, 2016
Ford will spend $640 million to replace door latches on nearly 2.4 million cars, trucks and vans because the doors can pop open while the vehicles are moving.On Thursday, the company announced it would add 1.5 million vehicles to the growing door-latch recall, which has become so costly that Ford had to cut its estimated full-year pretax profit to $10.2 billion from at least $10.8 billion.Customers have been complaining about the problem, which has affected much of Ford’s North American model lineup, since 2014. At least three million vehicles have been recalled after a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration investigation found 1,200 customer complaints about doors failing to latch.Thursday’s announcement came under pressure from the highway safety agency, which deemed an Aug. 4 recall of about 830,000 vehicles inadequate.AdvertisementFord said in a regulatory filing that the $640 million would cover the cost of both the Thursday recall and the one announced Aug. 4.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The latest recall includes the 2012-15 Ford Focus, the 2013-15 Ford Escape and C-Max, the 2015 Ford Mustang and Lincoln MKC and the 2014-16 Ford Transit Connect small van.AdvertisementFord says a spring tab in the door latches can break, and the doors either won’t close or could pop open. Dealers will replace the latches without charge. The company said it knows of one crash and three injuries that may be related to the problem.The Aug. 4 recall was limited to Mexico and 16 states with high temperatures and sunlight exposure because, Ford said, the rate of reports of failure was higher.Customers can check whether their vehicle is included on ford.com by clicking on safety recalls and entering their vehicle identification number.A version of this article appears in print on September 9, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Ford Expands a Costly Recall of Door Latches.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.