
Breakingviews By                     
QUENTIN WEBB

SEPT. 8, 2016
Super Mario made an unexpected cameo at Apple’s latest presentation, with news that the first mobile game starring the Nintendo character would go live in December. After the wild success of the Nintendo-backed Pokémon Go, this confirms that the Japanese group is no longer dragging its feet on change and is ready to use top characters on mobile.By noon in Tokyo on Thursday, Nintendo shares had risen more than 13 percent, adding nearly $4 billion in market value. The stock now trades at 38 times next year’s expected earnings, although those estimates may need to be revised upward.That’s a big reward for a slick but pared-back freemium game, intended to be played with one hand, while the player clutches a burger or holds onto an escalator handrail with the other. And at first, it seems odd this was not already in the stock price.That is because Nintendo’s push into mobile has been a long time coming. For years, the hardware-focused company feared that low-cost mobile titles would eat into the lucrative sales of its consoles and games. But it has already been 18 months since Nintendo, facing shareholder pressure, teamed up with the mobile specialist DeNA to develop mobile games.AdvertisementAnd more recently, Pokémon Go has been pretty strong proof that this change could work, even if Pokémon is not wholly owned by Nintendo. The game, an augmented-reality smash, has been downloaded half a billion times. Nintendo watchers have assumed that other well-known characters like Mario and Zelda would eventually follow Pokémon onto smartphones.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All that said, there was no certainty that Mario games were underway, and some worried that Nintendo might make minor titles priorities instead. Making an appearance at the iPhone presentation, the technology world’s biggest set-piece, refutes that. This suggests that Nintendo understands that it needs to use its core intellectual property if it wants these mobile titles to make waves.“Nintendo’s management has finally come to its senses,” says the analyst Pelham Smithers Associates, writing for SmartKarma.AdvertisementThe degree to which these games will strengthen Nintendo’s bottom line will rest on download levels and pricing. But strategically, it is clear that Nintendo has enjoyed a power-up.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »