AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerThe former chief financial officer of the real estate investing giant American Realty Capital Properties was arrested on Thursday morning at his home in Pennsylvania on charges that he fraudulently inflated financial performance numbers for the company in 2014.The executive, Brian Block, was expected to appear in federal court in Manhattan on Thursday afternoon to face charges that he knowingly misled investors through material misrepresentations about American Realty Capital’s financial results, prosecutors said.“When investors are lied to about material information, as is alleged to have happened here, the perpetrators need to be investigated and prosecuted,” said Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan.Mr. Block is charged with one count of conspiracy to commit securities fraud, one count of securities fraud, two counts of making false filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission and two counts of submitting false certifications with required filings.American Realty’s former chief accounting officer, Lisa McAlister, pleaded guilty in the case in June to one count of conspiracy to commit securities fraud, one count of securities fraud, one count of making false filings with the S.E.C. and one count of making false statements.In a separate case filed Thursday, the Securities and Exchange Commission filed civil fraud charges against the two former executives. A lawyer for Ms. McAlister was not immediately available.Reid H. Weingarten, a lawyer at Steptoe & Johnson who represents Mr. Block, said the charges “are entirely unwarranted. We are very disappointed that the government, after a two-year investigation, has decided to charge Brian. He is completely innocent and will be exonerated in court.”American Realty Capital, which changed its name to Vereit last year, was one of the largest creators of real estate investment trusts. It was founded and built by Nicholas S. Schorsch and William M. Kahane. But the dynasty began to fall apart in 2014 after the accounting irregularities surfaced and forced Mr. Schorsch and the other executives to resign.A spokesman for Vereit said the company had no comment. The company has said in regulatory filings that it has cooperated with the S.E.C. and investigators.Last year, Massachusetts’ securities regulators accused a brokerage firm affiliated with American Realty Capital of faking proxy votes. After the charges were made public, American Realty Capital said it would stop creating new investment products and close existing ones to new investors.Advertisement