By STACY COWLEYNOV. 25, 2015
On Black Friday, as hordes of people begin their holiday shopping rites, Nan Morningstar will keep the door closed at Free Radicals, the clothing and costume boutique she and her husband own in Albuquerque.To make absolutely sure that no one can buy anything from her that day, she also plans to disable the shopping cart on her store’s website.“It seems like it’s been getting more overblown in America, and more out of hand,” she said of the annual post-Thanksgiving sales rush. “We don’t want to participate.”As big-box retailers prepare for their “doorbuster” sales and ever earlier opening hours, some small businesses are making a point of going to the other extreme. They are shunning discounts and avoiding extended hours, especially those that cut into the Thanksgiving holiday.AdvertisementSome, like Ms. Morningstar, are explicit about their desire to fight the holiday season’s commercialization. Lesouque, an online seller of globally sourced accessories and home goods, is closing its website for the day as part of a “break up with Black Friday” campaign, and it won’t be offering any discounts during the holiday season.AdvertisementGokben Yamandag, a co-founder of the site, spent years as a textile engineer at factories in Turkey, watching teenagers work long hours in harsh conditions. She came away from the experience with a deep horror of the marketing frenzies that encourage people to buy products in bulk at deep discounts.“These lower prices come with hidden costs,” she said. “Consumers might not know that when they buy their ‘two for $10’ shirts, someone along the way is paying the price. In most cases, the one paying is the person making our clothes.”Other retailers simply see closing for Black Friday as a sensible business choice.“People just don’t go to small businesses. They go to big-box stores looking for big, super deals,” said Gisela Claassen, the owner of Curds and Wine, a San Diego shop that sells winemaking and cheesemaking supplies. “The first year I was open, I had nothing to do. Nobody came in.”Ms. Claassen now shuts her store for the entire week around Thanksgiving. “My employees love it,” she said. “They get to spend the time with their families.”There is some evidence to back Ms. Claassen’s belief that most holiday shoppers are not drawn to businesses like hers. Only 24 percent of those planning to make holiday purchases say they intend to buy them from small local retailers, according to a National Retail Federation report. The organization forecasts that holiday sales will rise 3.7 percent this year, to $630.5 billion.Some independent stores opening for the season’s earliest shopping hours are doing it grudgingly. As major retailers like Macy’s, Sears and Target have moved their hours ever earlier — this year, all three will open at 6 p.m. on Thanksgiving Day — a growing number of malls are following their anchor tenants’ leads and opening on the evening of the holiday after being closed all day. Some require all of their merchants to adhere to the schedule.Deer Creek Winery, a family-run winemaker in Shippenville, Pa., has outlets in four Pennsylvania malls. Rhonda Brooks, a co-owner of the winery, would prefer to keep all of the stores closed on Thanksgiving, but two of the malls, Clearview Mall in Butler and Shenango Valley Mall in Hermitage, issued mandates telling tenants to open at 6 p.m. or risk being fined.Deer Creek heeded Clearview’s rule two years ago and opened on Thursday night. Sales were slow — “people only wanted to be at the big-box stores, for all the big sales,” Ms. Brooks said — and employees complained about having to leave their families to go to work.AdvertisementLast year, she refused, putting up a sign a week in advance saying that the store would not be open. Clearview did not levy a fine, Ms. Brooks said. (A representative of Clearview did not respond to a request for comment.)But at Shenango Valley, where Deer Creek’s store opened a few months ago, she felt compelled to follow her new landlord’s rules. Her store will open at 6 p.m.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Paul Vidwan, the mall’s general manager, said most retailers were in favor of the policy.“If we are pushing this and promoting this and advertising that we’re open, it’s not very good for us if half the stores are closed,” he said.The fines for those who flout the rule vary at Shenango Valley Mall, depending on the details of each tenant’s lease. Dale Willerton, a former mall manager who now runs a commercial lease consulting business, said mall fines for offenses like ignoring holiday hours typically ran around $200 a day. He noted that most managers did not follow through with their threats to charge the fines.Black Friday has become synonymous with heavy discounting, but small businesses can rarely afford to slash prices the way the big chains do — and some refuse to even try. Courtney Stamm, the owner of the Cheeky Puppy, a pet goods boutique in Washington, plans to open on Black Friday, but she will not be running any sales or promotions.“Our customers are not particularly motivated by discounts,” she said. “There are times that I’ve put items on a sale shelf and they just sit there.”She is instead focusing her energy on the day after Black Friday, which a campaign led by American Express promotes as Small Business Saturday. In past years, American Express has given its customers statement credits of $10 to $25 for making purchases that day at participating small retailers. The company said it would not offer any refunds this year, but it is continuing to publicize the event.To draw in Saturday shoppers, Ms. Stamm arranges special events. Last year, she brought in a popular Etsy seller of custom collars and leashes to take on-site orders; the day set a sales record for her business. This year, a professional pet photographer will be at the store to snap portraits in return for a $20 donation to a local rescue group.AdvertisementSome online retailers are also holding out against the seasonal pressure for discounts.Tuft & Needle, an online mattress retailer, advertises on Facebook, where the ads’ viewers are free to leave comments. For weeks, one question has come up there repeatedly: What holiday sales are you offering?The answer is none. The company experimented in the past with small referral discounts and found that the customers they brought in had higher return rates and lower satisfaction scores. The company’s founders, who preferred to set one price and stick to it, decided their mattresses would never go on sale.“It’s crazy how trained the shoppers are now,” said Evan Maridou, Tuft & Needle’s chief operating officer. Even without discounts, last year’s Monday after Thanksgiving was its biggest sales day of the year.In Albuquerque, Ms. Morningstar plans to avoid shopping at all on Black Friday. Instead, she will eat leftovers and spend time with her family and friends.“This is one of the perks of being a microbusiness,” she said. “Since I’m the boss, I get to say if we’re going to take a day off.”A version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Doorbusters? No, Just Closed Doors .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.