By REUTERSNOV. 25, 2015
LONDON — The British travel company Thomas Cook said demand for its vacation packages was ahead of last year and would defy market worries that security concerns would dent Europe’s appetite for foreign travel.Shares in Thomas Cook, Europe’s second-largest vacation company behind TUI Group, rose 8.5 percent to 106.7 pence in morning trading on Wednesday. The stock had lost 20 percent since Britain suspended flights to the Egyptian resort area Sharm el Sheikh on fears that a bomb brought down a Russian plane late last month.Security fears were intensified by the attacks on Paris that killed 130 people on Nov. 13. Vacation packages to Tunisia from Britain had already been halted after the death of 38 tourists in a massacre on a Tunisian beach in June.Demand for getaways has strengthened, however, Thomas Cook said on Wednesday as it released annual results. Bookings from Britain were up 8 percent compared with the same time last year, and up 1 percent over all across its main markets in Northern Europe.AdvertisementWith the winter sun destinations Egypt and Tunisia far less popular, vacationers were opting to go to the Canary Islands, and on long-haul trips to North America, Mexico and Cape Verde, said Peter Fankhauser, chief executive of Thomas Cook.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When customers want to travel, they recognize the greater security that tour operators such as ourselves can offer,” he said.AdvertisementFor its financial year to Sept. 30, Thomas Cook reported a 4 percent drop in annual core earnings to 310 million pounds, or $467 million, slightly higher than a consensus analyst forecast. It had already warned that cancellations of vacations to Tunisia would lower profit.The company confirmed that it was on track to meet current analyst expectations for it to grow core earnings by 13 percent to around £350 million for the current financial year, signaling that it should be able to weather the cost of Egyptian vacation cancellations.“The current trading picture is more robust than we expected, and although it’s early days post-Paris, they seem confident that the trading picture will continue,” said Greg Johnson, an analyst at Shore Capital.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.