By LESLIE PICKERSEPT. 9, 2016
Jonathan Rinehart, who is credited with helping to pioneer the field of deal-making communications, died on Aug. 30. He was 86 and lived in New York.The cause of death was complications from Parkinson’s disease, said his daughter, Annabelle Rinehart.While the modern method of public relations dates back more than a century, communications strategy involving deals — often the hallmark of a chief executive’s career — is a bit younger. Before Mr. Rinehart’s era, lawyers handled public relations about transactions, contending that “P.R. was too important to be left to the P.R. people,” according to Joele Frank, who worked with him.Mr. Rinehart tried to change that notion by operating more strategically, those who knew him said. He started the Jonathan Rinehart Group in the mid-1970s. It later merged with Mel Adams and Associates to create Adams & Rinehart.AdvertisementThe firm advised on some of the most prominent deals, including hostile takeovers, friendly mergers, spinoffs and bankruptcies, in the boom years of the 1980s. His clients were as varied as Gillette and BP. His mainstays were Seagram Company, which once was among the largest alcohol distributors in the world, and Salomon Brothers, the investment bank that is now part of Citigroup.AdvertisementWith competitors Dick Cheney (no relation to the former vice president) of Hill & Knowlton and Gershon Kekst of Kekst & Company, Mr. Rinehart carved out a lucrative niche, advising companies on how to communicate with shareholders and the news media during takeovers.Two of today’s most prominent financial communications companies, Sard Verbinnen and Joele Frank, Wilkinson Brimmer Katcher were founded by alumni of Mr. Rinehart’s firm.“I’ve built my firm in a lot of his image,” said Ms. Frank, the managing partner of her firm. “Jonathan always told me that he tried to hire people for whom work was very important and part of their identity.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.George Sard, the chairman and chief executive of Sard Verbinnen, said, “It was a great school, and I learned the business from him.”He said Mr. Rinehart “was really shrewd as to how he assessed a situation, and would always tell the client straight and not necessarily what they wanted to hear.”Mr. Rinehart was born in Manhattan on April 19, 1930. He held his first summer job at 16 in the mailroom at Fortune Magazine. In the 1950s, he graduated from Yale and enlisted in the United States Navy Air Intelligence, where he served for several years during the Korean War. For almost a decade he was a journalist, first for Time magazine, then for Newsweek.He started his career in corporate communications at Eastern Airlines, where he became the senior vice president of public relations, before starting his firm in 1974. Adams & Rinehart was acquired by Ogilvy & Mather in 1986, and Mr. Rinehart retired in 2000.Mr. Rinehart’s marriage to Diana Lynn ended in divorce in the 1970s. He and his second wife, Ann Ferrell, were divorced in 1987.In addition to his daughter, he is survived by a son, Clem Rinehart.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.