By AMIE TSANGSEPT. 9, 2016
The Dodd-Frank Act must be a real drag for private equity. After years of scant federal oversight, the sector was suddenly lumped with a new set of regulatory exams and reporting obligations.Private equity has been lobbying hard, though, and the years of persistence may just pay off today, when the House votes on a bill the industry has championed.If it passes, private equity firms will still have to put up with federal exams, but their reporting obligations will be loosened.The bill comes soon after several enforcement actions against private equity firms by the Securities and Exchange Commission. This, critics say, raises the question: Why would you undo restrictions on the industry just as the S.E.C. is identifying problems with it?AdvertisementAnd it’s not just any industry. It is one that, as an investigation by The New York Times found, has expanded its reach into parts of daily life in the United States.AdvertisementIt almost makes you feel bad for banks. Just as private equity gets a little wiggle room, regulators spring a report on them suggesting that Congress should bar banks from getting involved in the physical commodities market or owning private equity-like stakes in outside companies.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Wells Fargo has long presented itself as a bank that cares more about long-term relationships than making a quick buck.So much for that image.It took a hit when it emerged that employees secretly issued credit cards and set up sham accounts. The fraudulent banking practices cost the bank $185 million in fines.Regulators concede that the financial harm to consumers was not huge. But what does it say about the culture of the bank?Employees were rewarded financially for opening new accounts and said they felt extreme pressure to open as many accounts as possible.Maybe it’s time to examine these incentives a little more closely.Imagine a pacemaker being hacked.This was the disturbing vision raised by Carson Block, an investor known for betting against companies’ stocks. His hedge fund, Muddy Waters, was in a rather unorthodox partnership with MedSec, a company that engages in bounty hunting for bugs and considers its research on vulnerabilities in medical devices a public service.The pair announced last month that they had uncovered “troubling cybersecurity flaws” in pacemakers made by St. Jude Medical. It seemed more like a scene from a spy thriller than the usual accounting issues that Mr. Block specialized in.AdvertisementMedSec, however, has a curious history, and the story of how the company teamed up with Mr. Block is an interesting one.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.