By SAM ROBERTSSEPT. 9, 2016
Daniel H. Cohen, who was the senior vice president in charge of advertising when The New York Times became the first publication to generate more than $1 billion in advertising in a single year, died on Friday in Zurich. He was 64.He had traveled to Zurich with family members and died there after a long struggle with brain cancer, his family said.Mr. Cohen was a great-grandson of Adolph S. Ochs, the family patriarch who bought The Times in 1896, and a first cousin of Arthur O. Sulzberger Jr., the company’s current chairman and publisher, and of Michael Golden, the vice chairman.He held several senior executive positions in the circulation and advertising departments before he left to begin a television production company in 1999. On his leaving, Mr. Sulzberger said of Mr. Cohen: “Even as he led The Times to unparalleled levels of print advertising revenue, he has been a strong voice for our electronic future, both on the internet and in broadcast.”AdvertisementMr. Cohen was a director of The New York Times Company from 2007 to 2010 and a trustee of the family trust that owns most of the class B shares that elect a majority of the company’s board members.AdvertisementAlex S. Jones, who with Susan E. Tifft wrote “The Trust: The Private and Powerful Family Behind The New York Times” in 1999, said in an interview that Mr. Cohen was instrumental in the decision by Ochs heirs in the mid-1990s to change the family’s ownership structure, a move that consolidated and assured the continuity of its control.Mr. Cohen’s supporting the change “was typical of Dan’s generous nature,” Mr. Jones said, noting that the decision could potentially have represented “a significant financial cost” to him. As a result, he said, the restructuring “has proved key to sustaining family stewardship of The Times.”Mr. Cohen joined The Times’s strategic planning department in 1983. He served as Northeast circulation manager and circulation sales development manager in the circulation department, then shifted to the advertising department, where he was managing director of sales, group director of promotion and vice president of advertising. In 1996, he was promoted to senior vice president for advertising.Later, his production company, Dan Cohen & Sons, produced television shows, some with culinary themes. One, “A Cook’s Tour,” on the Food Network, introduced the chef Anthony Bourdain to a television audience in 2002. (He later moved to CNN.) The Cohen company also produced two other Food Network shows starring the chef Bobby Flay: “Boy Meets Grill” and “Throwdown With Bobby Flay.”Mr. Cohen later founded DeepSee, an oceanic exploration and submarine leasing company.“Dan, at heart, has always had a strong streak of the entrepreneur in him,” Mr. Sulzberger said when Mr. Cohen left The Times. “He must be related to Adolph Ochs.”Daniel Hays Cohen was born in Manhattan on Aug. 1, 1952, the son of Dr. Judith P. Sulzberger, a physician and Mr. Ochs’s granddaughter, and Dr. Matthew Rosenschein Jr., whom she had met in medical school. (He was certified in psychiatry and internal medicine.) They divorced in 1956.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Daniel and his brother, James, who is known as Jace, were adopted by Dr. Sulzberger’s second husband, Richard N. Cohen, a Yale-educated insurance broker, whom she married in 1958.After graduating from Tufts University with a bachelor of arts degree in 1974, Mr. Cohen was hired by the Multimedia Corporation as a management trainee. He went on to work from 1976 to 1980 as a television cameraman; a broadcast journalist and a director at WESH-TV in Orlando; a program director for Warner Amex Cable in Dallas; and, from 1981-83, vice president for business affairs for Fort Worth Productions, an independent film company that supplied content for public television.AdvertisementIn Orlando, he was so successful as an investigative reporter that local power brokers implored him, unsuccessfully, to run for mayor. There he met and married a rival TV reporter, Leah Thompson Keith. She became a prosecutor in the Manhattan district attorney’s office and now represents accused young people pro bono. They lived in Manhattan.She survives him, along with their two sons, Alex and Adam; and his brother, Jace.Mr. Cohen was director of education and corporate development for ReServe Inc. (Retired Professionals Serving the Nonprofit Community) and a volunteer math and reading mentor at Spark Academy in Newark, an elementary school that is a part of the KIPP (Knowledge Is Power Program) network of nonprofit public charter schools. He also served on the Tufts University Board of Overseers for Arts and Sciences.An avid outdoorsman, he was on the board of the Rainforest Alliance, a conservation group, and treasurer of the nonprofit Arctic Explorer Fund.In voting to restructure the family’s ownership of The Times in the 1990s, Daniel and Jace Cohen joined other Ochs-Sulzberger cousins in consolidating four separate trusts, which held 85 percent of the controlling Class B stock, into a single trust, in which each of them and their children would share equally.Theoretically, if those shares were ever distributed, the two brothers’ stake could be less valuable. But as Ms. Tifft and Mr. Jones wrote in “The Trust,” “the centripetal pull of the family, and the decision to speak with one voice regarding the fate of The New York Times, was a powerful incentive.”The book quoted Daniel Cohen as saying that he and his brother had “made it not an issue of wealth; we made it an issue of the mission of the newspaper and of the company.”A version of this article appears in print on September 10, 2016, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Daniel H. Cohen, Former Times Executive, Dies at 64.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.