
Breakingviews By                     
GINA CHON

SEPT. 9, 2016
Buyout firms are at the forefront of Capitol Hill. They have successfully promoted legislation to roll back regulatory disclosures required under the postcrisis Dodd-Frank legislation, even as they settle cases over misleading investors. If the bill is enacted, however, there is a risk of repercussions.The House passed the plan on Friday. If it is made into law, private equity firms will no longer have to notify clients when there is a management change of a fund, or provide brochures about fees and other information if it has already been disclosed elsewhere. The American Investment Council, an industry lobby group, says the bill is needed to update rules for a growing industry.Critics are starting to rally. The Americans for Financial Reform group, the California pension giant known as Calpers, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and other influential groups oppose the bill. They say it would exploit investors and threaten retirement savings. Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, has also criticized the proposal and is positioned to fight against it when it reaches her chamber.If the bill makes it through the Senate despite opposition, it could galvanize other efforts to rein in the buyout industry. There is already growing bipartisan support to get rid of the so-called carried-interest tax loophole, which allows private equity partners to pay lower taxes on investment profit than they would on fee income.AdvertisementCritics could push to have the Financial Stability Oversight Council study whether large private equity firms pose a systemic risk and should be regulated accordingly. Lawmakers might advocate for restrictions on fees, for example barring funds from charging investors for advice provided to their own portfolio companies. Several firms, including Apollo Global Management just last month, have paid millions of dollars to settle accusations that they misled clients on fees.Wall Street experienced a backlash after winning approval for a bill to change part of Dodd-Frank in 2014. The move allowed banks to continue trading swaps instead of separating the activity into units that didn’t hold deposits. The victory motivated critics, including Ms. Warren, to hit back in other areas. Big banks have since tamped down their lobbying and any legislation easing regulation now faces challenges.AdvertisementThe latest bill could hand buyout shops a similarly hollow victory. Passing it could be just what their critics in Washington need to spur them on.Gina Chon is Washington columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »