By SAM ROBERTSSEPT. 6, 2016
Richard Neville, who challenged societal taboos and obscenity standards as a founder of the satirical countercultural magazine Oz in the 1960s, died on Sunday in Byron Bay, Australia. He was 74.The cause was complications of dementia, his daughter Lucy said.Mr. Neville would evolve into a futurist who envisioned a “race between self-discovery and self-destruction,” as he put it. But his greatest legacy was Oz, which was started with two other budding journalists — all barely out of college — from his parents’ home in suburban Sydney on April Fools’ Day in 1963.Four years later, it spawned a more famous and raffish London offspring that sold over 80,000 copies at its peak and became a paradigm of the underground magazine.With his co-founders — Richard Walsh, editor of a Sydney University student newspaper, and the artist Martin Sharp — Mr. Neville inaugurated Oz with a historical account of the chastity belt and an exposé of back-alley abortions. They later peppered it with, among other things, radical feminist essays by Germaine Greer and risqué cartoons by R. Crumb.AdvertisementLampooning sexual mores, revealing racism and mocking priggishness, Oz incited fusty establishment elders in Australia and London and provoked what was, at the time, Britain’s longest and possibly most colorful obscenity trial.AdvertisementOver six weeks in 1971, Mr. Neville eloquently mounted his own defense; the comedian Marty Feldman was called as an expert witness; John Lennon and Yoko Ono recorded a pop single (“God Save Us”) to raise funds for the defense; and Anna Wintour, a young British national, offered to marry Mr. Neville, who was her boyfriend and boss at the magazine, to keep him from being deported after he was convicted.The case was the basis of a 1991 BBC television production called “The Trials of Oz,” starring Hugh Grant as Mr. Neville.“He was a provocateur, an adventurer and a journalist,” Geoffrey Robertson, a lawyer who aided the defense, told The Guardian.Throughout his life, Mr. Neville opposed violence, derided orthodoxy and demonstrated what Mr. Robertson described as “a commitment to sexual equality, rock ’n’ roll and human rights” and an “endless curiosity about what lay beneath the emperor’s newest clothes.”Adapting a Neville axiom 25 years later, Tony Blair declared during a New Labour election campaign in the mid-1990s: “As Richard Neville said, there is only an inch of difference between us and the Conservatives, but it is an inch worth living in.”Richard Clive Neville was born in Sydney, Australia, on Dec. 15, 1941, the son of Clive Neville, a bookkeeper who became managing director of a newspaper, Country Life, and the former Betty MacKnight, a journalist.He graduated with a bachelor’s degree from the University of New South Wales, where he edited the cheeky student newspaper. In founding Oz with Mr. Walsh and Mr. Sharp (who died in 2013), he was animated by the American satirists Lenny Bruce and Mort Sahl. (The name was inspired by a contraction for Australia, as well as L. Frank Baum’s books.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A year later, they were charged with obscenity on the basis of a cover photograph in which Mr. Neville appeared to be urinating on a government building. The three were convicted and sentenced to up to six months’ hard labor, but the verdict was overturned on appeal because the magistrate had misdirected the jury.AdvertisementMr. Neville worked as an advertising copywriter and a movie reviewer before moving to Britain. He published the first issue of London Oz in 1967 in what he assumed would be a more forgiving cultural climate. It wasn’t, not with the “Oz Guide to Taking LSD” or a special edition on “The Pornography of Violence” or, perhaps most notoriously, the May 1970 issue, which prompted the obscenity trial.The issue was guest-edited by teenagers who had responded to an invitation by the magazine to include whatever content they chose. One submitted cartoon showed a bear’s genitalia.Mr. Neville was tried with two colleagues at London Oz — Jim Anderson, a fellow Australian, and Felix Dennis, a former rock drummer who went on to become a media mogul. (He died in 2014.)The three were acquitted of conspiring to corrupt public morals, but the judge directed a guilty verdict for obscenity. Mr. Neville was sentenced to 15 months in prison. But that verdict, too, was reversed on appeal.Oz ceased publication in November 1973, after Mr. Neville had left the magazine.Mr. Neville wrote several books, including “Playpower” (1970), predicting that technology would allow more leisure time, and “Hippie Hippie Shake” (1995) a memoir. In the late 1970s, he was a New York-based freelance writer and collaborated with Julie Clarke, a television reporter, on “The Life and Crimes of Charles Sobhraj,” a 1979 counterculture-gone-amok biography of a serial killer who preyed on Western tourists in Southeast Asia.He and Ms. Clarke later married. She survives him, along with their daughters, Angelica and Lucy Neville.Mr. Neville was a commentator on television programs in Australia in the 1980s and founded the Australian Futures Foundation in 1997.He later said that he had left Oz because he was tired. Besides, he said, the ’60s — the “stuff going on in the ether that was beginning to make life quite a lot different from the life of our parents,” as he put it in 2013 — were over.But he also defended that decade’s cultural explosion, saying “it was perhaps commercialized, it was marketed, it can be ridiculed, but at the same time, at its core, it had a genuine spirit of hope for humankind.”AdvertisementUnlike many contemporaries, though, he did not go in for nostalgia.“The thing that was important about the way he thought was he always welcomed the future,” Germaine Greer said this week on Australian television. “He looked forward to the new.”Because of an editing error, an earlier version of a headline with this obituary misstated Mr. Neville’s given name. As the obituary states, he is Richard Neville, not Robert.Michelle Innis contributed reporting from Sydney, Australia.A version of this article appears in print on September 10, 2016, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Richard Neville, 74, a Founder of Oz,  a Counterculture Magazine of the ’60s.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.