AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere’s what to expect in the week ahead:ECONOMYMany American families are still living on less money than before the Great Recession, but the Census Bureau on Tuesday is expected to report that incomes are rising. The median household income in 2014 was $53,657, about $4,000 below the pre-recession median after adjusting for inflation. Economists expect the government to report that gap narrowed significantly in 2015. The government will also update its estimates of the share of Americans living in poverty and the share who have health insurance coverage. Taken together, the new data is expected to show that more Americans are benefiting from one of the longest periods of economic growth in the nation’s history — and also to serve as a reminder that the recovery remains incomplete. Binyamin AppelbaumTECHNOLOGYEuropean officials will unveil new technology rules on Wednesday aimed at reining in many of the world’s largest companies. Under the proposals, which will take years to complete, European publishers may be given powers to charge internet companies like Google whenever their content shows up in the tech giants’ online results or other services. Tools like Facebook’s WhatsApp and Apple’s FaceTime will also be more heavily policed, and European consumers are likely to be given greater freedom to choose where to buy premium sports and movie services from across the region. Mark ScottPOLICYJean-Claude Juncker said the European Commission had a “last chance” to connect with ordinary citizens when he took over the presidency of the executive branch of the European Union two years ago. The situation has, if anything, worsened as Mr. Juncker prepares to deliver an annual State of the Union speech on Wednesday. Most of the bloc’s 28 member states have barely started to carry out Mr. Juncker’s plan to share the burden of the region’s influx of migrants, and a majority of Britons voted in a referendum in June to exit the European Union. Mr. Juncker, right, has also faced an outcry from lawmakers and consumer groups who said a flagship plan to lower cellphone charges for people using their phones outside their home country did not do enough to reduce costs. In his speech, Mr. Juncker may seek to emphasize what the bloc still can do to boost Europe’s lackluster economy and to tackle the scourge of high youth unemployment by redoubling calls for less austerity economics and greater investment. Mr. Juncker could also call for greater European Union cooperation on defense now that Britain, long skeptical about such an initiative, plans to leave the bloc. James KanterECONOMYThe Commerce Department will report retail sales data on Thursday, as stores around the country continue to push back-to-school sales and promotions for the fall. Excluding autos, retail sales probably rose two-tenths of a percent in August, according to data from the research firm IHS Global Insight. Retail sales were flat in July. Rachel Abrams The Bank of England is widely expected to keep interest rates steady when it announces its latest decision on rates on Thursday, but it may signal a need for a further cut in November when it provides an update on its outlook for inflation. In August, the central bank cut its benchmark interest rate to 0.25 percent, the lowest level in its 322-year history, and expanded other measures to bolster Britain’s economy over fears that the country’s decision to leave the European Union could weigh on growth. The rate had remained steady at 0.5 percent since March 2009.Better-than-expected economic data in the last week or so bolstered the pound against the dollar and has raised questions about whether the Bank of England was too dire in its warnings about the potential impact on the British economy before the referendum in June on whether to leave the European Union. At a committee hearing in Parliament last week, Mark Carney, the Bank of England governor, said he was “comfortable” with the analysis taken by the central bank ahead of the vote and the actions it has taken since then. Chad BrayTECHNOLOGYPreorders for Apple’s new iPhone 7 and 7 Plus began on Friday and the devices will be available at Apple stores and carrier retail locations in more than 25 countries this coming Friday. But this year, the company said it would not disclose opening weekend sales numbers because initial sales numbers are “determined more by supply than by demand.” The updated version of the best-selling phone now comes in two new colors, a shiny jet black and a matte black. Prices start at $649. Katie BennerECONOMYOn Friday morning, two new data releases will provide fresh evidence of where the economy is going. At 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department will announce the latest data on the Consumer Price Index for the month of August. The index is expected to show an overall increase of 0.1 percent, with the so-called core C.P.I., which excludes volatile food and energy prices, rising by 0.2 percent. While the reading is expected to be tame, traders will be focusing on this month’s data more than usual ahead of the Federal Reserve’s decision on whether to raise interest rates on Sept. 21. A stronger reading on inflation could bolster the arguments of policy makers who want to raise rates sooner rather than later.At 10 a.m., the University of Michigan will release its preliminary reading on consumer sentiment in September. Economists expect an increase in the index to 91 from 89.8 in August, with consumer optimism buoyed by steady hiring, a strong stock market and low energy prices. Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisement