AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsSam Iacobellis, an engineer whose development and lightning delivery of 100 B-1 supersonic stealth bombers to President Ronald Reagan in the 1980s was credited with speeding the collapse of the Soviet Union, died on Saturday in San Luis Obispo, Calif. He was 87.The cause was complications of a stroke, his son, who is also named Sam, said.The B-1 contract, with Rockwell International for $20.5 billion (more than $50 billion in today’s dollars), was a cornerstone of Reagan’s strategy to end the Cold War by engaging the Soviets in a costly — critics said profligate — arms race that would threaten them with bankruptcy.It worked, according to what Russian generals and astronauts later told Robert Cattoi, the former chief engineer for Rockwell, in large part because of the B-1.“One of them asked me, ‘Do you know Sam Iacobellis?’” Mr. Cattoi told The Los Angeles Times. “‘If you see him, tell him he was far more responsible for ending the Cold War than he might realize. We didn’t have the resources to match it. It was the straw that broke the camel’s back.’”The B-1, with its adjustable sweptwing design, has been what the Air Force calls “the backbone of America’s long-range bomber force.” But it had a star-crossed history of political setbacks and technical problems, mostly involving suppliers.The program was begun under the Nixon administration in 1970 to replace an aging fleet of B-52s and reverse what was viewed then as Soviet air superiority.“The Soviet military knew they could then achieve a ‘first strike’ on the U.S. — catching the older B-52s on the ground,” said Erik Simonsen, who was a spokesman for the B-1 program. The B-1 “negated” that first-strike capability, Mr. Iacobellis (pronounced EYE-koh-bell-is) later said.Development of the aircraft was scrapped as too expensive, however, by President Jimmy Carter in 1977. But it was resurrected as the B-1B Lancer by Reagan in 1981 over the objections of congressional critics (until subcontracts for the plane were dispersed to companies in almost every state) and cost-cutters, who branded the aircraft a “flying Edsel.”The first B-1B was delivered to the Strategic Air Command a little more than three and a half years after the production contract was signed, years faster than the customary schedule.“What an airplane!” Mr. Reagan told aircraft workers when the first of the initial order of 100 B-1Bs was rolled out in California in 1984. “You know, I have no complaints about Air Force One, but I was wondering, does Rockwell take trade-ins?”The original B-1, which cost $220 million each, could evade radar detection by flying just 200 feet above the ground, reach speeds of up to 900 miles an hour, carry as many as 22 cruise missiles, fly for 11 hours without refueling, and go from a standstill on the ground to 10,000 feet in just 1 minute, 59 seconds.The bomber has been deployed in Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya. The Air Force says that 104 four-engine B-1 Lancers were manufactured and that 62 remain in the fleet.As Rockwell’s executive vice president and deputy chairman, Mr. Iacobellis was named program manager for the B-1B. The company fulfilled the contract under budget and ahead of schedule in six years.“We worked like we were on the front line of the Cold War,” he told The Los Angeles Times.Sam Frank Iacobellis was born on Aug. 17, 1929, in Fresno, Calif. His father, Frank Iacobellis, an Italian immigrant, was a farmer and rancher. His mother, the former Mary Ceppaglia, the daughter of Italian immigrants, was born in New York City.Mr. Iacobellis graduated from California State University, Fresno, and received a master’s degree in engineering from the University of California, Los Angeles.Besides his son, Sam Iacobellis II, he is survived by his wife, the former Helene Myers; a daughter, Lee Ann Schantz; two grandchildren; and a sister, Anna Saladino.Mr. Iacobellis told a Fresno State campus engineering magazine this year that as a youngster, he was inspired to pursue an aviation career by a cousin who flew a North American Aviation P-51 Mustang fighter-bomber during World War II. (He sent his cousin car wax to apply to the plane’s wings to reduce drag.) When North American, which was later acquired by Rockwell, came to campus recruiting, he applied and was hired as a draftsman making $1.62 an hour.“I didn’t ask how much they were going to pay me,” he recalled. “I just wanted to go there. So the day after graduation I reported to Los Angeles to work.”He added: “It was one of the most rewarding experiences one could have because I was capitalizing on all the previous engineers’ work. I was taught to never take shortcuts, because the life of a pilot or an astronaut or a crew member is in your hands.” (Mr. Iacobellis himself piloted a B-1 twice.)After 43 years at Rockwell, he retired as one of three operating officers, responsible for the company’s rocket engines and aircraft and spacecraft operations, including the space shuttle. (Rockwell later sold its aerospace and military business to Boeing.)After the Cold War ended, Mr. Iacobellis and Gen. Pyotr Deinekin, former commander of the Soviet air force, exchanged models of the B-1 and a Soviet imitation. General Deinekin wrote in a note with the gift, “We both should be pleased that our airplanes did not have to see each other in combat.”Advertisement