By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDSEPT. 12, 2016
TPG Growth has established itself as a boldface name in investing, with stakes in companies that include Silicon Valley darlings like Uber and Airbnb and the guitar maker Fender.Now the business, part of the investing titan TPG, is planning to branch out into the world of so-called social impact investing that is meant to be philanthropically and financially successful — and with operations on a big scale.TPG Growth plans to raise money for what it will call its Rise Fund, which it hopes will eventually invest more than $1 billion, according to people with direct knowledge of the matter. The fund will involve a partnership with Elevar Equity, an investor that has backed 24 companies in seven countries.An Elevar co-founder, Maya Chorengel, is expected to spend a significant amount of time working on the Rise Fund.AdvertisementThe new fund, which has been in the works for about a year, is the latest entry into social impact investing. Most impact funds have been run by smaller investment firms, though last year Bain Capital announced that it had hired Deval Patrick, the former Massachusetts governor, to oversee what it called its Double Impact fund.AdvertisementOverseeing the effort by TPG Growth is William E. McGlashan Jr., who in 2013 moved his family to India for a year to help oversee the firm’s investments in developing countries in the region. Among its more prominent investments is in Apollo Towers, which runs cellphone towers in Myanmar and which the firm has promoted as having helped spur mobile phone use in the country.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Investments by the Rise Fund will most likely look similar to the one in Apollo Towers, which has generated strong returns. TPG Growth expects returns from the new fund to produce, at minimum, market-rate returns.A study published last year by Cambridge Associates and the Global Impact Investing Network found that on average, impact funds that had raised less than $100 million outperformed their nonimpact counterparts, though those that had raised over $100 million tended to lag in returns.One major element of the Rise Fund is that it aspires to have rigorous metrics that quantify the social impact of its investments, the people with knowledge of the matter said. To that end, TPG Growth and Elevar plan to work with the Bridgespan Group, which has worked with the likes of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Omidyar Network, the philanthropic organization of Pierre Omidyar, the billionaire founder of eBay.TPG Growth has also been in discussions directly with the Omidyar Network, which uses a rating system to evaluate how successful investments have been in their missions.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B6 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.