AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.35 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.51 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.25 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week.Florida, Boe-Peco-Ref-F, $140.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Louisville/Jefferson County, Mo., $154.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Paulding County Water Sewerage, Ga., $150.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Baltimore County, $63.7 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.New York Transitional Finance Authority, $187.5 million of Series B-2 revenue bonds. Competitive.New York Transitional Finance Authority, $62.5 million of Series B-3 revenue bonds. Competitive.Rutherford County, Tenn., $101 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Seattle, $151 million of Series C revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Tampa, Fla., $51.7 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Virginia Public Building Authority, $197.8 million of Series A revenue bonds. Competitive.Virginia Public Building Authority, $188.2 million of Series B revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Virginia Public Building Authority, $150.8 million of Series C revenue bonds. Competitive.Arizona, $121.3 million of certificates of participation. RBC Capital Markets.Board of Regents of the University of Texas System, $125 million of revenue financing system bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois, $116.1 million of certificates of participation. Morgan Stanley.Colorado Health Facilities Authority, $70 million of hospital revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Colorado Health Facilities Authority, $72.5 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler.Connecticut, $964.3 million of special tax obligation bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Dallas Area Rapid Transit, $219 million of senior lien sales tax revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Economic Development Authority of Newport News, Va., $83.7 million of residential care facilities revenue refinancing bonds. BB&T Capital Markets.Harbor Department of Los Angeles, $196.4 million of revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Illinois Finance Authority, $113.6 million of OSF Healthcare System revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Illinois Finance Authority, $79.4 million of Riverside Health System revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Indiana Finance Authority, $95 million of Deaconess Health System obligated group revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.King County, Wash., $500 million of sewer improvement and revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Louisiana Public Facilities Authority, $226.1 million of revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Louisiana, $211.9 million of general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $178.7 million of Boston Medical Center bonds. Morgan Stanley.Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency, $70 million of housing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Mecklenburg County, N.C., $145.6 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Minnesota Housing Finance Agency, $101.3 million of homeownership finance bonds. RBC Capital Markets.New Jersey Health Care Facilities Financing Authority, $98 million of Trinitas Regional Medical Center obligated group issue refinancing and revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.New Orleans, $50 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.New York Convention Center Development Corporation, $416 million of hotel unit fee revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York State Housing Finance Agency. $62.3 million of affordable housing revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Newark Higher Education Finance Corporation, Tex., $61.5 million of revenue improvement and refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Rhode Island Housing and Mortgage Finance Corporation, $192.9 million of homeownership opportunity bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Richmond County Hospital Authority, Ga., $130.7 million of revenue anticipation certificates. Morgan Stanley.Rochester, Minn., $290 million of health care facilities revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Successor Agency Tustin Community Redevelopment Agency, Calif., $60.5 million of tax allocation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Tarrant County Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, Tex., $120 million of retirement facilities revenue bonds. Ziegler.Tennessee Housing Development Agency, $125 million of residential finance program bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Unionville-Chadds Ford School District, Pa., $57.5 million of general obligation bonds. Boenning & Scattergood.Washington Housing Finance Commission, $54.56 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Western Placer Unified School District, Calif., $72.48 million of refunding certificates of participation. Hilltop Securities.Advertisement