By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDSEPT. 12, 2016
The hedge fund that helped prod Yahoo into selling its core business has found a new target for its brand of shareholder activism: the drug maker Perrigo.The fund, Starboard Value, has taken a 4.6 percent stake in the pharmaceutical company and has urged it to take steps to bolster its sagging stock price, according to a letter sent to Perrigo’s board.In the letter, Starboard pointed out the steep drop in Perrigo shares since the drug maker rebuffed a takeover bid last year by a fellow pharmaceutical company, Mylan. That bid was valued around $205 a share at the time.Shares of Perrigo have fallen more than 50 percent during the last 12 months, closing on Friday at $88.71.AdvertisementAccording to Starboard, Perrigo has mismanaged its core business of generic over-the-counter medicine and has failed to deliver on promises it made during its defense against the bid from Mylan. Starboard also complained about bonuses that Perrigo executives received after successfully fending off Mylan.Advertisement“We believe that Perrigo trades at a significant discount to fair value and that there is substantial value to be created at Perrigo for the benefit of all its shareholders,” Jeffrey C. Smith, Starboard’s chief executive, wrote in the letter. “However, these are challenging times for Perrigo, and we strongly believe that material change is necessary.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a statement on Monday, Perrigo said that it “will review the letter carefully and looks forward to a constructive and productive dialogue with Starboard — as we do with all of our shareholders — while we execute on a number of strategic and operational initiatives.”Perrigo’s case will be led in part by its chief executive of only a few months, John Hendrickson. His predecessor and the architect of the defense against Mylan, Joseph C. Papa, left for the drug maker Valiant Pharmaceuticals International this year.Since assuming his post, Mr. Hendrickson has criticized Mr. Papa’s tenure at Perrigo, arguing that the company’s “recent track record of performance against our own expectations is unacceptable.”Starboard’s 4.6 percent stake makes it the company’s third-biggest shareholder, behind the mutual fund giants Vanguard and Capital Research, according to regulatory filings.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.