AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningLike a child on a playground who wants everyone to watch a new maneuver, companies clamor for public attention by presenting their numbers in a way that makes them look as successful as possible. But when those measures involve manipulating the figures, then their efforts can end up as a fraud on investors.Public companies are required to follow generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, in reporting their financial results. But those rules do not always put a company in the best light, and so many — one estimate is 448 of the 500 companies on the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index — use what are known as non-GAAP measures to report on their business.There is nothing wrong with using these to help give investors greater insight into a company’s results by making adjustments that exclude certain amounts that may not be relevant to future operations. But as Jason Voss pointed out on the Enterprising Investor blog, “The non-GAAP metrics tend to move in only one direction: up.”Two recent cases show how manipulating the numbers can end up misleading investors in violation of the securities laws.The Justice Department announced charges last week against Brian Block, the former chief financial officer of the real estate company American Realty Capital Partners, which changed its name to Vereit last year. He is accused of conspiracy, securities fraud and providing false information in filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission for inflating the company’s funds from operations, a crucial non-GAAP measure of the performance of real estate investment trusts.His lawyer stated that Mr. Block “is completely innocent and will be exonerated in court.”The company’s former chief accounting officer, Lisa P. McAlister, pleaded guilty in June to similar charges, although the case was sealed until prosecutors unveiled the indictment of Mr. Block.She admitted that American Realty had made an error in the first quarter of 2014 in the calculation of its adjusted funds from operations, or F.F.O., but failed to correct the figure once it came to light, which resulted in reporting higher amounts. The charges against her claim that she and Mr. Block later met in his office to enter false numbers into a spreadsheet used to report results in the next quarter to cover up the inflated figures.According to the National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts, the leading organization for the industry, funds from operations is a widely used standard for reporting performance that eliminates fluctuations in real estate values that can make it harder to compare how different companies are performing. Although American Realty’s financial statements were correct under GAAP, the more important number that real estate investment trusts want investors and analysts look at was F.F.O., so reporting incorrect results can amount to fraud if it is done intentionally.Nor is it a defense to a fraud charge that correct information was reported in the financial statements. When a company promotes its results by using a non-GAAP measure, then any false figures can result in misleading investors because they are not required to ferret out the truth by overlooking what a company chooses to highlight.The story of American Realty has taken some interesting twists since the initial disclosure of accounting problems in October 2014. The company’s chief executive said at the time that “we don’t have bad people, we had some bad judgment there” — a distinction without a difference for violating the law.Ms. McAlister filed a lawsuit in December 2014 against Nicholas Schorsch, American Realty’s former chief executive who built the company, and others claiming that she was fired in retaliation for exposing the fraudulent accounting. She later withdrew the case. The S.E.C. filed a parallel civil action against Mr. Block and Ms. McAlister last week, and under its whistle-blower rules, she will not be eligible for an award because she has been convicted of a securities violation.The amounts involved at American Realty were not large, with the discrepancy being roughly 3 cents a share in the first quarter of 2014. But on Wall Street, missing an earnings target by even a penny can result in a stock being pummeled, so financial executives know they have to make their numbers or face the wrath of investors and the chief executive.Fiat Chrysler is facing investigations by the S.E.C. and the Justice Department over something far less important than the financial measure used by the real estate industry: a long winning streak of monthly increases of new-car sales that turned out to be exaggerated.The company extolled how well it was doing since emerging from bankruptcy after the financial crisis, highlighting how it achieved higher vehicle sales for 75 months in a row. It turns out the streak ended three years earlier, at 40 months — which is not bad, but much less impressive than what it told investors about how well it was doing.The New York Times reported in July that the Justice Department visited the company’s headquarters in Michigan and several regional sales offices to gather information and interview witnesses as part of an inquiry into how the company reported sales, and any pressure it might have put on dealers to increase their numbers.Fiat Chrysler changed its methodology for reporting monthly sales after disclosure of the investigations, which a spokeswoman said was “an opportunity to be more transparent.”This information is typical of the non-GAAP reporting that companies embrace to show how well they are doing because it involves an easily grasped figure for the media to report and analysts to highlight. Everyone loves a winning streak, which means there is enormous pressure to keep it alive as long as possible, perhaps by tinkering with the numbers just enough to maintain the facade another month.No charges have been filed against Fiat Chrysler or any of its executives. It may turn out that the monthly sales figures are not important enough to merit an enforcement action, although Mary Jo White, the S.E.C.’s chairwoman, has said that non-GAAP measures are something the agency is focusing on. She pointed out in a speech in June that “in too many cases, the non-GAAP information, which is meant to supplement the GAAP information, has become the key message to investors, crowding out and effectively supplanting the GAAP presentation.”Gretchen Morgenson noted in April in her Fair Game column in The New York Times, “Creativity abounds in today’s freewheeling accounting world.” It is hard to criticize companies for giving out more information than they are required to provide. But sometimes more is not necessarily better when the result is painting a picture that is far rosier than the real numbers can support.Advertisement