By BEN PROTESSSEPT. 12, 2016
They don’t have badges or grand jury power, and yet corporate monitors are often entrusted to keep an eye on Wall Street.At a time when federal authorities are focusing on white-collar crime, monitors have become a growing industry — and a proxy for the government — as they oversee compliance with settlement deals and review problematic practices. These arrangements, most recently in the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s settlement with Wells Fargo, have produced a flood of business for corporate monitors at law firms and stand-alone consulting shops, which in turn have gone on something of a hiring spree for former government employees.That spree will continue on Monday, when Guidepost Solutions, a well-known monitoring firm, is expected to announce that it hired Daniel M. Burstein, who until recently was a top official at the New York State Department of Financial Services. Mr. Burstein, who helped oversee several of the state agency’s prominent enforcement actions against big banks and mortgage firms, will lead Guidepost’s financial institutions practice.Mr. Burstein’s arrival comes on the heels of Guidepost recruiting several other prominent government officials. Last month, Guidepost hired Stephanie Douglas, who once led the F.B.I.’s National Security Branch. And late last year, it hired Donna A. Bucella, a former United States attorney for the Middle District of Florida.“Guidepost is growing strategically, and bringing in high-profile hires like Dan allows us to offer financial institutions access to some of the most highly regarded expertise,” the firm’s chief executive, Julie Myers Wood, said in a statement.AdvertisementGuidepost, which also conducts internal investigations of potential wrongdoing and reviews corporate compliance programs, is hardly the only monitor snagging prominent assignments. FTI, Kroll and Navigant also compete for this work.AdvertisementAnd yet, the firm has recently handled assignments for a who’s who of corporate wrongdoers. The Justice Department appointed the firm’s chairman, Bart M. Schwartz, to track General Motors’ compliance with a federal deal stemming from its defective ignition switches. He was also the “compliance consultant” overseeing activities at Steven A. Cohen’s investment firm.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As head of Guidepost’s financial institutions practice, Mr. Burstein will conduct internal investigations, review compliance programs and bid for monitorships. He is recused for two years from working on a case involving the New York agency.At the New York agency, where Mr. Burstein was most recently executive deputy superintendent, he often directed the work of corporate monitors at the companies he regulated. Those companies included Deutsche Bank and Ocwen Financial.“Coming from the government, I understand the regulator’s perspective, and I’m well positioned to help companies reform their practices to meet regulators’ expectations,” he said in the statement.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.