AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangMaurice R. Greenberg, the former chief executive of American International Group, goes to trial this week — a mere 11 years after charges were filed.Mr. Greenberg, who is known as Hank, and A.I.G.’s former chief financial officer, Howard I. Smith, are accused of:• Engineering bogus reinsurance transactions to bolster reserves, and• Orchestrating other transactions to allow the company to convert insurance losses into investment losses.It’s no accident that it has taken this long to go to trial.“The words ‘give up’ don’t exist in Hank Greenberg’s vocabulary,” notes Kenneth G. Langone, a Wall Street executive who helped found Home Depot.And, as David Schiff, a former insurance analyst, observes, “this is his legacy, his reputation.”The Irish government is appealing Europe’s ruling over Apple’s taxes. That’s not surprising: After all, it does not want to scare off other multinationals looking to invest.But it actually could do with the money, some say.Left-wing lawmakers, government workers and even fans of Apple have criticized the move. Can it really give up such a big payday? It amounts to about $21.3 billion, including interest, according to calculations by European officials.There is plenty Ireland could do with that tidy sum, especially after the government imposed austerity measures six years ago.The case highlights the country's identity crisis since the downturn. It has managed to attract international companies and the jobs that come with them, but much of the growth in the economy is related to financial maneuvering, rather than improvements in the domestic economy.“The Irish government never did do as much for us as they are now doing for Apple,” one government employee notes.Tesla Motors is preparing updates to its Autopilot system. The changes could have prevented an accident in May that took the life of an Ohio man, according to Elon Musk, the chief executive.The improvements mean that drivers will have to refrain from taking their hands off the steering wheel for long periods. A more precise use of radar should also recognize more potential obstacles.However, as Mr. Musk pointed out, “Perfect safety is really an impossible goal.”“There won’t ever be zero fatalities,” he added.For its part, Uber is looking to introduce a fleet of self-driving cars in Pittsburgh, but with relatively little fanfare.But just because it is being low key does not mean there has not been a fuss over it.Critics argue that the city’s hands-off approach to Uber’s experiment means it is basically handing over control to a company that has a reputation for running roughshod over regulators and municipalities.• Business Roundtable publishes its latest C.E.O. Economic Outlook Survey.• Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, will speak at the International Economic Forum of the Americas, in Toronto.• Lael Brainard, a Fed governor, will discuss monetary policy at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs.• Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, will speak at the Economic Club of Washington.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement