By DAN HORCHNOV. 26, 2015
SÃO PAULO, Brazil —  Luis Stuhlberger’s Brazilian hedge fund has had an astonishing run — even in the face of his country’s sinking economy.But he has grown increasingly bearish about the economic outlook for Brazil, and he is no longer placing most of his bets here, deciding to look elsewhere for investment opportunities.“Brazil is going to get much worse before it gets better,” he said.Given his record, when Mr. Stuhlberger talks, Brazil watchers pay attention. His flagship fund Verde, known for its big-picture calls on economic trends, has returned an average of 29 percent a year, after fees, since it was founded in 1997.Brazil’s stock market returned 10 percent a year, on average, and its main bond market benchmark returned 16 percent a year over the same period.AdvertisementAnd while Brazil has been practically synonymous with economic volatility, Verde has had only one down year ever — 2008, during the global financial crisis, when it lost a modest 6 percent.AdvertisementThese numbers are in Brazil’s currency, the real, in which Mr. Stuhlberger’s fund is priced, and most of his clients are Brazilian retail investors. But even in dollars, Verde’s average annual return has been over 20 percent.A foreign investor who had given Mr. Stuhlberger $35,000 in 1997 would now have over a million dollars, even after the recent collapse of Brazil’s currency.A Brazilian who had given him 35,000 reais, the cost of a sport utility vehicle at the time, would now have 4 million reais, enough for a couple to retire in comfort.“He has the best long-term track record in Brazil,” said Armínio Fraga, head of the Brazilian asset manager Gávea Investimentos, and former managing director of the investor George Soros’s firm. “Like all great investors, Luis thinks big and he thinks creatively, without dogma or formulas.”Global players have taken note. Credit Suisse bought Mr. Stuhlberger’s firm, Hedging-Griffo, in 2006. When his noncompete clause ended last year and Mr. Stuhlberger became independent again, the Swiss bank bought a minority stake in his new firm, Verde Asset Management.“He’s a legend here, so we benefit from being able to offer our clients meetings with him and early access to his views,” said José Olympio Pereira, chief executive of Credit Suisse Brazil.The hedge fund giant Blackstone recently allocated part of its $3 billion Alternative Multi-Strategy Fund to Mr. Stuhlberger, alongside names such as Goldman Sachs and Cerberus.AdvertisementMr. Stuhlberger is not a stock picker, and he rarely holds a big position in a single company. Instead he tries to identify economic trends, to allocate funds among asset classes to get ahead of these trends, and to use hedging strategies to smooth out the ride while he waits for his bets to pay off.“Most of the time I do nothing except read and study,” he said. “Sometimes I go the whole year without changing allocations. Then I make a big change and wait.”He got a little too far ahead of local trends early last year, as his decision to exit Brazil’s stock market, short its currency and keep his bond holdings conservative kept Verde slightly in the red for most of 2014.But in September 2014 markets came around to his bearishness, and Verde ended the year up 9 percent. So far this year, it is up 24 percent.Such returns were below the fund’s historical average, but Alberto Jacobsen, chief executive of Risk Office, a São Paulo investment consultancy for institutional investors, said Mr. Stuhlberger’s performance was “highly impressive” given the country’s environment. “It’s a lot harder to make money when the stock market is falling and interest rates are rising. Many other hedge funds here lost money.”Big losses in Brazil were reportedly one of the reasons the United States-based Fortress Investment Group decided to liquidate its flagship hedge fund.But despite his past success, Mr. Stuhlberger concluded last year that there were too few opportunities in Brazil for a fund of Verde’s size to be fully invested. So he has begun to return, in installments, 40 percent of its 14 billion reais ($3.8 billion) to investors.“It’s much too early to buy the stock market here. My clients don’t pay me to hold cash for them,” he said.AdvertisementVerde is required by regulations to keep 80 percent of its assets inside Brazil. But Mr. Stuhlberger, long unusual among fund managers here for investing globally — he bet big on German real estate in 2011 — opened a new fund this year that is available only to qualified investors, and therefore has no limit on how much it can invest abroad.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His main bets in this go-anywhere fund, called Horizonte, are that developed-country equity markets and the dollar are not done rising; China will devalue its currency; and emerging markets will stay in the doldrums as low interest rates, low commodity prices and slow growth persist for the foreseeable future.Some are cautious about his new venture. “He’s brilliant, but we’re not certain that he’ll have the same competitive advantage outside Brazil that he does at home,” Mr. Jacobsen said.At home, Mr. Stuhlberger sees problems deeper than a political crisis and low prices for commodity exports.“The country isn’t financially viable,” he said. “The government has tried to build a European social democracy in the third world. The numbers don’t add up.”Despite high taxes — at 36 percent of the country’s gross domestic product, Brazil’s tax burden is about the same as Germany’s — the country is running a gaping budget deficit, in part because Brazilians retire with a government pension at an average age of 54.“There will have to be a major crisis before the population accepts cuts in social spending,” Mr. Stuhlberger said.And though outrage at the way some of that spending is diverted has led to a groundbreaking investigation into corruption, Mr. Stuhlberger said the corruption was so endemic he feared that no new, clean political institutions existed to replace the old ones.While he waits for the crisis to deepen, his Brazilian allocation is mostly in local inflation-protected bonds. He also holds currency derivatives that will profit if the real falls further, and has a small position long on Petrobras bonds and short on the stock.AdvertisementFor both the government and Petrobras, the energy giant, he said, “Default is not a risk, for now.”Mr. Stuhlberger came late to the hedge fund business. Planning to work in his father’s construction company, he studied civil engineering, but found that math interested him more.In 1980 he started to work in a small brokerage house trading first coffee, then gold, at a time when many Brazilians sought the precious metal as a defense against hyperinflation, since the government forbade holding foreign currency as an investment.When Brazil lifted most capital and currency controls in 1990, Mr. Stuhlberger began to trade stocks and bonds on the newly important futures exchanges.He was 42 years old when he opened Verde in 1997. He started with under a million dollars. Success quickly brought clients, and he closed the fund to new investors in 2002.For all his gloom about Brazil’s economy, Mr. Stuhlberger, now 60, says he loves life here.“The people are incredibly talented, and the Brazilian way is to help each other out. There’s not the ruthlessness that you see in the U.S. Here you can be friends with your competitors.”He said work left him little time for socializing or hobbies, though he and his wife of 36 years have a passion for movies from Argentina.He now spends several months a year traveling internationally, and some members of his team are abroad more often than they are at home.“It’s where we’re looking for investments now,” Mr. Stuhlberger said. “Outside of Brazil.”A version of this article appears in print on November 27, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Brazil Hedge Fund Star Looks Abroad for Next Bet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.