AdvertisementSupported byBy Noam ScheiberIn one of the earliest moves to bring employee benefits to workers in the so-called gig economy, an online marketplace that connects millions of families with babysitters, nannies and caregivers announced on Wednesday that it would provide up to $500 a year for workers to use for health care, transportation or education expenses.The new benefit will be offered by Care.com to the caregivers who provide its services. It represents a concrete, if limited, approach to a problem that has long bedeviled workers who receive income from multiple sources: Employers or clients — often individuals or families — rarely have deep enough pockets to fund the employee benefits that larger companies typically offer.The Care.com solution to this problem is to earmark a small portion of the transaction fee it charges many families toward the caregiver benefit and allow the contributions to accrue across jobs.“As freelance labor moves to work for different people, their benefits should move with them,” said Sheila Marcelo, the founder and chief executive of Care.com. “We haven’t seen anyone do what we’re doing. We think it’s groundbreaking.”The issue has gained increasing attention with the growth in recent years of platforms like Uber, TaskRabbit and Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, which allow workers to complete jobs on an episodic basis. Last November, a group of prominent business leaders, worker advocates and policy specialists, including several tech executives, signed a document proclaiming the need for a system of portable benefits for gig-economy workers. Ms. Marcelo was among the executives who signed the document.Despite the rising interest, however, there have been strikingly few accomplishments to date. In 2012, the New York Taxi Workers Alliance, a labor organization representing cabdrivers, persuaded the Taxi and Limousine Commission to require taxi medallion owners to deduct 6 cents per fare from the driver’s credit card receipts to fund portable benefits for drivers, like health care services and disability coverage.The New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan struck down the regulation in 2014. (Corey Johnson, a member of the New York City Council, has said he plans to introduce legislation aimed at creating a similar fund.)Earlier this year, Uber reached an agreement with the regional branch of a prominent union, the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, to create an association to represent roughly 35,000 Uber drivers in New York City. The drivers association could eventually set up and administer a fund for benefits like paid time off.Some worker advocates said the Care.com development could help generate momentum on the issue.“We’re starting to see the first signs of life, where companies see it as in their interest to collect money for workers to get benefits,” said Sara Horowitz, founder and executive director of the Freelancers Union, which promotes the interests of independent workers. “It’s a really important first step.”The new Care.com benefit will be funded by diverting two percentage points of the 12 percent transaction fee that it charges families who use its platform to pay their caregivers. The caregivers can accrue an unlimited amount of benefit money in a given year, but can spend only up to $500. The company said it arrived at this figure because it is equivalent to what a typical employee pays over six months for pharmacy benefits or vision insurance. Any amount the caregivers do not spend will be rolled over to the following year.Ms. Marcelo conceded that a large percentage of families do not use the Care.com platform to pay the more than nine million caregivers they find there, noting that the payment option is very recent. But she said she expected families to rely more on the company’s payments feature in the future because their caregivers, mindful of the new benefit, would nudge them in that direction.Sherwin Sheik, the chief executive of CareLinx, a smaller service that focuses more narrowly on providing in-home care to older adults and patients with chronic conditions, applauded the move and said his company was also considering ways to bring more benefits to the caregivers on its platforms. CareLinx already provides professional liability, auto accident and property damage insurance for most of its roughly 160,000 caregivers.“These workers a lot of times are living paycheck to paycheck,” he said. “We all need to do what we can do to help these caregivers earn more and save.”Still, some worker advocates were concerned by the development, arguing that any success in creating portable benefits for gig-economy workers could implicitly concede the fight over whether such workers should be classified as employees or independent contractors. Employees receive a variety of rights and protections, including minimum wage, overtime pay and a federally backed right to organize; contractors have very few.“Benefits can make you a little less helpless,” said Bhairavi Desai, executive director of the New York Taxi Workers Alliance, “but it doesn’t fill that void.”Advertisement