By SYDNEY EMBERSEPT. 13, 2016
Vice Media said on Tuesday that it was delaying the start of its daily HBO half-hour newscast by two weeks. The program, “Vice News Tonight,” will now begin on Oct. 10 instead of Sept. 26, as Vice had announced.Josh Tyrangiel, who was hired last October to oversee the program, announced the decision at an event at Vice’s headquarters in Brooklyn.“HBO and Vice both have incredibly high technical standards,” Mr. Tyrangiel said to explain the delay. “We are just making sure that everything looks as good as we want it to look. We plan on being on the air for a lot of years, so none of us thought that a couple of days was that big a deal.”During the event, which was intended to showcase “Vice News Tonight” for the news media, Mr. Tyrangiel laid out his vision, calling the program “an opportunity to diversify what we do.” He said it would cover an array of subjects, including world news, politics, climate and technology.Advertisement“We’re looking for more than just the ‘what’ of news,” he said. “We think we can add a lot of value by helping people understand the world.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A sample program, which Mr. Tyrangiel said was not a pilot, included segments on Mosul, Iraq; the painkiller fentanyl; and emojis.AdvertisementMr. Tyrangiel said graphics and visual journalism would be big components of the program. He said two shows that he considered touchstones for “Vice News Tonight” were “Saturday Night Live” and “Sesame Street” because they convey information using different formats determined by the subject matter.“Just as important as what you cover is: What does it look like? How do you cover it?” Mr. Tyrangiel said. “We need to create a multiformat show.”When plans for “Vice News Tonight” were unveiled in March 2015, Richard Plepler, chief executive of HBO, said the program would make its debut that year. Last month, when Vice Media announced the September debut date (which is also the night of the first presidential debate), a spokesman for Vice Media said the program was “on schedule.”A version of this article appears in print on September 14, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Vice Media Delays HBO Newscast Debut Till Oct. 10.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.