By ALEXANDRA STEVENSON and MATTHEW GOLDSTEINSEPT. 13, 2016
“Everybody will have a lower growth rate than we’re used to,” said the billionaire Ray Dalio, founder of the world’s biggest hedge fund.The billionaire hedge fund manager Ray Dalio on Tuesday defended the “unusual” culture at his $150 billion firm, Bridgewater Associates.Speaking at a hedge fund conference in Manhattan, Mr. Dalio said Bridgewater’s policy of “radical transparency” was not for everyone. He said the firm had a policy of taping all meetings “for everybody to see so that there’s no spin.”“Some people absolutely hate it, and some people could never work anywhere else,” he said.Bridgewater’s culture has come under scrutiny this year in a number of media reports, including a front-page article in The New York Times. That article described a sexual harassment complaint against the firm, which has since been settled, in which a former employee said Bridgewater was a “caldron of fear and intimidation.” Mr. Dalio responded at the time that his firm had been a victim of “sensationalistic and inaccurate” reporting.Mr. Dalio was one of several featured speakers at the Delivering Alpha investment conference in Manhattan on Tuesday. At the annual event, which is sponsored by CNBC and Institutional Investor, a number of well-known money managers shared their views on the markets and the economy.AdvertisementMr. Dalio also weighed in on the global economy and markets, speaking alongside Timothy F. Geithner, the former Treasury secretary, during a morning panel at the conference. Mr. Dalio said he took issue with Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, who said on Monday that it was time for the Federal Reserve to begin raising interest rates on a regular basis. Mr. Dalio said it would be wrong to raise rates now because of the overall economic weakness in the world economy.Advertisement“The risks are so much more on the downside,” Mr. Dalio added.A large number of Bridgewater employees are dedicated to studying the impact of geopolitical events on the economy, and the firm publishes a daily research note for clients called Daily Observations with its assessment of macroeconomic trends and the impact on the markets. The note is said to be read by investment professionals as well as officials in Washington.Sounding the alarm, Mr. Dalio said central banks and policy makers had run out of options to stimulate growth, adding that there was no precedent for today’s global economy.“We’re out of ammo at this point,” he said. “But the idea that you should raise rates to replenish the arsenal and slow the economy, that’s a weird argument to make.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other billionaire investors at the conference also took issue with the performance of central bankers in the United States and around the world.It has been a roller coaster of a year for Bridgewater as it contends with reorganizing its core management committee, which reports to Mr. Dalio. The firm announced in March that Greg Jensen, a co-chief investment officer who was viewed largely as the heir apparent, would be stepping down from his role as co-chief executive following reports of infighting at the top. Bridgewater later hired Jon Rubinstein, a former Apple executive, to replace Mr. Jensen.Despite the volatility, Bridgewater recently said it had raised $22 billion from investors, in part for a new portfolio called Optimal.Bridgewater’s flagship Pure Alpha fund, which makes broad bets on global economic trends, is down 9.4 percent, and its All Weather fund, which the firm contends will “perform well across all environments,” is up 13.5 percent.Last year, the performances were reversed: The All Weather fund lost 6.9 percent, and Pure Alpha gained 4.7 percent.Optimal is flat so far this year.Bridgewater is misunderstood, Mr. Dalio said, “because we’ve sort of kind of kept it behind the scenes in a sense.”A version of this article appears in print on September 14, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Fund Manager Defends Firm and Its Culture as Transparent.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.