AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberFor the second time in two months, Time Inc., the publisher of Time, People and Sports Illustrated, has shuffled its top leadership as it tries to reinvent itself as a digital organization and turn its well-known magazine titles into successful online properties.The company announced on Tuesday that it had named a new chief executive to succeed its chief of three years, Joseph A. Ripp, effective immediately.The new chief, Rich Battista is Time Inc.’s executive vice president and president for brands. Mr. Ripp will become the executive chairman and continue to lead the board.In an interview, Mr. Ripp, 64, who guided Time Inc. through its spinoff from Time Warner two years ago, said that he and the board had always had conversations about a succession plan, but the decision to appoint a new chief executive was “a little bit accelerated” because of a recent health incident.“While I wasn’t hit by a bus, a couple of weeks ago I really did have a health issue,” he said, that made him reassess how much time he could put into the company. He declined to provide more details on the incident, but said he was “quite healthy right now.”The change in leadership occurred a month after Jana Partners, an activist investment firm, revealed in a regulatory filing that it had taken a stake in the company.Mr. Battista, 52, who joined Time Inc. last year, has worked in the media industry for 25 years and has held executive and management roles at companies including Mandalay Sports Media and Fox Television.Mr. Battista takes the reins of Time Inc. at a time of great transition. In July, the company named Alan Murray, the editor of Fortune, its chief content officer, overseeing all of its editors in the United States. It also reorganized its advertising sales and brand development teams.Magazine publishers across the spectrum have struggled to adapt to an increasingly digital world, but Time Inc.’s strategy has at times appeared to lack focus. The company has looked to bolster its capabilities in mobile, events, native advertising — ads that look like editorial content — and video, buying companies like HelloGiggles, a lifestyle site aimed at women, and Viant, the parent of Myspace. It has introduced mobile platforms like Instant, which features videos of celebrities. And it has started an ad-supported video streaming service from People and Entertainment Weekly.Several revenue initiatives, including Instant and the streaming service, were under Mr. Battista’s purview.“The overall mandate is to turn this company into a growth story and bring us to a whole new level,” Mr. Battista said in an interview, “and I think there are tremendous opportunities to do that.”“In my short tenure here, I think I’ve had a track record of building new businesses and new opportunities,” he added.Since the spinoff, Time Inc.’s stock has tumbled, and the company has struggled to turn itself around in the face of falling print advertising and circulation revenue. The company has had disappointing financial results, albeit with some gains in digital advertising revenue. In the second quarter, when Time Inc.’s revenue declined 1 percent, its digital ad revenue increased 65 percent.Still, when Time Inc. reported its second-quarter earnings last month, it lowered its guidance for the year and now expects its revenue to be flat to 1.5 percent higher compared with last year. It had previously forecast its revenue to be 1 to 5 percent higher. Last year, the company’s revenue fell 5 percent.Mr. Battista said Time Inc. was focusing more on native advertising and video as it looks to increase revenue. The company is also investing heavily in technology, particularly for digital advertising. He did not say when the company would become “a growth story.”Advertisement