AdvertisementSupported byBy Clifford KraussHOUSTON — American travelers are being treated to bargains at the gasoline pump this Thanksgiving weekend. Prices are at their lowest level for the holiday since the financial crisis of 2008 despite heightened tensions in the Middle East and a spate of terrorist attacks that would normally lead to higher prices.On Thursday, the national average for regular gasoline was $2.05 a gallon, 6 cents lower than only a week ago, and 76 cents lower than last year, according to the AAA motor club. AAA expects that nearly 42 million Americans will take road trips through the weekend.The price of gasoline has tumbled for weeks. The biggest declines were in Michigan, Illinois, Wisconsin, Indiana, Ohio and Minnesota as several Midwestern refineries, particularly Exxon Mobil’s plant in Joliet, Ill., finished their seasonal maintenance.About 60 percent of the nation’s gas stations are selling gasoline for less than $2 a gallon, according to Tom Kloza, global head of energy analysis at the Oil Price Information Service, with 75 percent of all sales nationwide below the $2 mark.As the average driver consumes more than 60 gallons a month, most drivers will save $40 to $60 between Black Friday and Christmas, compared with last year, Mr. Kloza estimated, and up to $75 from the holiday season of 2013.Those savings will be compounded for the few million consumers dependent on heating oil, mostly concentrated in New England and nearby states. The average consumer there may be able to save as much as $500 or more this winter on heating.“It’s a nice gift, although I don’t know if the savings will be spent or be saved or go to paying off some debt,” Mr. Kloza said.Wherever the savings go, he noted that they were remarkable given how much oil and gasoline prices historically have climbed during periods of unrest, particularly in the Middle East.With crude oil prices still less than half what they were in the summer of 2014, the low gasoline prices are no big surprise to energy experts. “The market no longer fears a geopolitical price rally,” Mr. Kloza added. “It’s just a different mind-set that switched around the middle of last year.”While the Turkish downing of a Russian warplane this week briefly sent oil prices upward on Tuesday, they came right back down. Even as worsening relations between Turkey and Russia put some natural gas pipeline projects in jeopardy, the incident had no direct, immediate effect on global oil supplies.Gasoline prices are still relatively high on the Pacific Coast, with regular gasoline selling for an average of $2.71 a gallon in California. But with demand expected to decline over the next few weeks and refineries retooled for cheaper winter blends, experts say the national average for regular gasoline should fall below $2 a gallon by Christmas.Behind the low prices are building crude inventories around the United States and the world, a sign that oil production remains resilient despite the price collapse and that demand remains soft in Europe as well as in China and other emerging markets.Even as the crude supplies are building to record seasonal levels in the primary domestic storage hub at Cushing, Okla., producing countries in Africa and the Middle East keep sending oil to the Gulf of Mexico, hoping to find buyers for supplies they cannot sell in the glutted Asian markets.Energy transport experts say the number of oil-carrying tankers in the Gulf of Mexico is triple the average, carrying nearly 30 million barrels of oil, according to Matt Smith, director of commodity research at ClipperData, which tracks global crude shipments. Similar tanker traffic jams can be found off the coasts of Singapore, China and the Persian Gulf.Saudi Arabia, Russia, Iraq and the United Arab Emirates are still pumping at record or near-record rates.Oil production is dropping in the United States, but not fast enough to support oil prices much above $40 a barrel. That is putting a severe financial strain on many oil companies. According to the law firm Haynes & Boone, there were 36 Chapter 11 bankruptcy filings by North American producers this year as of Nov. 5, accounting for $13 billion in secured and unsecured debt.“Economic indicators suggest more producer bankruptcy filings will occur before the year is out,” the law firm stated in a new report.The failure of so many mostly small companies, along with the rising number of rigs that companies are decommissioning around the country, are convincing many experts that the oil price will eventually rise next year at least modestly. Moreover, as the oil industry has retrenched, it has canceled more than $200 billion worth of projects around the world this year, and that should temper supply growth over the years to come.Nevertheless, a significant rise in oil prices will come only after there is more pain in the oil patch, experts say.“The oil price needs to average under $45 a barrel for four to six months to correct the balance and supply,” said Raoul LeBlanc, an oil expert at IHS, a consulting firm. Nevertheless, he added, “We’re setting ourselves up for a structural uptrend.”Advertisement