AdvertisementSupported byBook EntryBy Jonathan A. KneeThe last 20 years has seen a reduction in many of the most blatant forms of workplace discrimination against women. A recent Harvard Business Review article reported, however, that subtle bias is often worse than the more overt variety. The very ambiguity of the behavior heightens stress and diminishes the chances of successfully seeking recourse, legal or otherwise. This could explain, in part, the stubborn persistence of the wage gap and continued underrepresentation of women in top corporate and professional roles — despite decades of women outnumbering and outperforming men through college.The good news is that there has been an explosion in detailed social science research documenting these subtler obstacles to women achieving their full professional potential. Overwhelmingly, the greatest challenges to women stem from unjustified perceptions – for instance, that a working mother has a lack of commitment — reinforced by erroneous perceptions, which is reflected in the tendency to attribute credit for women’s work to men. Some research also points to the behaviors of women — for instance, an unwillingness to ask for a raise, say “no” to unreasonable requests or take credit for their own achievements. Yet these tendencies are often a rational response to the negative reactions elicited when women undertake activities or display traits that are viewed neutrally or even positively in men. One recent study suggests that women increasingly do ask for raises with similar frequency to men, but are 25 percent less likely to get one.There are significant hurdles, however, to using academic research to stimulate actual changes in the workplace. First, the research must be made accessible (both the language itself and where it is published) to a general audience. Second, nuanced strategies must be created to focus on behaviors that often reflect unconscious predispositions.A number of books in recent years have taken up the joint challenge of increasing awareness and developing practical tools and policies to combat these institutional and psychological biases. The most influential of these has been Sheryl Sandberg’s 2013 best seller “Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead.” Ms. Sandberg’s book attracted a dizzying array of criticism, much of which seemed to have been based on its title rather than its substance. Ms. Sandberg’s narrative was explicitly rooted in her own life experiences. At the time, she made clear that her focus was “most relevant to women fortunate enough to have choices” rather than those “struggling to make ends meet,” and more recently she even apologized for not having been more sensitive to the challenges of single motherhood.Now comes Jessica Bennett’s “Feminist Fight Club: An Office Survival Manual (For a Sexist Workplace),” which uses the same academic research base to speak to an entirely different demographic in an entirely different voice. It is “Lean In” conceived as an illustrated guide for millennials. Where Ms. Sandberg is careful to avoid offense and clarify that she is not speaking for everyone, Ms. Bennett’s book includes a “womanifesto” and a chapter subtitled “Carry yourself with the confidence of a mediocre white man.” Despite its irreverent tone, “Feminist Fight Club” is as grounded in academic research as “Lean In.”Toward the end, it includes a helpful six-page letter to men. Until then, however, the book is chock-full of stories, drawings and mostly practical advice for working women. The topics covered range from lactation and power poses to negotiating raises and mentoring. Ms. Bennett manages to convey a remarkable amount of substance briskly and entertainingly.If I have a criticism of the book, it is the lack of a narrative arc. Ms. Bennett uses the establishment of her own Feminist Fight Club (essentially a support group of early-career women) as a loose theme to tie the various pieces, but in the opening pages she suggests that the book can be read in almost any order. As a 54-year-old white man (who may or may not be mediocre), I admit that I am not well placed to judge whether Ms. Bennett has hit on the most effective way to transmit important information to Gen Y. I can’t help but cling, however, to the old-fashioned notion that it is easier to retain information integrated into an overarching story line rather than as disconnected bits and pieces. That said, if “Feminist Fight Club” is on the right track in its presentation style, it has performed a huge service not just to its target audience but to the businesses they will be joining.Jonathan A. Knee is professor of professional practice at Columbia Business School and a senior adviser at Evercore Partners. His next book, “Class Clowns: How the Smartest Investors Lost Billions in Education,” will be released by Columbia University Press in November.Advertisement