
Breakingviews By                     
JOHN FOLEY

SEPT. 14, 2016
The German pharmaceutical group Bayer has finally agreed to buy the American seed-maker Monsanto for $66 billion. Shareholders in Bayer do not get the chance to vote on the takeover, but they have already made their views plain. Compared with the wider market, Bayer shares have probably lost $7 billion in value already.“We have very, very little overlap,” said Werner Baumann, C.E.O. of the chemical conglomerate, on regulatory concerns with a deal for the fertilizer maker.Combining Monsanto with Bayer would create a seed-and-fertilizer giant with revenue of 23 billion euros (about $26 billion) — bigger by far than its closest rival, Syngenta of Switzerland. Yet the price of building such an impressive empire is too high. Bayer would be paying a $17 billion premium to Monsanto’s market capitalization on May 11, the day before talks between the two were first reported. Yet the value created by the deal, after taxing and capitalizing the annual savings of $1.5 billion, is just $12 billion.That value gap might explain why Bayer’s shares have flagged. As of Wednesday, the company’s market capitalization was slightly lower than on May 11. Yet the MSCI World Industrials and Health Care indexes are both up more than 2 percent over the same period. If Bayer shares simply tracked the benchmark, the company would be worth over $7 billion more than it was by midafternoon London time on Wednesday. Broadly speaking, that makes sense because Bayer is paying away all the benefits of the deal, and then some, to Monsanto shareholders.The market does not always get it right. And in this case, the immediate verdict does not really matter, because Bayer shareholders do not get a vote on whether the tie-up goes ahead. Antitrust regulators do have a say, however. If they nix the deal, Bayer must pay Monsanto a $2 billion breakup fee. That would be painful for the German group’s shareholders, but they would still be better off than if the seed had never been planted in the first place.John Foley is Reuters Breakingviews editor for Europe, the Middle East and Africa. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »