By RACHEL ABRAMS and ERIC LIPTONSEPT. 16, 2016
Mylan, the maker of EpiPens, an injection device for severe allergy attacks, is trying to persuade the United States Preventive Services Task Force to add the product to the group’s list of preventive medical services. That could make EpiPens available to patients with no insurance co-pay. It could also benefit the company by allowing it to raise prices on the product while limiting complaints from the public. The higher prices would be pushed to the government, insurers or employers.The 16 volunteer members of the task force are medical and preventive care experts appointed by the director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, a division of the federal Health and Human Services Department. They serve four-year terms. The chairwoman is Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, a professor of medicine and of epidemiology and biostatistics at the University of California, San Francisco.Created in 1984, the group is empowered by Congress to decide which treatments should be labeled “preventive.” The idea is to encourage treatments to improve the health of the public, by helping to prevent or detect diseases or change bad habits, like smoking, that can cause disease.The task force takes nominations on screenings or services that may help prevent disease. It then uses a panel of experts to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposal. The costs of the treatments are not supposed to be factored into the decision.AdvertisementThe task force evaluates only medical services intended for people who show no signs or symptoms of illness, because it defines “preventive” services as those that stop people from getting sick to begin with. This is why task force officials said it was unlikely epinephrine auto-injectors like EpiPen would secure a spot on the list.A procedure that is endorsed by the group receives one of three classifications: A, B or C.An A grade means the task force has a “high certainty” that a service offers a substantial net benefit to consumers. A B grade means the task force has decided that a service offers a moderate or substantial benefit.AdvertisementThere are 54 preventive services that now fall into the A and B classification. They are almost exclusively counseling and disease screenings, such as tests for colorectal, cervical and lung cancer, hepatitis B and C, hearing loss, blood pressure, certain sexually transmitted diseases and depression. No prescription medications for diagnosed illnesses fall into those categories. The only named drug on the A or B list is aspirin, which the task force recommends for the prevention of cardiovascular disease and colorectal cancer for adults who meet select criteria. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A C label means the task force has “at least moderate certainty that the net benefit,” of the medical screening or counseling procedure is small.Recommendations also can differ based on age or other risk factors. A breast cancer screening for women ages 50 to 74, for example, receives a B grade, while the same screening for women ages 40 to 49 gets a C. Similar distinctions are made for aspirin, for example, which gets a C for people ages 60 to 69 but a B for those 50 to 59.The task force can also recommend against a given medical service by giving it a D, or an I for insufficient evidence to decide one way or another.Under the Affordable Care Act, if the task force gives a treatment an A or a B grade, the vast majority of insurance companies must offer it to you for no out-of-pocket cost. The exceptions are group health plans that began or individual policies that were bought before 2010 and have not made significant changes to their benefits or costs.For treatments in the C group, insurers can choose whether to add it to their own preventive lists and provide them with no co-pay.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.