
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
SEPT. 16, 2016
Plenty of people have reason to celebrate the $56 billion bid by Bayer AG, the German pharmaceuticals giant, for Monsanto, the United States agribusiness company.If the deal goes through, Monsanto’s executives and shareholders will receive a 44 percent premium to their company’s stock price on Wednesday, before Bayer sweetened its offer. The companies’ bankers and deal advisers will also reap rich rewards in the deal, which will create a global pharmaceuticals, health care and pesticides behemoth.History suggests, however, that one group should be wary of the transaction: Bayer’s stockholders. Their company, which is paying cash for Monsanto but also taking on $10 billion in debt, could very well underperform its peers in the coming years.That’s the message in a new and comprehensive analysis by the S&P Global Market Intelligence team. “Mergers & Acquisitions: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly (and How to Tell Them Apart),” by Richard Tortoriello and a group of analysts, found that among Russell 3000 companies making significant acquisitions, postdeal returns generally underperformed those of their peers.Advertisement“Despite the often-heard claim of M&A synergies,” the report said, “acquirers lag industry peers on a variety of fundamental metrics for an extended period following an acquisition. Profit margins, earnings growth and return on capital all decline relative to peers, while interest expense rises, as debt soars, and other ‘special charges’ increase.”AdvertisementThis view was not among the talking points from the Bayer executives who contended — as their counterparts in previous deals also did — that their shareholders would benefit mightily from the transaction. In announcing the Monsanto deal, they said it was expected to increase the combined companies’ earnings in the first year after closing. The executives also said they foresaw double-digit profit growth at the combined company in the third full year, driven in part by purported synergies of $1.5 billion over that period.Time will tell, of course, whether these expectations become a reality. But the S&P Global analysis of deals going back 15 years indicates otherwise.In their study, the analysts included United States companies in the Russell 3000 stock index that had done at least one deal from 2001 to 2013. To eliminate inconsequential acquisitions, the researchers included only those transactions that were at least 5 percent of the acquiring company’s market capitalization or enterprise value.A total of 9,000 transactions made the cut. Returns on the acquirers’ stocks were calculated through April 2016 and were compared with the performance of the Russell 3000 index over the period. The researchers also studied the performance of acquirers before and after they had made a purchase.“In general M&A deals underperform either their index or their peers over an extended period,” Mr. Tortoriello, a quantitative analyst at S&P Global, said in an interview. “That doesn’t mean there aren’t some deals that do very, very well, but over all they underperform.”How much? From 2001 to last April, the study found, a $1,000 investment in the Russell 3000 index would have grown to $2,956. The same investment in an index of Russell 3000 companies that made acquisitions of the type examined by the researchers would have turned into a paltry $1,671.Although the study reported on a three-year period following an acquisition, Mr. Tortoriello said over five years the outcomes were the same.AdvertisementTiming, he speculated, is one reason for the poor performance. “Mergers and acquisitions really heat up at the top of the market when business prospects going forward aren’t as good,” he said. “Then it cools down when the market falls, just when you’d want to be buying stocks and companies.”Indeed, as the broad market indexes have pushed higher in recent years, mergers have increased. Last year was a record for buyouts, with $2.2 trillion worth occurring in the United States. This year is doing nearly as well: As of July 31, over $800 billion in deals had been struck, and that was before the Bayer-Monsanto acquisition.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fueling many of these deals are rock-bottom interest rates and softening corporate earnings. Many acquirers pick up companies to help keep their profits aloft.But precious few executives seeking to juice their earnings via acquisitions will get what they wished for. The average acquisition, the S&P Global study concluded, “tends to be dilutive to earnings growth over an extended period.”Other performance metrics — returns on both equity and invested capital — also declined as acquirers compared with their industry peers. This is partly a result of increased interest expense and other charges. And when looking at return on invested capital, many postmerger companies struggled under the weight of their increased debt loads.Fully aware that some acquisitions generate better returns than others, the S&P Global analysts set out to determine the characteristics of truly awful deals.“It’s easier to handicap bad acquisitions because there are so many of them,” Mr. Tortoriello said. “We found firms that have the highest levels of growth in assets and share issuance prior to an acquisition tend to underperform afterward. That indicates these companies are growing too fast; the acquisition strategy is part of their overextended growth pathway.”Another aspect of failing deals: Those using stock as buyout currency underperform those deploying cash, as Bayer is doing with Monsanto. And the larger the stock acquisition, the more likely it is to underperform significantly, the study found. Acquirers using the highest percentage of stock underperform industry peers by 3.3 percent one year after the deal is done and by 8.1 percent after three years.“Companies tend to make stock acquisitions when their shares are high and when business conditions are doing very well,” Mr. Tortoriello said. “So that’s probably closer to an inflection point in the market and economy and isn’t good for the prosperity of the acquisition.”AdvertisementFinally, the study found that acquirers with the highest one-year spending on buyouts underperformed their peers by 2 percent in the first year after closing and by 9.3 percent after three years. This reinforced the analysts’ conclusion that companies with heavy deal making in their blood should either be avoided by investors or seen as candidates for short sales or negative bets.Assuming that Bayer’s purchase of Monsanto goes through, it won’t be clear for a while whether its management promises will come to pass. A Bayer spokesman, Christopher Loder, declined to comment further on the merger or on the study’s findings. But Bayer’s use of cash over stock suggests a better chance of success; so does the fact that the company has not been a serial big-ticket deal maker in recent years.Still, when it comes to buyouts, the track record of most companies is poor. Shareholders of acquisitive companies — including Bayer’s — should be aware of all the risks executives don’t like to talk about.Twitter: @gmorgensonA version of this article appears in print on September 18, 2016, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Champagne for Bayer, Ice Water for Investors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »