AdvertisementSupported byBy John Koblin[ Our full report on the 2016 Emmy Awards | the list of Emmy winners | red carpet looks | our critic’s review of the show ]THERE was a time several years ago when awards shows were on the upswing.As television ratings began to erode in an era of Netflix, the DVR and Facebook, awards shows, along with sports and other big live events, were among the few rock-solid programming institutions that were immune to the changes, delivering grindingly sturdy results.Well, they used to, at least.Over the last two years, these shows have started to lose their ratings luster. The Academy Awards this year hit an eight-year low in viewership. The Grammys hit a seven-year low. The Golden Globes have shed about 2.5 million viewers in the last two years. Last year, the Emmys broadcast had its lowest ratings ever.Here's a look at some of the most memorable moments from the 68th Primetime Emmy Awards.The ratings drops aren’t just for the major productions: Numbers for the ESPYs, the American Music Awards, the Country Music Awards and the Billboard Music Awards have also gone down. MTV’s Video Music Awards lost a third of its audience last month, even though the show was broadcast on a number of cable channels and featured performances from superstars like Beyoncé and Rihanna.Trying to buck this recent trend on Sunday will be the Emmys, which will be broadcast on ABC and hosted by Jimmy Kimmel.[ Primetime Emmy Awards 2016: The Nominees ]Executives in the television industry are aware of the declines and are wondering if they are part of the cyclical rise and fall of awards shows, or if people’s ever-changing viewing habits are finally affecting the ratings for these three- to four-hour, commercial-loaded TV events.“What prompts these trends?” said Don Mischer, the longtime TV-event producer who is overseeing this year’s Emmys. “As we’ve gone through time, there is so much more content available that the pieces of the pie are getting smaller and smaller.”57 PhotosView Slide Show ›Left and center: Jordan Strauss/Invision, via Associated Press; right: Lucy Nicholson/ReutersThat’s one theory: that viewers are instead turning to an ever-expanding list of options instead of habitually tuning in to the Oscars or Emmys. Another is that with a growing number of awards programs, viewer fatigue is setting in. Yet another is that at a time when services like Netflix provide programming without commercials, the prospect of watching a prolonged awards show riddled with ads seems like too much to endure. It doesn’t hurt that highlights from an awards show that happened the night before are always just a click away.“There are so many things fighting for your time, and live TV, even for live events, is fairly inefficient,” said Rich Greenfield, an analyst at BTIG, a financial-services firm. “Our tolerance for commercials and high-ad loads is disappearing. Once you started to binge watch, it’s just hard to go back to any form of live-linear TV unless you’re an absolute die-hard fan.”Finding an answer is critical for an industry that is desperately trying to maintain an ad-supported business model. Big live events that drive viewership and provoke engagement — on social media in real time, and in offices the day after — are a crucial component of that strategy.Executives point out that awards shows have long been prone to seesaw ratings, with any number of factors affecting their appeal. For the Oscars, viewership is often dictated by whether a series of blockbusters, or movies with big-name stars, were nominated for best picture. For other awards, the competition that night — whether it’s an N.F.L. playoff game that goes into overtime or a hit like “The Walking Dead” — can dictate an up year or a down year.The television critics James Poniewozik, Mike Hale and Neil Genzlinger evaluate the 2016 Primetime Emmy nominations.Some live events like sports continue to deliver strong numbers (even if the opening N.F.L. prime-time games this year dropped in the ratings, and the Olympics failed to deliver the same audience highs it did four years ago). This year’s presidential debates may set viewership records, coming off a primary debate season that shattered many cable news ratings records.And though awards show ratings are down from where they were a couple of years ago, the numbers are still high. The Golden Globes viewership in January was bigger than what it was drawing earlier this decade; the Grammys did better than 10 years ago. And for all the declines, the Tonys hit a 15-year viewership high in June, no doubt propelled by the popularity of “Hamilton.”Still, the trends among the major awards programs are noticeable. After experiencing an unexpected rise in viewership — the Oscars and the Globes had strong gains in 2012 through 2014, and the Emmys had a bump in 2011 through 2013 — awards shows appeared to be finding new life. Some argued that social media platforms like Twitter spurred the growth, as the shows provided viewers a shared cultural experience.But in the last two years, the gains have stopped. The Oscars went from an audience of 43.7 million in 2014 to 34.3 million this year. The Golden Globes went from a total of 20.9 million viewers in 2014 to 18.5 million this year. The Grammys went from 28.5 million viewers two years ago to 25 million this year. And the Emmys went from an audience of 17.6 million in 2013 to 11.9 million last year. There are similar trend lines for many other awards programs, with big highs from a couple of years ago eroding by the millions.“Perhaps the outlier was the growth in viewership,” said Michael Nathanson, an analyst at MoffettNathanson. “Maybe this is just the reality now.”Dan Donnelly, a managing director at Publicis Media, said that even if ratings continue to fall, big live events still deliver an audience that few programs can match, and so might remain attractive to advertisers.“Even with that decline, if someone tells you, ‘Oh, you can advertise in an environment with 18, 25 or 30 million viewers, even if they used to have 45 or 50 million,’ well, then wow, that’s still a great place to play,” he said.The average price for a 30-second commercial also remains steady, according to Kantar Media. The Oscars charged $1.7 million for a 30-second spot this year, higher than three years ago, and the Globes charged $575,000, compared with $425,000 in 2013. The Super Bowl, of course, far surpasses other events, attracting $5 million for a 30-second spot.There is also hope within ABC that it is better positioned than Fox (last year’s Emmy network) to provide a promotional push — through Mr. Kimmel’s late-night show and “Good Morning America” — that could position the show for higher ratings this year.The Emmys present an unusually intriguing case study: They are dedicated to honoring an industry that’s never been bigger or filled with more celebrated shows, but those shows also don’t attract big audiences, Mr. Mischler said, at least compared with Emmy winners of years past.Producers for the show said they have had to take special care to introduce a growing supply of shows and actors to viewers who might never have watched or heard of them.“Each year, there are more nominations of shows and actors that an increasing number of viewers at home are unfamiliar with,” Mr. Mischer said. “We will go on the air Sunday night, and how many of viewers across the country are familiar with ‘Portlandia’”?Or, as Mr. Nathanson, the analyst put it: “Amazon won an Emmy for ‘Transparent’ last year. Most people haven’t seen it.”Advertisement