AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressShoppers in the United States took a step back in August, cutting their spending on cars, furniture and building materials to bring down total retail sales after four straight months of gains.The Commerce Department said on Thursday that retail sales fell 0.3 percent in August, a sign of caution in American consumers.Rising incomes and job growth have trickled into consumer spending, supporting economic growth even as a strong dollar and low energy prices have hurt the United States industrial sector. Over the first eight months of the year, retail sales rose 2.9 percent compared with that period in 2015.“The underlying fundamentals for the consumer remain quite strong,” said Stephen Stanley, chief economist at Amherst Pierpont. “That makes August’s clunker of a report a little hard to explain.”Mr. Stanley noted that the decline in retail sales might reflect some doldrums before the presidential election and that sales reports in the next few months would be critical.Still, consumers clearly appeared to pause in August. Spending on building material and furniture dipped, though home sales have been healthy in recent months. Auto dealers reported declining sales ahead of the new model year. Sales also fell at gas stations, largely reflecting the lower price of oil. Even online and catalog sales, a sector that usually posts strong gains, slipped.Not all categories declined. Back-to-school shopping appeared to bolster sales of clothing. And spending at restaurants and grocery stores also improved.The solid retail spending of previous months had defied the anemic economic growth in the first half of 2016. Retail sales seemed to largely track a robust pace of hiring, which similarly went against the slowing pace of overall economic growth.The unemployment rate remains a healthy 4.9 percent. And monthly job gains have averaged 232,000 since June, an indication that many employers expect growth to pick up.More Americans are also finally enjoying solid income gains. The median household income jumped 5.2 percent last year to an inflation-adjusted level of $56,516, the Census Bureau said on Tuesday. It was the largest annual increase since 1967, when the government started reporting the data.Still, the durable but sluggish recovery means that incomes have not yet fully recovered from the recession. The median household still earns 1.6 percent less than it did in 2007, before the downturn struck.Advertisement