By AMIE TSANGSEPT. 15, 2016
When DealBook reported that Wells Fargo had been fined for thousands of its employees opening accounts without customers’ consent, one of our readers wrote to ask what comes next legally for the lender.It looks as if we just got the answer: The bank has received subpoenas from three different United States attorneys’ offices in the last week.The subpoenas raise the prospect that the investigation (which is in its early stages) could lead to criminal charges, but prosecutors could also still handle the investigation as a civil fraud matter, which would require a lower burden of proof.Wells Fargo executives have continued to deny regulators’ assertions that it was the bank’s incentive system and culture that encouraged the misdeeds.AdvertisementYou’ll hear more from the lender’s chief executive, John Stumpf, when he testifies before the Senate Banking Committee on Tuesday.AdvertisementDemocrats have said that they are keen to know whether top executives condoned the behavior.Global agriculture is in a wrenching downturn. Farmers have produced too much corn, wheat and soybeans. That has forced them to slash their prices. And that, in turn, has cut into spending on seeds, pesticides and fertilizer.Agribusiness giants have tried to protect themselves by consolidating to reduce costs. But this raises the prospect of higher costs for farmers — a concern for lawmakers and regulators in Washington.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa and chairman of the Judiciary Committee, has scheduled a hearing for next week to discuss the mergers, including Bayer and Monsanto’s $66 billion tie-up.“It seems to be catching fire and happening so fast with so many,” Senator Grassley said. “When you have less competition, prices go up.”If regulators do nix the deal, Bayer will be stuck with a painful $2 billion breakup fee.If incomes are improving and poverty is down, why is Donald J. Trump’s message about economic decay still so resonant?• Real incomes are still smaller than in the late 1990s.• Large parts of the country, including rural America, are still lagging.The upswing is real, but the gains have been strongest for people living in large metropolitan areas and for those with college degrees.AdvertisementIt’ll take more widespread growth to change how people actually feel. And in any case, good news about rising incomes is unlikely to change the complexion of the presidential race.• The Commerce Department will publish data on retail sales.• The Bank of England is expected to keep interest rates steady. Read our profile of Mark J. Carney, the Canadian who is in charge of the central bank as it confronts the challenges surrounding the British vote to leave the European Union.“If the safety engineer felt unsafe, he could at any time smack down a big red button in the center console — suspiciously similar to a seat ejector switch from a James Bond film — to disengage from self-driving mode.”— Mike Isaac of The New York Times describes a trip in a self-driving Uber.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.