By BROOKS BARNESSEPT. 15, 2016
LOS ANGELES — By making it easy for people to buy movie tickets online or through a smartphone app, Fandango has experienced breakneck growth over the last two years. A couple of taps and presto! The seats are yours.But that, Fandango has decided, is no longer good enough.To keep growing — and, with any luck, help theaters and studios entice Americans, particularly young ones, to go to the movies at all — Fandango will alter course. Instead of relying on customers to come to it, Fandango will also go to them: Over the weekend, for instance, Fandango will begin selling tickets to Hollywood movies directly on Facebook.In a first, Facebook users in the United States (only a portion initially) will be able to buy tickets — without leaving their news feeds — to coming films like “The Magnificent Seven,” starring Denzel Washington and Chris Pratt; “Storks,” a Warner Bros. animated movie; and the comedy concert movie “Kevin Hart: What Now?” While tested in rudimentary ways in the past, a robust, continual melding of movie ticket purchases with Facebook’s vast audience has never been done before, Paul Yanover, Fandango’s president, said.“It’s not just about purchasing ease, it’s also about bringing along groups of people,” Mr. Yanover said. “Hey, we’re going to see this movie. Why don’t you come along? Great. Boom. Done.”AdvertisementJulie Ask, an analyst with Forrester who was privately briefed by Fandango on its plans, offered an enthusiastic appraisal.Advertisement“Consumers, particularly young ones, find it inconvenient to hop into different silos to get something done,” she said. “They want it all in one place. That sounds obnoxious, I know — the definition of a ‘first-world problem’ — but it’s true, and Fandango is solving it for them.”Facebook represents only one area of expansion for Fandango, which NBCUniversal owns. On Tuesday, Fandango began allowing users of Apple’s enhanced iPhone messaging app to buy tickets without leaving a texting conversation. Anyone using Apple’s new iOS 10 operating system can tap on a Fandango applet while on the Messages page. Posters for films playing in theaters pop up. Tapping a poster brings up a display of nearby theaters and showtimes, along with purchasing options.A Fandango interface designed for Snapchat (again, allowing users to buy tickets without toggling between apps or leaving the platform) is on the way. “This is about Fandango appearing in these environments in an organic, natural way — the way people communicate with each other now, the way they actually discover, plan and buy,” Mr. Yanover said.Although Mr. Yanover is not ready to show his full hand, he said in an interview at Fandango headquarters that additional offerings were in the works. Might Fandango, for instance, introduce ticket-buying on YouTube, where it operates a popular channel, Movieclips, stocked with trailers and snippets of old films? Mr. Yanover smiled, but declined to comment.Social networks are crucial marketing tools for Hollywood, but actually acquiring customers has remained an elusive goal, in part because companies like Facebook have been more focused on other priorities. But that is changing. “There is now an arms race to offer more and more services and keep people in their environments longer,” Ms. Ask said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Anything that increases ticket sales is likely to be warmly embraced by studio executives and theater buyers, who have been fighting to keep moviegoing relevant as in-home entertainment options proliferate. About 513 million people went to the movies over the summer, a 3.5 percent decline compared with a year earlier, according to studio data. For the year so far, attendance is up about 1.2 percent.“The social aspect of what Fandango is doing is really important for Hollywood,” said Paul Dergarabedian, a senior media analyst at comScore. “Most people do not go to the movies alone, and there is the potential here to turn a two-ticket purchase into a four-ticket purchase.”Fandango is facing competition from a start-up called Atom Tickets. Incubated by Lionsgate, with additional financing from Disney and 21st Century Fox, Atom has promoted itself as a way for theaters and studios to increase group sales by making it easier for friends to plan outings. The Atom app, introduced this year, has also made discounts, particularly for less popular showtimes, part of its mission, along with concession stand preorders.But Fandango is the giant in this segment of the industry, servicing about 27,700 movie screens in the United States and growing quickly. So far this year, ticketing revenue is up 51 percent compared with the same period last year, according to a Fandango spokesman. In 2015, Fandango grew by 81 percent. About 70 percent of Fandango tickets are sold on mobile devices.Advertisement“We’re really proud of our growth, and people will still come to us, but we’ve spent a lot of time watching how movie discovery and planning is changing,” Mr. Yanover said. “And I think these offerings we are unveiling are an important shift, not just for Fandango, but for Hollywood as a whole.”A version of this article appears in print on September 16, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Buy Movie Tickets on Facebook? Fandango Will Make It Possible.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.