
Breakingviews By                     
DOMINIC ELLIOTT

SEPT. 16, 2016
Markets are usually unforgiving to lenders with skimpy capital positions. But Deutsche Bank’s frailty could help it bargain with the United States Justice Department over a potential settlement for charges related to its mortgage securities business.The Justice Department’s opening salvo of a penalty of $14 billion, or 12.5 billion euros, could all but sink Deutsche Bank. The bank, Germany’s largest lender by assets, had legal provisions of €5.5 billion at the end of June. But only €4 billion of that is earmarked for regulatory enforcement, including claims that trades by Russians broke sanctions as well as other cases.Suppose Deutsche Bank has put away €3 billion for this settlement with Washington. If it paid as much as the Justice Department has proposed, its Tier 1 capital as a proportion of risk-weighted assets could fall below 9 percent — a perilously low level given changes in regulations are set to erode all banks’ Tier 1 ratios.Like its peers, the German bank may be able to haggle with United States authorities. Citigroup paid $7 billion to settle a host of mortgage-related charges, though the Justice Department had first sought $12 billion, according to Reuters. And Deutsche itself paid $1.9 billion to settle a separate civil case over mortgage securities in 2013.AdvertisementThe Justice Department may try to play hardball. Many regulators believe Deutsche Bank to be among the worst of the offenders, involved in almost every industry scandal as well as several idiosyncratic ones. It has also been slow to bring its compliance up to scratch.But the steadfast refusal by Deutsche Bank’s chief executive to raise equity could, in the end, bolster the bank’s negotiating position. A fine of much more than $7.5 billion would push Deutsche Bank’s Tier 1 capital ratio below the psychologically important threshold of 10 percent, on Reuters Breakingviews calculations. That could raise market alarm given that the International Monetary Fund has reckoned Deutsche Bank is the world’s most systemically risky bank.AdvertisementA big, painful penalty may well be in the offing. But when it comes to negotiating over the final bill, Deutsche Bank’s weakness could actually be a strength.Dominic Elliott is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »