AdvertisementSupported byBy Niraj ChokshiAn F.B.I. agent did not violate the agency’s undercover policy by posing as a journalist nearly a decade ago during an investigation, a federal watchdog has concluded, despite criticism by journalists that the practice is harmful to the news-gathering process.The finding is contained in a report released on Thursday by the Justice Department’s Office of the Inspector General. The episode involved a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent who posed as a “staff publisher” for The Associated Press in order to infiltrate the computer of a person suspected of having made repeated bomb threats to Timberline High School in Washington State.“We believe that the judgments agents made about aspects of the planned undercover activity in 2007 did not violate the undercover policies in place at the time,” the report reads.The inspector general also found that an F.B.I. policy adopted this June requiring an agent to obtain high-level approval before posing as a journalist constitutes “an important and appropriate addition” to its undercover policies.Many news media advocates disagreed with the opinion.Paul Colford, vice president of The Associated Press, said in a statement that the findings “effectively condone” the agency’s impersonation of journalists.“Such action compromises the ability of a free press to gather the news safely and effectively and raises serious constitutional concerns,” he said.Neema Singh Guliani, an American Civil Liberties Union lawyer, also criticized the F.B.I.’s undercover policies, calling the agency’s hacking practices “a virtual black box.”“We don’t know how often the F.B.I. hacks, what techniques they use, or the possible impact on third parties,” she said in a statement.Local police officers initially tracked the emailed threats to Italy and the Czech Republic, but sought additional assistance because they believed that the threats did not originate in either country.The F.B.I. joined the investigation and ultimately decided to try to track the suspect by infiltrating his computer. To do that, an agent, posing as a fictional A.P. staff publisher, Norm Weatherill, emailed the suspect with a link to a fake news story, which would infect the suspect’s device with tracking software.The agent wrote:I respect that you do not want to be bothered by the Press. Please let me explain my actions.I am not trying to find out your true identity. As a member of the Press, I would rather not know who you are as writers are not allowed to reveal their sources.The school has continually requested that the Press NOT cover this story. After the School Meeting last night, it is obvious to me that this needs coverage.Readers find this type of story fascinating. People don’t understand your actions and we are left to guess what message you are trying to send ...The suspect clicked the link, allowing the F.B.I. eventually to identify him as a 15-year-old sophomore at the school. He was expelled and sentenced to 90 days of juvenile detention and two years each of supervised release, mental health counseling and probation.The digital tracking approach was exposed in a July 2007 Wired magazine story, while the agent’s impersonation was revealed seven years later after The Seattle Times and the Electronic Frontier Foundation obtained emails from the investigation through a Freedom of Information Act request.At the time, a lawyer for The Associated Press wrote to then-Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. criticizing the practice as threatening the news agency’s credibility and undermining the independence of the free press.About two dozen media organizations and publications, including The New York Times, wrote a separate letter to Mr. Holder and the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, expressing “deep concern” over the reports.“The utilization of news media as a cover for delivery of electronic surveillance software is unacceptable,” they wrote in the letter shepherded by the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press. “This practice endangers the media’s credibility and creates the appearance that it is not independent of the government.”In a letter to the editor published by The Times, Mr. Comey defended the practice as “proper and appropriate.”“Only the suspect was fooled, and it led to his arrest and the end of a frightening period for a high school,” he said.In the end, the inspector general’s office concluded that the impersonation did not violate undercover policies and issued only three recommendations, none of which would lead to a discontinuation of the practice.Advertisement