AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanLet me get this straight: Some 5,300 employees and managers at Wells Fargo’s retail banking division knowingly opened millions of unauthorized accounts in the names of their customers, are rightly fired as a result, but the senior executives at the bank responsible for them and their reprehensible behavior are not? What year is this? 1928? 2007? Or is this 2016, eight years after the crucible moments leading up to one of the worst financial crises in our collective lifetimes?Come on, if you can’t mete out even a modicum of justice in a situation as blatant as this, then you deserve all the Elizabeth Warren you get.By Wall Street standards, the Wells Fargo fiasco is minor in terms of dollar amounts. According to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the employees opened something like 1.5 million unauthorized deposit accounts in the name of unsuspecting customers and made 565,000 unauthorized credit card applications, generating $2.6 million in fees and enabling the employees to qualify for bonuses. Wells agreed to pay $185 million to settle with the regulator, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the City and County of Los Angeles.Before this behavior was widely publicized earlier this month, Wells Fargo, based in San Francisco, was one of the most respected financial institutions in the country, viewed as a kindly, exceedingly well-run neighborhood-oriented bank with only modest aspirations for the rough-and-tumble world of Wall Street investment banking. That kind of folksy appeal attracted the attention of the billionaire investor Warren E. Buffett and his company, Berkshire Hathaway, the bank’s largest investor, with a 10 percent stake. Mr. Buffett’s imprimatur helped make Wells Fargo the nation’s most valuable bank.But like Wall Street firms, Wells Fargo had an incentive system that rewarded “cross-selling,” which is banking lingo for selling more and more products to the same customer. So, a checking account customer would be offered a Wells Fargo credit card, or a home-equity loan, or a mortgage. You get the idea.Wells Fargo employees got big bonuses for cross-selling. That is typical on Wall Street of course, which is not to say it is a good thing. (In fact, the Wall Street compensation system remains deeply flawed.) But somehow, 5,300 of these Wells employees thought it was perfectly fine to open deposit and credit card accounts for millions of customers at the bank without their permission or authorization. They then could claim a new account had been opened, satisfy their sales quotas and collect a bigger bonus. Nice work if you can get it — and entirely illegal, unethical and unacceptable. It is also a symptom of the wider cultural cancer that has pervaded Wall Street for decades. (Three separate United States attorneys have issued subpoenas to the bank seeking more information about the wrongdoing.)Carrie Tolstedt, the divisional senior vice president for community banking, was the person responsible for Wells’s 6,000 branches where the infractions took place. When she retired, quietly, in July, the bank knew that her operation had been under scrutiny for sales tactics for more than a year. Ms. Tolstedt spent 27 years at Wells Fargo, and was no doubt steeped in the bank’s culture. In the last three years, she was paid a total of $27 million. She remains employed at the bank until the end of the year. When she leaves, she will probably be able to take with her nearly $125 million in stock and options, her reward for longevity and seniority. But where’s the accountability?That is basically the question that Jim Cramer put to John G. Stumpf, Wells Fargo’s chairman and chief executive, in an interview on CNBC on Tuesday. He asked Mr. Stumpf why Wells Fargo did not “claw back” Ms. Tolstedt’s compensation and accrued stock. It is the right question and the bank should do exactly that, because this is the precise situation where such clawback provisions are relevant. But Mr. Stumpf deflected. “Jim, to the extent that’s a consideration, there’s a board process,” Mr. Stumpf said.When Mr. Cramer asked Mr. Stumpf a second time, Mr. Stumpf served up another helping of the same corporate pablum. Incredibly, Mr. Stumpf also used the tired excuse that a couple of bad apples will not spoil the whole bunch. He said Wells Fargo had 100,000 employees in its branch banking and retail division at any given time and that every year on average for the last five years, 1,000 of them “didn’t get it right. But I have to say, the vast majority did do it right doing the right thing every day.”Had Mr. Stumpf spoken with Mr. Buffett, Mr. Cramer asked? Berkshire owns more than 500 million shares of Wells Fargo. At the end of 2015, that stake was worth $27.2 billion, one of the most successful of Mr. Buffett’s “Big Four” investments, along with his stakes in American Express, Coca-Cola and IBM. He has lost nearly $1.6 billion on his Wells Fargo investment since the news broke about the scandal. Mr. Stumpf would not answer the question.Mr. Cramer also asked Mr. Stumpf about his own responsibility for the mess, and the response was more corporate pablum. “To the extent we don’t get it right 100 percent of the time, because that’s our goal,” Mr. Stumpf said. “If we don’t make that plan, I’m responsible. I’m accountable,” he added. “Anybody else in the company, we all feel when we fall short of that plan, we feel accountable and responsible and we’re taking action.”Should Mr. Stumpf resign, Mr. Cramer asked? “Jim, I think the best thing I can do right now is lead this company and lead this company forward,” the chief executive said.Actually, Mr. Stumpf, that is not true. The best thing you can do your company, your shareholders and your country is to resign. You have presided over a poisonous culture where, incredibly, 5,300 employees thought it was perfectly fine to cheat their own customers to get themselves a bigger bonus. That is simply unacceptable behavior, as you will no doubt hear in spades on Tuesday when you testify before Congress about the scandal.Advertisement