AdvertisementSupported byBy Vinod Sreeharsha and Dan HorchRIO DE JANEIRO — With its chief executive in jail, BTG Pactual tried to calm investors on Friday, saying that it would cooperate with any investigation.The Brazilian investment bank also sought to distance itself from the executive, André Esteves, who has been its driving force, not to mention its largest shareholder.The bank’s interim chief executive, Persio Arida, on Friday sent a letter to clients, saying, “We continue running BTG Pactual and its businesses as we have always done.”He highlighted the bank’s financial strength and emphasized that “BTG Pactual, as everyone is aware, is not the target of any investigation or accusation.”Yet questions remain on how the bank will weather the crisis. Mr. Esteves, who built BTG Pactual into the dominant investment bank in Brazil, was arrested on Wednesday on accusations of obstruction of justice in a broad investigation into corruption involving the state-owned oil giant Petrobras.Shares of BTG Pactual have tumbled more than 26 percent in trading in São Paulo since the news of the arrest. In a research note, Goldman said that a prolonged absence of Mr. Esteves “would most likely hamper the bank’s ability to retain private banking and asset management clients, affect cost and availability of funding and hurt investment banking origination.”Luis Miguel Santacreu, a financial sector analyst for the Brazilian credit ratings agency Austin Rating, said, “The risk isn’t to BTG’s balance sheet, just to its reputation, but reputation for a bank is everything.”In an interview on Friday with the Brazilian newspaper Valor Econômico, Mr. Arida acknowledged that Mr. Esteves “was always the most emblematic face of the bank.” He noted that “all the partners always found it convenient for the bank to be associated with a face.”But he added: “The people who run the bank are the partners. The bank is much bigger than any emblematic figure.”While BTG Pactual towers over others when it comes to deal-making — it is the top merger adviser in Brazil, with 36.5 percent of the market, according to Dealogic — it is just Brazil’s seventh-largest bank as measured by assets. The country’s banking system is highly concentrated in the big four: Banco do Brasil, Itaú, Caixa Econômica Federal and Bradesco. BTG Pactual is only about a sixth the size of the fourth-largest bank, Bradesco.And analysts say that there are unlikely to be any ripple effects from the crisis at BTG Pactual.“We don’t see any systemic risk from BTG,” said Gilberto Tonello, banking sector analyst with the brokerage GBM Corretora in São Paulo, noting that the bank’s credit portfolio is only about $13 billion.Edwin Gutierrez, head of emerging markets sovereign at Aberdeen Asset Management, agreed, saying, “I don’t think there’s going to be any systemic implications.”This week, BTG Pactual tried to project that it was business as usual at the bank. The same day that its board named Mr. Arida as the interim head, the bank announced a share buyback and kept investor events previously scheduled for wealth management clients.An executive at BTG Pactual, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said in an interview that 350 people attended the event on Wednesday in Rio de Janeiro and 450 attended one in São Paulo.So far there are no signs of a loss of confidence. A head trader of a rival São Paulo asset manager said that BTG’s proprietary trading operations, which are its biggest source of revenue, were operating normally.BTG Pactual has also sought to dispel market rumors that it would now have to be sold.The BTG Pactual executive when asked about a potential sale said, “No, we are not considering that. Not at all.”The bank’s fundamentals remain strong. It posted a net profit of 1.51 billion reais ($381 million) in the third quarter, and has $58 billion in assets under management as of the end of the third quarter.Still, news of the arrest clearly rattled Brazil’s financial industry. Mr. Esteves is accused of colluding with Delcídio do Amaral, a leading senator from President Dilma Rousseff’s Workers’ Party, to offer a star witness millions to flee the country and keep him from signing a plea agreement with prosecutors.Beyond the question of whether the accusations against Mr. Esteves will be proved is whether the investigation will be limited to Mr. Esteves, as BTG has assets in oil and gas, including in companies affected by the corruption investigation. The bank also acquired Petrobras assets in Africa in a deal that raised some eyebrows.Yet, if the scandal stays limited to Mr. Esteves, the bank’s stocks and bonds, which have fallen sharply since the arrest, would probably recover, Mr. Santacreu of Austin Rating said.“It’s a very solid bank. And other banks here are providing it with lines of credit in case it needs the liquidity.”Vinod Sreeharsha reported from Rio de Janeiro, and Dan Horch reported from São Paulo, Brazil.Advertisement