By BROOKS BARNESSEPT. 16, 2016
LOS ANGELES — The Disney ABC Television Group, grappling with industrywide upheaval in viewing and delivery, on Friday moved to reinforce its senior management team.Bruce Rosenblum, who formerly served as the No. 1 television executive at Warner Bros., will join the Disney ABC Television Group as president of business operations. Disney said in a news release that Mr. Rosenblum would oversee global distribution, digital media, strategy and other departments for networks that include ABC, Disney Channel, Freeform and Disney XD. (ESPN will not be part of his portfolio.)Mr. Rosenblum, 58, who left Warner in 2013 after being publicly passed over for the chairman job at that studio, will report to Ben Sherwood, 52, president of the Disney ABC Television Group. Mr. Sherwood, who helped produce the movie “Charlie St. Cloud” before joining Disney, said in an interview that he would spend more time on “creative” matters, which is Hollywood shorthand for series conception and execution.“This will free me up to focus more of my energy on making great shows,” Mr. Sherwood said in a telephone interview. He added, however, that he would not delve too far into the nitty-gritty. He will not sit in on pitch meetings, for instance, or give specific feedback on scripts — “notes” in television parlance.AdvertisementMr. Sherwood called Mr. Rosenblum “a powerful and influential leader and partner” and praised his “terrific interpersonal skills.” Mr. Rosenblum, who has recently been serving as chairman of the Television Academy, a volunteer position, said that he began discussing the job in June with a corporate recruiter. “I said, ‘That’s exactly what I want to do,’” Mr. Rosenblum recalled. “I’m looking forward to partnering with Ben.”Although his predecessor, Anne Sweeney, did the job without a top lieutenant, Mr. Sherwood is facing enormous challenges as viewers — particularly the young ones Disney courts — watch more television in nontraditional ways, including on their phones. Increasing numbers of consumers are reducing the number of channels that they receive or going without a cable hookup entirely.AdvertisementEstablishing a more “efficient and effective operating structure” became a priority, Mr. Sherwood said, because of “the complexities of the marketplace.”A version of this article appears in print on September 17, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Disney Hires Executive To Shore Up  TV Division.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.