

      By BINYAMIN APPELBAUM and 
    
KEVIN GRANVILLE

UPDATED December 2, 2016

 The Federal Reserve looks ready to raise interest rates.  When the Fed increased its benchmark interest rate last December after keeping it near zero for seven years, Fed officials were in general agreement that they might raise rates as many as four times in 2016. Instead, they are likely to increase them for the first time this year at their final meeting of 2016, on Dec. 13 and 14.  Economic growth remains slow and steady, but Fed officials are increasingly convinced that’s good enough. Their concerns about moving too soon are giving way to worries about waiting too long.   Those worries have intensified since Donald J. Trump’s election. Investors are betting Mr. Trump will collaborate with Congress on tax cuts and other measures that could increase economic growth. He has also proposed new barriers to imports, which could drive up inflation.    Fed officials have emphasized that they still expect to raise rates slowly. Almost every year since the financial crisis has brought fresh predictions of faster growth, followed by disappointment. Fed officials have increasingly concluded that the world itself has changed. Slow productivity growth is weighing on global economic growth. Officials no longer expect to return interest rates to precrisis levels.    But they are ready to move rates a little higher. The Fed is currently holding its benchmark rate in a range between 0.25 percent and 0.5 percent. Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, told Congress in November that a rate increase “could well become appropriate relatively soon.”  During an economic recovery, the number of people who can’t find work gradually dwindles. Employers start chasing applicants. Wages start to rise. And the Fed, worried about inflation, starts raising interest rates to prevent the economy from overheating.More than seven years into the current recovery, the unemployment rate fell to 4.6 percent in November, a historically normal level, but the rest of the picture doesn’t look quite right. The unemployment figure counts only people who are actively seeking work, but millions of adults remain on the sidelines. By keeping rates low, the Fed could draw more of those people back into the work force. But labor market conditions are tightening, wages are rising, and policy makers increasingly are worried about overheating. If the Fed were to “delay increases in the federal funds rate for too long, it could end up having to tighten policy relatively abruptly,” Ms. Yellen told Congress last month. The Fed cut its benchmark rate by five percentage points in response to the Great Recession. That is five points of stimulus, right? Well, Fed officials are increasingly convinced that it has become more like three points of stimulus.Global interest rates are in a historic swoon. The problem can be described as a glut of money or an absence of attractive investment opportunities. One consequence is a narrowing gap between the market rate and the Fed’s benchmark rate.That means the Fed is providing less stimulus than it thought, which in turn means it doesn’t need to pull back quite so quickly, since it doesn’t have as far to go. But …The Fed usually increases rates because it fears inflation, and inflation remains sluggish, in part because of the weakness of the global economy. But Fed officials have other worries. Notably, they are worried about creating future financial crises.Low rates are intended to encourage financial speculation. But too much risk-taking is not a good thing. And the longer rates stay low, the greater the risks. Fed officials have highlighted some areas, like commercial real estate, but they are also worried about the problems they cannot see. After all, the next crisis usually comes from a different place than the last one.This fear of the unknown has become a major argument for moving more quickly to raise the benchmark rate. But mistiming a rate increase has consequences. If the Fed moves too soon, it could derail what remains of the economic expansion. If it waits too long, it could be forced to hit the brakes even harder.20%Paul A.VolckerAlanGreenspanJanet L.Yellen15Each Fedchairman’stenureBen S.Bernanke1050’80’85’90’95’00’05’10’1520%Paul A.VolckerAlanGreenspanBen S.BernankeJanet L.Yellen15Each Fedchairman’stenure1050’80’85’90’95’00’05’10’1520%Paul A.VolckerAlanGreenspanBen S.BernankeJanet L.Yellen15Each Fedchairman’stenure1050’80’85’90’95’00’05’10’1520%Paul A.VolckerAlanGreenspanBen S.BernankeJanet L.Yellen15Each Fedchairman’stenure1050’80’85’90’95’00’05’10’15It seems like a distant fever: In the late 1970s and early ’80s, energy prices soared and the inflation rate rose into the double digits, spiking at nearly 15 percent. To bring inflation under control, Paul A. Volcker, as Fed chairman, pushed the benchmark rate up to 20 percent (and home buyers looking for a 30-year fixed mortgage paid up to 18 percent). The higher rates plunged the economy into a deep recession. Since then, inflation has fallen sharply, but the economy has had a harder time delivering broad-based prosperity as inequality has widened and incomes for most Americans have stagnated. This pattern has continued even as the United States has slowly recovered from the collapse of the housing market and the subsequent financial crisis. Fed officials, like sailors trying to make headway on a windless sea, have resorted to a number of extraordinary measures, including pumping trillions of dollars into the banking system and leaving short-term rates near zero for years, in an effort to revive the economy. But the Fed’s inability to restore growth to historical levels has exposed shortcomings in current macroeconomic theory and set off a vigorous debate over how to navigate a changing economic environment. Putting the United States in a global frame, Ms. Yellen, in a speech in August, discussed the “marked decline” in the interest rate levels necessary to bring about maximum employment and output. The reasons are varied, she said: a slowdown in population growth in many countries, smaller productivity gains and a “decreased propensity to spend” because of various financial crises around the world since the late 1990s. But in an admission that underscored the Fed’s difficult position, she expressed how challenging it is to see into the future.“Our understanding of the forces driving long-run trends in interest rates is nevertheless limited,” she said, “and thus all predictions in this area are highly uncertain.”For more background and perspectives on the Fed and the United States economy, from The Times and elsewhere:+ “Divided Fed Holds Interest Rates Steady but Notes Improving Economy,” on the outcome of the Fed’s September meeting, and Janet Yellen’s comments afterward. + Minutes from the Fed’s Nov. 1-2 meeting.+ “What Happens When the Fed Raises Rates, in One Rube Goldberg Machine,” a whimsical, enlightening video from The Upshot.+ “Why Are Interest Rates So Low?” an essay by Ben S. Bernanke, the former Fed chairman. (Brookings.edu)+ “Labor and Inflation Complicate Plans to Raise Rates, Yellen Explains,” about a wide-ranging speech that Ms. Yellen gave in October. + “Changes in Labor Participation and Household Income,” a look at some reasons why fewer people are looking for work, from the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. (Frbsf.org)+ “A History of Fed Leaders and Interest Rates,” ranging from Paul Volcker to Janet Yellen. Advertisement