AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsHoward E. Butt Jr., a billionaire heir apparent to his family’s Texas supermarket empire, who gave up the business to spread a Christian message about the dignity of work and its nexus with faith and built a nationwide following, died on Sept. 11 at his home in San Antonio. He was 89.The cause was complications of Parkinson’s disease, his wife, Barbara Dan Butt, said.Mr. Butt advocated a role for the laity in improving the world through personal renewal within the professions, the family and the local church.“Christianity that does not change us in our homes will never change the world,” he said. “Church work is done wherever we have excellence in our work that exhibits love for the people we are working with.”As the eldest son of the founder, Mr. Butt inherited the leadership of the supermarket chain H-E-B, which, with close to 380 stores, 96,000 employees and more than $23 billion in annual sales, is the largest private employer and family-owned company in Texas. It began as a mom-and-pop grocery owned by his paternal grandmother.Forbes magazine has listed the Butts as America’s 23rd-richest family, with $11 billion split among five relatives.But Mr. Butt, a Southern Baptist, who as a college student and lay minister had led a Christian youth revival movement, wrestled with the dual pressures of the business and his spiritual pursuits. That struggle led to severe depression, which he later discussed openly.In the 1960s, he gave up the vice presidency of day-to-day operations at H-E-B and ceded the role to his brother, Charles. In 1982, Howard Butt became the company’s vice chairman and president of the H.E. Butt Family Foundation, which was founded by his mother as a philanthropy for underprivileged children. He expanded it to support hospitals, libraries and Christian retreats that integrated religious faith and business leadership.At the same time, he continued to encourage the evangelical movement to engage other Christians, even those unaffiliated with a particular church. In 2000, he began giving a one-minute radio homily, a segment he titled “The High Calling of Our Daily Life,” which highlighted the role that faith has played in the successful careers and personal lives of ordinary people. His homilies were carried on 3,000 stations in every state, reaching millions of listeners.Howard Edward Butt Jr. was born to Howard Sr. and the former Mary Elizabeth Holdsworth on Sept. 8, 1927, in Kerrville, in the Texas Hill Country, about 65 miles northwest of San Antonio. His paternal grandfather had moved the family there from Tennessee for his health — he had tuberculosis — and his grandmother founded the store below their apartment.Howard Sr. had served on President John F. Kennedy’s Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity and was also a Southern Baptist lay minister.Shortly after graduating from Baylor University in Waco in 1947 with a degree in business, Mr. Butt married Barbara Dan Gerber. Besides her, he is survived by their sons, Howard III and Stephen; their daughter, Deborah Dan Rogers; his brother, Charles; his sister, Eleanor Butt Crook; eight grandchildren; and one great-granddaughter.By age 12, Howard Jr. was a supermarket cashier, and in 1948, a year after graduating from college, he was managing his own store. But at Baylor, inspired by a youth revival he had joined, he became a lay evangelical minister. His competing priorities precipitated a nervous breakdown.“I had been living my whole life with Dad wanting me to be part of the company,” The San Antonio Express-News quoted him as saying.In his 1996 book, “Renewing America’s Soul: A Spiritual Psychology for Home, Work and Nation,” Mr. Butt wrote: “There are certain circles where to be really ‘in’ you need your own psychiatrist. In case you might not be aware, Baptist evangelism is not one of those circles.”He saw a psychiatrist, he said, but a conversation with his brother proved invaluable.“In a sudden exhibition of grace in my life, my brother, Charles, and I talked about our dreams,” he told an interviewer in 2007. “I dreamed of doing something long-term in lay renewal. Charles dreamed of doing great things in the grocery business.”By the 1960s, he had quit the family company to devote full time to his spiritual agenda.Advertisement