AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangMutual funds that mimic the strategies of hedge funds — the so-called liquid alternatives sector — were the hottest investments a few years ago. And, despite lagging returns and setbacks at several funds, retail investors have continued to stick with them.This could all be about to change, though.In the last five months, investors have pulled $5.1 billion from liquid alts. Even the market leader has been unable to shake off lackluster performance.Why then, after sticking with them for so long, are investors finally turning around?Because “painting with a broad brush, performance has really been underwhelming, and fees are probably still too high,” according to Jason Kephart, an alternative investments analyst at Morningstar.The other issue is that they are sold as an alternative to risky and richly-priced stocks and bonds.“Nobody is calling their broker and saying ‘I would like a mutli-alternatives fund or a managed futures fund,’ ” says Doug Black, the found of Aronson SpringReef, which reviews the performance of financial advisers.“It’s anti-reform. She’s layering on even more complexity.”— Douglas Holtz-Eakin, president of the American Action Forum, on how Hillary Clinton has come up with an even more complicated tax code than the one in existence.Laurence D. Fink has increased BlackRock’s assets to $5 trillion from zero. The firm has become so powerful under his leadership that it has even been suggested that BlackRock has become the new guarantor of stability, simply because of its ability to buy and sell stocks and bonds in time of duress.Perhaps most impressive, he has slipped through the grasp of regulators, successfully arguing that major fund companies like BlackRock pose no risks to markets because of their size.Mr. Fink has focused on rules-based, data-driven investment styles such as exchange-traded funds. The idea is to eliminate the potential for human error. And the firm’s risk mitigation platform, Aladdin, has played a significant role in putting this into practice.With a founder who has left such a profound imprint on the company, finding someone qualified to succeed him could become an existential question. Virtually anyone would suffer in comparison.There is a long list of possible successors, but Mr. Fink has taken pains not to tip his hand.The Justice Department has proposed that Deutsche Bank pay $14 billion to settle a mortgage securities investigation, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing people familiar with the matter.The lender is expected to push back hard, and this may not be the final penalty.“Deutsche Bank has no intent to settle these potential civil claims anywhere near the number cited,” the bank said. It has not indicated what it has set aside in anticipation of the settlement.A number of banks have already paid multibillion-dollar settlements for misleading investors about the quality of mortgage-backed securities before the financial crisis.Although The Journal reports that Deutsche Bank lawyers have suggested a much lower amount to close the investigation, it comes at a bruising time for the German lender, which is in the middle of an overhaul and was given a failing grade by American regulators.• The new iPhone 7 hits retail stores. Check out our review of the latest Apple smartphone.• The Labor Department will publish the Consumer Price Index for August, which is expected to show a slight increase.• The University of Michigan will publish its preliminary reading on consumer sentiment in October, which is expected to have improved.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement