By MICHAEL CORKERYSEPT. 18, 2016
Michel C. Bergerac, a French-born deal maker who ran the cosmetics giant Revlon for roughly a decade, diversifying its holdings before losing a battle for control of the company in 1985, died on Sept. 11 in Manhattan. He was 84.His wife, Alice, confirmed his death, which came after a long illness.Mr. Bergerac was recruited to join Revlon in 1974 by the company’s founder, Charles H. Revson.At the time, Mr. Bergerac was president of the European unit of International Telephone & Telegraph and he knew very little about perfume and makeup. But he was an astute deal maker and would use that expertise to expand Revlon beyond its core cosmetics business, transforming it into a major player in the health care industry.At Revlon, Mr. Bergerac made dozens of acquisitions, expanding the company’s reach into drugs, vision care and medical diagnostics. By 1984, health care was a major driver of Revlon’s profits.Advertisement“The most important thing is to seize a trend, and when we come in with our might it won’t matter that we weren’t the first. Everyone will think we were,” Mr. Bergerac told The New York Times in 1976.AdvertisementMr. Bergerac was also highly compensated for his day. When he agreed to come to Revlon, he was paid a $1.5 million bonus (more than $7 million in today’s dollars), earning him the nickname Bonus Baby and a spot on the covers of several newsmagazines.Mr. Bergerac was fluent in multiple languages, spoke English with a distinct French accent and brought an international flair to even the most mundane of tasks. For example, he could make “the proposal for ratification of auditors sound like an invitation to the casbah,” according to an article in The New York Times in 1975, describing one Revlon annual meeting.In 1985, Pantry Pride, a company headed by the investor Ronald O. Perelman, took control of Revlon from Mr. Bergerac in a drama that defined an era on Wall Street of corporate raiders and junk bond financing.Mr. Bergerac had tried unsuccessfully to fend off the takeover by teaming up with the investment firm Forstmann Little. But he was no match for Mr. Perelman’s Pantry Pride, a supermarket chain that was smaller than Revlon but had tapped into the bond market to finance the $2.7 billion takeover.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Here we built a great American corporation,” Mr. Bergerac said at the time. “Then through this process the stock ended up in the hands of the arbitrageurs, who forced the sale of the company.”After leaving Revlon, Mr. Bergerac ran his own investment and advisory firm in New York, M. C. Bergerac & Company.Michel Christian Bergerac was born on Feb. 13, 1932, in Biarritz, France, to Charles and Alice Bergerac. His father was a utility company executive.Mr. Bergerac studied political science and law in Paris. He was awarded a Fulbright Scholarship to study business at the University of California, Los Angeles, where he earned an M.B.A. He became an American citizen in the early 1960s.AdvertisementHe served on numerous boards, including those of CBS, Cornell Medical College and Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover.Besides his wife, there are no immediate survivors.Mr. Bergerac was an accomplished hunter, who traveled around the world in search of big game.“He was a great raconteur, who knew so much about so many things like wine and art,” said Frank A. Bennack Jr., executive vice chairman and former chief executive of Hearst, who was a friend of Mr. Bergerac. “He was a little different than your typical C.E.O.”A version of this article appears in print on September 19, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Michel C. Bergerac, 84; Made Over Revlon.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.