SEPT. 18, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.29 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.49 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.19 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:  Florida Board of Education, $140.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $175 million of debt securities. Competitive.St. Louis County, Mo., Library District, $74.5 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.AdvertisementMadison, Wis. $85.3 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing promissory notes. Competitive.AdvertisementNew York City Municipal Water Financing Authority, $200 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Alabama, $100.1 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.New York State Dormitory Authority, $1.1 billion of sales tax revenue bonds. Competitive.American Municipal Power, Ohio, $206.6 million of combined hydroelectric projects revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Berks County, Pa., $92.1 million of Kutztown Area School District general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Bexar County, Tex., Health Facilities Development Corporation, $52.3 million of army residence community bonds. Raymond James Financial.Broward County, Fla., $73.1 million of professional sports facilities tax and revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.California, $700 million of Providence St. Joseph Health Obligated Group taxable bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Central Florida Expressway Authority, $425 million of senior lien revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.AdvertisementDoylestown, Pa., $75.7 million of Doylestown Hospital revenue bonds. PNC Capital Markets.El Dorado Irrigation District, Calif., $84 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Erie County, N.Y., Industrial Development Agency, $133 million of school facility revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Farmington, N.M., $100 million of pollution control revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Georgia Private Colleges and Universities Authority, $328.8 million of Emory University revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Greensboro, N.C., $61.1 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Indiana Finance Authority, $285 million of state revolving fund program bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Johnson County, Kan., $152.3 million of Shawnee Mission Unified School District general obligation refinancing and improvement bonds. George K. Baum & Company.Lee County, Fla., School Board, $61.1 million of certificates of participation. Wells Fargo Securities.Los Gatos-Saratoga Joint Union High School District, Calif., $54 million of election of 2014 general obligation bonds. Barclays Capital.Missouri Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $125.3 million of debt securities. Goldman Sachs.AdvertisementNew Jersey Health Care Facilities Financing Authority, $228.4 million of Atlantic Health System refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.New York, $500 million of Northwell Health taxable bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Northside Independent School District, Tex., $84.2 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Samuel A. Ramirez & Company.Pennsylvania Economic Development Finance Authority, $233 million of University of Pittsburgh Medical Center revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, $649.9 million of subordinate revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Rancho California Water District Financing Authority, Calif., $115 million of fixed-rate revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Rhode Island Health and Educational Building Corporation, $139 million of Care New England hospital financing revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Texas Water Development Board, $575 million of state water implementation revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Tuolumne, Calif., Wind Project Authority, $160 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.AdvertisementTurlock, Calif., Irrigation District, $160 million of first-priority subordinate revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Vestavia Hills, Ala., Board of Education, $70 million of special tax school warrants. Citigroup Global Markets.Wisconsin, $62.7 million of petroleum inspection fee bonds. Goldman Sachs.Wisconsin Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $193 million of Marshfield Clinic Health System revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Wisconsin Housing and Economic Development Authority, $141.4 million of homeownership revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.A version of this article appears in print on September 19, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Treasury Auctions to Be Held the Week of Sept. 19.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.