By THE NEW YORK TIMESSEPT. 18, 2016
Here’s what to expect in the week ahead:BANKING INDUSTRYWells Fargo’s chief executive, John Stumpf, will face questions on Tuesday from the Senate Banking Committee over the widespread creation  of sham banking accounts and credit cards by bank employees trying to meet strict sales goals. Mr. Stumpf has said publicly that the sales were not the result of a flawed culture inside the bank. Committee members are expected to ask him why he and other top managers did not do more to stop the practices, which have gone on since at least 2013. Michael CorkeryECONOMYDespite a recovery in home prices that has helped homeowners repair their finances, house hunters still can’t find much to buy. This week, two reports will update the inventory situation: the Census Bureau’s report on new home construction, being released on Tuesday, and the National Association of Realtors’ report on existing home sales and inventory, on Thursday. Economists expect modest increases in both, but a month’s worth of data won’t change much. The ratio of listings to households is hovering near a mid-1980s low, according to Moody’s Analytics, and home construction has started leveling off. Conor DoughertyAt the beginning of the summer, it was regarded as very likely that the Federal Reserve would raise interest rates in September. There was even a brief moment in recent weeks when officials appeared to be considering the idea. But now, it seems pretty clear that the Fed will leave its benchmark rate unchanged for the sixth consecutive meeting when officials gather in Washington on Tuesday and Wednesday. The economy is growing but not overheating, and the Fed’s leadership is disinclined to intervene. A growing number of Fed officials, however, are anxious about waiting too much longer, so a rate increase later this year, probably in December, remains a distinct possibility. Binyamin AppelbaumJapan’s central bank plans to publish the results of a much-anticipated review of its monetary policies on Wednesday. Despite more aggressive efforts since 2012 to pull the economy out of deflation, consumer prices remain in a growth-sapping slump. The bank is asking why, and whether more can be done. In particular, it is re-examining its policy of charging commercial banks to keep reserves at the central bank — creating so-called negative interest rates. Introduced in January, the policy is unpopular with commercial banks because it eats into their profits, and the public is nervous that savings accounts — which still pay interest, albeit at a microscopic rate — could be the next target. Whatever the report concludes, analysts are divided about what action the Bank of Japan will take. Any sign that it is pulling back from its deflation-fighting commitments could roil markets and hurt the fragile economy. Jonathan SobleDRUG INDUSTRYMylan’s chief executive, Heather Bresch, is scheduled to testify on Wednesday before the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, where she is likely to be grilled over her company’s decision to raise the list price of the EpiPen, a severe-allergy treatment, which increased to more than $600 for a two-pack from about $100 in less than 10 years. Ms. Bresch and her company have come under intense criticism in recent weeks over the price increases of the EpiPen, and have sought to defuse the controversy by increasing the amount of patient assistance Mylan provides and by offering a cheaper generic version of the pen. Several members of Congress have demanded that the company answer questions about the price increase, but this is the first congressional hearing on the issue. Katie ThomasECONOMYEuropean Union trade ministers are to meet on Thursday and Friday in the Slovak capital of Bratislava to discuss the beleaguered Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, which would create the world’s largest trade area. The ministers are facing pressure to decide on whether to push for a deal while President Obama, who announced the start of the talks three years ago, is still in the White House. American and European trade officials have said that progress on harmonizing regulatory standards remained possible, and they have suggested that talks could eventually resume after the election in the United States. Countries like Sweden and Finland remain supportive, and the next round of negotiations has been scheduled for early October in New York. But governments and legislators in crucial countries like Germany have grown increasingly wary of the initiative. They fear a backlash from voters who distrust globalization and regard the partnership as little more than a corporate power grab. France has said it wants to halt the talks. James KanterA version of this article appears in print on September 19, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Questions for Wells Fargo, and a Meeting of the Fed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.