By BEN SISARIOSEPT. 16, 2016
A federal judge on Friday rejected a recent Justice Department ruling on music licensing in a move that was immediately hailed by the music industry as a major victory.In his decision, Judge Louis L. Stanton of the United States District Court in Manhattan said the Justice Department erred last month when it issued a detailed interpretation of a regulatory document known as a consent decree. The document has long governed Broadcast Music Inc. (BMI), a licensing agency that collects money whenever songs are publicly performed, including on the radio, on streaming services and in public places like restaurants and retail stores.After a two-year investigation, the antitrust division of the Justice Department decided that BMI and its rival performing-rights society, the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (Ascap), were required to issue so-called 100 percent licenses for the millions of songs in their catalogs. That means that even if BMI or Ascap represented only one of multiple writers of a song, the organization must be able to offer performance licenses for the whole song.The case concerns the side of the music business that deals with songwriters and publishers — not record companies and performers, whose work is covered by separate copyright laws.AdvertisementThe Justice Department’s decision was seen as a victory for broadcasters and for digital music providers like Google and Pandora. But music industry groups argued that it would result in tumult throughout the business. BMI challenged the interpretation, and this week a group of songwriters filed a separate suit over the issue.AdvertisementIn his ruling, Judge Stanton — who monitors BMI and its compliance with its consent decree, which dates to 1941 — was unequivocal that the interpretation of the Justice Department’s antitrust division was incorrect.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Nothing in the consent decree gives support to the division’s views,” Judge Stanton wrote.It was not immediately clear what effect the ruling would have in the long term. In a statement, BMI said that Judge Stanton’s order was now the controlling interpretation of its decree. But the Justice Department can appeal the decision, and a spokesman said that the agency was reviewing the order.Also unclear was the decision’s impact on Ascap, which is governed by a separate consent decree and is monitored by a different judge.As news of Judge Stanton’s decision spread throughout the songwriting world on Friday, it brought a sense of relief for a side of the business that has been buffeted by the industry’s move to streaming. Among the many concerns expressed about the Justice Department’s statement were that songwriters would be forced to change their writing habits based on the affiliations of their collaborators — the nightmare scenario, they said, was that an Ascap writer and a BMI writer would now face perplexing hurdles to working together.If Judge Stanton’s ruling stands, it should put those fears to rest, Michael O’Neill, the chief executive of BMI, said in an interview on Friday.“Now songwriters can go into writing rooms,” Mr. O’Neill said, “not feeling like they have to bring lawyers with them."A version of this article appears in print on September 19, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Rejects Justice Dept. Decision on Music Licensing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.