
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

SEPT. 19, 2016
Wells Fargo is facing a perfect storm of bad publicity and demands for changing its corporate culture after employees opened millions of fake customer accounts to hit their sales targets. The Justice Department has begun a preliminary inquiry into the bank’s conduct while its chief executive, John Stumpf, will be grilled this week by the Senate Banking Committee, including Senator Elizabeth Warren — the scourge of the big banks.Wells Fargo was sure to face criticism over the misdeeds of employees once The Los Angeles Times broke the story three years ago, detailing a hard-driving sales culture in which retail bank employees opened the accounts without customer permission to pad performance numbers. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, a relatively new regulatory agency, eventually took up an investigation and announced a $185 million settlement this month.What is unusual is that the reaction to the settlement seems to have caught Wells Fargo by surprise, as if management had no idea that it would be hit with so much scrutiny on different fronts. Unlike many companies that signal the existence of an investigation and its impending settlement in their regulatory filings, Wells Fargo did nothing to condition the market to what was going to come. Maybe that was out of a naïve belief that the size of the settlement — “only” $185 million — would not attract much attention in an era of multibillion dollar penalties.Wells Fargo’s 2015 annual report, issued in February, blandly describes other lawsuits and investigations involving the bank, including mortgage issues related to the financial crisis, and notes that it had set aside approximately $1.3 billion to cover the cost of litigation. But it mentions nothing about the C.F.P.B.’s interest in how it treated its customers.AdvertisementThe settlement, with the C.F.P.B., the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Los Angeles city attorney, was insignificant compared with other recent blockbuster resolutions with the big banks, and the bank’s litigation reserve easily covered the penalties. But the extent of the violations and sheer number of customers affected was far beyond that seen in other cases, so the narrative was not so much about the size of the penalty as the pervasive misconduct that continued even into this year. Moreover, the C.F.P.B.’s portion of the settlement, $100 million, allowed the agency to proclaim it the largest penalty it ever imposed, something that was sure to draw further attention.AdvertisementWells Fargo’s response to the settlement shows that it does not seem to have considered how it would present its side of the story. On the day of the announcement, there was a statement saying “we regret and take responsibility for any instances where customers may have received a product that they did not request” — about as tepid a mea culpa as one might hear.Mr. Stumpf did not speak with the news media until days after the settlement, and then he seemed to point the finger at low-level employees who opened the accounts while avoiding accepting any real responsibility by management. That led to the Wall Street Journal headline “Wells Fargo CEO Defends Bank Culture, Lays Blame With Bad Employees.”It will only get worse for Mr. Stumpf when he arrives on Capitol Hill. Ms. Warren is already arguing that “this is a bank that’s just too big to manage,” and the House Financial Services Committee announced on Friday that it too will call him to testify later this month.William D. Cohan in his Street Scene column in DealBook last week pointed out that all Mr. Stumpf could say about clawing back the compensation of Carrie Tolstedt, the executive in charge of the retail bank division before she announced her retirement in July, was that the company had procedures that would be followed. Mr. Cohan called for Mr. Stumpf to resign, something sure to be echoed as he appears for the Congressional tongue-lashings.“I think the best thing I could do right now is lead this company, and lead this company forward,” John Stumpf said in an interview with Jim Cramer on “Mad Money.”When companies catch the market by surprise with a legal settlement, the chief executive’s head may well end up on the chopping block. Barclays was the first big bank to reach a settlement with the Justice Department over the manipulation of the London interbank offered rate, or Libor, in July 2012. Within days, Robert E. Diamond Jr., the bank’s chief executive, resigned. In that case, Barclays paid $450 million, a small amount relative to later settlements of more than $1 billion, but that hardly mattered. Investors were shocked by the revelation of the extent of the bank’s wrongdoing.There is also a question about whether Wells Fargo was required to disclose the settlement once it knew the amount it would have to pay. A recent case filed by the Securities and Exchange Commission shows that the agency takes corporate disclosure obligations in this area seriously.RPM International, a chemical products company, and its general counsel, Edward W. Moore, were sued for failing to timely disclose an investigation by the Justice Department into overbilling by one of its subsidiaries. The company had reached a settlement but did not initially reserve an amount to make the payment, which would hurt its quarterly earnings. The S.E.C. asserts that Mr. Moore failed to disclose the status of the investigation to senior management, the audit committee, or the outside auditors, including a determination that the settlement would require a higher payment than the company initially thought necessary.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.RPM’s chief executive issued a statement that the audit committee found no “intentional misconduct” in the handling of the settlement and that it stood by Mr. Moore.AdvertisementThis is a rare case in which the S.E.C. asserts that a company’s failure to disclose an investigation and settlement violated the corporate disclosure requirements, which are notoriously broad. In annual reports, management must disclose “any known trends or uncertainties” that will have a material impact on its operations, while Rule 12b-20 requires the disclosure of any “further material information” that is necessary so that other statements are not misleading — the ultimate catchall provision.How Wells Fargo handled its settlement raises the difficult question of when a company must disclose information to investors because it is material to their evaluation of a business. The standard of materiality is a flexible one, looking to whether a reasonable investor would consider the information important, so companies often have wiggle room to keep things secret until they are finally required to disclose.When more than 5,000 employees are involved in misconduct that results in more than 2 million unauthorized deposit accounts and credit cards, it is difficult to claim conduct that widespread would not be considered important by investors. Wells Fargo has seen its market value drop by close to $20 billion since the settlement’s disclosure, and it is no longer the most valuable bank, showing how strongly investors feel about the case.But the total cost of the resolution was little more than a rounding error for a bank that reported $5.6 billion of net income in its more recent quarter. There is a good argument that revealing the settlement earlier was unnecessary, especially when it did not require setting aside any additional funds in its litigation reserve.As is usually the case, arguments about when the securities rules require disclosure is a matter of judgment, so it is unlikely that the S.E.C. would find that Wells Fargo violated the law. But it may have violated a cardinal rule of Wall Street: Don’t take the market by surprise. Goldman Sachs learned that lesson the hard way in April 2010 when the S.E.C. sued the firm for fraud over how it packaged and sold a synthetic collateralized debt obligation devised to help bet against the housing market. News of that lawsuit drove Goldman’s stock price down nearly 13 percent on the day of the filing.Would earlier disclosure of the impending settlement have prevented the waves of criticism washing over the bank? Wells Fargo was going to be pilloried in the midst of a presidential campaign in which each side wants to ramp up criticism of the big banks. But it might have softened the blow had it tried at the outset to show how it responded to the reported misconduct rather than just reacting with denials of managerial responsibility.Investors need not be told everything, nor is a company required to disclose important information immediately. But the price for not informing the public, especially when information puts a company in a bad light, is that management loses control of the story when the media and Congress turn a critical eye on how the business was operated.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »