By AMIE TSANGSEPT. 19, 2016
Donald J. Trump and Hillary Clinton have very different approaches to taxation, but when it comes to spending, they both seem to agree on one thing: improving the nation’s infrastructure.That is in line with a growing number of economists who see upgrading infrastructure as a way to invigorate the economy. For example, spending on new buildings and equipment has been weak partly because that depends on improvements in the nation’s transportation network and pipelines.But, as ever, there is still debate on how much should be spent, and who will pay for it.Spend too little and the nation’s backbone could deteriorate, costing more money in repairs. Spend too much and risk crowding out private investment, pushing up inflation and interest rates.Lawrence H. Summers, who served as Treasury secretary under President Bill Clinton, argues that America’s need for better infrastructure is so great that the country could increase its debt load and still come out ahead. Others argue funding should come from increased taxes or budget cuts elsewhere.AdvertisementEither way, and regardless of who wins in November, there is some optimism that a public works push is coming.AdvertisementOnce again, it comes down to who is going to pay — but this time, it involves public pensions.There are two competing ways of valuing a pension fund, and that means two sets of numbers.The debate over the two sets has raised concerns that governments nationwide do not know the true condition of the pension funds they are responsible for, meaning millions of people are exposed to risks they have no way of knowing about.It turns out the cost of providing a steady, guaranteed income for life is large — alarmingly so.Take, for example, California and its renowned public pension system, Calpers.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Calpers keeps two sets of books to show the full cost today of providing — the officially stated numbers, known as the actuarial approach, and the ones that reflect the market value. The market value is not publicly disclosed and paints a much more troubling picture.But as even the relatively modest actuarial value of the pension fund (a calculation of the cost of providing a pension for life geared toward helping employers plan stable annual budgets) has grown, some local governments have struggled. Doubtful that they can really afford their pension plans, they have told Calpers that they want out.Calpers, in turn, has calculated the market value of the pension promises and, in some cases, the discrepancy between the two values has been a rather nasty surprise.For Citrus Pest Control District No. 2, a fund serving just six people that wanted to convert itself to a 401(k) plan, the district ended up settling the bill.AdvertisementIt’s our third case of who pays, but at least this time, we know the answer.Donald Trump’s Manhattan real estate empire has relied on a huge amount of government and taxpayer assistance. He has reaped at least $885 million in tax breaks, grants and other subsidies for luxury apartments, hotels and office buildings in New York, according to city records.The subsidies enabled him to lower his costs and sell apartments at higher prices because of their reduced taxes.No possible subsidy was left untapped.In one case, after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center, Mr. Trump lined up a $150,000 grant for one of his buildings near ground zero. That took advantage of a program to help small businesses in the area recover, even though he had acknowledged on the day of the attacks that his building was undamaged.“His whole M.O. is to exploit the government for everything he could get,” said Jerilyn Perine, the city housing commissioner during the Giuliani and Bloomberg administrations.“It is the goal of Chinese outbound industrial policy programs to replace foreign technology leaders in the medium term — not just in China but also in global export markets.”— Sebastian Heilmann, president of the Mercator Institute for China Studies, a think tank based in Berlin, on China’s strategy of investment.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.