AdvertisementSupported byBy Clifford KraussHOUSTON — The Securities and Exchange Commission has requested information from Exxon Mobil on the company’s longstanding policy of not writing down the value of oil reserves, as other energy companies have done in the recent past, Exxon Mobil confirmed on Tuesday.The inquiry mirrors an investigation by the New York attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, into how the company has valued its assets in light of future climate change regulations that may force fossil fuel companies to keep oil, natural gas and coal in the ground.The federal agency requested company documents and commentary in August. The request was reported on Tuesday by The Wall Street Journal. Exxon Mobil shares fell by 1.5 percent on the day.“We are fully complying with the S.E.C. request for information and are confident our financial reporting meets all legal and accounting requirements,” said Alan T. Jeffers, an Exxon Mobil spokesman.Most major oil and gas companies have been forced to lower their valuations, collectively amounting to more than $50 billion, since oil prices swooned to around $50 a barrel in recent weeks from over $100 a barrel two years ago. In February, the price fell below $30.The S.E.C. would not comment on the investigation.The company has defended itself, arguing that it already performs accounting tests on its assets and reports its findings publicly. It also denies allegations being investigated by Mr. Schneiderman and several other state attorneys general that it hid its own scientists’ climate research while publicly raising doubts about established climate science.In Exxon Mobil’s view, fossil fuels will be essential in energy production for a growing population around the world in the coming decades, and its assets will be valuable in the years to come. It says that oil and gas, like other commodities, rise and fall in price over time and that it therefore makes its investment decisions for the long term. The company also argues that it is working to curb climate change through research into carbon capture and sequestration and advanced biofuels made from algae.Environmentalists cheered the S.E.C. inquiry in hopes that regulators were escalating their enforcement on the oil and gas industry to include more rigorous reporting to investors on the potential risks of climate change to their businesses.“This is a remarkably important development,” said Bill McKibben, co-founder of the environmental group 350.org. “The federal government is joining the courageous attorneys general.”Advertisement