AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Gina ChonThe Wells Fargo case has exposed something besides bad bank practices: gaps in United States regulatory teamwork.The Justice Department was kept in the dark until the last minute about the widespread problem of unauthorized accounts at the bank and the $185 million fine it would be paying, according to people familiar with the situation. That is why prosecutors are only just now beginning an investigation.The United States has a sprawling financial oversight regime. Four federal agencies watch over banks, while two more regulate markets and thus the financial institutions involved. Those entities do not have criminal authority, however, and do not include state and local officials who also have supervisory duties.Cooperation therefore helps maximize leverage and penalties imposed on firms accused of wrongdoing. Regulators often work with the Justice Department on cases in which additional civil charges or a criminal probe may be warranted. In recent cases ranging from market manipulation to violations of sanctions, that kind of collaboration has netted both criminal guilty pleas and substantial regulatory fines in one large settlement.Justice Department officials are getting a late start in the Wells Fargo case, which involves more than two million deposit and credit-card accounts that the bank admitted to opening without customer authorization. Prosecutors only learned of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau probe against the bank around the time the record fine was announced on Sept. 8, said the sources, who requested anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly.That means that the authorities are belatedly tracking down possible witnesses and documents that could be harder to find now that the regulatory case has been settled. Wells Fargo did not admit or deny guilt, but has fired about 5,300 employees in relation to the scandal, which dates back to at least 2011.Richard Cordray, the director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, has worked with the Justice Department in the past, including on discriminatory lending practices. The agency didn’t say when it began its investigation of Wells Fargo, but such cases usually take at least a year.Its pursuit of the claims is commendable. Mr. Cordray also has been fighting Republicans, who have been trying to undermine his agency since its creation under the Dodd-Frank legislation. A big settlement stands to help his agency’s cause. For the sake of consumers, taxpayers and watchdogs, however, a more harmonious approach would be better.Advertisement