
Breakingviews By                     
ROB COX

SEPT. 20, 2016
Great partnerships are often forged when each party enjoys a surplus of something the other needs, and there’s little conflict in their ambitions. By that logic, two of Silicon Valley’s best-known firms, Apple and Tesla Motors, really need each other right now. An investment in Tesla by Apple in return for some of the carmaker’s innovation dust might be just the ticket.Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, is revamping the company’s approach to self-driving cars and its broader role in the future of transportation. He just fired some of the company’s autonomous car team, according to The New York Times.At Tesla, the founder, Elon Musk, needs billions of dollars of capital as he ramps up the company toward its target of making 500,000 vehicles a year by 2018. He could also use an injection of corporate credibility as his proposed deal to buy his solar-panel venture SolarCity, also publicly traded, appears to be running into unanticipated headwinds.The idea of Apple acquiring Tesla in its entirety isn’t new. It surfaced even before Mr. Cook poached some of Mr. Musk’s engineers a year ago. That move prompted Mr. Musk to tell a German newspaper: “If you don’t make it at Tesla, you go work at Apple.” But it might not require a full purchase to address the strategic challenges of the two companies — which, arguably, are each becoming most prominent in areas where the other could fairly easily help.AdvertisementMr. Musk’s hurdles are the most obvious. The entrepreneur who runs the $30-odd billion Tesla is struggling to persuade investors of the merits of his plan for Tesla to acquire SolarCity. The deal, worth $2.6 billion when announced in early August, is supposed to create a “vertically integrated sustainable energy company.” Last week the deal was publicly panned by James S. Chanos, a prominent hedge fund manager. By the math of the all-share deal, its market-implied chances of success have been falling, too. Shares of SolarCity closed on Monday nearly 25 percent below Tesla’s offer price.AdvertisementThe acquisition and the potential conflicts it throws up are a distraction for Mr. Musk from Tesla’s carmaking ambitions, not to mention from the task of proving the safety of the company’s Autopilot feature after a fatal crash in May. Even if investors decide to back him in buying SolarCity, any slippage in either company’s plan could hurt its ability to hit up investors for additional funding. Both need regular cash injections — over $2 billion each last year — to fund operating and capital investment outflows.Apple could easily address Tesla’s capital problem by buying, say, a 20 percent stake. While dilutive to existing owners — including Mr. Musk, who owns about 21 percent — that would bring in nearly $8 billion at $215 a share, just under a 5 percent premium to Monday’s market closing price.That would take the question of capital off the table at Tesla for years to come. It would more than cover the negative free-cash flow estimated at $4 billion through 2020 by researchers at Auburn University, in a report titled “Driving Off a Cliff: The Case Against Tesla,” plus any extra needed for the accelerated production targets the company has since announced.For Apple, with more than $230 billion of idle cash, the investment would be close to a rounding error. Its shareholders would probably rejoice at converting a sliver of money in the bank for a placeholder in an emerging leader in self-driving cars. Unlike a full purchase, buying a minority stake will not dilute Apple’s profitability, either. The company has projected gross margins of around 38 percent in its next fiscal quarter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Now, what could Tesla do for Apple? With a market capitalization north of $600 billion, Mr. Cook’s business is doing fine at the moment. Shares of the company have gained some 5 percent since the iPhone 7 was unveiled earlier this month. Pre-orders for the new handset have been robust despite reviews that largely called it an incremental advance on its predecessor. Features like wireless earbuds are novel, but hardly game-changing.Many analysts, investors and observers want Apple to develop more new products. Its last big product introduction, of watches, was a relative dud. Since the devices went on sale in April 2015, Apple’s shares have fallen 8 percent, and investors fret that the company has been running short of new ideas. At the same time, shares of Alphabet, Google’s parent, have rallied by nearly 50 percent.One area in which Alphabet appears to be further ahead is self-driving vehicles. Apple doesn’t talk publicly about its plans in the car business, but earlier this month it fired dozens of staff members and closed parts of its so-called Titan project, focused on autonomous cars.Ideas are something Mr. Musk has in abundance. In addition to running Tesla and creating SolarCity, he’s trying to make a going concern of space travel and freight through Space Exploration Technologies, or SpaceX. In his spare time, he also hatched the Hyperloop, an idea to use air pressure to speed human beings through tubes at extraordinary speeds.AdvertisementIn that respect, he resembles Steven P. Jobs. Even when Apple was in its relative infancy in 1986, its co-founder bankrolled the creation of Pixar, the animation studio. For two decades, that side project put him in conflict with some of the media companies whose content would become a key attraction for iPhone users. In 2006, a year before introducing the handset that changed the world, Mr. Jobs sold Pixar to Disney for $7.4 billion in stock; Disney put him on its board.With competition no longer an issue, Mr. Jobs became a consigliere to Disney’s boss, Robert A. Iger, who told Fortune after the Apple founder died: “We would stand in front of a whiteboard and talk about ideas. And every once in a while he’d come to me thinking the sky’s falling apart and that our business was screwed. And I’d say, ‘Tell me how.’”That sort of relationship would probably be hard to develop between a chief executive and a subordinate — one argument against Apple swallowing Tesla whole. But as a collaboration, with shared goals and running businesses that work together rather than competing for talent and customers, a functional Cook-Musk partnership might serve both companies’ shareholders.As part of the deal, Apple could fold its wobbly car operations into a joint venture with Tesla, add a couple of directors to Tesla’s board — helping to handle deals with the likes of SolarCity — and bring Mr. Musk onto its own. Of course, the two executives would have to be capable of playing nice. Mr. Musk might have to walk back his crack last year that Apple was the “Tesla graveyard.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »