By LIZ MOYERSEPT. 20, 2016
Todd A. Combs, a protégé of the billionaire investor Warren Buffett, has been named a new board member at JPMorgan Chase.The move, which was announced Tuesday morning, is effective immediately, making him the bank’s 12th director.Mr. Combs, 45, is one of Mr. Buffett’s stock pickers as investment officer at Berkshire Hathaway, which he joined in 2010 after being plucked from seeming obscurity. He had been chief executive of Castle Point Capital, a hedge fund he founded in 2005 to manage money for wealthy families and foundations. At Castle Point, he focused on investing in financial services companies, with stakes in U.S. Bancorp, Goldman Sachs and MasterCard. As of his last filing in November 2010, before joining Berkshire, his fund had an $11.4 million stake in JPMorgan.Berkshire owns several big stakes in financial companies that compete with JPMorgan, including a 16.4 percent stake in American Express, 5.99 percent in U.S. Bancorp and 10 percent in Wells Fargo. But while Mr. Buffett has praised JPMorgan’s management — specifically its chairman and chief executive, Jamie Dimon— and has said in the past he personally owned some shares of the bank, Berkshire did not have a stake as of its most recent regulatory disclosure.Mr. Buffett and Mr. Dimon have crossed paths before, even meeting in secret with other financial company chiefs in recent months to discuss corporate governance for public companies.Mr. Combs also sits on the board of the aircraft industry supplier Precision Castparts, a role he took on in January after helping guide Berkshire Hathaway’s purchase of the company for more than $30 billion last year.“Todd Combs is an extraordinary leader, investor and thinker, with a deep understanding of finance and business,” Mr. Dimon said in a statement on Tuesday. “We’re pleased he has agreed to serve on our board of directors, and our company and our board will benefit from his wisdom and judgment.”A version of this article appears in print on September 21, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: JPMorgan  Adds 12th Director.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.