AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangRemember the days when a congressional grilling was pretty much a rite of passage for bank chief executives?Well, today we’re going retro — John G. Stumpf, the chairman and chief executive of Wells Fargo, will testify before the Senate Banking Committee on the scandal over unauthorized accounts.Mr. Stumpf, who has cultivated the bank’s down-to-earth image, will eat some serious humble pie by apologizing profusely, according to prepared testimony reviewed by The New York Times.You can expect some schadenfreude: Mr. Stumpf had portrayed Wells as being different from the risky global investment banks behind the mortgage crisis.The hearing could also focus on the possibility of clawing back pay tied to profits derived from illicit activity, stoking momentum toward new rules governing salary practices, The Wall Street Journal reports.Another issue is how surprised Wells Fargo seems to be by the intense scrutiny it has come under — it is almost as if it did not expect it. Companies often point to investigations and settlements in regulatory filings.Wells Fargo, however, did nothing to indicate this was coming, and the company has paid a high price for its lack of disclosure, Peter J. Henning writes.Why do business leaders do it?Talking to Fortune 500 executives, Andrew Ross Sorkin says he would be “hard-pressed to name one who didn’t at least roll his or her eyes when Mr. Trump’s name was mentioned.” Many criticize him, too.But they quickly follow up by saying that they could never go on the record with their comments.Why? Fear.One executive who has publicly decried Mr. Trump is Reid Hoffman, who helped found LinkedIn. But even he hesitated, saying he was worried he might become a target for Mr. Trump and his Twitter account, or worse.“Everyone gets worried about being attacked, and part of the logic and mechanics of bullies is that they cause people to be fearful that they’ll be singled out and attacked,” Mr. Hoffman said.Auto safety regulators have come out and said it: They think the nation’s highways will be safer when cars are driven by machines, not by people.“We envision in the future, you can take your hands off the wheel, and your commute becomes restful or productive, instead of frustrating and exhausting,” said Jeffrey Zients, director of the National Economic Council.Now that federal regulators have endorsed the technology, they have to balance the interests of companies like Tesla, Google and Uber with public safety concerns.The guidelines published on Monday, though, were still not as specific as the safety requirements imposed on human-driven vehicles.“Knowing what I know about computer vision, I wouldn’t take my hands off the steering wheel.”— Jitendra Malik, a researcher in computer vision at the University of California, Berkeley, referring to the fatal crash of a Tesla in Autopilot mode in May. Tesla has announced that it is modifying the system.• The Census Bureau’s report on new home construction is expected to show a modest increase in activity.• The Federal Open Market Committee meets, although no decision will come until Wednesday.• The Senate Committee on the Judiciary will hold a hearing on competition and consolidation in the seed and agrochemical industry.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement