By IAN AUSTENSEPT. 20, 2016
OTTAWA — General Motors and a union narrowly averted a strike by Canadian workers on Tuesday with a deal that could serve as a model for preserving the country’s dwindling auto jobs.Under a tentative pact, G.M. will close one of two assembly lines at its Oshawa, Ontario, plant, its largest in Canada. But the automaker agreed to rebuild another assembly line there to produce cars and trucks.The move will bolster overall employment in Oshawa, which currently has about 5,700 total workers, including engineering and other nonunion employees. The automaker also agreed to move production of one engine from Mexico to another Ontario plant, a provision that bucks the trade trend.The tentative deal “really turned the tide of what has happened in the auto industry in this country for over a decade,” said Jerry Dias, the leader of Canada’s Unifor, the country’s largest private sector union.AdvertisementIn a brief statement, G.M. said that the agreement would lead to “significant new product, technology and process investments” at its two Canadian factories, as well as a parts warehouse elsewhere in Ontario. The company added that it would be looking for government financing to cover some of the investment.AdvertisementWhile the deal focuses on two production lines, it has proved a battleground for the country’s manufacturing. The cars and trucks produced in Canada, most of which are shipped to the United States, are a vital component of the country’s exports.But the industrial heartland has been hit by the same forces reshaping manufacturing worldwide.Last year, 2.2 million cars and trucks were made in Canada, compared with 2.6 million 10 years earlier. And since the 2008 recession, new factories have largely headed toward the United States and, increasingly, Mexico.At the outset of negotiations, the union was focused on keeping jobs in Canada, rather than on traditional issues like improving wages and benefits. The carmaker was similarly clear that it would not make a decision about any investments in Canada until after the negotiations concluded.In recent years, General Motors has pulled back production in Canada.The company is gone from Windsor, Ontario, the city across the river from Detroit. Most of what was once a transmission plant there is now a pile of demolition rubble. From the site, the cylindrical towers of G.M.’s world headquarters are now clearly visible.Unifor feared a similar future awaited Oshawa, where the company and its predecessors have been making cars for 108 years.The Oshawa plant has two assembly lines. One, which produces the Chevrolet Equinox, is set to close under the new deal. The other builds the Cadillac XTS, the Buick Regal and the Chevrolet Impala.A much newer G.M. plant in Ingersoll, Ontario, seems to have a comparatively secure future. It is the company’s main source of the Equinox, a top-selling small sport utility vehicle, as well as of the similar GMC Terrain. That factory is covered by a separate contract that expires next year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.G.M. also operates a plant that produces engines and transmissions in St. Catharines, Ontario, which Mr. Dias said also required investment from the company.AdvertisementUnder the new labor pact, G.M. is to move some engine production to St. Catharines from Mexico. The new pact also calls for wage increases. And temporary workers will switch to full time. But, in a concession from Unifor, new employees at G.M. Canada will receive defined contribution retirement plans, rather than full pensions.After settling with G.M., Unifor will now have to deal with the clouds hanging over some factories owned by Ford Motor of Canada and FCA Canada, part of Fiat Chrysler. The Canadian manufacturing operations of Honda and Toyota are not unionized.FCA recently renovated a plant in Windsor that makes minivans, but uncertainty surrounds its former American Motors factory in the Toronto suburb of Brampton, Ontario, which produces large rear-wheel-drive cars. And while there is little near-term concern about the Ford assembly plant in Oakville, Ontario, that is not the case with an aging factory in Windsor that builds large 10-cylinder engines.Despite the settlement with G.M., Canada remains a tough sell.During the contract talks, Unifor pitched the weakness of the Canadian dollar as a potential cost advantage for American carmakers, providing a discount on spending in Canada. But companies are generally reluctant to base long-term investment plans on fluctuating exchange rates.The union also highlighted its pay system, in which workers do not reach full-scale wages for 10 years, presenting an advantage over that of American unions. But Canada is trying to find its place at a politically sensitive time when the United States wants to bring more jobs home.“Policy makers used to be focused on expanding production” in Canada, said Greig Mordue, an associate professor at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, and the former general manager of Toyota Motor Manufacturing Canada. “Now they’re focused on sustaining what they’ve got.”Canada also can’t effectively compete with Mexico anymore.Most carmakers have developed standardized manufacturing systems. So quality control and productivity remain relatively consistent in different locations, according to Mr. Mordue.Car companies can also recruit factory workers with higher skill levels than in the past, since they offer better wages than other types of manufacturers in Mexico. “When you pay a premium, you get the best,” Mr. Mordue said.G.M. provided one of the few bits of good news for Canada when it said in June that it would hire up to 750 people, mostly engineers, to work on software development and research in the country. As with Google and other tech companies, a major attraction was the University of Waterloo’s highly regarded mathematics and computer science departments.AdvertisementBut Mr. Mordue said such gains provided little consolation to less skilled factory workers facing an uncertain future. “You can’t replace 7,000 production jobs with 700 software engineering jobs,” he said.Follow Ian Austen on Twitter @ianrausten.A version of this article appears in print on September 21, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: G.M. and Union Avoid Strike by Canadian Workers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.