AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaViacom is back on the hunt for a new chief executive. The person for the job could be a member of the extended family: CBS’s chief executive, Leslie Moonves.The interim chief executive, Thomas Dooley, told the board he would not stay past mid-November. He had stepped in to lead Viacom after Philippe P. Dauman left last month when the controlling shareholder, Sumner M. Redstone, decided to shake things up again. A decade ago, he split Viacom and CBS partly because he could not decide on who should run the whole empire.A refreshed board at Viacom has been busy trying to clean up a giant mess that just prompted another profit warning on Wednesday. Directors opted to slash the dividend to help pay down the $12 billion debt load. Directors also shelved Mr. Dauman’s swan-song plan to sell a minority stake in the movie studio Paramount Pictures.Finding a new chief will be a challenge. Mr. Redstone’s firm grip on the company, alongside his increasingly involved daughter, Shari, and his fickle tendencies, will scare away many candidates. For years, he heaped praise on Mr. Dauman and paid him huge sums of money to show his appreciation. A spate of lawsuits and bad business fractured the relationship.Alternatively, Viacom insiders may be tarnished. There may be talented executives at the company capable of doing the job, and there may be advantages to hiring a chief executive who already knows the ins and outs. But performance has been so bad in so many areas at Viacom, which owns MTV and other cable networks, that it is not obvious how a senior manager there could effectively make big changes.That is why Mr. Moonves may be the best option. When Mr. Redstone separated his media conglomerate, it was to give the faster-growing Viacom room to run without the sleepier CBS holding it back. It has turned out that CBS is the better-managed operation, delivering a far superior return to shareholders.Mr. Moonves did it with a keen eye for hit shows like the “The Big Bang Theory” and securing rights to National Football League games. A creative spark is needed at Viacom as the media landscape lurches through difficult transitions. Structuring a financially sound merger of the two TV broadcasters may be tough, but the strategic rationale of putting Mr. Moonves in charge of a combined company at least would make sense.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement