By KATIE THOMASSEPT. 21, 2016
“I’m concerned that is a rope-a-dope strategy,” Representative Elijah Cummings told Heather Bresch, chief executive of Mylan.Members of Congress on Wednesday pelted the chief executive of Mylan, the company behind the EpiPen, the treatment for severe allergy attacks, with questions about steep price increases on the product and accused her of turning her back on families that could no longer afford the lifesaving treatment.The chief executive, Heather Bresch, was the latest in a string of drug company leaders to be interrogated by the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform as public outrage has grown over the rising cost of drugs.Some lawmakers even expressed frustration that the scene on Wednesday seemed all too familiar, with little evidence that the interrogations were yielding results.“I’m concerned that is a rope-a-dope strategy,” Representative Elijah E. Cummings, the ranking Democrat on the committee, said in his opening statement. “The industry will take their punches. But then they go right ahead and keep raising their prices.”AdvertisementMs. Bresch defended her company’s practices, referring to oversize charts and an EpiPen. She said the public had overlooked Mylan’s efforts to expand access to EpiPens, such as distributing thousands of them free to schools.Advertisement“It troubles me greatly that the EpiPen product has become a source of controversy,” she said in her opening remarks.“Price and access exist in a balance, and we believe we have struck that balance,” she said.Lawmakers queried Ms. Bresch on everything from her pay — which she said was about $18 million — to the mode of transportation she used to travel to Washington, D.C.“You flew on a private jet,” said Representative Bonnie Watson Coleman, Democrat of New Jersey.“I did,” Ms. Bresch answered.The hearing came after weeks of public complaints over the company’s decision to raise the list price on EpiPen, for a pair of the devices, to more than $600 today from around $100 in 2007. Similar hearings were held in the last year with executives from Turing Pharmaceuticals and Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, companies that also sharply raised prices on some drugs.Critics have accused Mylan of price gouging because it controls most of the market for a lifesaving product for people who are at risk of a potentially deadly allergic reaction known as anaphylaxis.The company has gone on the defensive, offering patients additional assistance with out-of-pocket costs and announcing that it would begin selling a generic version of the product at half of the cost.But those moves failed to mollify critics, and several members of Congress ordered the company and Ms. Bresch to answer questions about Mylan’s actions. On Tuesday, the West Virginia attorney general said his office was investigating Mylan over potential antitrust violations and accusations that it may have overcharged the state Medicaid program for the product.At the hearing on Wednesday, several lawmakers said that the actions Mylan had taken so far were not good enough and that measures like expanding discount cards and patient-assistance programs — which are tied to a family’s income — did not go far enough.Advertisement“A lot of these people don’t have those discounts,” said Representative Stephen Lynch, Democrat of Massachusetts. “They are regular, middle-class people, and they don’t have that discount.”“But in a way, you’ve done us a favor,” he said, “by showing us what’s wrong with the health care system.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mylan acquired the product in 2007 and moved aggressively to expand the EpiPen market. The company and Ms. Bresch, who is the daughter of Senator Joe Manchin, Democrat of West Virginia, have been strong promoters of the product. They have lobbied the government for several measures that would increase the number of patients who receive prescriptions for EpiPens, have enlisted patient groups and doctors who received funding from them, and have given thousands of the devices to schools.Insurers have been pushing a greater share of costs onto patients. Because many patients must now pay thousands of dollars out of pocket before their insurance coverage steps in, for example, they feel the effects of higher drug prices more acutely.As in the past, Ms. Bresch sought to shift the blame for the EpiPen’s price. She said that after distributors and pharmacy benefit managers took their fees, and after other costs were accounted for, the company made a profit of about $50 for each pen.“I think many people incorrectly assume we make $600 off each EpiPen,” she said. “This is simply not true.”But several questioners expressed skepticism about those figures and chastised Ms. Bresch for what they said were inadequate answers about financial details of the company.“I’m asking questions — you’re the C.E.O.,” Mr. Cummings said. “I would think you would know.”AdvertisementOthers noted that EpiPen controls nearly all of the market for epinephrine auto-injectors, and criticized the Food and Drug Administration for not acting quickly enough to ensure that competing products could enter the market.A similar product, Adrenaclick, holds a tiny fraction of the market. Another competitor, the Auvi-Q, was withdrawn last year after it was found that the device could deliver an inaccurate dose. Some companies, including Teva, are developing generic versions of the EpiPen, but those efforts have so far been unsuccessful.During the hearing, an F.D.A. official, Dr. Douglas C. Throckmorton, said the agency was “working hard” to make it easier for companies to develop alternatives. But several lawmakers criticized the agency and said it had dragged its feet in approving alternatives and providing help to smaller companies that wanted to enter the market.Ms. Bresch drew bipartisan ire, as Democrats and Republicans alike took turns calling her out. Representative Mick Mulvaney, Republican of South Carolina, acknowledged that he did not typically criticize chief executives for seeking to make a profit. But he said he was motivated to do so in this case because Mylan had lobbied lawmakers like him so aggressively.“You came and you asked the government to get in your business — so here we are today,” he said. “You get a level of scrutiny and a level of treatment that would ordinarily curl my hair, but you asked for it.”A version of this article appears in print on September 22, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mylan Chief’s Answers on EpiPen Frustrate House Panel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.