AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerThe Justice Department, which is suing Anthem and Cigna to block their $48 billion deal, revealed on Wednesday in court documents that the two health insurers have been accusing each other of breaching their merger agreement.On Aug. 16, Cigna’s counsel told the court’s special master that the insurers’ in-house lawyers had been exchanging letters “accusing each other of breaching the merger agreement,” according to a filing Wednesday in the District Court for the District of Columbia. The government has asked the two companies to produce documents that discuss any breaches but both objected, saying their correspondence is privileged. On Wednesday, the government asked the court to compel them to turn over the correspondence.United States Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch announced in July that the government had filed lawsuits to block not just the deal between Cigna and Anthem, but also one between Aetna and Humana. The transactions would condense the five biggest American health insurers to three, which the government has argued is noncompetitive.Even before the lawsuit, Cigna and Anthem appeared reluctant to close their deal. In May, a series of letters reported by The Wall Street Journal revealed brewing hostilities between the two, including Cigna’s tendency to miss deadlines and submit paperwork in the wrong format during the antitrust review process.In Wednesday’s filing, the government argued that the relationship between the companies ran counter to their defense in the case — that the merger would enhance competition because it would result in billions of dollars’ worth of cost savings.“Such efficiencies don’t happen overnight,” the government wrote in its court filing. “They require cooperation over months (if not years) to integrate the operations of these multibillion-dollar firms.”Separate representatives for Anthem and Cigna declined to comment on the government’s latest filing.The Justice Department also argued that the breach letters were not privileged, a legal term that keeps communications between lawyers and clients from being disclosed. The companies cite the so-called common interest rule, which protects the communications between two parties that are jointly defending themselves. However, the government said, this rule does not protect “adversarial communications” such as the letters accusing each other of breaching the merger agreement.“Such communications are not in furtherance of a joint defense strategy, and Defendants cannot have a joint legal interest in accusing each other of breaching a contract,” the government wrote.Judge Amy Berman Jackson of the Federal District Court for the District of Columbia recently set a trial date for Nov. 21, and the companies set a deadline of April 30 as the day by which they must complete the deal. Hostility between the two could make them less likely to extend that deadline.If the deal breaks, then Anthem would need to pay Cigna a $1.85 billion breakup fee, according to their merger agreement.Neither stock moved demonstrably after the filing was disclosed. Anthem closed the day about 2 percent higher, while Cigna gained less than 1 percent.Advertisement