AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangThe income gap doesn’t just apply to people — it applies to states, as well.American corporate might is increasingly concentrated in just four states: California, Massachusetts, New York and Texas.In fact, California alone accounts for a fifth of public companies in the United States, despite having only 12 percent of the population. By contrast, states like Illinois and Ohio are home to a shrinking proportion of public companies, according to analysis by the Deal Professor.The change reflects a shift toward the technology and biotechnology industries.There does not seem to be a special template, though, for making a state attractive — it just seems to be winner takes all.The concentration needs to be studied further but, in the meantime, the West Coast is likely to strengthen its pull, especially on lawyers and bankers.The direction of trade — shifting low-skilled manufacturing jobs to places where labor is cheaper — also continues apace.Sure, it might not have looked that way when General Motors agreed to stop manufacturing an automobile engine at a factory in Mexico and move jobs to a plant in Canada.But the deal is just more evidence of how companies can use international factories to tilt the dynamics of labor negotiations in their favor.Jobs being “brought back” are actually jobs being forged in advanced manufacturing. Workers themselves had to give up their fight for pensions that pay fixed amounts, while G.M. managed to lock in a highly skilled set of workers in Waterloo, Canada’s Silicon Valley.Less-educated workers, however, are still likely to be left behind.The chief of Wells Fargo, John G. Stumpf, appeared before the Senate Banking Committee. He apologized. He expressed regret. He vowed to make amends.But the senators were not having any of it. And the more he tried to explain, the more skeptical they became.Senator Elizabeth Warren even suggested he resign, saying that his pushing responsibility onto low-level employees showed “gutless leadership.” On the issue of clawing back pay, Mr. Stumpf said it was a process that he could not get involved in.And this is not the end of it — Wells Fargo is under fire from multiple directions:• Mr. Stumpf has been invited to testify before the House Financial Services Committee, which is also investigating Wells Fargo.• Prosecutors are examining the scandal.• The Securities and Exchange Commission has been invited to join the fray by Senator Jeff Merkley, Democrat of Oregon.One company the Securities and Exchange Commission is already scrutinizing is Exxon Mobil.It has asked for information from Exxon Mobil about its policy of not writing down the value of oil reserves.The request, earlier reported by The Wall Street Journal, comes after the New York attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, investigated how Exxon Mobil valued its assets in light of future climate change regulation. The slump in oil prices have already forced most major oil and gas companies to lower their valuations.Exxon Mobil argues that fossil fuels will be essential for a growing world population and its assets will be valuable in the long term. It also says that it is working to curb climate change through its research.It has denied allegations being investigated by Mr. Schneiderman and other state attorneys general that it hid its own scientists’ climate research while publicly raising doubts about established climate science.• The Federal Reserve will announce its latest policy decision. It is expected to leave its benchmark rate unchanged, although officials did appear to be considering a rate rise.• Mylan’s chief executive, Heather Bresch, will testify before the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. She is likely to be grilled on her company’s decision to raise the list price of the EpiPen allergy treatment.• $7.4 Billion: The amount raised by Postal Savings Bank of China in the largest initial public offering so far this year. Only a fraction of the shares will be held by nongovernment investors, though — more than 75 percent of the shares were presold to cornerstone investors (big buyers that get priority by promising not to sell their stakes for six months).Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement