By DAVID JOLLY and NICOLA CLARKSEPT. 23, 2016
PARIS — Jérôme Kerviel, the rogue trader who nearly brought down the French bank Société Générale more than eight years ago, has had his fine reduced on appeal: By 99.98 percent, in fact.The court’s ruling was the latest legal victory for Mr. Kerviel, who in June won a wrongful dismissal suit against his former employer. That was despite the shock in global markets in January 2008, when Société Générale disclosed that Mr. Kerviel, then a junior trader on its derivatives desk, had managed to make 50 billion euros, or $56 billion, in unauthorized trades.The unwinding of those transactions resulted in a loss of €4.9 billion and brought the bank, France’s third-largest, to the brink of collapse. At the time of his conviction, he was ordered to pay that sum to the bank in restitution.But on Friday, an appeals court in Versailles, near Paris, cut Mr. Kerviel’s fine to €1 million, including damages and interest.AdvertisementThe court did not overturn Mr. Kerviel’s criminal conviction, but it found that Société Générale itself bore most of the responsibility for the size of the losses, which the court said were worsened by the weaknesses of the bank’s internal oversight and control systems.Advertisement“This is manageable,” David Koubbi, Mr. Kerviel’s lawyer, said after the ruling. “A €5 billion fine is a social death penalty, but one million is something else altogether.”Mr. Kerviel was found guilty of fraud in 2010 and, in addition to his huge fine, was sentenced to three years in prison — though he ultimately spent only five months behind bars.He has never denied falsifying documents and entering fake trades to mask his illegal dealings. But he has maintained that his bosses turned a blind eye to his activities as long as they were profitable.In its ruling on Friday, the Versailles court found that it was not “occasional negligence” by the bank, “but rather managerial choices” that allowed Mr. Kerviel to “carry out his criminal acts.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bank’s losses were of such a magnitude, the court said, that they would not have been possible “without the eminently deficient nature of Société Générale’s control systems, which created an elevated degree of vulnerability.”The bank previously admitted to management failures and weaknesses in its risk control systems and was ultimately fined €4 million by the French Banking Commission for those lapses.A spokeswoman for Société Générale did not immediately respond to requests for comment. But Jean Veil, a lawyer for the bank, said he was “satisfied” with the court’s decision to reduce Mr. Kerviel’s fine to an amount that was within his means to pay.“The court has found a solution that is more comprehensible to the general public,” Mr. Veil said.AdvertisementThe bank has long acknowledged that the original €4.9 billion restitution award was a symbolic sum that it did not expect would be paid.Nonetheless, Mr. Kerviel’s lawyer, Mr. Koubbi, said the former trader would continue to fight any orders to repay the bank, noting that his client still had three other civil complaints pending against his former employer.While Mr. Kerviel never had any realistic hope of paying the original fine, that the court put most of the onus on the bank is of more than academic interest for Société Générale.By affirming the bank’s responsibility, the ruling could allow French tax authorities to recoup €2.2 billion in tax breaks tied to the losses that the bank claimed in 2008. France’s budget minister, Christian Eckert, said in June that the government would seek to reclaim some or all of those tax benefits if the court overturned Mr. Kerviel’s fine.A version of this article appears in print on September 24, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: 4.9-Billion-Euro Fine Is Shaved Down to 1 Million for a Rogue Trader.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.