By JONATHAN SOBLESEPT. 21, 2016
TOKYO — Despite sagging public confidence in its ability to encourage growth, Japan’s central bank on Wednesday raised a key economic target and said it would continue to pump money into the economy until it succeeded.The announcement is very likely to add fuel to a debate about the effectiveness and credibility of the Bank of Japan, which has taken an increasingly active role in trying to shake the economy, the world’s third-largest, out of two decades of doldrums. It comes amid broader questions about the ability of central banks around the world — and whether they are running short of tools to re-energize global growth.The Bank of Japan said on Wednesday that it had set a new target for Japan’s consumer prices, saying it intended to “overshoot” its existing price target of 2 percent price rises, year-over-year.It did not specify by how much — and it gave little indication of how it would do so. After three and a half years of trying to lift prices under its current governor, Haruhiko Kuroda, the bank’s standard measure of inflation stood most recently at minus 0.5 percent.AdvertisementFalling prices, a relatively new problem in places like Europe, have haunted Japan for two decades. They are associated with weak economic growth, as wages and corporate revenues slide in tandem with the cost of goods and services. Escaping the trap, known as deflation, has been a central goal for Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who appointed Mr. Kuroda in 2013.
            After declining for a decade, 10-year government bonds yields in Japan fell below zero this year.        Yield on Japanese10-year government bonds+2.0%+1.5+1.02012: Shinzo Abe is elected prime minister of Japan.+0.50NEGATIVE TERRITORYJULY 2016–0.18%–0.5’00’05’10’15+2.0%Yield on Japanese10-year government bonds+1.5+1.02012: Shinzo Abe is elected prime minister of Japan.+0.50JULY 2016NEGATIVE TERRITORY–0.18%–0.5’00’05’10’15SEPT. 21, 2016
Events have not played out as planned.Mr. Kuroda initially promised to beat deflation in two years, a deadline that has come and gone. The bank has tried a number of tactics to lift prices, including a reduction of interest rates below zero and buying large quantities of government bonds. Those tactics have poured money into Japan’s financial system, making it cheaper to borrow and — in theory, at least — encouraging the sort of spending that leads to higher prices and economic growth.AdvertisementIn January, the Bank of Japan took the unusual step of introducing a negative short-term interest rate, a policy also adopted by central banks in Europe. The idea is to encourage lending to households and businesses by penalizing commercial banks that keep cash sitting unused at the central bank. The bank kept its rate steady at minus 0.1 percent on Wednesday.External shocks, like the plunge in oil prices in 2014, have hampered the bank’s efforts to create inflation. But ultimately, the bank said Wednesday, a sustained rise in prices has not occurred for one main reason: Japanese people don’t believe it will.“The price stability target of 2 percent has not been achieved,” the bank said, “largely due to developments in inflation expectations.”Mr. Kuroda has relied heavily on what economists say is the self-fulfilling nature of inflation predictions. If people think prices will rise tomorrow, they are likely to spend and borrow more today and to demand wage increases to offset the predicted rise in the cost of living. By bracing for inflation, they can in effect create it.The importance of expectations, Mr. Kuroda said, was behind the bank’s decision to aim on Wednesday for even faster price rises. “We are showing an extremely strong commitment,” he said.Yet the longer the bank goes without succeeding, some specialists say, the more likely people are to ignore its promises.Advertisement“Kuroda gambled and lost,” said Takuji Okubo, an analyst at Japan Macro Advisors. He pointed to other tweaks to its policies announced on Wednesday as evidence that the bank itself recognized it needed to change course.In one of the changes, the bank said it would seek to exert more direct influence on long-term interest rates, instead of just the short-term rates that central banks normally control. Long-term rates have fallen as a result of the bank’s policies. That is what the bank wanted — lower borrowing costs are good for economic activity — but if anything, they may have fallen too far.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Commercial banks have complained loudly. They make money by exploiting differences between the cost of short- and long-term credit, which have largely disappeared in Japan. In a review of the Bank of Japan’s policies completed before Wednesday’s announcement, central bank officials identified the situation as an adverse side effect that could destabilize the financial system.In the future, the bank said, it would carry out its bond-buying program in such a way that yields on 10-year Japanese government bonds — the benchmark for long-term borrowing costs — would “remain more or less at the current level” (around zero). The share prices of commercial banks rose sharply in response.Mr. Okubo said the bank’s new long-term rate target amounted to a tightening of monetary policy, an assertion Mr. Kuroda rejected. The 10-year yield has fallen as low as minus 0.3 percent since February, after the Bank of Japan took the unusual step of cutting its crucial short-term rate below zero, and it remained slightly negative on Wednesday.“It’s not tapering,” Mr. Kuroda said, adding that the bank would continue to buy bonds at a rate of about 80 trillion yen a year, or about $785 billion, the same as previously.Follow Jonathan Soble on Twitter @jonathan_soble.A version of this article appears in print on September 22, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Bank of Japan Raises Inflation Target Despite Limited Progress in Meeting Goal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.