By NEIL GOUGHSEPT. 21, 2016
HONG KONG — China’s biggest banks are struggling with a slowing economy, rising bad debts and shrinking profits.So to raise more than $7 billion in the world’s largest new share sale in two years, a stodgy Chinese bank has sought a little help from its friends.The Postal Savings Bank of China, a sprawling state-owned lender that is one of the country’s biggest, priced shares on Wednesday for its initial public offering at $0.61 each, valuing the new shares at $7.4 billion, according to a person familiar with the offering who was not authorized to speak publicly about the pricing. The total proceeds make it the biggest single I.P.O. anywhere since 2014, when Alibaba’s $25 billion New York listing set the global record.But only a fraction of those shares will be held by nongovernment investors, as Chinese state-run companies have already pledged to buy up most of them.AdvertisementThe big I.P.O. is shining a light on the practice, called cornerstone investing, of inviting big investors to buy up large chunks of shares before a company goes public. Though it is less common in other markets, it has been increasingly used by Chinese state firms going public in Hong Kong, where government-controlled companies purchase growing numbers of shares to ensure a smooth offering.AdvertisementBanks tend to go along with the practice because it helps get deals done, but it has come under criticism in the past because it can give plugged-in investors preferential access to new offerings.Postal Savings Bank declined to comment.On the face of it, the I.P.O. recalls a period a decade ago, when an initial wave of offerings by China’s biggest state banks on overseas stock markets resulted in megalistings attracting eager investors among foreign funds and Wall Street banks.Optimism about China’s banks soared with the country’s double-digit economic growth rates, and lenders like the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, China Construction Bank and the Bank of China surpassed traditional names like Citigroup and Bank of America to become the biggest banks in the world by market value.That enthusiasm has been replaced by an increasing wariness of problems with China’s traditional growth model, which relied heavily on state-directed investment to support economic growth. That led to mountains of debt and rampant industrial overcapacity in areas like mining, steel making and other manufacturing businesses.Shares in China’s big banks now trade at less than the reported value of their assets — a signal that investors do not believe the banks’ books or that they expect more problem loans will crop up.With Postal Savings Bank, more than 75 percent of the shares in the bank’s I.P.O. were presold to so-called cornerstone investors, big buyers that get priority by promising not to sell their stakes for six months. All six cornerstone investors in the deal are entities affiliated with the Chinese government.That state support included about $2 billion from China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation and investments from Shanghai’s main port operator, a regional airline operator and the country’s main power grid company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The postal bank I.P.O. comes amid a relative lull in big listings in Hong Kong. And the deals that have gone through have increasingly relied on cornerstones — a sign that underlying demand from retail or small investors may be lackluster.AdvertisementFor example, cornerstone investors accounted for nearly 80 percent of the shares offered in the June listing of CDB Leasing, a state-backed aircraft leasing company. Last month, Everbright Securities, a state-controlled brokerage, sold nearly 70 percent of its I.P.O. to cornerstones.Last year, cornerstone investors accounted for a record 41 percent of all I.P.O.s in Hong Kong, according to figures from Dealogic, a financial data provider. The previous high was 36 percent in 2012, a difficult year for new listings.Cornerstones last year bought almost $14 billion worth of the $33.6 billion in shares sold through 49 new listings in the city, according to Dealogic.The growing influence of cornerstones in Hong Kong has come under scrutiny, but so far regulators and lawmakers have taken a relatively hands-off approach.In 2013, the city’s stock exchange cautioned underwriting banks against giving cornerstone investors preferential treatment or privileged access to information about a company’s business.A year later, the Financial Services Development Council, a government advisory body, proposed overhauls to the I.P.O. process and the effect that cornerstones have on deal pricing.“One undesirable side effect of I.P.O. cornerstone investment is that it takes the pricing process further away from the normal market forces and may have a distortive effect on the company’s market value,” the council wrote in its recommendations.To date, Hong Kong regulators have not moved to limit cornerstone investing. A spokesman for the stock exchange said on Wednesday that it had researched the issue and “found no conclusive evidence that cornerstone investments narrow the shareholder base.” He added that after last year’s review, the listing committee “decided that no additional regulation is warranted at this stage.”Postal Savings Bank agreed to sell 12.1 billion shares at 4.76 Hong Kong dollars each, near the bottom of the market range. The offering was helped along by an unusually high number of underwriters — 26 banks in total worked on the deal.Follow Neil Gough on Twitter @n_gough.Emily Feng contributed research from Beijing.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.