By KATIE ROGERSSEPT. 22, 2016
Here’s a question that separates a real “Harry Potter” fan from the rest of the muggles who think this is all just a bunch of wizarding gibberish: Is your Patronus a Siberian cat, a heron or a basset hound?The patronus charm, a cross between a spirit animal and a good-luck charm, is one of the many bits of “Harry Potter” lore that fans continue to debate and celebrate nearly two decades after the first book was published. This has given J.K. Rowling, the boy wizard’s creator, plenty of time to turn her wizarding world into a finely tuned marketing machine.On Thursday, that machine delivered what it called the “only authentic Patronus experience,” allowing visitors to Ms. Rowling’s definitive fan site, Pottermore, to take a quiz and see what theirs would be.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The test, produced with 3D animation and written by Ms. Rowling herself, quickly excited fans online, who used the social media incantation #ExpectoPatronum to share their results. Twitter erupted into a menagerie full of dolphins, polecats, aardvarks and Irish wolfhounds. Some very high-profile fans played along.
            It's here MY OWL IS FINALLY HERE*furiously looks for his login info* https://t.co/IZFci6936x (There’s no way of knowing how many possible patronuses are out in the wizarding world. This writer’s patronus is a basset hound. The editor’s is a Siberian cat. Ms. Rowling’s is a heron.)Ms. Rowling and her employees at Pottermore hinted at this with some mysterious viral marketing. A day earlier, Potterheads were frantic over a mysterious tweet sent by Pottermore that showed a completely dark image, followed by images of a dark forest.But Potter obsessives are hard to fool: Most fans guessed what was happening right away.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.