AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robert CyranMcLaren’s cars travel fast, but rumors about Apple acquisitions can flash by, too.Apple approached McLaren, which is based in Britain, about an investment or purchase, according to The Financial Times. The $610 billion Apple, though, has made few acquisitions, even to help it pioneer smartphones. While McLaren is a high-tech supercar and Formula One business, it is still hard to see it taking Apple’s vehicular ambitions far.Apple executives might enjoy such a bauble. The design guru Jony Ive has a penchant for Aston Martins and Bentleys. Eddy Cue, head of software and services, sits on Ferrari’s board. But Apple’s typical market is far bigger than the rarefied one for $1 million automobiles. And the technology of designing racecars does not trickle down very fast — BMW retains an aura of tech leadership and refinement despite dropping its Formula One team years ago.Over the last year Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., has, according to reports, sniffed around the electric-car maker Tesla Motors, the entertainment giant Time Warner, the video-streaming site Netflix, the music service Tidal, the camera maker GoPro and the software producer Adobe. The spread of technology, Apple’s lack of hit new products and its giant cash hoard — more than $230 billion — explain why both outsiders and some insiders might fancy and even start exploring all kinds of options.Even if any of the above were both real and serious, however, they have not happened because Apple so far has countenanced only small deals. Its largest ever was for the headphone maker Beats Electronics, acquired for $3 billion in 2014. When Apple entered the mobile phone market, some thought it might have to buy a manufacturer like Palm. Instead, it snapped up bits and pieces of the technology it needed, like its Siri voice-activated assistant.Perhaps the promise and challenges of autonomous electric cars will force Apple to change its habits. Even the dedicated carmaker Tesla, for example, used a Lotus-produced chassis and body for its first model. But the simpler explanation probably applies. Fancy can run free when a company has so much cash. A McLaren deal is probably already no more than a dot disappearing over the horizon.Advertisement