By PATRICIA COHENSEPT. 22, 2016
The Education Department on Thursday moved to shut down the nation’s largest accreditor of for-profit colleges, which had stood watch as failing institutions like Corinthian Colleges and ITT Technical Institute teetered on a pileup of fraud investigations.The Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools — known as A.C.I.C.S. — is one of a few  dozen different organizations charged with maintaining standards and quality at the country’s more than 5,400 higher education institutions.An accreditor’s seal of approval is a prerequisite for colleges’ enrollment of students receiving federal student loans and aid, a funding stream that is essential for the institutions’ survival.A letter from the Education Department said that A.C.I.C.S. was out of compliance with regulations in 21 areas. While it acknowledged some progress, the letter stated that the group’s “track record does not inspire confidence that it can address all of the problems effectively.”AdvertisementThe council has said it plans to appeal the decision. “We believe that A.C.I.C.S. has demonstrated that the organization can come into compliance with the Department of Education’s regulations within one year as required under the department’s recognition criteria,” Roger J. Williams, the council’s chief executive, said in an email before the decision was issued.AdvertisementA.C.I.C.S. was responsible for approving roughly 240 institutions that received $4.7 billion in taxpayer money last year.An estimated 600,000 students currently attending schools the council has accredited are in no immediate danger of losing their federal financial aid. Regardless of any appeal, those schools have 18 months to secure the approval of another accreditor — although they might have to meet more stringent standards.The patchwork system of accreditation has been repeatedly criticized as being beholden to the institutions under its supervision. For-profit schools select which accreditor to use, and then pay for and govern it. Not only do accreditors set their own standards, but Congress specifically prohibited the government from establishing minimum benchmarks for accreditors to judge success in student achievement.Although several agencies have been under pressure for slipshod oversight, A.C.I.C.S. has frequently been singled out for the scale of its deficiencies and its low standards. A Senate committee, several state attorneys general, federal agencies and others are scrutinizing its record.In June the national advisory panel on accreditors voted to strip A.C.I.C.S. of its authority after a staff report from the Education Department recommended its demise — a foretaste of Thursday’s decision.As a group, the mostly for-profit colleges that A.C.I.C.S. has overseen have the lowest graduation rates in the country and among the highest rates of student loan defaults. The Education Department staff report found that it failed to verify job placements, identify institutions that were at risk and monitor educational quality.The accrediting agency was also plagued with conflicts of interest. At least two-thirds of its commissioners worked as executives at for-profit colleges, including Corinthian and ITT, a ProPublica investigation discovered last year.AdvertisementCorinthian was accredited even as it declared bankruptcy in 2015. The accreditation of ITT — dogged for years by similar fraud and abuse complaints — was revoked only in August. The company filed for bankruptcy last week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A.C.I.C.S. approved 15 other institutions or parent companies in the last three years that were under investigation by state or federal agencies, according to a report by the Center for American Progress, a liberal nonprofit in Washington.Since the spring, the council has scrambled to regroup.Mr. Williams, who took over the top job in August after two predecessors resigned, said in an emailed response to questions that A.C.I.C.S. had taken several steps to strengthen its standards and practices. He listed new procedures to verify placement data, train its evaluators, identify institutions at risk and monitor recruiting by employing a “secret shopper.”For-profit career colleges and accreditors have repeatedly emphasized that their students are more disadvantaged, giving that as the reason for their low graduation and high default rates. They tend to be poorer and older; many attend school while working and caring for families.In the past, accreditors have defended their continued approval of struggling colleges, saying their job is to improve quality at schools, not put them out of business.“We have taken the criticisms seriously,” Mr. Williams said, “and regardless of whether some amongst us deemed particular points fair and others not, we have collectively supported and aggressively pursued a self-improvement plan.”Ben Miller, who wrote the Center for American Progress report and was formerly a senior policy adviser at the Education Department, remained skeptical. “How legitimate are last-minute, half-baked improvements that only came about once they were afraid enough about their future?” he asked.Colleges and universities created accrediting panels as voluntary membership associations in the late 19th century as a way to standardize admissions, curriculum and degree requirements. After World War II, when the federal government started financing education through the G.I. Bill, it began to link accreditation to a school’s eligibility for federal aid.A series of scandals led to the passage of stronger federal oversight in 1992. Those reforms were soon unwound by aggressive lobbying on the part of colleges and a wave of deregulation Congress pursued in the mid-90s.AdvertisementAs student loan defaults soared, the Obama administration moved to curb abuses by for-profit institutions. Calling accreditors the “watchdogs that don’t bark,” the Education Department issued a series of new regulations. But accrediting agencies remain the first line of defense on quality and the primary gatekeepers to financial aid.Three Democratic senators introduced legislation on Thursday aimed at strengthening the process. Their bill would require the Education Department to establish standards related to loans, graduation, retention, earnings and job placements, and require accreditors to respond more quickly to investigations and lawsuits.“Accrediting agencies are supposed to make sure students get a good education and ensure colleges aren’t cheating students while sucking down taxpayer money,” said Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, one of the sponsors. “But right now the accreditation system is broken.”A version of this article appears in print on September 23, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Education Department Moves to Close a Watchdog of For-Profit Colleges.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.