By EMILY FENG and CARLOS TEJADASEPT. 22, 2016
China has marriage on its mind — but perhaps not commitment.New figures show that the number of marriages in China has fallen for two straight years, while divorces have continued to climb. The trends — which have their roots in China’s one-child policy, its stunning economic rise and the changing role of women at work and at home — have led a new generation to question the traditional role of marriage in Chinese society.A discussion of matrimony and women’s roles has risen on the internet in China in recent weeks after publication this month of a New York Times article about the decline of marriage in China. In comments on Weibo, a social-media network, many Chinese discussed their lack of marriage plans — and the reasons behind that.Of course, many of their comments will sound familiar to people in other countries — perhaps especially to those who are married. But China is in the midst of its own profound social and economic changes, upending traditional notions of love and family. Chinese data — from the data provider CEIC Data and China’s National Bureau of Statistics — back up some of the trends with hard figures. 3.1 people in 2015 4.43 people in 1982The average number of people in Chinese homes is shrinking for a variety of reasons: fewer children, more seniors living alone and other factors. But some responding to the article cite another reason: the joy of living alone.AdvertisementFrom Weibo:别介懿：婚后生活各种不爽。谁不想追求优质的生活.After marriage, your life has all kinds of unhappiness. Who doesn’t want to pursue a high quality of life?守護_牛奶瓶：我觉得 如果结婚的话那要找个契合的 不然两个人在一起天天跟战场或者有一方很擅长冷暴力 或者另一方很矫情 又不给对方面子的话 真没必要在一起。会很累 而且双方婚后不幸福的几率还是蛮大的。谈恋爱的时候忍个两三年 七八年 十年都正常 婚后柴米油盐几十年 过不下去离婚的也已经很正常了。I think that if you’re going to get married, you need to find someone whom you get along with. Otherwise, two people who spend all their days together as if they are in a war, or if one of them is good at cold violence [emotional cruelty], or the other person is very hypocritical and doesn’t give the other person any face, then there is no need to be together. You’ll get very tired, and the probability of both sides’ being unhappy is very large. Dating for two, three, seven, eight, 10 years is all normal. People getting divorced after decades of going through the ins and outs of daily life is already very common.Advertisementhongxingstar：从小到大父母一直吵架，我自己也觉得一个人自由，如果谈恋爱或结婚我肯定会受不了！I’ve fought with my parents from childhood until now about this. I too think it is more free being just one person. I don’t think I could take it if we talked about romance or marriage!围观也是个体力活：婚姻的忠诚度越来越低，自己能过得很好，干嘛找个累赘？Loyalty in marriages is ever diminishing, and one can be very happy alone. Why seeking out a burden?44.2 percent in 2004 51.7 percent in 2014Many women in China once saw marriage as the primary route to economic security. Now Chinese women are increasingly educated and increasingly part of the work force.From Weibo:心比扎软ii: 我觉得只要自己各方面都独立 就会发现能给自己带来踏实的感觉的是手里的钱 而在也不是别人的依靠了 结婚真的也是很麻烦.I think that if in every aspect you are independent, then you will come to find that what will put you most at ease is the money you have in your hand and not the money you depend on someone else for. Marriage is also very troublesome and inconvenient.morningLAq：有的男的大男子主义太厉害了，认为他们自己在外面工作一天挺辛苦的，回来就像大爷一样躺着，帮一下都感觉自己救了整个世界！然而妻子也是在外面工作一天回来还得像个免费保姆一样！万一收拾不好家里就得bb了，收拾不好自己还得担心老公出轨之后错在自己.Some men’s sense of patriarchal is just too much. They think working outside the home all day is very tough, and when they come back they want to lie down as if they’re the master. If they have to help out at all, they feel as if they’ve been asked for the whole world! And their wife has also worked all day, but when she comes back she’s like a free housemaid! If you don’t clean the house well, then he’ll criticize you. You’ll have to worry about your husband’s having an affair and blaming yourself afterward.原來你是我最想留住的圉運：女人的价值不应该体现在婚姻上，自己又不是养活不了自己。不是不想结，是这个社会对女人的保障太少，好男人太少。男人，父辈，及身边亲人，都认为女人就得结婚，生孩子，照顾家庭，都醒醒吧，时代变了，先看看自己、自己的儿子什么样子吧！A woman’s value should not be reflected through marriage. It’s not as if one cannot support oneself. It’s not that I don’t want to get married, it’s just that society’s guarantees for women are too few and there are too few good men. Men, your male elders, close friends: They all think that women should get married, have children and care for the family. Wake up, everyone. Times have changed. Why don’t you look at yourself first and what your own sons are like!1:12.5 in 1982 1:7.3 in 2014The ratio of the elderly to 15-to-64-year-olds is getting narrower. That puts pressure on younger Chinese people in a culture where children traditionally care for their elders.AdvertisementFrom Weibo:killersara2：结婚要么生理需求，要么长辈逼迫.In marriage, either there are psychological needs or the elders try to coerce you.寂寞是蓝棒棒的：如果不是为了父母，我就不会结婚.If it weren’t for my parents, I wouldn’t get married.Libra_Cy：其实不是不愿结婚了，只是不愿意凑合，可是父母都觉得应该凑合着过，甚至包括那些已经结婚了的同龄人，总会说你眼光太高啊，凑合凑合得了啊，巴拉巴拉一堆，好像不结婚就成罪人了一般，实在无语，但我还是不愿凑合.Actually, it’s not that we don’t want to get married, it’s that we don’t want to settle for good enough, but our parents think that we ought to settle. Even the people my age who are already married will always say, “Your expectations are too high, just settle, blah blah blah.” it’s as if in not marrying, we become criminals. I really have no words. But I don’t want to settle either.很想很想你DYING：对啊，这是中国，就算是父母都不在没有人逼你结婚，也会有闲言碎语包围着你.This is China. If your parents haven’t coerced you into marrying, then it’s the gossip that surrounds you that will.22.28 per 1,000 people in 198212.37 per 1,000 people in 2014Birthrates are declining in China despite the end of the one-child policy, as more people choose to delay reproduction or forgo it altogether.From Weibo:琵琶娘子: 我也不想结婚，人生漫长，为何一定要有家庭.I don’t want to get married. Life is endless. Why would you want a family?枫林寒情: 女人自己能赚钱，也能生孩子 要男人何用？Women can earn their own salary and can have children on their own. Why do we need men?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.