By AMIE TSANGSEPT. 22, 2016
The world of health care is filled with acrimony and accusations at the moment.On Tuesday, John Stumpf, the chief of Wells Fargo, united Democrats and Republicans in their ire. This time, it was the turn of Heather Bresch, who oversees Mylan, to be chastised by both sides.Interrogated by House members, she came under fire for everything from the EpiPen, which has become a source of controversy, to her use of a private jet.But it could all still be for nought.“The industry will take their punches,” said Representative Elijah E. Cummings, the ranking Democrat on the committee. “But then they go right ahead and keep raising their prices.”The New York Times editorial board makes the same point, arguing: “To have a real impact on drug prices, Congress will need to do a lot more than browbeat pharmaceutical executives in the hopes of shaming them into reducing their prices.”AdvertisementThe furor has not been enough to put off the drug maker Novum Pharma. The company, based in Chicago, which just raised the price of a 60-gram tube of acne cream by 128 percent, to $9,561.AdvertisementAnd over in the health insurance sector, Anthem and Cigna have been accusing each other of breaching their $48 billion merger agreement.The Justice Department is suing to block the deal. It contends that the merger, along with another one between Aetna and Humana, would condense the five biggest American health insurers to three, which the government has argued is noncompetitive.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Leon G. Cooperman is preparing for the fight of his career.The Securities and Exchange Commission accused his firm, Omega Advisors, of reaping $4 million in illegal profit, and he isn’t taking it lying down. A five-page rebuttal to the civil complaint was followed by a defiant conference call.It looks as if the gloves will be off — the S.E.C. is under pressure for not taking more cases to trial, and Mr. Cooperman, an early titan of the hedge fund industry, is not known for holding back.“It took me 50 years of hard work and playing by the rules to get where I got. I’m not going to let these people destroy my legacy,” he told investors.The fight for control is over, but the tension remains.Thomas E. Dooley will step down as interim chief executive of Viacom in November. Mr. Dooley was a longstanding partner to Philippe P. Dauman who, as those who have been following the long battle at the top will know, was recently ousted.So who is in line to lead the struggling company?It could be a tough gig, considering Sumner M. Redstone’s grip.AdvertisementViacom insiders may be tarnished, so Leslie Moonves, the chief of CBS, may be the best option, Breakingviews writes. He is part of the extended family — Mr. Redstone split Viacom and CBS partly because he could not decide who should run the empire.Mr. Moonves, with his keen eye for hit shows, could bring some creative spark to Viacom.• European Union trade ministers meet in Bratislava, Slovakia, to discuss the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, which would create the world’s largest trade area. What’s at stake?• The European Systemic Risk Board opens its annual conference.• Jacob J. Lew, the Treasury secretary, will testify to the House Financial Services Committee for the annual report of the Financial Stability Oversight Council.“There were enough problematic foreclosure cases involving Wells Fargo moving through the courts that the bank’s dubious practices seemed as pervasive then as the questionable account-opening scheme does now. And some of the elements of both scandals — improper fees and forgeries — are the same.”— Gretchen Morgenson on how the scandal over fake accounts at Wells Fargo echoes its handling of foreclosure cases.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.