AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonThe MAC might be back. And that would be bad news for the beleaguered shareholders of Yahoo.The announcement on Thursday that Yahoo had been hacked and some 500 million of its customer accounts with sensitive, confidential information were leaked is a blow to its business. It could also have significant implications for Yahoo’s $4.8 billion deal to be acquired by Verizon.The sale agreement the parties negotiated includes an out for Verizon if there is a material adverse change, known as a MAC, to Yahoo’s business during the time between signing and closing.A material adverse change is specifically defined to include any:circumstance, event, development, effect, change or occurrence that, individually or in the aggregate . . . has had, or would or would reasonably be expected to have, a material adverse effect on the business, assets, properties, results of operation or financial condition of the business, taken as a whole.For those with the patience to read through this lawyer language, you will note that it defines a MAC not very helpfully as a “material adverse effect.” Given the redundancy here, the true definition of a such a clause has been explained by the Delaware courts, the place where any dispute over the Yahoo deal will be litigated.And it is a high standard. In Huntsman v. Hexion, Judge Stephen P. Lamb found that Huntsman had not suffered a material adverse effect, and that the specialty chemicals company Hexion, which, along with its private equity backer, Apollo Global Management, had sued to end its deal with Huntsman, had knowingly and intentionally breached the merger agreement.In that ruling, the court held that a MAC is tough to prove. Judge Lamb said in his opinion that no Delaware court had ever found for a buyer on a MAC claim. He relied heavily on the opinion of Judge Leo E. Strine Jr. in IBP v. Tyson Foods to describe a MAC as a “significantly durational” adverse event “expected to persist in the future.”In Huntsman’s case, there was no material adverse change to its business. Huntsman’s 2007 earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, its so-called Ebitda, was only 3 percent below its 2006 Ebitda, and its 2008 figure was estimated to be only 7 percent below 2007. Judge Lamb found that since Ebitda is independent of capital structure, it is a better measure of the operational results of a business for determining a material adverse change.In addition to a material adverse effect being long term and durational, it must also be unexpected and specific to Yahoo’s operations, because of the number of carve-outs that are in any such clause. These carve-outs exclude general changes to the economy and industry under the theory that a MAC should be an event specific to the company. (If you’d like to know more, you can read my case study here.)But this may be the exception. This is a significant issue for Yahoo, and it will likely be long term and durational. The only question is what the actual impact will be and whether it will surpass the impact of the numbers in the Huntsman case. Yahoo will most likely argue that the impact is minimal and that users are still happily using its site, albeit in somewhat declining numbers. But Verizon can claim that this is likely to have a material impact. In other words, this data breach is something that is tailor-made for litigation.If nothing else, this gives Verizon significant leverage to renegotiate the price, because of the peculiar dynamics of a MAC clause. The clause is a way for the parties to allocate risk in an acquisition. When a company agrees to be acquired, there is almost always a period from the execution of original acquisition agreement to its completion. A MAC clause is a means for the parties to contractually allocate who will bear the risk of adverse events during this time.During the most recent financial crisis, MAC clauses were invoked in deals to acquire Genesco, Huntsman, HD Supply, Sallie Mae and Accredited Home Lenders, among others. The buyers asserted the clauses to justify not completing their deals because of adverse events. In large part, these acquirers succeeded in terminating or renegotiating their deals, with many coming to litigation over the matter.These assertions were really part of the negotiation dynamic among the parties as the financial crisis took hold. A buyer can invoke a MAC clause to try to drive down the price of an acquisition by taking advantage of either changed market conditions or adverse events affecting the target company.And that is what Verizon can do here. Yahoo is so tired out at this moment that it may be willing to agree to something. The alternative is to detail in court how bad the company was hit by the information breach. That is never a palatable outcome.So bring on the litigators and stay tuned. The long national nightmare of Yahoo may not be over.Advertisement