AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy John G. TaftBankers love the phrase “cross-sell.” I don’t.As a matter of fact, I propose a moratorium on using the phrase as a way to stop future abuses like the creation of 1.5 million accounts at Wells Fargo that may or may not have been authorized by customers.I feel so strongly about this that I never once used it during my decade-long career as the head of a major wealth management business.Cross-selling was made a financial services mantra — one analyst actually saw fit to call it a “religion” in an article in The Wall Street Journal — by Richard Kovacevich, the former chief executive of Wells Fargo, who also called his bank’s branches “stores.”How many times do we have to learn this lesson? Any time a financial institution talks about the investments, services and advice it offers as “products” that can be sold and cross-sold to customers, trouble isn’t far behind.The most charitable way to describe the rationale behind cross-selling is that a financial institution should offer solutions for as many of the needs of individuals as possible to help them better manage their increasingly complicated financial affairs.Nothing wrong with that.In fact, there are several reasons this can be good for individuals. Having your financial affairs consolidated in one place makes it easier to keep track of and manage, holistically, all of your assets and liabilities. Having a larger and more significant relationship with a financial institution can help you get better service and pay less than you otherwise would if your money was spread around. And it’s easier for your bank or wealth management firm to give you good advice when they can see your aggregated financial statement.It’s also really good for the financial institution. The more products and services individual customers use and pay for at their bank, the more profitable they are to the bank.Which is where the problem lies: The phrase “cross-selling” is all about profitability, not about meeting client needs. When employees hear it over and over in meetings, and read it repeatedly in memos and emails, they know what it really means.Banks aren’t credible when they blame fraud on a small number of employees who allegedly didn’t live up to the bank’s culture. When thousands of employees are fired for unethical behavior, that points to a systemic problem — a problem with controls, a problem with incentives and, almost certainly, a problem with culture.And let’s face it, when it comes to culture, words matter.These days, forward-looking financial services firms are doing everything they can to evolve from being sales-oriented, product-centric businesses to more consultative, client-centric businesses. Calling employees salespeople, the branches they work in stores, the people they are serve customers and the services they offer products is simply out of touch.We are entering an era I call the fiduciary era — when acting in the best interests of individual clients is becoming both a threshold requirement of regulators and an expectation of individuals.In this new era, banks need to talk about their employees as trusted advisers or relationship managers. Credit cards, lines of credit, investment accounts, deposit and checking accounts should be called solutions to clients’ needs. Consumers should be referred to as clients instead of merely customers, to whom a higher duty of care is owed.Cross-selling has no place in the fiduciary era.And yet, we still hear it all the time. As long as we do, we’ll continue to see examples of this kind of behavior.John G. Taft, is chairman of DelaneyTaft L.L.C. He was a former chief executive of the Royal Bank of Canada’s wealth management unit in the United States and a former chairman of the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, or Sifma.Advertisement