
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
NOV. 24, 2015
This interview with Margaret Keane, C.E.O. of Synchrony Financial, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Tell me about your early years.A. I grew up in Queens with six siblings and two cousins. It was a lot of people. We had one bathroom. It was a very typical Irish Catholic family. My family is pretty much all New York City policemen. It started with my grandfather and we’re into the fourth generation now.I was the only one in the family who didn’t really want to pursue that, and I’m also the only one in my family who did not go to Catholic high school. I went to a public high school, and that experience helped me think about going to college because it’s a different group of people. It’s much more diverse.But my dad got sick when I was 10 years old, and he was sick for eight years before he died. It pretty much wiped our family out financially — my dad didn’t have the right insurance and because they had all these kids, they made some bad financial decisions and cashed in his insurance policy to pay bills when he was sick.AdvertisementSo I worked two jobs through college to pay my own way, and got a third job in my senior year. I took out student loans to give the money to my mother to help pay off the debt she had on the house. As I got older, I said to myself, I’m never going to be in this position. I think I have more insurance policies than anybody.That third job was working for Citibank part time as a collector. The work was flexible. You had to make 90 calls a day, and they paid $5.50 an hour, which was a lot of money back then.That work defined me in some ways, too, because of what happened in my family. Believe me, we got collection calls, too. So I have a very high sensitivity to people who run into trouble, particularly when it relates to medical bills.I literally paid off someone’s credit card bill. I had listened in on one of our calls, and the woman was elderly and had been sick, and she sounded fairly desperate on the phone. I said, “Find out how much money she owes.” It was a couple of hundred dollars. I wrote a check.And after college, what did you do?I joined the management trainee program at Citibank after I graduated, partly because they would pay for me to get my M.B.A. I went to school five nights a week after work, and then I started moving up through the ranks.AdvertisementAnd what were some early leadership lessons?The biggest thing I learned when I first started managing people is that you really have to respect the people who were there before you showed up. So you could come in with all these great ideas, but if you come in acting like you know it all and you don’t get the buy-in, then they will reject you.Another important lesson was getting comfortable with the idea of having people work for you who are smarter than you. When you’re young, there’s an insecurity that you have to do and know everything. There are leaders who never learn that lesson, even later on in life.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other lessons?A leader has to be decisive. The most frustrating thing for any organization is when you’re just waffling around and no one knows what to do. You’re going to make mistakes, but you’re better off moving the organization forward than having them waffle. And then you have to be very clear with the organization about what’s happening and why.Have you been given any feedback over the years about your leadership style that surprised you?There were two things. One was true. One was not true.For a while, there was a perception that I couldn’t make hard decisions. And the reason they thought I couldn’t make hard decisions was because people liked me. I would get really angry about it because I know how to make hard decisions, but it’s always about how you treat the process when you’re making the hard decisions.The second one is something that I really have been working on and is very important in the role I’m in now. I’m a doer by nature, and because I’ve worked my way up, I know a lot of things. So it’s easy for me to want to jump in and try to solve something. So I’ve learned to hold myself back from solving the problem and to let the organization solve it first.How do you hire?I always ask, “Why are you leaving your current job, and why are you coming here?” You want to make sure people aren’t running away from something and you want to make sure they’re coming here for the right reasons. And then I want to know if they can build teams. Do they have a following? How many people have followed them from one job to the next?What career and life advice do you give to new college grads?I’m a big believer in getting an internship, because you have to figure out what you want to do. Particularly for this generation, they’re coming out of college and a lot of them don’t know what they want to do. An internship can give you a sense of where you want to go.And there are a couple of things I say to our interns. The first is work hard. You’re not going to get anywhere if you don’t dig in and work hard. And that means doing things you don’t like doing and not complaining about it. That’s just life.The second thing I tell them is that you have to ask questions and raise your hand. If you’re not getting enough out of the assignment that we’re giving you, then raise your hand. Do the job that somebody doesn’t want to do and you will get noticed.AdvertisementAnd for this generation, I also say, pick your head up from your phone. Look around, see what’s happening, engage socially. As much as we think they’re social, they’re not really that social because they do everything on their phones.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on November 29, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: When Hardship Informs Leadership.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »