AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinNew York’s financial regulator wants information from Caliber Home Loans, one of the nation’s fastest-growing mortgage firms, about its handling of distressed mortgages and origination of mortgages to borrowers with checkered credit histories.The request for documents is an indication the New York Department of Financial Services is ratcheting up an early stage investigation into Caliber, a wholly owned subsidiary of Lone Star Funds, a large private equity firm based in Dallas, said a person briefed on the matter but not authorized to speak publicly.The New York regulator made the request in a letter sent a week ago to Caliber, said the person briefed on the matter. The regulator told Caliber it was investigating multiple complaints from consumers in New York and wanted information related to the firm’s procedures for handling distressed mortgages and foreclosures.The regulator is also asking for information about mortgages Caliber has begun writing to borrowers who have filed for bankruptcy or been foreclosed on but are repairing their credit histories. Caliber is one of the few mortgage firms that has begun making so-called nonprime loans nearly a decade after the start of the housing bust.The investigation officially began several months ago, but the regulator only recently began asking the firm to provide documents. The inquiry, by Maria Vullo, the superintendent for the Department of Financial Services, coincides with a separate investigation opened last fall by Eric Schneiderman, the New York State attorney general.A Caliber spokesman declined to comment on the document request.Ms. Vullo is following in the footsteps of her predecessor, Benjamin Lawsky, who was a forceful regulator of the nonbank mortgage firms that emerged as major players in the business of collecting mortgage checks and dealing with delinquent borrowers in the wake of the financial crisis.When he was superintendent, Mr. Lawsky reached a settlement with Ocwen Financial in 2014 that forced its executive chairman to step down after major problems were found with the firm’s dealings with distressed homeowners. During Mr. Lawsky’s tenure, the agency also began an investigation into portions of Nationstar’s business that is continuing. That large mortgage firm is backed by the Fortress Investment Group, another big private equity firm.The heightened scrutiny of Caliber comes as private-equity-owned mortgage firms are grabbing a large share of the business. Big banks have pulled back from processing mortgages after paying big fines levied by regulators and federal authorities for foreclosure abuses during the financial crisis.Caliber, a firm that Lone Star began cobbling together nearly four years ago, now ranks as the 10th-largest mortgage servicer, or bill collector, out of 30 major companies nationwide.The rapid growth at Caliber, which has more than 5,000 employees, has not been without problems. Last year, the ratings agency Fitch issued a negative outlook on Caliber, partly because of its rapid growth and increased regulatory scrutiny.Most of the distressed loans handled by Caliber are bought at discount from either government agencies or banks by Lone Star, which has long specialized in investing in beaten-down assets.Linda Tirelli, a lawyer in White Plains who is known as a forceful advocate for homeowners facing foreclosure, said in April that she had complained to Ms. Vullo’s office about Caliber because of how the mortgage firm handled an effort by one of her clients to negotiate a loan modification. Ms. Tirelli said she had a phone conversation with one of the lawyers in the agency’s real estate division and provided documents that she said suggested Caliber had been disingenuous in the negotiations.“They seemed genuinely interested,” said Ms. Tirelli, whose client has since received a loan modification deal from Caliber. “If enough people complain, that is how you get change.”Advertisement