By ANITA GATESSEPT. 25, 2016
“There will be no more birthday celebrations, birthday cakes, levity or celebrations of any kind within the office,” the boss wrote on Feb. 8, 1978. “This is a business office. If you have to celebrate, do it after office hours on your own time.”The employees of Tiger Oil Company probably weren’t surprised. They had seen worse. “Do not speak to me when you see me,” the man had ordered in a memo the month before. “If I want to speak to you, I will do so. I want to save my throat. I don’t want to ruin it by saying hello to all of you.”The boss was Mike Davis, otherwise known as, tellingly, Tiger Mike. A former chauffeur, he had become a Houston oil and gas magnate. But he earned an even greater measure of notoriety as the author of blunt and widely circulated office memos that earned him the unofficial title “world’s grumpiest boss.”Mr. Davis died at 85 on Sept. 18 at his home in Las Vegas. His death was confirmed by Mathew Goolsby, a longtime friend and business associate, who said the cause was complications of prostate cancer.AdvertisementTiger Oil filed for bankruptcy in the 1980s, but decades later it made news again when Mr. Davis’s memos started showing up on the internet, notably on the website Letters of Note. The site’s founder, Shaun Usher, declined to identify the oil industry source who made him aware of the memos in 2010 or so, but with Mr. Davis’s permission he has included them in a new book, “Letters of Note: Volume 2” (2016).“I wanted to put him in the first book,” Mr. Usher said on Saturday in a phone interview from his home in Manchester, England. “But his first response was just literally: ‘Not interested. Thanks.’ But I kept trying.”After Mr. Davis saw a copy of that book (“Letters of Note,” 2013), which included correspondence by the likes of Katharine Hepburn, Mick Jagger and Galileo, he reconsidered. He wrote a letter, asking “Are the same kinds of celebrities going to be in your second book?” Mr. Usher responded by mentioning a few: Winston Churchill, Beatrix Potter, Richard Burton. And that was enough to persuade Mr. Davis; he even volunteered to send a photo.Advertisement“He wasn’t embarrassed” by the contents of the memos, Mr. Usher recalled.As a manager, Mr. Davis appeared to be concerned about the dress code (“On days you have to work, and you think you should be off, you wear slouchy dress attire,” he complained), idle conversation (“Do your jobs and keep your mouth shut!” he once wrote, in all capital letters) and office furniture (“I am paying you to work — not slouch in your chair with your feet up on a desk or table”).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Davis had gone into the oil business with money from a divorce settlement. In the 1950s he worked as a chauffeur for Helen Gilmer Bonfils, the fashionable Denver Post heiress and owner, one of the most powerful women in Colorado. In 1959, when she was 69 and he was 28, they married, although he was, as The Post once reported, “a pugnacious and profane high school dropout.”Their marriage lasted until 1971, and according to “Papa’s Girl,” a 2007 biography of Ms. Bonfils by Eva Hodges Watt, the couple were happier than some people had predicted. “She loved the fact that Mike had enough guts to behave outrageously,” a family friend was quoted as saying.Mr. Davis’s most recent moment in the business spotlight was in 2012, when the billionaire Kirk Kerkorian and his Tracinda Corporation settled (for undisclosed terms) a lawsuit against him for fraud. It was reported that Mr. Davis had deceived Mr. Kerkorian into investing in Delta Petroleum Company, which soon failed, and that Mr. Davis had received a $5 million finder’s fee in Delta stock for arranging the deal.Edward Michael Davis (everyone called him Mike) was born on March 1, 1931, although exactly where and to whom has been a matter of speculation. The Las Vegas Review-Journal reported that his birthplace was the Rosebud (Sioux) reservation in South Dakota, that he had served in the Army, and that both his parents and all six of his siblings had died.He was the longtime partner of Phyllis McGuire, the youngest of the McGuire Sisters, the midcentury pop-singing trio. Last month he talked to The Las Vegas Sun about helping her put her Las Vegas mansion, complete with an indoor Eiffel Tower replica, on the market.Posting on social media, old friends and colleagues agreed that Mr. Davis had been difficult to work for, but they found redeeming qualities. On Facebook, one consultant wrote, “I remember the first time I was cussed out by him”; a former employee saluted him as “truly one of a kind”; and a colleague hailed him as “one of the last of the great oil field wildcatters.”A version of this article appears in print on September 26, 2016, on Page A25 of the New York edition with the headline: Edward Davis, ‘World’s Grumpiest Boss,’ Dies at 85.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.