By DAVID SEGALSEPT. 25, 2016
Anyone visiting the Rockefeller Center studios of MSNBC on Sept. 2 would have witnessed a peculiar spectacle: the reporter Gabriel Sherman arriving for an on-air interview accompanied by a bodyguard.Mr. Sherman had come to discuss his New York magazine cover article about the end of Roger Ailes’s career as the chairman of Fox News over allegations of serial sexual harassment. It is just a fraction of what Mr. Sherman has written in the six years he has covered the cable TV titan, a canon that includes a 500-plus-page biography, “The Loudest Voice in the Room,” published in 2014.The output has placed Mr. Sherman at the vanguard of the biggest media story of the year, a distinction he earned by having the nerve and focus to forage at the hostile perimeter of the country’s most successful cable news operation.A high tolerance for stress has helped, too. In mid-July Politico reported that Mr. Ailes had once talked about dispatching thugs to beat up Mr. Sherman. It is unclear how serious he was. But now that Mr. Ailes had lost his job, it seemed possible that he would also lose his famously volatile temper. So Mr. Sherman and the editors at New York hired some muscle.Advertisement“It was surreal,” Mr. Sherman said, recalling being protected by a former professional basketball player wearing a dark suit. “He’d had a cameo in ‘White Men Can’t Jump,’ so I got to ask him about Wesley Snipes. Nothing happened, but he was there.”The agita-to-upside ratio of turning Fox News into a beat has always been dauntingly high, and nobody knows that better than Mr. Sherman. But it is a testament to Mr. Ailes’s grip on both his own narrative and his employees that the behavior that would lead to his downfall is a minuscule part of “The Loudest Voice.” Mr. Sherman says he had “an inkling” of a pervasive culture of sexual harassment at Fox, but the only two victims heard from in the book are women who met Mr. Ailes before the network was founded.So in some ways Mr. Ailes’s noisy exit represents a second chance for Mr. Sherman, an opportunity he has seized. In the months since the former Fox anchor Gretchen Carlson went public with her sexual harassment lawsuit, he has produced a gusher of words that seem to nail every detail of this tawdry story.AdvertisementAs Mr. Sherman researched and wrote the biography, starting in 2011, Mr. Ailes and his allies began a sustained public relations offensive designed to discredit the writer and silence his sources. This included, as reported by CNN, the compiling of a 400-page dossier on Mr. Sherman. There were social media attacks by Fox’s on-air talent (“PHONEY JOURNALIST,” the host Sean Hannity posted on Twitter) and articles on Breitbart News tarring Mr. Sherman as a lackey of the left-leaning billionaire George Soros.Only the extent of this campaign might have come as a surprise. For years, reporters knew that writing even down-the-middle features about the network might be considered a belligerent act.In 2006, Julia Angwin, then a reporter at The Wall Street Journal, wrote an article about Mr. Ailes’s struggles to start MyNetworkTV. “I later saw Ailes at an event and he said: ‘You took your shot. I have the rest of my life to take mine,’” she recalled. “Then he walked away.”A spokeswoman at Fox News said the company did not know about the operation to discredit Mr. Sherman. It and other tactical battles fought by Mr. Ailes were run in a space, reportedly on the 14th floor of the network’s headquarters, that some called the black room. A handful of underlings loyal to Mr. Ailes were in charge of the work there, the spokeswoman said, all of whom were recently laid off.Marc L. Mukasey, a lawyer for Mr. Ailes, said in a written statement: “Roger Ailes builds media companies and helps elect presidents. He couldn’t give a hoot about Gabe Sherman. It’s Sherman who appears to be obsessively stalking Roger and his family, and it’s Sherman who seems willing to go to any length to keep his own name in the news. Roger is on to new challenges.”Presented with an inventory of details in this article, Mr. Mukasey said, “Your facts are backward and wrong.” He did not elaborate.In early September, a different lawyer hinted in a letter to New York  that a defamation suit might be filed against the magazine over its coverage of Mr. Ailes. In hindsight, Mr. Sherman says he underestimated Mr. Ailes’s pugnacity. “Part of me was maybe a little naïve when I took on the book,” he said. “I just thought it was the biggest story on my beat. It really hadn’t been done. It wasn’t like I was being masochistic.”Mr. Sherman spoke one recent afternoon in the cafeteria of New York magazine’s SoHo offices. He has a boyish mop of reddish-brown hair and the wide, unblinking gaze of a man ready for a staring contest. A self-described introvert, he speaks a few decibels louder than necessary when he talks of work. “The Second-Loudest Voice in the Room” would do for his biography.AdvertisementEven sitting, he is in nonstop motion. He pinches the stubble on his chin, rearranges his sleeves, tugs at his forelock, stifles a coffee belch with a fist to his lips. Repeat in random order.His wife, Jennifer Stahl, a freelance editor, will sometimes spot this excess energy. “I’ll tell him, ‘Gabe, you haven’t been to the gym today,’” she said in a phone interview. “‘You’ve got to burn it off.’”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What Mr. Sherman doesn’t leave on the treadmill he brings to the office. Former colleagues at The New York Observer, where he started in 2003, called him the Bot. In part, this captured an inability to grasp the social nuances of a newsroom, a place where raw ambition is supposed to be politely concealed and where frisking fellow reporters for information and sources is frowned on. But mostly, the nickname was a tribute to his tenacity, notably a willingness to call even people who had just hung up on him.“It was remarkable because I think if someone hung up on me, I’d be traumatized,” said Sheelah Kolhatkar, a staff writer for The New Yorker who used to sit next to Mr. Sherman at The Observer. “But it seems like over time, everyone ends up talking to him.”Whether that information is accurate, or sufficiently vetted, is another matter. Last October, for instance, he wrote in New York magazine that “Joe Biden is running for president,” citing a source familiar with a conversation between Mr. Biden and a union leader.And in April 2015, he wrote that Howard Stern had phoned Donald Trump to tell him about some bawdy repartee that the Fox host Megyn Kelly had engaged in while on Mr. Stern’s radio show. The idea was that Mr. Stern was giving Mr. Trump — who had recently tangled  with Ms. Kelly — some ammunition for future skirmishes. But Mr. Stern said on his show that the call as described didn’t happen and offered Mr. Sherman $1 million if he could prove it did.Nonetheless, Mr. Sherman’s hits far outnumber his misses. Originally, he pitched his agent a book about Fox News, but he quickly realized that the network was a reflection of the will of one man. With an advance from Random House of $450,000, he started reporting a biography.Fifteen minutes after he placed his first call, the intimidation began. The person he phoned had contacted Mr. Ailes, whose public relations representative called Mr. Sherman to browbeat him into backing off.Public attacks on websites and social media started about six months later. Then, in the summer of 2012, Ms. Stahl spotted a black sport utility vehicle at the bottom of the driveway at a house in Vermont that she and Mr. Sherman had rented. The place was on a dead-end dirt road, in a tiny town where pickup trucks are the norm. When Ms. Stahl started walking toward the vehicle, it pulled into the driveway of a neighbor, who wasn’t home. Who was in this car was never known, though Mr. Sherman assumed it was an Ailes operative.AdvertisementThe low point, Mr. Sherman said, was a death threat delivered by telephone that winter. Mr. Sherman believes that the caller was not connected to Fox but had been whipped into a furor by the online attacks on the reporter’s character.“He said something like, ‘You’ve gone after the right, and now we’re coming after you,” he recalls. “Then a lot of things you can’t print in a newspaper.”He filed a police report, and that night the couple packed their bags and drove to Pennsylvania to stay with family. “I thought, we need to get out of New York,” Mr. Sherman said. “This is too stressful.”Once a final draft was ready, Mr. Sherman needed to bulletproof the text. He spent $100,000 to hire two fact checkers to sift through the manuscript, with help from Ms. Stahl. The process, he said, took 2,000 hours.“The Loudest Voice” is a surprisingly empathetic account of one of the more colorful and consequential figures in the business. Of course, it is missing the voice in the title, which is heard directly only in “A Note on Sources,” in which Mr. Sherman recounts vivid attempts to persuade Mr. Ailes to sit for interviews.“I was always wondering, ‘Why is he so paranoid about me writing this book?’” Mr. Sherman said. “My pitch to him was ‘I want to try to understand how you changed America, and how television reshaped American politics.’ But he couldn’t do what Steve Jobs did with Walter Isaacson,” Mr. Sherman said, referring to the author of a biography on Jobs, “and say, ‘Cover my life, warts and all.’ Now we know why.”The book spent two weeks on the New York Times best-seller list, but sales fell short of expectations. To date, 11,000 copies have been sold, according to Nielsen BookScan, along with 19,000 copies of e-books and audiobooks, according to Random House. It is still in print, and there are plans for a paperback, with a new afterword.Mr. Sherman’s travails started to pay off in July, on the day Ms. Carlson’s litigation came to light. Her lawyer, Nancy Erika Smith, was inundated with calls from reporters around the world, but took Mr. Sherman’s personally.“He knew so much that I had a certain level of trust that he’d be honest and be able to put things in context which nobody else could, in the same way,” Ms. Smith said in a phone interview. And, she added, “he kept calling.”An article on Monday about Gabriel Sherman, author of “The Loudest Voice in the Room,” a biography of Roger Ailes, misstated the availability of the book. A paperback version is in the works, but the hardback is not out of print. The article also misstated the occupation of Jennifer Stahl, Mr. Sherman’s wife. She is a freelance editor, not a freelance fact checker.An article on Monday about Gabriel Sherman, author of “The Loudest Voice in the Room,” a biography of Roger Ailes, using information from Mr. Sherman, misstated the size of the advance he received for the book. It was $450,000, not $430,000.A version of this article appears in print on September 26, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Grit vs. Goliath.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.