SEPT. 25, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.17 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.40 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.08 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Board of Education, $140.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation Turnpike Enterprise, $175 million of debt securities. Competitive.AdvertisementHennepin County, Minn., $95 million of Series B general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Hennepin County, Minn., $60.3 million of Series C general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementGalena Park Independent School District, Tex., $102.7 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Riverside County Transportation Commission, Calif., $76 million of debt securities. Competitive.Tuscaloosa Public Education Building Authority, Ala., $69.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Mecklenburg County, N.C., $200 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Anaheim Housing and Public Improvements Authority, Calif., $290.4 million of electric utility distribution system revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.California Public Works Board, $527.5 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.California, $210 million of Palomar Health general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.California, $200 million of general obligation bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Corona-Norco Unified School District, Calif., $102 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Foothill-De Anza Community College District, Calif., $225.9 million of debt securities. Morgan Stanley.AdvertisementGoodyear, Ariz., $77.7 million of Public Improvement Corporation municipal facilities revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Goodyear, Ariz., $55 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Greater Orlando Aviation Authority, Fla., $189 million of airport facilities revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Harris County Hospital District, Tex., $158.4 million of senior lien revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Hawaii, $676 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Irvine Ranch Water District, Calif., $106 million of bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Johnson-Miami Unified School District, Kan., $82.4 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Lehigh University, Pa., $150 million of taxable bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Livermore Valley Joint Unified School District, Calif., $82 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Los Angeles Community College District, $171.7 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Ramirez.Maricopa County, Ariz., $66 million of Industrial Development Authority senior-living facilities revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Massachusetts, $430.3 million of transportation fund revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Massachusetts, $127.2 million of federal highway grant anticipation notes. Morgan Stanley.AdvertisementMissouri Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $97.7 million of senior-living facilities revenue bonds. Ziegler.Nebraska Municipal Energy Agency, $68 million of power supply system revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank, $98.8 million of refinancing bonds. Raymond James.New York City Housing Development Corporation, $72 million of debt securities. Morgan Stanley.Newark Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, Tex., $53.9 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Norfolk, Va., $167 million of general obligation capital improvement and refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Ohio, $100 million of capital facilities lease appropriation bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets.Oklahoma Capitol Improvement Authority, $181 million of state highway capital improvement revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Port Huron Area School District, Mich., $97.7 million of St. Clair County school building and site bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Rancho California Water District Financing Authority, Calif., $67 million of tax-exempt fixed-rate revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Rhode Island Health and Educational Building Corporation, $88.9 million of higher education facility revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.AdvertisementRiverside County, Calif., $82.4 million of Teeter obligation notes. Raymond James.St. Johns County, Fla., $55.4 million of water and sewer revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.A version of this article appears in print on September 26, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.