AdvertisementSupported byBy Henry FountainLooking to build on momentum from the Paris climate agreement’s milestone last week, government officials will gather in Montreal beginning Tuesday for final negotiations on a deal to cap greenhouse gas emissions from international jet flights.The measure — which is supported by many governments, by the aviation industry and to some degree by environmental groups — is expected to be approved by Oct. 7, the last day of the nearly two-week assembly of the International Civil Aviation Organization, the United Nations agency that oversees international air travel.Last week, the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, announced that he had secured enough commitments to ensure that the Paris accord, which was reached in December, would enter into legal force this year.And at least 55 countries, including the United States, China and most of Europe, have announced support for an aviation agreement. If all of them participate, it would be a major step in reducing the environmental impact of international air travel, an often-overlooked contributor to climate change, largely through the purchase of credits to offset emissions.“This year’s assembly is aviation’s Paris moment,” said Brad Schallert, deputy director for international climate cooperation with the World Wildlife Fund. “It’s a litmus test to see which countries are ready to step up and lead.”But reducing aviation’s impact on climate has been discussed since the Kyoto climate talks nearly 20 years ago, and there are concerns that the current measure, which has been under negotiation for several years, will not go far enough soon enough.In an earlier version of the proposal, participation by most countries would have been mandatory beginning in 2020. But after the latest negotiations, participation would be voluntary until 2027. That raises the possibility that, at least initially, the measure would not achieve the goal of capping emissions at levels outlined for 2020 regardless of the future growth of air travel. There may be more negotiating during the assembly itself.“For this mechanism to be a good first step forward, it’s important that states agree to solidly reach this carbon-neutral growth goal in 2020,” said Kelsey Perlman, a policy officer at Carbon Market Watch, which studies the use of carbon markets for protecting the climate.Michael Gill, executive director of the Air Transport Action Group, a coalition of companies and organizations throughout the industry, said the group had preferred a mandatory approach. “However, we do understand that this has been an extremely sensitive political discussion and, from our perspective, it’s been important to reach as broad a consensus as possible,” he said.Among countries with large international aviation traffic, Russia and India have yet to signal their support. The two countries have expressed concern that an offset program could be an economic burden on developing countries.In its present form, the measure would, in fact, exempt many small and developing nations with relatively small airlines. Because of rules on competition, that would mean that some popular international routes by major carriers to and from those countries would also be excluded. For instance, if South Africa is exempt, as it is expected to be, South African Airways flights between Johannesburg and London would be excluded. But flights on the same route by British Airways and others would be excluded as well.International flights now account for about 2 percent of annual worldwide emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, and, with air travel increasing and emissions reductions taking effect in other industries, the percentage is expected to grow significantly in the coming decades.International aviation emissions are not covered by the Paris agreement, which calls for emissions reductions to keep global warming “well below” 2 degrees Celsius, or 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, over the average preindustrial temperatures.They are also not part of the pledges to control emissions that countries have made as part of the Paris accord. Mr. Ban acted quickly to obtain those pledges in part because of the possible election of Donald J. Trump, who has vowed to pull the United States out of the international pact. Under its rules, once the deal comes into legal force, no country can withdraw from it for four years.By contrast, in its present form, the aviation agreement would allow a participating country to opt out of the voluntary phase after six months. So a future president could withdraw and deal the agreement a crushing blow.That “opt out” clause is one of several elements in the current proposal that, if not changed, will make it “hard for the environmental community to embrace this agreement with completely open arms,” said Ms. Perlman, of Carbon Market Watch.The offset measure would come on top of other emissions reductions that result from steps the aviation industry is taking, including improving efficiency in aircraft and operations, as well increasing the use of biofuels.Under the program, carriers would have to buy carbon credits to offset emissions above the 2020 limit. The credits would be offered by forest-conservation programs, alternative energy installations and other projects that prevent some amount of emissions. Many of the projects are in developing countries.The validity of these credits is another cause for concern, said Bill Hemmings, director of aviation and shipping at Transport & Environment, a federation of European environmental groups. There will be much work to do after the assembly to develop standards ensuring that the credits available through the program are monitored and verified, and to avoid so-called double counting, in which emissions reductions used as aviation credits are also counted by countries toward their Paris pledges.“It’s clear there are a lot of issues yet to be sorted out,” Mr. Hemmings said. “But without watertight guarantees, you don’t have anything.”The cost of the program would depend on several factors, including the number of credits needed and their cost. One estimate by the United Nations aviation agency suggests that by 2025, the program could cost airlines from $1.5 billion to $6.2 billion, or about 0.2 percent to 0.7 percent of worldwide revenue.Airlines — many of which already run voluntary programs in which environmentally conscious passengers can buy offset credits for specific flights — would decide on their own whether to pass some or all of the cost on to all passengers.Because it is not yet clear how many countries will agree to participate in the voluntary phase of the program, it is also not clear how much of emissions above the 2020 limit would be offset. One estimate by the International Council on Clean Transportation, a research group, is that with widespread participation, about three-quarters of the excess growth in emissions from 2020 to 2035 would be covered.That is why, Mr. Schallert of the World Wildlife Fund said, it is important that more countries sign on, even during the assembly. “We need greater participation in the voluntary phases,” he said. “We’re pushing countries to do that.”Mr. Gill, of the Air Transport Action Group, said that no matter where the final negotiations led, it was important that any measure that was eventually approved be straightforward and clear.“The industry needs absolute certainty from an operating perspective,” he said. “We are asking for governments to come up with firm decisions at this assembly.”Follow Henry Fountain on Twitter: @henryfountainAdvertisement