By HIROKO TABUCHINOV. 29, 2015
If the lines at Target or Macy’s this Black Friday seemed shorter than in years past, shoppers have the Internet to thank.More people shopped online over the Thanksgiving weekend than in brick-and-mortar stores, according to a closely watched survey released by retail’s biggest trade group, the National Retail Federation. (Spending at physical stores still dwarfs online spending, however.)The trade group also stuck by its forecast on Sunday that retail sales this holiday season will rise 3.7 percent this year, below last year’s growth of 4.1 percent. For the first time in over a decade, however, the group did not release estimates of total spending for the holiday weekend.The federation’s chief executive, Matthew Shay, said big shifts in consumer behavior made Black Friday weekend sales less of a bellwether for holiday spending, or for the state of the American consumer.AdvertisementShoppers are taking advantage of a deluge of sales and promotions to shop when they want, and how they want, he said.AdvertisementRetailers, in turn, are scrambling to offer sales earlier each year, both in stores and online.“Shopping has changed and the consumer has changed and retailers have changed,” Mr. Shay said. “Retailers are heavily promoting starting the day after Halloween.”Meanwhile, there is “a broad and deep expectation” among shoppers that sales and promotions will continue far beyond Black Friday, and less of an imperative to spend over the weekend, Mr. Shay said.
      In shops across the country, including the empty malls of Georgia and the “not too crazy” crowds at struggling J. Crew, the relative calm that accompanied Black Friday shopping this year belied a frenzy for deals — many of them on the web.
    The importance of Black Friday has long been more myth than fact. Black Friday is generally not the year’s biggest shopping day. MasterCard estimated that shoppers bought more on Dec. 23 last year, presumably in a late scramble for Christmas gifts.And Black Friday’s importance has waned even further in recent years, as retailers offered holiday sales earlier and longer. Some industry experts have questioned whether the holiday season itself is losing significance as retailers increasingly offer sales all year round. And data shows that consumers are spending less on clothing and shoes and more on traveling, eating out and on their cars and homes.Still, holiday promotions — many of them on Black Friday — remain critically important for some products, like new gadgets and technology.“For new categories, historically, over half of the volume in early years shows up in the fourth quarter,” Shawn DuBravac, chief economist of the Consumer Technology Association, said on Sunday. That has been true for DVDs, high-definition TVs, Blu-ray technology and Apple’s iPad, he said.“That’s what we’ll likely see with smartwatches this year,” he said. “Half of overall volume for smartwatches should show up in the holiday quarter.”AdvertisementBut for the consumer technology industry over all, about 27 percent of the year’s sales came during the holiday quarter, only slightly more than during other times of the year, he said.The National Retail Federation, which surveyed about 4,300 consumers before and during the Thanksgiving weekend, said that shoppers had spent or planned to spend $300 over the weekend this year. Because of a change in methodology, that figure was not directly comparable to the $381 that consumers said they had spent or would spend in the group’s survey last year.Nearly 102 million people said they shopped in stores over the Thanksgiving weekend, the trade group said, compared with more than 103 million who said they had shopped online. Some did both, and over all, more than 151 million people shopped over the weekend, according to the federation’s survey.Getting an early reading of holiday sales has always been based on guesswork. A more accurate measure of holiday spending will not be available until the Department of Commerce releases retail spending figures next month for November, and for December in January.ShopperTrak, which estimates sales at about 12,000 brick-and-mortar retailers worldwide using location analytics, said that combined sales in the United States on Thanksgiving and Black Friday totaled about $12.1 billion. That compares with an estimate of $12.3 billion spent over those two days in stores last year.But Kevin Kearns, ShopperTrak’s chief revenue officer, cautioned against reading too much into those results. ShopperTrak’s data showed greater spending before Black Friday, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This year, we saw Black Friday ads emerge before Halloween, as retailers aimed to get at the shopper’s wallet early,” he said in a statement. Over all, ShopperTrak forecasts that retail sales will climb 2.4 percent this holiday season.Data from Adobe that aggregated sales on about 4,500 retail websites underscored the growing importance of online shopping. Shoppers spent a record $7.2 billion online on Thanksgiving Day and Black Friday, Adobe said, a 14.3 percent jump from the previous year. About a third of purchases came from mobile devices, according to Adobe.The company predicted that shoppers would spend another $3 billion on Monday, when retailers offer fresh deals on electronics and other merchandise. (On the other hand, the significance of so called Cyber Monday is also declining, as online shopping becomes ubiquitous. “I anticipate the term will slowly go away,” said Mr. DuBravac of the Consumer Technology Association.)AdvertisementMr. Kearns, of ShopperTrak, said that shopping websites were also changing the way people shop in stores.“Shoppers are researching products ahead of time, targeting their store visits and arriving in-store with the intention of making a purchase,” Mr. Kearns said.Social media also played a part in shaping shopper sentiment going into the holiday weekend, he said. In particular, he suggested, more shoppers may be staying away from stores on Thanksgiving Day as part of a “social backlash against store openings on the holiday.”A version of this article appears in print on November 30, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Black Friday Just a Day, No Longer a Bellwether.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.