AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere’s what to expect in the week ahead:OIL INDUSTRYOil traders will closely monitor the meeting of the International Energy Forum, which includes representatives of producing and consuming countries, scheduled for Monday through Wednesday in Algiers. Analysts expect that oil ministers from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and other crucial oil-producing countries, including Russia, may use the forum to work on a deal aimed at propping up oil prices, which are now about $46 a barrel for Brent crude. Reaching an agreement will probably require overcoming tensions between the two big OPEC powers: Saudi Arabia and Iran. The Saudis quashed a freeze deal in April, when the Iranians refused to participate. Stanley ReedLEGALMaurice R. Greenberg, the former chief executive of American International Group, is expected to take the witness stand on Tuesday in his civil fraud trial, which recently got underway in a New York State court. The 91-year-old Mr. Greenberg, who is known as Hank, is expected to go toe-to-toe with lawyers from the New York’s attorney general’s office, and his appearance could last several days. He has fought the accusations for more than a decade, determined to preserve his legacy as a prominent businessman and the architect of A.I.G. The case was originally filed by Eliot Spitzer when he was the state attorney general. Mr. Greenberg and another former A.I.G. executive, Howard Smith, face charges that they engineered phony reinsurance transactions intended to make A.I.G.’s numbers look better to Wall Street, a claim that Mr. Greenberg and Mr. Smith have denied. Liz MoyerECONOMYThe Federal Reserve’s policy meeting last week was an unusually fractious affair. Seven officials voted to extend the Fed’s economic stimulus campaign, and three voted to raise interest rates. Now, both sides will begin to offer public explanations about what happened and what is likely to come next. Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, will answer questions at a pair of events. On Wednesday, she will testify before the House Financial Services Committee. The topic is regulation, but members of Congress rarely feel bound to stay on topic. On Thursday, she will speak with participants at a forum for minority bankers run by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. One of the dissenters, Eric Rosengren, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, issued a statement on Friday. Scheduled to speak on Wednesday are the other two: Loretta Mester, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, and Esther George, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Binyamin AppelbaumMERGERSShareholders of SABMiller will vote Wednesday on whether to approve a more than $100 billion merger with Anheuser-Busch InBev that would create a giant in the brewing industry. But Anheuser-Busch InBev’s efforts to win shareholder approval for the deal could face a challenge this week. To win support for the deal last year, Anheuser-Busch InBev proposed allowing SABMiller’s two largest shareholders — the American tobacco giant Altria and the Santo Domingo family of Colombia — to take restricted shares instead of cash. After an outcry from some investors, SABMiller’s board recommended — and a British court later ordered, in August — that the two biggest shareholders be treated as a separate class, allowing other investors to vote on the cash offer separately. As a result, Anheuser-Busch InBev needs to win the support of 75 percent of the shares voted by a smaller pool of investors — one that does not include its two largest shareholders — for the transaction to proceed. Chad BrayECONOMYOn Wednesday, the Commerce Department will release data on durable goods orders in August. Economists expect overall durable goods orders to have dropped by 1.4 percent last month, reversing the 4.4 percent gain in July. Weaker demand for planes is expected to pressure the data downward, but economists will be keeping an eye on more stable levels of orders for machinery and goods like washers and dryers. Excluding the volatile transportation category, durable goods orders are expected to decline by 0.4 percentage point. Nelson D. SchwartzBANKINGOn Thursday, the House Financial Services Committee will hold a hearing on the fake bank accounts created at Wells Fargo. The bank’s chief executive, John Stumpf, has been invited to testify. The hearing follows a dramatic showdown in the Senate last week, at which Mr. Stumpf was grilled over his response to the widespread problems. Some Republican members of the House committee are also expected to raise questions about the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which fined the bank $100 million for the illegal practices, and about why the regulator did not unearth the long-running scandal sooner. Michael CorkeryECONOMYThe Commerce Department will release new data on Friday on personal income, consumption and inflation in August. Economists are looking for personal consumption to increase by 0.1 percentage point, and income and inflation to rise by 0.2 percentage point each. The economy is growing modestly, and the data is expected to reflect that steady pace. A stronger reading on inflation, however, would draw more attention, especially with the Federal Reserve eyeing a potential interest rate increase later this year. Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisement