By GERALDINE FABRIKANTSEPT. 23, 2016
At a time when many university endowments have been reporting lackluster or even negative returns, Yale has turned in a winning year.The university said on Friday that its endowment earned 3.4 percent for the fiscal year ended June 30, putting its value at $25.4 billion.The Yale endowment, under the leadership of David Swensen, has long been a top performer. Its latest showing is particularly striking since the average among endowments that have reported so far is a loss of 2.7 percent, according to Cambridge Associates, which manages over $9 billion for foundations and endowments.On Thursday, Harvard, the only university with an endowment larger than Yale’s, reported a 2 percent  decline, ending the fiscal year with $35.7 billion.AdvertisementEndowments are crucial for university budgets. In fiscal 2017, Yale’s endowment is expected to contribute $1.2 billion, or about 34 percent of the university’s budget. The endowment has felt increasing pressure as distributions to the operating budget have nearly doubled over the last decade.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Under Mr. Swensen, who has led the endowment since 1985, the average annual return over the last 10 years was 8.1 percent, surpassing the average of 5.1 percent for college and university endowments.AdvertisementMr. Swensen pioneered an investment model that included a broader array of assets than had typically been used at universities, adding categories like private equity and natural resources to the mix rather than investing exclusively in stocks and bonds.Despite current skepticism about hedge fund performance, Yale has maintained its diversified approach. But since the financial collapse in 2008 — which caused a steep decline in the endowment’s value and made it difficult to meet university budget needs — it has decided to keep half of its investments in liquid assets.Mr. Swensen has also relied solely on outside managers rather than creating an internal management team at Yale. That model is now widely followed by many schools with large endowments. Harvard has long been the exception, although it recently decided to give a significant portion of its endowment to outside firms.A version of this article appears in print on September 26, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Yale Endowment Shines vs. Returns for Its Peers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.