By RACHEL ABRAMSSEPT. 26, 2016
American Express will be able to prevent businesses from pushing customers toward competing credit cards after all.On Monday, a federal appeals court ruled that American Express could stop merchants that accept its cards from encouraging customers to use rival payment cards that charge the stores lower transaction fees. The decision reversed a lower court’s 2015 ruling that such restrictions violated federal antitrust law.The decision is a major victory for American Express, which wants to ensure that its customers, who pay higher-than-average membership fees, do not encounter any barriers to use. The ruling means that American Express can continue to enforce provisions in its contracts with merchants that prohibit them from steering customers toward other forms of payment.Credit card costs are largely invisible to consumers, but retailers pay a fee each time a credit or debit card is used. Amex charges higher so-called swipe fees, or interchange fees, than Visa or MasterCard, and some consumer advocates argue that those costs can get unfairly passed on to shoppers in the form of higher prices.AdvertisementSwipe fees have been a source of simmering hostility between merchants and card issuers for years. Merchants say they overpay, while card networks, which act as electronic highways between stores and banks, argue that the fees help cover fraud losses, security and other costs of doing business. American Express has also argued that customers expect the rewards and other benefits that its membership fees cover.AdvertisementWhile an amendment in the Dodd-Frank financial reform bill put a cap on debit card fees, no such cap exists for credit cards.The decision stems from 2010 lawsuit brought by the Justice Department and attorneys general in 17 states. Last year, Judge Nicholas G. Garaufis of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York ruled that prohibiting merchants from steering customers toward other forms of payment constituted “an unlawful restraint on trade.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But on Monday, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit disagreed, saying that the decision focused only on the merchants’ interests, “while discounting the interests of cardholders.”“This approach does not advance overall consumer satisfaction,” the three-judge panel wrote. “Though merchants may desire lower fees, those fees are necessary to maintaining cardholder satisfaction — and if a particular merchant finds that the cost of Amex fees outweighs the benefit it gains by accepting Amex cards, then the merchant can choose to not accept Amex cards.”In a statement, American Express said that it was “pleased” with the court’s decision.“This means consumers will be able to choose how they pay and our card members will not be discriminated against at the point of sale,” the company said.The Justice Department, which could appeal the ruling, could not be reached immediately for comment.American Express accounted for roughly 26.4 percent of all credit card purchases in the United States as of 2013, according to Monday’s decision. That puts it far behind Visa, which accounted for 45 percent, but slightly ahead of MasterCard, at 23.3 percent.After the Justice Department filed its suit in 2010, Visa and MasterCard agreed to a settlement that would allow merchants to offer incentives to customers for using other forms of payment.But American Express chose to take the issue to court. The company’s terms are laid out in the agreements it has with merchants who choose to accept its cards.A version of this article appears in print on September 27, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Ruling for Amex on Antitrust Appeal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.