AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere is what to look out for this week:The International Monetary Fund is expected to decide on Monday at a meeting of its executive board to include the Chinese currency, the renminbi, among the major currencies that make up its benchmark currency basket. The Chinese government has long been pushing for such a move as a recognition of China’s increasing economic power.The renminbi would join the dollar, euro, pound and yen as the main currencies in the fund’s reserve assets, also known as special drawing rights. Inclusion is expected to increase demand for the renminbi and lessen, to a small degree, global reliance on the dollar. —Landon Thomas Jr.Ten companies are expected to begin taking orders for new listings on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets this week. They will be China’s first initial public offerings since July, when the government banned new share sales to halt a plunge in the markets. The companies are among 28 that are expected to list before the end of the year, part of a backlog of nearly 700 firms that have applied for domestic I.P.O.s.Orders for shares must be prefunded under current rules and are expected to temporarily lock up hundreds of billions of dollars in investors’ funds, which may have contributed to the 5.5 percent drop on Friday on Shanghai’s main share index as investors appeared to be cashing out of their current holdings. —Neil GoughAutomakers on Tuesday are expected to report excellent sales of new vehicles in November, as consumers took advantage of holiday promotions and attractive financing deals on new cars, trucks and sport utility vehicles. Industry analysts predict sales in the United States topped 1.3 million vehicles during the month, and possibly set a record for November volumes.The Detroit car companies were particularly aggressive with Black Friday deals, and analysts expect all major automakers to continue offering big incentives through the rest of the year. Over all, the industry is on pace to achieve 17 million sales in 2015 — a threshold not reached in more than a decade. —Bill VlasicBond investors and federal lawmakers who have been considering a financial rescue for Puerto Rico will be watching on Tuesday to see whether the island makes a $354 million debt payment. Analysts have warned that the debt owed by the Government Development Bank could be the first major payment skipped by the San Juan government and its financial advisers as part of a strategy to preserve cash and force creditors to negotiate.Last week, officials in Puerto Rico said they had not decided whether they would make the payment. —Michael CorkeryThe Bank of England on Tuesday will release the results of its latest round of stress tests that examine the British banking sector’s ability to handle global financial shocks. This year, the central bank is looking at the ability of British banks to weather a potential deterioration in economic conditions in Asia and the eurozone. In a research note last week, Citigroup said that it would expect Britain’s largest publicly listed banks to pass the tests. —Chad BrayThe Federal Reserve has been signaling in recent weeks that it is finally ready to start raising its benchmark interest rate, which it has held near zero since December 2008. Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, has a pair of chances this week to contribute to that public relations campaign. She is scheduled to address the Economic Club of Washington on Wednesday afternoon.The next morning, she heads to Capitol Hill to testify before the Joint Economic Committee. The appearances may be her last public remarks before the Fed’s policy-making committee meets on Dec. 15 and 16. —Binyamin AppelbaumShareholders of the Finnish telecom giant Nokia gathering in Helsinki on Wednesday are expected to approve the $16.6 billion takeover of the company’s French-American rival Alcatel-Lucent. The meeting, and anticipated approval from Alcatel-Lucent’s investors, are the final stages before Nokia completes the deal.It’s the latest chapter in the company’s 150-year-old history, which includes making rubber boots in the 19th century and once reigning as the world’s largest cellphone manufacturer before losing out to rivals like Apple and Samsung. —Mark ScottThe European Central Bank has signaled that it is likely to intensify measures to stimulate the eurozone economy when it meets in Frankfurt on Thursday. Analysts expect the central bank to broaden its purchases of assets like government bonds, which is a way of printing money and feeding it into the economy.The central bank could also increase the interest rate it charges banks to park their cash in its virtual vaults, a way of encouraging them to lend the money instead. —Jack EwingAnthem and Cigna, two of the nation’s largest health insurance companies, could take a step toward consummating their merger on Thursday. Shareholders of both companies will vote on whether to proceed with the deal, valued at nearly $50 billion. Anthem’s purchase of Cigna is one of two mergers being proposed that would combine the five largest insurers into three companies; the other deal is one announced between Aetna and Humana.But even if Anthem and Cigna shareholders give the go-ahead, the merger must survive intense scrutiny among federal and state regulators. —Reed AbelsonLawyers expect the United States Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation to decide on Thursday whether to consolidate plaintiffs’ lawsuits against Volkswagen into one court. The panel, meeting in New Orleans, is appointed by the chief justice and is made up of seven sitting judges from different judicial circuits.The automaker has admitted using deceptive software to evade emissions tests for some of its diesel vehicles. Many plaintiffs’ lawyers are accusing Volkswagen of defrauding customers, who say the value of their cars has dropped. —Danielle IvoryGreek labor unions are to hold a general strike on Thursday, the second in two months, to protest the austerity measures underpinning the country’s third international bailout. The 24-hour walkout by Greek workers is expected to shut down public services and disrupt public transportation and flights.Government officials are preparing to enforce a new set of economic overhauls agreed to with creditors, including rules for the management of delinquent bank loans and the creation of an independent state privatization fund. The government claims Greece is recovering and has presented a budget, which is to go to a parliamentary vote on Saturday, predicting only a mild recession for next year.Greece’s efforts to reform the economy and to deal with the European refugee crisis are expected to top the agenda of talks during a planned visit to Athens on Friday by Secretary of State John Kerry. —Niki KitsantonisOn Friday at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department will report the latest figures on hiring and unemployment in November. The monthly jobs figures are always watched closely, but this report is arguably the most anticipated of the year. That’s because it is the last one that Federal Reserve policy makers will have in hand before they meet on Dec. 15 and 16 and decide whether to raise interest rates.Wall Street is looking for a payroll gain of 200,000, and the unemployment rate unchanged from October’s 5 percent level. While not as strong as the 271,000 increase in payrolls last month, a 200,000 increase would be evidence that the economy could withstand the first interest rate increase in nearly a decade. Even if the payroll gain comes in a bit below that 200,000 consensus prediction, most economists still expect the Fed to move in December. —Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisement