
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

SEPT. 26, 2016
Pfizer has finally admitted that there is no rabbit in its breakup hat.After spending $600 million over several years studying and preparing for a possible split, the drug company said on Monday that it had decided to remain whole. Pfizer’s chief executive, Ian C. Read, always seemed keener on acquisitions. Although it is true that the process helped close a conglomerate discount, the gap may soon reappear.The idea of a split has been hanging around since Mr. Read took over in 2010. His predecessor departed after Pfizer’s stock lost almost two-thirds of its value in a decade. A series of deals worth more than $220 billion had really only proved that the bigger the business, the more difficult it is to find new drugs that make a difference.Under pressure from investors, Mr. Read initially tried a different tack. Pfizer sold two divisions and spun one off to shareholders. That fired up hopes for bigger change. Mr. Read hinted and then in 2013 confirmed that the company was considering splitting. The stock rose about 85 percent in his first three years at the helm, comfortably outperforming the broader market.Then Mr. Read caught the merger bug. Pfizer failed to buy AstraZeneca for $118 billion but succeeded over the last two years in purchasing Hospira, an injection-drug company, for $15 billion; Medivation, a cancer specialist, for $14 billion; and Anacor, a dermatology company, for $5 billion. A planned $160 billion deal for the Ireland-based Allergan was scrapped this year after the United States Treasury Department clamped down on tax-reducing deals known as inversions. Since 2013, Pfizer’s stock has slightly underperformed the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index.AdvertisementThe huge cost of evaluating and preparing for a split was not entirely wasted, Pfizer says. Separating into two business units — innovative health and essential health — means managers are more focused and accountable. And the company is promising to provide more detailed financial information.For the most part, Wall Street has given Pfizer the benefit of the doubt. The chief financial officer, Frank D’Amelio, reckons that any potential gap between the company’s market capitalization and its breakup value has closed.AdvertisementYet the stock slipped on Monday, so investors do not universally love the decision not to split. Pfizer’s sprawl and tendency to overpay for acquisitions could mean the idea is back on the table before too long.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »