
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

SEPT. 26, 2016
The Securities and Exchange Commission’s latest insider trading case, against the prominent hedge fund manager Leon G. Cooperman, will test whether the old proverb “where there’s smoke, there’s fire” is enough to prove a violation.The S.E.C.’s complaint seemingly paints a picture of a classic violation in which an investment manager receives news from someone inside the company and then rushes to trade on it. But the case is hardly typical, and Mr. Cooperman vowed to fight the charges in a five-page letter to his investors that said, “We have done nothing improper and categorically deny the commission’s allegations.”Mr. Cooperman’s hedge fund, Omega Advisors, was one of the biggest investors in Atlas Pipeline Partners in 2010. The S.E.C.’s case concerns a $682 million asset sale by Atlas that would help it deal with a difficult financial situation. The announcement of that sale, in July 2010, caused the company’s stock to jump more than 30 percent. That is the stuff on which insider trading cases are built.Omega Advisors, which is also named as a defendant, bought call options before the announcement of the sale in various accounts it managed, the type of trading that usually draws attention. Although the S.E.C. pursued civil securities fraud charges, Mr. Cooperman wrote that the Justice Department delayed its inquiry into trading at the firm until the Supreme Court decides an insider trading case set for argument on Oct. 5.AdvertisementWhat makes the S.E.C.’s case against Mr. Cooperman different is that he essentially concedes receiving the information about the impending asset sale from an unnamed company executive and then trading on it. His letter says, “I have throughout my fifty-year career in the securities business firmly believed in detailed, fundamental research,” which involves “direct, face-to-face interactions with company management.”AdvertisementJust getting information is not a violation because the insider trading laws require proof that the person breached a duty of trust and confidence by trading on it. Rather than pursue a more traditional tipping case in which an insider gives information in exchange for a benefit, the S.E.C. asserts that Mr. Cooperman agreed to keep the information secret after speaking with the executive at Atlas who told him about the impending deal. That avoids the issue of showing Mr. Cooperman provided something of value to the source, which the regulator probably could not find.Instead, the case is built on Rule 10b5-2, which states that a duty not to trade exists “whenever a person agrees to maintain information in confidence.” So proving such an agreement will be the linchpin to establishing a violation.Was hedge fund pioneer Leon Cooperman turned in by his own son? “It could be a Shakespearean drama,” said Alexandra Stevenson, a New York Times reporter.The complaint is vague about how Mr. Cooperman agreed to keep the information confidential. It has only a conclusory statement that he “explicitly agreed that he would not use the confidential information to trade,” with no details about what was actually said. The two men spoke on three occasions before the announcement, and it is not even clear which conversation included the purported agreement.The S.E.C. has been down this road before, and that case did not turn out well. Mark Cuban, the owner of the Dallas Mavericks, was accused of insider trading in 2008 in shares of a small internet company in which he owned a substantial stake. The S.E.C. said he received negative information from a corporate executive and promised to keep it confidential but then sold out his position in the company before the announcement.The S.E.C.’s case was hamstrung by the refusal of the corporate executive to travel to the United States to testify in person, leaving the agency with little evidence to show an agreement, which Mr. Cuban denied making when he testified. A jury found that he did not violate the securities laws, and ever since, he has been a thorn in the side of the S.E.C., posting on Twitter that the case against Mr. Cooperman is a “witch hunt.”To avoid similar problems, the S.E.C. does its best in the complaint to show that Mr. Cooperman is untrustworthy, and therefore any denials he might offer about agreeing to keep the information confidential would not be credible.The S.E.C. claims that he improperly sought to influence the Atlas executive who provided him with the information to deny having shared it after Omega Advisors received a subpoena as part of the insider trading investigation. Although it could not charge him with obstructing justice, because only the Justice Department can pursue a criminal case, the agency certainly wants a jury to infer guilty knowledge from an attempt to cover up receiving confidential information.AdvertisementRight before he started buying, the complaint says, Mr. Cooperman told a consultant to Omega Advisors that the investment in the company was not a good one, using an expletive to describe Atlas. The S.E.C. hopes to show that the information about the asset sale caused a sudden change in sentiment, a harbinger of insider trading.The S.E.C. goes a step further in trying to put Mr. Cooperman in a bad light by pointing out that he asserted the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination rather than testify about the Atlas trading. Any time a witness refuses to answer questions, the government’s interest is piqued because that looks like smoke coming from a fire.
                The S.E.C. charged hedge fund manager Leon G. Cooperman and his firm Omega Advisors with insider trading.            That raises the interesting question about whether Mr. Cooperman will testify at trial if the case reaches that point. Unlike a criminal prosecution in which a defendant’s decision not to testify cannot be mentioned, in a civil case, a jury may draw an adverse inference from a defendant’s assertion of Fifth Amendment privilege in deciding whether there is proof of a violation. But if the person does testify, then the prior claim of the privilege against self-incrimination would be excluded in most cases because it is not relevant.Mr. Cooperman’s letter certainly indicates that he expects to testify, so the S.E.C.’s reference to his refusal to cooperate in its investigation appears to be intended more to make him look bad in the public’s eye — if someone claims to be innocent, why not say so when given the opportunity?The insider trading claim is not the only one the S.E.C. makes in the complaint. It also accused Mr. Cooperman of not making timely filings to report trades in other companies in which he held a substantial stake. Those documents alert investors about changes in a large shareholder’s position that can indicate where the stock might be headed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.These types of violations are akin to paying a parking ticket late, and bear no relation to the claims of insider trading. They are helpful, however, in showing that Mr. Cooperman is willing to play fast and loose with the securities laws by ignoring disclosure requirements intended to aid other investors to understand what is happening in the market. If he is willing to ignore these reporting rules, then the S.E.C. can argue to a jury that claims of innocence about trading on confidential information should not be given any weight.Mr. Cooperman lays out an elaborate defense of the trades in his letter, arguing that they were inconsistent with someone who was trading on inside information. He is right that he did not act with the usual secrecy attendant to getting confidential information.Nor did he tell his son, who runs his own hedge fund that had a bearish position in Atlas and would be hurt when the information came out. Mr. Cooperman was an investor in that fund, so he stood to lose money by not revealing it.The S.E.C. claims that the trading generated more than $4 million in profits, but Mr. Cooperman did not do what the typical violator does: sell the shares immediately to reap gains. But that is not a requirement for a violation, and the fact that there is a good explanation for the trades does not necessarily mean he stayed within the law.The S.E.C. has picked another fight with a billionaire who offers a full-throated defense against the complaint even though he never denies receiving confidential information. So the case appears to come down to a fairly simple decision: Who will the jury choose to believe? The S.E.C. hopes the smoke around Mr. Cooperman’s actions shows there was an insider trading fire.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »