By LESLIE PICKERSEPT. 26, 2016
In just three months, the Williams Companies’ board has experienced more conflict than many companies do in a lifetime. On Monday, the public discord was put to rest, at least for now.Williams announced the appointment of two more independent directors with the intent to select another two candidates to join the board by the company’s annual meeting in November, according to a statement.These four individuals in addition to three announced last month will make up a majority of the board, after three legacy directors step down in November. As a result, Corvex Management, the activist hedge fund led by Keith Meister, withdrew its proxy contest, according to a separate statement on Monday. Corvex owns about 4 percent of Williams and was trying to overhaul the board.Williams, an operator of natural-gas pipelines based in Tulsa, Okla., has been in the crossfire of a broken deal, an unsolicited takeover offer and multiple director resignations — all since late June. Following a judge’s ruling that a fellow pipeline operator, Energy Transfer Equity, no longer needed to abide by its agreement to acquire Williams, the two severed their transaction. Shortly after, half of Williams’s board members resigned, including Mr. Meister, largely protesting their inability to fire Alan S. Armstrong, the company’s chief executive.AdvertisementNews leaks of a potential takeover approach by Enterprise Products, another pipeline company, prompted Mr. Meister to issue an open letter to the remaining shareholders and submit the names of 10 nominees for directors at Williams. He indicated that he did not have enough time to come up with a full slate before the company’s deadline, so he nominated himself and analysts and managing directors from his hedge fund to serve as placeholders until he could identify actual candidates.AdvertisementHe never announced any such candidates. Williams identified three new directors in August and is gradually filling additional seats.On Sept. 8, Enterprise Products said that it had withdrawn its “indication of interest” to acquire Williams, blaming its decision partly on “the lack of engagement by Williams.” That prompted Mr. Meister to disclose a letter to the three new directors to encourage them to form a strategic review committee to evaluate a potential combination with Enterprise Products and other companies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Meister indicated on Monday that his talks with the three new directors led to Williams’s additional board changes.In his statement, Mr. Meister commended the three new directors, Stephen Bergstrom, Scott Sheffield and William Spence, “for taking a leadership role in discussions with Corvex which resulted in the announced plan to enhance the board’s composition.”Since Energy Transfer terminated their deal on June 29, Williams’s share price has gained almost 50 percent.The two newest board members announced Monday are Stephen I. Chazen, the former president and chief executive of Occidental Petroleum, and Peter A. Ragauss, the former chief financial officer of Baker Hughes.If the seven new board members are elected at the meeting Nov. 23, then the board would constitute 10 independent directors out of 11 total.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.