By LESLIE PICKERSEPT. 26, 2016
Two Midwestern exchange operators have agreed to combine in a deal that would merge two of the largest trading venues in the United States.CBOE Holdings, which owns the Chicago Board Options Exchange, where the popular Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index and volatility index options trade, is paying $3.2 billion in cash and stock to acquire Kansas-based Bats Global Markets, according to a statement released by the companies on Monday. The Chicago Board Options Exchange is the largest American options exchange, and Bats is the second-largest stock exchange operator in the United States by volume, behind the New York Stock Exchange.Shares of both CBOE and Bats declined about 3 percent each Monday morning after the announcement. CBOE has long been viewed as an acquisition target, and the deal for Bats, which generates revenue from more competitive products, may make CBOE less attractive to another suitor, said Andrew Bond, an analyst with RBC Capital Markets.Bats is trading about 5 percent below CBOE’s purchase price, indicating that the market sees the possibility of a competing bid for CBOE before the deal closes, he said. The transaction calls for a $110 million breakup fee payable by either side.AdvertisementBats stockholders will receive $10 a share in cash and 0.3201 of a share of CBOE’s common stock. As of Friday’s close, this represents $32.50 a share, about 71 percent higher than the $19 a share that Bats got in its initial public offering a little more than five months ago.AdvertisementThe companies indicated in a conference call on Monday that Bats had not been for sale and was not running an auction to sell itself. CBOE, however, was looking for a partner that could expand its scope, and in signing a deal with Bats, it is aiming for more diversification into equities, exchange-traded products and foreign exchange.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Within five years after closing the deal, CBOE also expects to generate cost savings of about $65 million by using just one trading platform and streamlining expenses, such as technology.The deal requires shareholder approval from both companies and regulatory clearance. Although it is expected to add to CBOE’s adjusted earnings per share the first full year after closing, it also requires that the company take on quite a bit of debt. CBOE received a commitment letter from Bank of America Merrill Lynch to provide $1.65 billion to help finance the deal.After the deal closes — expected for the first half of next year — Edward T. Tilly, CBOE’s chief executive, will retain that role for the combined company. Chris Concannon, Bats’s chief executive, will become president and chief operating officer. The combined company will have 14 directors, including 11 of the 14 members from CBOE’s board, and three from Bats’s board.The headquarters will be located in Chicago, with business offices in Kansas City, Kan., where Bats is based, and other areas like New York, London, San Francisco, Singapore and Quito, Ecuador.Bank of America and Broadhaven Capital Partners served as financial advisers to CBOE, while Barclays was the lead adviser to Bats, along with UBS. Sidley Austin served as CBOE’s legal counsel, while Davis Polk & Wardwell worked with Bats.A version of this article appears in print on September 27, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Exchange Operators Agree to Merge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.