AdvertisementSupported byMaurice Greenberg, right, the former chairman of the American International Group, with his lawyer, David Boies, leaving court on Tuesday.By Randall SmithMaurice R. Greenberg, the former chief executive of insurance giant American International Group, took the witness stand on Tuesday for the first time in his state civil accounting fraud trial in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.Mr. Greenberg and former A.I.G. chief financial officer Howard I. Smith face charges first brought in 2005 by Eliot Spitzer when he was the New York attorney general that they buffed up the insurer’s financial results with fraudulent transactions in 2000 and 2001. The trial was delayed by numerous pretrial appeals, many by the defense.Both men have denied the charges. For Mr. Greenberg, 91, fighting the case for years all the way to trial has been an attempt to protect his legacy. He built A.I.G. into a global insurance giant but was forced out in 2005.His first day of testimony lacked fireworks. In a largely decorous but occasionally testy confrontation over four hours, the state trial attorney David E. Nachman presented Mr. Greenberg with dozens of reports, memos, calender items and depositions in three-ring binders about escalating losses in the auto warranty insurance program begun by Mr. Greenberg’s son Evan, then an A.I.G. executive.The charges center on one deal that converted auto insurance underwriting losses into investment losses, which were viewed as less significant by some investors, and two transactions with the insurer General Reinsurance Corp., or Gen Re, that increased A.I.G.’s reserves when investors were concerned about its flagging reserve levels.Lawyers for Mr. Greenberg and Mr. Smith have said they intended for the transactions to comply with accounting rules. Mr. Greenberg’s lawyer, David Boies, has said his client was not aware of instances in which certain related documents were falsified.Mr. Greenberg, wearing gold-rimmed glasses that often slid down his nose, often replied that he could not remember the events in question, and spoke so softly that the court reporters sitting just a few feet away asked him to repeat his answers several times. At times, he resisted Mr. Nachman’s efforts to pin down what he knew about the losses as they emerged and what management did to address them.He also said the auto insurance issue was “a small part” of his job and A.I.G.’s global business in 137 countries. “There are many things going on at A.I.G., this was not that important,” he said, acting as though the trial itself were a minor inconvenience.Mr. Nachman’s response: “It wasn’t so insignificant that you didn’t insert yourself personally into these matters?”But at other times, Mr. Greenberg acknowledged that he took an active interest in the losses, and chose to get personally involved in part because he wanted to “teach a lesson to managers” involved. He also said he was “interested” in whether “there was a way of converting underwriting losses into investment losses.”Mr. Greenberg’s testimony was bogged down by the need for him to find state exhibits in the hefty binders in front of him on the witness stand and review their contents silently as Mr. Nachman waited for him to acknowledge that he had. At times, Mr. Nachman and State Justice Charles E. Ramos, the judge hearing the case, helped Mr. Greenberg turn pages and find passages. The trial is before the judge with no jury.Early on, the prosecutor and defendant had an edgy exchange.Referring to the auto warranty program, Mr. Greenberg said, “We fixed it.”Mr. Nachman replied, “We’ll talk about that.”To which Mr. Greenberg quickly responded, “I’m sure we will.”But as the lunch break began, Mr. Greenberg put his hand on Mr. Nachman’s shoulder as they spoke briefly.During this court appearance and an earlier one, Mr. Greenberg wore a lapel pin that he described as the French Legion of Honor, awarded in part for his service in World War II. One of his staunchest supporters, Kenneth G. Langone, a founder of Home Depot who once battled Mr. Spitzer in an unrelated case, attended the first hour of Mr. Greenberg’s testimony.Mr. Nachman began by taking Mr. Greenberg through his career building A.I.G., at times reading from “The A.I.G. Story,” a 2013 book Mr. Greenberg wrote with Lawrence A. Cunningham. As they discussed various insurance industry terms, Mr. Greenberg wagged his finger at Mr. Nachman and, referring to a certain loss ratio, said magisterially, “that’s the key number.”The trial is expected to last several months, though Mr. Greenberg’s testimony could end within a few days.After opening statements two weeks ago, Christian M. Milton testified on Sept. 14 that he had signed the Gen Re contracts as A.I.G.’s head of reinsurance. He said Mr. Greenberg had told him A.I.G. would get $500 million of extra reserves by paying $5 million to Gen Re.Mr. Milton, who now works for Mr. Greenberg at the insurer C.V. Starr, acknowledged that contracts for the deal indicated Gen Re would pay A.I.G. $10 million for reinsurance, but did not include a separate “offset provision” that A.I.G. would repay the $10 million to Gen Re plus the $5 million deal fee.State prosecutor Manisha M. Sheth called those provisions a “secret side agreement.” While Mr. Greenberg told him he would receive deal terms from Gen Re, Mr. Milton testified, he did not ask Mr. Greenberg about returning the premium. Mr. Milton’s 2008 criminal fraud conviction in Connecticut federal court and four-year prison sentence for the A.I.G.-Gen Re deal were overturned on appeal in 2011.Just before the trial, in a move that raised eyebrows at the courthouse, the defense law firm Boies, Schiller & Flexner hired one of Judge Ramos’ law clerks, Nameer Shukri, a move the judge said he was “delighted” by at a pretrial hearing Sept. 6. A spokeswoman for Mr. Boies, Dawn Schneider, said the hiring was not aimed at currying favor with the judge, who declined to comment.While Mr. Shukri will be “walled off” from the Greenberg case, Lynn Stout, a professor of corporate and business law at Cornell law school, said, “It’s pretty unusual for a law clerk and a law firm to begin negotiations over future employment while the judge is hearing a major case” involving the same firm. In an interview, Mr. Boies said, “We’ve hired dozens of law clerks from judges before whom we have pending cases.”Advertisement