AdvertisementSupported byBy Keith BradsherESKISEHIR, Turkey — A new high-speed rail line, completed last year, now links Eskisehir with Istanbul to the west and Ankara to the east. A narrow, serpentine river meanders through downtown, spanned by graceful blue bridges at almost every block, drawing tourists. Factories here make everything from cakes and cookies to refrigerators, large Ford freight trucks and aircraft parts.Yet despite the prosperous appearance, a chill has already settled over Eskisehir’s economy, and Turkey’s, as exports to China and the Middle East falter. And as Russia has halted most tourism to Turkey and threatened to stop food imports from the country after Turkish F-16 fighter jets shot down a Russian combat jet along the Syrian border last Tuesday, the risk of further economic trouble is clear.With unemployment already surging here, “our economy has slowed down,” said Yilmaz Buyukersen, the mayor of Eskisehir.Russia is one of Turkey’s largest markets for exports, after Germany. Eskisehir (pronounced Es-ki-SHARE) itself has a large sugar refinery, using sugar beets from nearby fields as its raw material; the city exports about $30 million worth of cookies, cakes, crackers and other foods to Russia, according to the local chamber of commerce.Turkey had been stepping up food exports to Russia in recent months as political frictions between Russia and the West led to a reduction in Russian food imports from the European Union.Russia had also been one of Turkey’s biggest sources of tourists until the past year, when the combination of the fall of the ruble and Western sanctions on Russia for its support of Ukrainian insurgents began steeply eroding the number of Russians who could afford to travel. The decline in tourism was a worry for economists here even before the Russian jet was shot down.“The trade deficit is out of hand, exports cannot meet the import bill, so tourism revenues are a major item in our balance sheet,” said Erinc Yeldan, the dean of the economics faculty at Bilkent University near Ankara.Still, Cengiz Kamil Firat, the deputy director general of general and bilateral economic affairs at Turkey’s foreign ministry, said that the nation’s economy was in better shape than it might seem.Russia’s decision to discourage tourism, for example, comes at the start of a quiet season for visitors to Turkey. The country is mainly a summer destination and would not expect another big influx until next June. “Things will probably de-escalate well before that,” Mr. Firat said.Russia’s main export to Turkey, however, is natural gas, supplying 60 percent of Turkey’s needs. Russia has not tried to limit that arrangement, which supplies Moscow with valuable foreign revenue at a time of Western sanctions. Nor has President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia yet interfered with Turkey’s biggest category of exports to his country, manufactured goods.Turkey’s exports to Russia totaled 0.8 percent of its economic output last year. But Mr. Yeldan said that more important than the dollar value of trade sanctions would be whether the dispute with Russia affects the international confidence that Turkey needs to continue attracting enough foreign investment to offset its chronic trade deficits.Economic difficulties in Turkey are a potential worry for the West. The European Union and the United States have been seeking more help from Turkey in stemming the number of Europeans who use Turkey to travel to and from areas in Syria and Iraq controlled by the Islamic State.A further concern lies in the potential political radicalization of Turkey itself if the economy worsens. A survey released by the Pew Research Center on Nov. 17, based on polling last spring, found that 8 percent of Turks had a favorable opinion of the Islamic State, although 73 percent had an unfavorable opinion.Many here in Eskisehir say that an influx of refugees from Syria and others without Turkish work papers is making the economy worse — even though Eskisehir is 400 miles from the Syrian border. “That’s a major problem,” Mayor Buyukersen said. “The number of Syrian refugees is increasing day by day and they are adding to our unemployment problem.”Unemployed workers wait all day in hopes of meeting employers in front of Eskisehir’s central mosque, a smaller version of Istanbul’s famed Hagia Sophia. Osman Boyaci, 50, who has two children, said that he and his fellow workers would normally expect to earn $20 for a day’s labor on a construction site, but were losing work to truckloads of Syrian immigrants who would accept $6 a day.Mr. Firat at the foreign ministry said that the Syrian refugees had caused resentment in some places, but also made cheap labor available that might help some businesses stay competitive.Eskisehir’s economic difficulties, and Turkey’s, go beyond coping with migrants or an interruption in tourism. Many emerging markets are facing difficulties with the slowdown in global trade, Turkey among them.Turkey has long depended on exporting manufactured goods to Europe and the Middle East, two regions where demand is weak right now. That is partly because of geopolitics and partly because Chinese industries with overcapacity at home have been exporting at low prices to Turkey’s longtime markets in the Middle East, Europe and Africa.Wars in Syria and Iraq have devastated demand for Turkish manufactures while sending more than two million refugees to Turkey.Iraq has traditionally been Turkey’s second-largest export market after Germany, but years of war have depressed sales there. Syria, another big market, has collapsed into civil war, and shipping goods by truck south through Syria or Iraq to Turkey’s longtime markets in the Persian Gulf has become risky and difficult.“They’re not closed — there’s a lot of smuggling, people have to live” in Syria, said Savas M. Ozaydemir, a leading Eskisehir industrialist with holdings in roofing tile manufacturing, wiring manufacture and real estate. “But of course, it might be 30 percent of what it was.”The route around Iraq and Syria through Iran is much longer and costlier — and Iran has imposed a hefty fee on Turkish trucks, ostensibly because they may fill up on subsidized diesel fuel while in Iran. Turkey’s strong support for democracy in Syria and for the removal of Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad, an Iranian ally, have not helped.One of the few democracies in the Middle East, Turkey has also upset the military-led government in Egypt by criticizing it. In response, the Egyptians barred many of the Turkish trucks that used to arrive on ferries at Port Said to carry cargo to markets on the Arabian Peninsula, further constraining Egyptian exports.Turkey has also depended on exporting construction materials to China, but a real estate downturn there has crippled housing starts and the need for Turkish imports.China has been the world’s largest market by far in recent years for marble, installed on a huge scale in hotels, apartment buildings, office towers and even swimming pool decks, despite the use of inexpensive finishes that can leave the marble almost as slippery as glass.Turkey has 40 percent of the world’s commercial marble reserves and has been by far the dominant supplier to China, where domestic marble tends to be heavily cracked and often an unattractive yellow. But the value and tonnage of China’s marble imports have plunged by nearly a third just in the past year, paralleling a steep drop in housing starts there.For Cekicler Marble in Eskisehir, that has meant closing three of the company’s nine marble quarries and laying off a third of the 450 workers. The company had designed for sale to China an automated production line that costs $550,000 and helps turn 25-ton blocks of Turkish marble into slim tiles. But after expecting to sell 10 a year, the company actually sold one last year and none this year, with leads for the sale of two next year.“We did not want to sell blocks, just finished products,” said Yavuz Cekic, the company’s marketing director. ”But we couldn’t compete with other companies that just opened quarries and shipped the blocks.”There have been a few bright spots for Turkish industry, and they are predicted to keep the nation’s economic growth rate around 3 percent over the next several years — weaker than the 5 percent growth that Turkey became accustomed to during the last decade, but still stronger than that of many countries.One area of strength is construction at home. Fearing further political instability in the Arab world, families across the Middle East have been buying apartments in Turkey. Together with low interest rates, that has touched off a building boom in Ankara and Istanbul.Here in Eskisehir, the new high-speed rail service and Mayor Buyukersen’s rezoning of an old downtown factory district for high-rise apartment towers have produced a series of new building projects.But for now, many business owners are worried. “I’ve been in Eskisehir for 15 years,” said Sinan Atinar, the owner of a sliced meat sandwich shop on a downtown city square. “I’ve never seen it as slow as this.”Advertisement