AdvertisementSupported byNews AnalysisBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — FOR roughly a decade, ever since the DVD market started to implode, movie studios have been investor afterthoughts. Hits? Misses? Ho-hum, and back to the cable networks. With its steadily climbing subscriber fees, the Wall Street theory has held, cable would always save the day for the media conglomerates.But at the Walt Disney Company, at least for the moment, that conventional wisdom has been flipped. Movies — in particular one movie, “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” — have started to drive Disney’s stock.The question is whether that is sustainable. In August, with Nielsen estimating that ESPN had 92 million subscribers, down from 95 million a year earlier, and Disney acknowledging a “modest” erosion, Disney shares plunged 22 percent, to $95.36 from $121.69, dragging down the whole media sector. But even as some media companies struggled to regain ground, Disney shares quickly bounced back. Disney closed on Wednesday at $118.67.Friday brought new ESPN turbulence. After Disney released its annual report, repeating those subscriber numbers, shares briefly fell by 4 percent. But Disney was already recovering by the session’s end, closing at $115.13, down 3 percent. Analysts say the takeaway is clear: Investors care about subscriber attrition at ESPN, part of a cable unit that provided about 45 percent of Disney’s operating income in fiscal 2015. But they care more, for now, about Walt Disney Studios, which will restart the “Star Wars” movie series on Dec. 18 after a decade of theatrical dormancy. Disney plans a “Star Wars”-related film once a year through 2020, roughly when “Star Wars” theme park attractions are expected to open in Florida and California.“You would not believe the level of Wall Street fixation on ‘Star Wars’ right now,” Michael Nathanson, an analyst at MoffettNathanson, said by phone on Friday, echoing other Disney analysts. Wall Street expects “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” to take in at least $1.5 billion worldwide. Some analysts predict $2 billion or more. Tim Nollen of Macquarie Securities has estimated that mountains of related merchandise could generate an additional $5 billion in revenue over the next year.The exuberant expectations have, in effect, shifted the conversation about Disney in an unusual way, analysts say, toward a movie’s potential to deliver otherworldly riches and away from the challenges buffeting the broader cable and broadcast television businesses, including the cracks in ESPN’s once-impregnable armor. “It’s amazing how Disney (or market psychology) has been able to divert the focus” away from a decelerating ESPN, Todd Juenger, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein, wrote in a research note on Nov. 18. “Now the single most frequent question we get regarding Disney is, ‘What’s in your model for “Star Wars”?’ ”Mr. Juenger added, “We do have concern, however, that once ‘Star Wars’ is digested, the focus will return to affiliate fees.”In retrospect, analysts say, Disney seems to have been remarkably prescient in preparing for a slowdown at its still-formidable cable division, spending $15.5 billion over the last decade to buy Pixar Animation Studios, Marvel Entertainment and Lucasfilm, the studio behind “Star Wars.” As subscriber erosion, a wobbly advertising market and soaring sports rights costs have combined to slow ESPN growth, Disney — to a greater degree than its rivals — has added backup engines, Mr. Nathanson noted.For the last six months of its fiscal year, which ended on Oct. 3, Walt Disney Studios had operating income of $1 billion, a 51 percent increase from the same period a year earlier. Stratospheric ticket sales for “Avengers: Age of Ultron,” produced by Marvel, and Pixar’s “Inside Out” were the primary drivers; the studio also receives a portion of profits from movie-themed merchandise.Disney, which declined to comment for this article, finds itself trying to pull off a nearly impossible balancing act. The company is counting on “Star Wars” to buoy its stock price while it also tries to tamp down expectations for the film with investors and the news media. The expectations game is one reason that relying on content for growth is tricky: Unlike cable subscriber fees, which rise at contractually stipulated percentages and times, a movie’s value can only be guessed at in advance. “In December, it’s rare to see a big debut,” Alan F. Horn, the chairman of Walt Disney Studios, cautioned The Hollywood Reporter last week, referring to opening weekend box-office sales. (The record for a December opening is “The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey,” which took in about $85 million in 2012.) “People are shopping, they’re traveling,” Mr. Horn added. Disney also noted that only 18 percent of students will be out of school on the film’s opening day and emphasized that the film’s entire run should be the measuring stick.Still, many box-office analysts expect “The Force Awakens,” which has already generated more than $50 million in advance ticket sales, to deliver the biggest opening weekend in Hollywood history — never mind December. The record-holder is Universal’s “Jurassic World,” which took in $208.8 million over its first three days in June, according to Rentrak, which compiles box-office data. What happens if “The Force Awakens” falls short of expectations, potentially refocusing investors on the challenges facing ESPN? Ask Disney executives that question and prepare for a response akin to Darth Vader’s famous line from the first “Star Wars” movie: “I find your lack of faith disturbing.”But on the last earnings call, Thomas O. Staggs, Disney’s chief operating officer, did seek to remind investors that one movie does not a studio make. Disney has a parade of probable box-office behemoths in the pipeline for next year, including Marvel’s “Captain America: Civil War,” Pixar’s “Finding Dory,” the sequel “Alice Through the Looking Glass” and “Rogue One: A Star Wars Story.” Movies, in other words, could continue to carry the day at the world’s largest entertainment company.“I’ve been at Disney a long time,” Mr. Staggs said, “and I can’t remember a movie slate that comes close to this one.”Advertisement