By AMIE TSANGSEPT. 27, 2016
It was confrontational and antagonistic.The first presidential debate is done, and Hillary Clinton dominated on issues like national security and gender.But Andrew Ross Sorkin still has a big question that wasn’t answered in last night’s debate: Donald J. Trump has tried to project himself as a successful businessman throughout his campaign. So where is his business backing?His plans to lower corporate taxes and remove regulations should make him a chief executive’s dream and yet, many successful businesspeople refuse to support him or do business with him.Perhaps the self-described great negotiator isn’t so great at striking a deal after all?Twitter is notable for the amount of stock it pays out to its employees, which is high even by Silicon Valley standards.AdvertisementThe company racked up $682 million in stock-based compensation last year, compared with $557.8 million in adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.AdvertisementWhat does that mean for its potential sale?The new owner would need to compensate its newest employees by either paying cash or doling out more equity.This hasn’t stopped chatter about a possible sale from growing louder — Walt Disney is working with a financial adviser to evaluate a bid for Twitter, according to Bloomberg, while Google and Salesforce.com have also expressed an interest.But it hasn’t done much to answer questions about whether the company is valued too richly.The last two years have been described as a catastrophic period for the hedge fund industry. Investors are frustrated with high fees and unsatisfactory returns.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Perry Capital is the latest casualty.The firm, founded by Richard C. Perry (once one of the most successful investors in the industry), is closing its flagship fund.“The industry and market headwinds against us have been strong, and the timing for success in our positions too unpredictable,” Mr. Perry wrote to investors.At its peak, Perry Capital managed $15 billion of investor money. By the end of last year, though, that had shrunk to $6.6 billion.Perhaps Daniel S. Loeb, the founder of Third Point, was on to something when he said, “We are in the first innings of a washout in hedge funds.”Advertisement“They established the culture that made this happen — it comes down from the top.”— Dennis Russell, a former Wells Fargo employee, who says the bank fired him for refusing to create unauthorized customer accounts to meet sales goals. Wells Fargo workers are joining lawsuits claiming they were punished for playing by the rules.• Maurice R. Greenberg, the former chief executive of American International Group, is expected to take the witness stand in his civil fraud trial. His appearance could last several days.• Speakers at the Sifma annual meeting include Mary Jo White, the chairwoman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and Timothy G. Massad, the chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.• The House Financial Services Committee will hold hearings on the Financial Stability Board’s implications for growth and competitiveness.• The Conference Board publishes its latest consumer confidence survey and the S&P publishes the latest data for the Case-Shiller Home Price Index.• The International Monetary Fund publishes the analytical chapters of its World Economic Outlook.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.