By RANDALL SMITHSEPT. 28, 2016
Maurice R. Greenberg, the former chief executive of American International Group, clashed with a New York State prosecutor on Wednesday over the extent of his role in a transaction at the center of his civil accounting fraud trial.In sometimes-heated exchanges with the state trial attorney, David E. Nachman, during his second day on the stand in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, Mr. Greenberg was shown what was said to be evidence that he had received a memo from and met with Joseph H. Umansky, a former A.I.G. executive who outlined the possible transaction in question.But Mr. Greenberg said he could not recall the memo, and could say only that he “may have” reviewed it. “Remember, this is 16 years ago,” said Mr. Greenberg, 91, his voice rising. “I don’t remember everything 16 years ago.” Although he mostly denied any recollection, at times he acknowledged he had been interested in pursuing Mr. Umansky’s idea.The state has charged that the sham transaction, known as Capco, allowed A.I.G. to convert into investment losses $163 million in auto warranty insurance losses, which were incurred under a program begun by Mr. Greenberg’s son Evan. Some investors see investment losses as less significant than insurance underwriting losses.AdvertisementMr. Greenberg and the former A.I.G. chief financial officer Howard I. Smith are on trial, accused of playing a role in engineering bogus transactions that improved the appearance of A.I.G.’s financial results more than a decade ago. The case was first filed by Eliot Spitzer in 2005, when he was New York State attorney general. The other transactions at issue, arranged with General Reinsurance Corporation, allowed A.I.G. to increase its reserves by $500 million in 2000 and 2001, at a time when investors were concerned about the insurer’s reserve levels.AdvertisementOn Wednesday, Mr. Nachman showed Mr. Greenberg dates on his own desk diary calendar that included a scheduled meeting with Mr. Umansky to discuss an April 2000 memo outlining the proposed transaction. Besides protesting that he could not recall that far back, Mr. Greenberg said that in any case he believed Capco would be vetted by lawyers and accountants.Mr. Nachman showed Mr. Greenberg a copy of a 2008 deposition he gave for the state’s case in which he acknowledged that he had “glanced at” and “skimmed” parts of the Umansky memo. But at that point, Mr. Greenberg protested on the stand, the idea was only “hypothetical.”The Umansky memo to Mr. Greenberg, which was introduced into evidence, described the possible creation of an offshore reinsurer with outside investors that could absorb the losses. “The accounting is aggressive, and there will be a significant amount of structuring required in order to address the legal, regulatory and tax issues,” the memo noted.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The state has charged that Mr. Greenberg helped Mr. Umansky find investors for the supposedly independent reinsurer, which A.I.G. in fact controlled. Under the plan that was later carried out, A.I.G. financed the outside investors’ stakes in the reinsurer, thus absorbing the related losses, the state has charged.After much pushback on the stand Wednesday, Mr. Greenberg acknowledged giving a green light to the plan and said he understood the outside investors would not actually lose money. Mr. Nachman asked Mr. Greenberg whether the “accounting is aggressive” language in the memo raised a red flag. “Not particularly,” Mr. Greenberg said. In his 2008 deposition he said that he had not asked for a legal opinion on the issue.Because Mr. Nachman hasn’t completed taking Mr. Greenberg through the chronology of the first of the two transactions in the case, Mr. Greenberg is likely to testify for at least two more trial days, pushing his time on the stand into next week.Near the end of the half-day of testimony, Justice Charles E. Ramos, who is hearing the case without a jury, urged Mr. Greenberg to speed the case along by skipping his hedging. “If we don’t want this trial to last a year, you’re going to have to give direct answers,” he said, without repeating the defense that it was “de minimis.”The day’s testimony was punctuated by several heated exchanges. At one point, asked by Mr. Nachman whether he recognized the handwriting of Mr. Smith, his co-defendant, Mr. Greenberg retorted, “How would I know?” Mr. Nachman replied, “You worked with him for 30 years.” Said Mr. Greenberg: “I’m not a handwriting expert!”At another point, Mr. Greenberg told Mr. Nachman, “You’re not listening.”Mr. Nachman asked: “You actually helped move this project along, didn’t you?”Advertisement“I don’t know what you mean,” Mr. Greenberg replied. Mr. Greenberg confirmed helping find outside investors for the project, but insisted that the issue was “a nonevent” in the context of A.I.G’s overall finances.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.