

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

SEPT. 28, 2016

The responses that John G. Stumpf, Wells Fargo’s chief executive, gave last week before a Senate committee investigating the bank’s misdeeds were widely viewed as a disaster. Under intense questioning, he downplayed the effects and extent of Wells Fargo’s actions and blamed them on rogue employees who, he said, “did not honor our culture.”  In his opening remarks, he notably veered off script from his prepared remarks, emphasizing how the practice of creating unauthorized accounts to inflate sales numbers went against the bank’s core principles.
Related Article

Actual Senate Testimony
Prepared Senate Testimony
I am the chairman and chief executive officer of Wells Fargo, where I have worked for nearly 35 years. It is my privilege to lead thethis company, which was founded 164 years ago and has played a vital role in the financial history and development of our country. Today, we are part of so many people’s lives. We employ more than 268,000 team members, 95 percent of whom are in the United States. One in every 600 working adults is a member of the Wells Fargo teamfamily, and we have a presence in all 50 states.I am deeply sorry that we failed to fulfill our responsibility to our customers, to our team members and to the American public. I have been with Wells Fargo through many challengesI've been through many challenges at Wells Fargo, none that pains me more than the one we will discuss this morning.Wrongful sales practice behavior in our retail banking business goes against everything regarding our core principles, our ethics and our culture. It runs counter to our vision of helping our customers succeed financially and it is not representative of Wells Fargo as an institution.I am here to discuss how accounts were opened and products were provided to customers that they did not authorize or want. I am going to explain this morning what happened and what we have done about it. But first, I want to apologize to all Wells Fargo customers. I want to apologize for violating the trust our customers have invested in Wells Fargo. And I want to apologize for not doing more sooner to address the causes of this unacceptable activity.the situation today. Tell you about the actions we have taken, and our commitment on how to move forward. Our entire culture is centered on serving our customers, and in this case, we let our customers down.Read the full transcript »Read the full prepared text »On Thursday, when a House committee takes its turn grilling Mr. Stumpf, he plans to stick with the same script he used last week.I am the chairman and chief executive officer of Wells Fargo, where I have worked for nearly 35 years. It is my privilege to lead the company, which was founded 164 years ago and has played a vital role in the financial history and development of our country. Today, we are part of so many people’s lives. We employ more than 268,000 team members, 95 percent of whom are in the United States. One in every 600 working adults is a member of the Wells Fargo team, and we have a presence in all 50 states.I am deeply sorry that we failed to fulfill our responsibility to our customers, to our team members, and to the American public. I have been with Wells Fargo through many challenges, none that pains me more than the one we will discuss this morning. I am here to discuss how accounts were opened and products were provided to customers that they did not authorize or want. I am going to explain this morning what happened and what we have done about it. But first, I want to apologize to all Wells Fargo customers. I want to apologize for violating the trust our customers have invested in Wells Fargo. And I want to apologize for not doing more sooner to address the causes of this unacceptable activity.I do want to make very clear that there was no orchestrated effort, or scheme as some have called it, by the company.Read the full prepared text »Advertisement