
Advertising By                     
MARTHA C. WHITE

NOV. 29, 2015
AS Beatles songs go, it’s no “Hey Jude.” But the department store Kohl’s hopes that the group’s light, bouncy tune “All Together Now” will be the one that’s stuck in consumers’ heads this holiday season.For its holiday campaign, Kohl’s commissioned cover versions of the song, from the band’s 1969 album “Yellow Submarine,” for a series of 15- and 30-second commercials. As the song plays, the ads depict members of a diverse extended family gathering over the holidays.The series includes vignettes of a same-sex couple — a first for Kohl’s, said Will Setliff, the company’s executive vice president of marketing.“The concept was to celebrate the extent and the breadth of different family types,” he said. “We were able to create a fictional family that we believe is an amalgamation of the diversity we see in our customers.”AdvertisementThis isn’t the first time “All Together Now” has been tapped by Madison Avenue. Nike — which eventually settled a lawsuit over its use of the Beatles song “Revolution” in 1987 — used a cover of “All Together Now” by the hip-hop artist Andre 3000 of Outkast in a 2010 commercial for the N.B.A. finals. A year later, Sprint used a cover of the song to promote its unlimited wireless plans.Advertisement“It’s not always easy to secure the rights to Beatles’ songs,” Mr. Setliff said. “We felt like this song had not been overused and wasn’t highly associated with any other brand or product or anything.”The Beatles and their representatives retain control of how their music is used. Even after Kohl’s paid to use the song, the company’s creative team and partners had to work with Sony to secure approval for the final advertisements, a process that took roughly five months. Last year, when Kohl’s used a song from the classic rock band Electric Light Orchestra, production took about a month and a half, according to Dave Peterson, creative director at Peterson Milla Hooks, the agency Kohl’s worked with for the broadcast portion of the holiday campaign.“There are teams of people who are lawyers or other consultants who research these things,” said David Fiorenza, an economics instructor at Villanova University who studies the entertainment industry.The views artists hold often dictate how their music is used in advertising.“Kohl’s is probably not as controversial as some other stores might be,” Mr. Fiorenza said, comparing it with Walmart, which has tangled with union-backed groups over issues like employee pay and working conditions.For Kohl’s, focusing on families — in all their diversity — is a “very, very smart way to go,” said Bridget Weishaar, a senior equity analyst who covers department stores for Morningstar.Showing a variety of ages, races and sexual orientations makes it likelier that viewers will see someone in the ads who resembles them, she said. “They’re inclusive, which is important, especially to the younger generation, and it better fits who’s walking through their doors.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Setliff called the incorporation of Kohl’s merchandise in the advertisements “subtle but pervasive,” pointing to details like the clothes, cookware and toys in the commercials.“What we tried to do with the product is connect it in a way that’s really real,” he said. “We’re not hitting people over the head with it.”AdvertisementThe Kohl’s broadcast campaign is being supported by social media promotion managed by the digital marketing agency Huge. “We can pick and choose our families — we really wanted to focus on that,” said Kurt Jaskowiak, the agency’s creative director.There will also be other online components, like a video that tells the story of an adopted teenager’s meeting his birth mother and sister for the first time.Mr. Jaskowiak said that Kohl’s was asking customers on social media to share their holiday traditions. When people comment, Huge is turning their stories into short animated clips meant for sharing across the retailer’s social footprint. Kohl’s also plans two pop-up shopping events in New York City that will feature a “story booth” where customers can recount holiday traditions for use in the online campaign.But while the campaign will be driven in part by impromptu customer interaction, its most notable aspect took a bit more planning. Covering a famous band like the Beatles for a commercial rather than using the original recording is a strategic and often financially driven decision, Mr. Fiorenza said.“It’s a big fee,” he said, estimating that using short clips of “All Together Now” performed by a cover artist might have cost Kohl’s $100,000. “If you have to play the entire song, it would be a much bigger fee,” he said.Mr. Setliff declined to say how much getting permission to use “All Together Now” cost, but said Kohl’s spent “significantly more” than it had in the past. Using the original audio would have cost about twice as much, Mr. Peterson said.For a song with an infectious tune, though, the investment could pay off.“So much of the emotional bite of the ad is contingent on the use of the music,” said Robert Goldman, a sociology professor at Lewis & Clark College who studies advertising themes.“All it requires is having two bars in your head. And if that holds, from an advertiser’s perspective, you’ve accomplished half the battle.”A version of this article appears in print on November 30, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Capitalizing on a Catchy Tune.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »