By EMILY STEEL and MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDSEPT. 28, 2016
A month after a bitter fight over Viacom’s leadership was settled, the company may find itself pressed to reunite with its corporate sibling, CBS.National Amusements — which is owned by the billionaire Sumner M. Redstone and is the controlling shareholder in Viacom and CBS — plans to send letters to both companies, instructing them to consider a merger, people briefed on the matter said on Wednesday.The request would prompt CBS and Viacom to establish independent board committees to explore the idea, said the people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. As of Wednesday evening, neither company had received such a letter.The instructions could be the first step toward joining the two media companies, which split in 2006 during a period of questions over leadership and the growth of both businesses.AdvertisementTheir fortunes have diverged since then: CBS, buoyed by strong ratings at its television network, has enjoyed a rising stock price and support from investors. By contrast, Viacom has struggled as its cable networks like Comedy Central and MTV have suffered from slumping ratings.AdvertisementThis year, Shari Redstone, Mr. Redstone’s daughter, clashed with  Philippe P. Dauman, then Viacom’s chief executive, over the direction of the company in a bitter and unusually public battle. At one point, after changes were made on the boards of National Amusements and Viacom, there were legal battles in three states in the fight for control. Then in August, Mr. Dauman agreed to step down as chairman and chief executive.Even now, Viacom is experiencing turmoil and uncertainty about its future. Its interim chief executive, Tom Dooley, said  he would step down in November, leaving the company in a position of having to find a permanent leader quickly.A CBS-Viacom deal would represent a solution of what to do about Viacom for National Amusements and the Redstone family. Mr. Redstone, who is 93 and in poor health, controls about 80 percent of the voting shares in Viacom and CBS through National Amusements, the private theater chain started by his father.Sumner Redstone’s daughter achieved almost total victory and Mr. Dauman was the biggest casualty, says James Stewart of The New York Times.“The easiest thing to do from Shari’s point of view is to convince Les and the board of CBS to do a deal,” said Mario Gabelli, whose investment firm, Gamco, is the second-largest voting shareholder in Viacom and CBS. He was referring to Leslie Moonves, the president and chief executive of CBS.Mr. Gabelli noted that any such deal would have to be handled carefully to comply with corporate governance matters, including the consideration of how a transaction would benefit shareholders of both CBS and Viacom and not just the Redstone family.Some analysts have said that a merger makes sense, creating a bigger company with greater negotiating clout over cable and satellite providers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They have also contended that Mr. Moonves, who has successfully guided CBS, could be better positioned to fix the issues at Viacom as the top executive overseeing both companies.“Today’s news represents the next chapter in a story that in our minds should have never occurred to begin with,” Michael Nathanson, an analyst with MoffettNathanson said in a research note. He said that a deal also would allow for the elimination of executive compensation and other overhead costs, producing savings of at least $400 million.AdvertisementBut Mr. Moonves and other industry analysts have expressed doubt about a corporate reunion. A major issue, analysts say, is that CBS is a strong company on its own and Viacom could drag down its fortunes.“We are doing extraordinarily well on our own with our own assets,” Mr. Moonves said in an investor conference earlier this month after he was asked about a deal with Viacom. “We are never going to do something that is bad for CBS shareholders or the employees.”On Wednesday, a spokesman for CBS said in an emailed statement, “As we’ve said before, the CBS Corporation will always act in the best interest of all of its shareholders.”Representatives for Viacom and National Amusements declined to comment.A version of this article appears in print on September 29, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Push Seen for Viacom and CBS to Reunite.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.