AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.17 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.37 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.12 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Department of Environmental Protection, $80.8 million of revenue bonds. Competitive. TUESDAYHighland Park, Tex., Independent School District, $52.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. Little Rock, Ark., School District, $127.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. Massachusetts, $550 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. WEDNESDAYLouisville/Jefferson County, Ky., $127.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive. Maryland Transportation Department, $300 million of revenue bonds. Competitive. Texas, $150 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAdams County, Colo., $179.2 million of refinancing and improvement certificates of participation. RBC Capital Markets. Arizona State University, $134 million of system revenue bonds. Bank of America. Delaware Transportation Authority, $222 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America. Georgia Housing and Finance Authority, $111 million of single family mortgage bonds. Bank of America. Kansas Department of Transportation, $400 million of highway revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley. Miami-Dade County, Fla., $82.7 million of solid waste system revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. Michigan Finance Authority, $283 million of government loan program water and sewer system revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. New Orleans, $200 million of water revenue bonds. Bank of America. New York Dormitory Authority, $292 million of dormitory facilities revenue bonds. Bank of America. Ohio Water Development Authority, $210 million of Ohio water pollution control loan fund revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Oklahoma Water Resources Board, $99 million of revolving fund revenue bonds. Bank of America. Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, $301.9 million of turnpike revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Peoria, Ariz., $60.3 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray. San Diego Unified School District, $100 million of general obligation bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank. South Dakota Housing Development Authority, $50 million of homeownership mortgage bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. St. Louis, Mo., Sewer District, $233.6 million of wastewater system improvement and refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities. Tahoma School District, Wash., $84.7 million of guaranty program school bonds. Piper Jaffray. University of Michigan, $312.4 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley. University of Texas, $241.9 million of taxable permanent university fund bonds. Wells Fargo Securities. Advertisement