AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangFirst, DealBook readers asked about legal consequences for Wells Fargo in its scandal over fake accounts. The bank received subpoenas shortly afterward.More recently, our readers have asked about clawing back pay. And, guess what? The bank has announced that it will claw back pay worth $41 million from John G. Stumpf, the chief executive.The move marks one of the first times since the financial crisis that a chief executive has been forced to give up compensation.But Mr. Stumpf is not the only one facing clawbacks.Carrie Tolstedt, who led the Wells Fargo community banking division, will surrender stock grants worth about $19 million. Both executives will forgo bonus payments for the year and Mr. Stumpf will forgo his $2.8 million a year salary while the board is investigating.It seems that the board has belatedly remembered its duties to the bank, Gretchen Morgenson writes. It has, until now, been fairly remiss, especially given that two Wells Fargo directors are former financial regulators with extensive experience in consumer banking.Standard Chartered has received accusations of potential wrongdoing by officials at an Indonesian power company in which it is an investor.The United States Justice Department is looking into the accusations, a person briefed on the matter said. The investigation was related to accusations that officials at the company, MAXpower, had paid bribes to win contracts, according to The Wall Street Journal, which earlier reported the inquiry. The regulatory newswire MLex also reported the investigation earlier this year.A recording of a conversation with the company’s chief executive, who used to work at Standard Chartered, featured discussions about illicit payments and joking references to soccer balls stuffed with cash, The Journal reports.The situation is particularly tricky for the bank, which is based in London but does most of its business in Asia, because of the settlement it reached after an investigation into accusations that it had transferred money for countries affected by United States sanctions.Misconduct could prompt prosecutors to re-evaluate whether to revoke the deferred-prosecution agreement and force the bank to plead guilty.It’s also a blow to William T. Winters, the chief executive who has been trying to overhaul the bank.Maurice R. Greenberg, the former chief executive of the insurance giant American International Group, took to the witness stand in his state civil accounting fraud trial.Considering the trial was 11 years in the making, there were few fireworks, but there were moments of testy confrontation.All in all, Mr. Greenberg spoke softly — inaudibly at times — and at certain points acted as if the whole issue and the trial were a minor inconvenience.There were also instances when he acknowledged that he took an active interest in the auto insurance underwriting losses in question because he wanted to ”teach a lesson to managers.”“We’re going to need something quite large to do that.”— Elon Musk, the billionaire founder of the SpaceX rocket company, on what it would take to colonize Mars.• Janet L. Yellen, the chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, will testify on regulation before the House Financial Services Committee. She is expected to offer some explanation about last week’s unusually fractious policy meeting.• The European Central Bank is holding its first annual research conference.• The Council on Foreign Relations will discuss the relationship between United States trade policy and labor markets.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement