AdvertisementSupported byBy Randall SmithMaurice R. Greenberg, the former chief executive of American International Group, told the judge presiding over his civil accounting fraud trial on Thursday that the motive for one key transaction was to help certain A.I.G. employees get continuing losses “off their back” in a competitive corporate culture.Mr. Greenberg’s brief exchange with Justice Charles E. Ramos in the New York Supreme Court in Manhattan occurred when the judge addressed him abruptly after a half-hour of testimony on Mr. Greenberg’s third day on the stand.Much of that testimony so far has consisted of brief, often noncommittal responses by Mr. Greenberg, 91, to questions from the prosecutor, David E. Nachman, about memos and other documents concerning the creation of an offshore reinsurer known as Capco. The state contends Capco was a sham used to convert into investment losses $163 million in auto insurance losses, duping investors.After a defense objection to a new piece of evidence, Justice Ramos leaned over to Mr. Greenberg at the witness stand and said quietly, “Sir, there is no one in this room who doesn’t think you’re a brilliant business manager and a rational person.”Capco, Justice Ramos said, “was not going to bring back losses. It was not going to correct the mistakes that were made in the auto warranty business. Why would A.I.G. go through the Capco transaction in the first place, what is the motivation for that?”Mr. Greenberg replied that he believed “the folks running the domestic property-casualty business would be stuck with the runoff of the auto warranty business,” referring to losses expected to continue for several years. He added, “They were arguing they shouldn’t be held accountable for the runoff” in an “intense” competitive environment. “That was the only reason.”To which Mr. Nachman retorted, “If the shareholders are deceived, that’s their problem!”The trial, being heard without a jury, is the culmination of years of legal wrangling between Mr. Greenberg and the state, which first filed the case in 2005 under Eliot Spitzer, the former New York attorney general. Mr. Greenberg has fought the charges as he tries to preserve his legacy as the man who built A.I.G. into a global insurance force.His testimony is set to resume next week, when the state is expected to quiz him about the other disputed transactions in the case, two reinsurance deals with General Reinsurance Corp. that boosted A.I.G.’s reserves by $500 million. Mr. Greenberg is on trial with another defendant, Howard I. Smith, a former A.I.G. chief financial officer. Defense lawyers have said their clients intended to comply with accounting rules.In a half-day of testimony on Thursday, Mr. Greenberg parried Mr. Nachman’s questions about the creation of Capco, saying he had not sought any special legal or accounting advice about the structure of the reinsurer, which absorbed the auto losses after it was created in mid-2000 with outside investors.Mr. Nachman asked whether the investors, whose own losses in Capco were covered by A.I.G., gave the venture “a veneer of independence.”Mr. Greenberg relied, “I don’t think so.”Did Mr. Greenberg know the investors had to be given “a sweetener” to participate? “I don’t recall,” Mr. Greenberg replied. “I did not get involved in those details. That was not my job.”When Mr. Nachman asked if shareholders were “told nothing about the fact that the auto warranty business is hemorrhaging and it’s being made up elsewhere,” Mr. Greenberg disagreed, saying “I don’t think that’s correct.”Finally, Mr. Greenberg was asked about the decision to unwind Capco, which occurred after an accounting scandal at the former energy giant Enron focused investors’ attention on the misuse of special-purpose vehicles. At first Mr. Greenberg said he didn’t recall the scrutiny of such transactions, but then he said he did.Did auditors ramp up their focus on special-purpose vehicles after Enron, he was asked. “I have no idea,” Mr. Greenberg said.Did he recall that at the heart of Enron was the use and misuse of special-purpose entities, he was asked a bit later. “I believe so,” he said.Advertisement