AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerIt was one of the few venture-backed start-ups brave enough to file for an initial public offering last year. But Nutanix, which provides cloud-based data storage for businesses, was faced with about nine months of choppy markets that discouraged many private companies from making their stock debuts.After much anticipation, Nutanix priced its $238 million I.P.O. Thursday evening, with a valuation of $2.18 billion — slightly higher than the one it received in the private markets two and a half years ago.While not the large premium that its latest investors would have liked, the seven-year-old company avoided the fate feared by others of pricing shares at a steep discount to their most recent private funding round. Nutanix’s shares, listed on Nasdaq under the ticker symbol NTNX, will begin trading on Friday.Nutanix was among the so-called unicorn class (those with valuations of $1 billion or more) of technology companies on every prospective I.P.O. list. So far, it is one of only a handful of venture-backed companies to go public this year with a valuation greater than $1 billion.With nearly 4,000 customers as diverse as Nordstrom, Nintendo and the Department of Defense, Nutanix garnered widespread attention for innovative technology that combined servers, storage and related software into one platform.Prominent venture capitalists, such as Khosla Ventures and Lightspeed Venture Partners, as well as the heavyweight mutual fund Fidelity Investments, invested more than $300 million in the company. As Nutanix postponed its I.P.O. earlier this year, it issued $75 million worth of debt to Goldman Sachs for additional cash.Nutanix, based in San Jose, Calif., was able to increase revenue by 84 percent during the year through July 31, generating about $445 million. Net losses, however, widened by about 34 percent as Nutanix spent millions of dollars more on sales and marketing and research expenses.Another large headline risk emerged, after Dell and EMC combined on Sept. 7. Dell accounted for a “meaningful portion” of Nutanix’s total sales over the last few quarters, the company said in its I.P.O. filing. Through the acquisition, Dell controls VMware, which competes with Nutanix.The company has warned that if Dell chooses VMware’s products over its own, it could harm Nutanix’s operating results and cause a decline in the stock price.Nutanix offered 14.9 million shares, at $16 each, the company said in a news release late Thursday. The company had been marketing 14 million shares at a range of $11 to $13 a share; it subsequently increased the range to $13 to $15 on Thursday after the underwriters felt more confident about investor demand.The company has a dual-class share structure, meaning that holders of class B stock will have 99 percent of the voting power after the I.P.O. Those investors purchasing class A shares through the offering will have only 1 percent.Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and JPMorgan Chase are managing the offering. Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, as well as Fenwick & West, provided legal counsel.Advertisement