By LESLIE PICKERSEPT. 29, 2016
Harvard has brought in a new manager from Columbia University to run its $36 billion endowment, the largest of any university.N. P. Narvekar, 54, was appointed president and chief executive of Harvard Management Company, the university said in a statement on Thursday. He succeeds Stephen Blyth, who resigned in July, citing health reasons, after 18 months on the job.The announcement came a week after the endowment reported an overall loss of 2 percent on its investments for the year through June. The loss follows several years when Harvard’s investment returns have lagged its peers, and while it has experienced significant management turnover as a series of chief executives have come and gone.Mr. Narvekar comes to Harvard after 14 years at Columbia, where he was chief executive of the university’s Investment Management Company, a $9 billion endowment portfolio that posted annualized returns of more than 10 percent during the last decade.AdvertisementRobert A. Ettl, who had been leading the endowment since Mr. Blyth’s departure, will become chief operating officer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Narvekar “is a superb leader and mentor with a proven ability to recruit, build and retain a talented and committed investment team,” Paul J. Finnegan, chairman of the Harvard Management Company’s board, said in a statement.AdvertisementAt the same time, Columbia announced that Peter Holland, who had been that university’s chief investment officer since 2003, would succeed Mr. Narvekar as the endowment’s chief executive.Before coming to Columbia, Mr. Narvekar was the managing director of the investment office at the University of Pennsylvania. He previously worked in a variety of roles at JPMorgan, ultimately becoming a managing director in the equity derivatives group. He has a master’s degree in business administration from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania and a bachelor’s degree in economics from Haverford College.Mr. Narvekar will assume the role on Dec. 5.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.