By SARAH LYALLNOV. 29, 2015
LONDON —  A July article on a front page of The Sun on Sunday tabloid, owned by Rupert Murdoch, was a classic of its kind. Titled “Lord Coke: Top peer’s drug binges with £200 prostitutes,” its highlights included cross-dressing, bare breasts lined with cocaine and the 69-year-old deputy speaker of the House of Lords excitedly burbling, “I just want to be led astray.”Two things were notable about the article, aside from the ensuing speedy resignation of the speaker in question, Lord Sewel. One was that the police, after raiding Lord Sewel’s apartment, declined to bring criminal charges against him — a sign of the newly wary relationship between Mr. Murdoch’s once all-powerful newspapers and the Metropolitan Police Service here.The other was how unusual it was to see this kind of article at all these days. Since the 2011 phone-hacking scandal involving the Murdoch-owned News of the World exposed the extent of some tabloids’ reliance on so-called dark arts — illegally listening to voice mail messages, bribing police officers and hiring private investigators for illegal information-gathering and surveillance, among other things — the papers have had to clean up their approach.Now, such exposés are few and far between.“The days of the Wild West,” with weekly articles about randy footballers or straying M.P.s with their trousers down, are over, said Alan Rusbridger, former editor of The Guardian and current chairman of the Scott Trust, which owns The Guardian.AdvertisementIn place of these exposés are easy-to-report celebrity interviews, reality-television gossip and articles promoting the political agenda of the papers’ proprietors. In the case of The Sun on Sunday and its sister paper, The Sun, this means a lot of articles and editorials reflecting an anti-European, anti-immigration and anti-Muslim viewpoint.Last Monday, for instance, The Sun devoted its front page to a poll that claimed that 20 percent of British Muslims supported Islamic Jihad, linking it to an opinion column with the headline “This shocking poll means we must shut door on young Muslim migrants.” (The Times of London, also owned by Mr. Murdoch, published a similar article and later printed a correction, saying that its headline had been misleading.)AdvertisementThe few drug and sex stings still orchestrated by the newspapers are subject to heavy legal scrutiny and, as in the case of Lord Sewel’s escapades, are justified by the papers on the grounds that they have a public purpose beyond prurience.In the past, tabloid reporters said that they were bullied by their editors into using dubious methods to get scoops. For Graham Johnson, a former organized-crime reporter for The Sunday Mirror, the eye-opening moment came when an editor told him to dig up dirt on a celebrity who was supposedly having an affair with a gangster.“I said, ‘How do you know?’” Mr. Johnson recalled. “He said, ‘I’ve been listening to her phone.’ And then he showed me how to do it.” Mr. Johnson, who said he quit after he illegally listened to dozens of voice mail messages and was made to follow the pair to a hotel, eventually pleaded guilty to phone hacking and was given a suspended jail sentence and ordered to perform 100 hours of community service.The phone-hacking scandal — which intensified with the revelation that employees of The News of the World had illicitly listened to the voice mail messages of a murdered schoolgirl and quickly snowballed to include the closure of the paper — changed all that behavior.After the phone hacking was disclosed, a number of tabloid employees were arrested. Hundreds of phone-hacking victims then sued News UK, Mr. Murdoch’s British newspaper arm, and Mirror Group Newspapers, whose tabloids also engaged in widespread phone hacking. The victims won payouts totaling in the hundreds of millions of pounds. After a long inquiry, a judge, Lord Leveson, recommended an overhaul of press regulation. A shocked Britain reappraised Mr. Murdoch’s outsize role in law enforcement, politics and celebrity culture, and the unspoken laws of the tabloids were reconfigured.News UK set out new rules for its reporters on topics like bribing public officials (do not), paying for stories (only sometimes), using private investigators (only with approval) and collecting private information electronically (do not do that, either). Employees are also required to have training on conflicts of interest, bribery, technology, workplace conduct, electronic communications and whistle-blowing.AdvertisementIn addition to the charges brought against dozens of journalists from various organizations, a number of police officers have been convicted of accepting money from tabloids — even as the journalists, in some cases, have been acquitted of the same offense. This has damaged the formerly symbiotic relationship between the two groups.“There’s been a complete breakdown in relations between reporters and the police,” said Scott Hesketh, a former crime editor at the tabloid The Daily Star. Mr. Hesketh used to pay the police and a string of contacts in prisons and in the court system for stories, he said, often to expose wrongdoing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“In the old days, I would have been able to call a normal copper and say, ‘Can you give me guidance?’” Mr. Hesketh said. “That’s all changed.”Furious about all the prosecutions, the Murdoch tabloids regularly inveigh against the Crown Prosecution Service, particularly when it comes to prosecuting reporters.“A truly grotesque amount of taxpayers’ money has been spent on Operation Elveden,” Graham Dudman, former managing editor of The Sun, told reporters after being acquitted of bribing public officials last spring, using the police investigation’s formal name. “It has now been exposed for what it is — a politically motivated witch hunt against tabloid journalism.”On the surface, many things seem unchanged. With circulations of 1.8 million and 1.5 million, The Sun and The Sun on Sunday are still the largest-selling newspapers in Britain. Earlier this fall, Rebekah Brooks, who resigned from the Murdoch empire but was acquitted of various crimes in 2014, was reinstated to, basically, her old job as chief executive of News UK.Mr. Murdoch still remains a major behind-the-scenes player in British politics, using his papers to rail against his commercial competitors like the BBC and Channel 4, among other things.But times have changed, even for him. Consider Mazher Mahmood, the so-called Fake Sheikh and a Murdoch favorite, who was an undercover reporter for The News of the World and The Sun on Sunday. His identity concealed behind elaborate disguises, Mr. Mahmood regularly entrapped public officials and celebrities into committing crimes, caught their misdeeds on camera and exposed them in print. He has bragged that his articles have resulted in more than 100 convictions.But a 2013 sting, in which Mr. Mahmood posed as a Bollywood director and supposedly persuaded a pop singer to sell him cocaine, ended in disgrace for the reporter. The judge in the subsequent criminal case threw out the charges against the singer, Tulisa Contostavlos, and accused Mr. Mahmood of misleading the court. Mr. Mahmood is currently awaiting trial on charges of conspiring to pervert the course of justice.Rather than publicly defending Mr. Mahmood, as it most likely would have once done, The Sun on Sunday suspended him. It will not say whether or not it is paying his legal bills.Advertisement“The British press has had to clean up its act,” Mr. Hesketh said, “and it has cleaned up its act.”A version of this article appears in print on November 30, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Getting the Scoop on the Up and Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.