AdvertisementSupported byBy William GrimesMary Weber Novak, who took over Spottswoode, her family’s Napa Valley vineyard, after her husband’s death and turned it into one of California’s top producers of cabernet sauvignon and sauvignon blanc, died on Sunday in St. Helena, Calif. She was 84.The cause was cancer, her daughter Beth Novak Milliken said.In 1977, Ms. Novak, a former schoolteacher and the mother of five, faced a crisis when her husband, a doctor, died suddenly of a heart attack at the age of 44. They had fallen in love with the Napa Valley on a visit and, in 1972, bought Spottswoode, a 31-acre estate, founded in 1882, in St. Helena, at the foot of the Mayacamas Mountains. They later bought an adjacent 15 acres.The Novaks initially sold their grapes to prominent local winemakers, like the Shafers and the Duckhorns. But after she took over the estate, Ms. Novak decided in 1982 to produce her own wines. She hired as her winemaker Tony Soter, who would emerge as one of the industry’s brightest talents.Powerful, elegant and balanced, the winery’s cabernet made an immediate impact. “Its 1982 debut dazzled with polished, forward flavors,” The San Francisco Chronicle wrote.In 1990, Wine Spectator magazine put Spottswoode’s 1987 cabernet on a list of the world’s top 10 wines. Although overshadowed by the cabernets, the winery’s sauvignon blanc ranked high as well, the beneficiary of Ms. Novak’s affection for a traditionally low-prestige grape.The critic Jon Bonné, in his book “The New California Wine: A Guide to the Producers and Wines Behind a Revolution in Taste,” called Spottswoode’s sauvignon blanc “perhaps the most serious effort for that grape in California.”Mary Hedvig Weber was born on Sept. 17, 1932, in Los Angeles. Her father, Karl, ran the Weber Showcase and Fixture Company, a manufacturer of display cases for banks and stores. Her mother, the former Mary Noyes, was a homemaker.After graduating from Marymount High School, she attended Stanford University and earned a degree in education in 1954.She taught kindergarten at St. Martin of Tours School in the Brentwood section of Los Angeles before marrying Jack Novak, whom she had met at Stanford, in 1956.In addition to her daughter Beth, she is survived by two other daughters, Kelley Novak and Lindy Novak; two sons, Mike and Matt; a brother, Nicholas Weber; a sister, Katrina Weber; and nine grandchildren.After visiting friends in the Napa Valley, Ms. Novak, a keen gardener, and her husband decided to relocate and start a rural life. Dr. Novak sold his general practice in Solana Beach, in San Diego County, and the couple set to work replanting and cultivating grapes that found favor with the best wineries in the area.“We knew very little about growing grapes or making fine wine, but we planned to study and learn by doing, and we were eager to embrace an agricultural lifestyle in a rural town,” Ms. Novak told Decanter magazine for a profile of her in its November issue.In its first year, Spottswoode Winery, now the Spottswoode Estate Vineyard and Winery, produced a mere 1,200 cases of 1982 cabernet, and for decades thereafter it produced only cabernet and sauvignon blanc. In 1985, at Mr. Soter’s urging, Ms. Novak became one of the first wine producers in the area to embrace organic methods.Her daughter Beth joined the business in 1987 and is now its president. Her daughter Lindy became a marketing director in 1992. After Mr. Soter left in 1997 to start his own winery, Ms. Novak hired a succession of women as winemakers for the estate, including Mia Klein, Pam Starr, Rosemary Cakebread and Jennifer Williams. The current winemaker is Aron Weinkauf.The same impulse that led Ms. Novak to organic farming inspired other initiatives. The winery now relies on solar energy and, through a partnership with the organization One Percent for the Planet, contributes 1 percent of its gross profit each year to environmental causes.Ms. Novak also played a leading role in the restoration of Spring Creek, which runs through the Napa Valley and had suffered badly over the years with the development of local real estate projects.Advertisement