

      By ERIC OWLES

UPDATED September 29, 2016

Nine days ago, the leader of Wells Fargo faced an increasingly skeptical Senate committee for more than two hours. Today, he was denounced for more than four hours at a House panel. His opening statement for Thursday’s House hearing included a notable difference: Hastening a policy change, Mr. Stumpf said that Wells Fargo would eliminate sales goals for its retail bankers by the end of the week, three months earlier than it had planned. The remarks did little to quell lawmakers. Secondly, we recently announced the elimination of product sales goals for everyone in retail banking, effective January 1. Today, I am announcing that we are accelerating this process and ending all product sales goals effective at the end of this week. We want to make sure nothing gets in the way of doing what is right for our customers. Read the full testimony » Under new leadership, we’ve already began taking steps to insure that the sales culture in our retail banking business, is wholly aligned with our customer’s interests. On September 13th, 2016, we announced a major decision that we will end product sales goals for everyone in our retail banking business. Because we want to make certain that nothing gets in the way of doing what is right by our customers. The new leadership team’s primary mission will be to provide the best possible service to our customers. Read the full testimony »In a string of intense and hostile questioning on Thursday, lawmakers denounced the practice of creating unauthorized accounts in the names of real customers. Several lawmakers also called for Mr. Stumpf’s resignation. Representative Jeb Hensarling, the Texas Republican who is chairman of the committee, asked who was the highest ranking executive at Wells to be dismissed. “There were managers and managers and managers of a manager,” said Mr. Stumpf. He later said the highest ranking employees to be dismissed were branch managers. No one at the bank holding company was fired. Representative Brad Sherman, a Democrat of California, asked if Wells Fargo would hold customer suits “to these forced arbitration clauses and screw them again out of their day in court?”  “I believe in arbitration,” Mr. Stumpf replied. “I’m not for Congress setting the corporate structure,” said Representative Randy Neugebauer, a Republican of Texas, on Mr. Stumpf’s dual role as chairman and chief executive. “Did you dump the stock after you found out about the fraudulent accounts,” asked Representative Carolyn Maloney, a Democrat of New York. “The timing is very, very suspicious.”“I sold those shares and I sold them with proper approvals,” said Mr. Stumpf, “With no view about anything that was going on with sales practices or anything else.”“We have evidence of illegal sales practices going back to 2007,” said Representative Maloney. “Will you agree to extend the review period?” “Again, Congresswoman, we’re going to go back to 2009,” Mr. Stumpf said. “Are you saying that all those quarterly reports that you were following,” asked Representative Scott Garret, a Republican of New Jersey, “None of that information was material?” “At the time, through the facts and circumstances, we filed accurate reports and we did not believe it was material,” Mr. Stumpf said. “Was this fraud? Was this just a H.R. problem, was this theft?” asked Representative Sean Duffy, a Republican of Wisconsin. “ Did you steal? I want to know if you and I are on the same page. Did Wells Fargo employees steal from a million to 2 million other customers, yes or no?”“In some cases they did,” said Mr. Stumpf.“Why shouldn’t you be in jail?” asked Representative Mike Capuano, a Democrat of Massachusetts, questioning the difference between Wells Fargo’s C.E.O. and someone who robbed his bank.“There is no question that we had done things that we need to improve on and we’ve paid fines and we’re trying to get better,” said Mr. Stumpf.Advertisement