
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

SEPT. 29, 2016
Sumner M. Redstone and his family are contemplating a reunification.The controlling shareholders behind the media conglomerates CBS and Viacom, which split 10 years ago, have suggested a tie-up. Leslie Moonves, chief executive of the more successful CBS, would do non-Redstone shareholders a disservice if he paid a full premium for the struggling and currently leaderless Viacom. But the investors of Viacom, the owner of MTV and other networks, might want one.National Amusements, the Redstone family theater chain, has about an 80 percent voting stake in both companies, though the accompanying economic interest in each case is roughly 10 percent. Strategically, the idea to put the two businesses back together is far from absurd. And Mr. Moonves has the chops to fix struggling cable networks like MTV and the movie studio Paramount Pictures.The trouble is keeping both sets of shareholders happy. If CBS bought Viacom at a price 25 percent above the market value of its shares, a Reuters Breakingviews analysis in June showed that the $3.5 billion present value of synergies estimated at $500 million a year, less tax, would fail to cover the premium. Looked at another way, the return on investment would not leave any buffer over the companies’ cost of capital.
                War has spread across the empire of Sumner Redstone, one of the entertainment industry’s most tenacious titans. At stake are the fortunes of his family and confidants, as well as the fate of Viacom and CBS.            Viacom’s recent weakness has shifted the math slightly in CBS’s favor since then, but the numbers still do not make a strong case. National Amusements might instead promote a merger with no premium – after all, its interests make the price of any deal something close to a zero-sum game. But Viacom’s owners would probably balk at that.AdvertisementThere may be middle ground. For example, an all-stock purchase of Viacom by CBS at a 10 percent premium could work, with Viacom shareholders owning 40 percent of the combined company and sharing in the upside of any magic that Mr. Moonves can unleash. Such a balancing act would involve potential conflicts of interest for the Redstones, though, and the risk that shareholders of one company — or both — would feel badly treated.Elon Musk, the entrepreneur with big investments in both Tesla Motors and SolarCity, is struggling with similar potential conflicts in his efforts to merge them into a sustainable-energy combo. In that situation, external investors will get to vote on the deal.AdvertisementIf CBS and Viacom decide to merge, non-Redstone shareholders will not be so lucky.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »