By AMIE TSANGSEPT. 29, 2016
Could it be time for CBS and Viacom to get back together again?With the fight over Viacom’s leadership settled, National Amusements — through which Sumner M. Redstone controls Viacom and CBS — plans to send letters to both companies instructing them to consider merging, people briefed on the matter said.The letters would ask the two companies (which split a decade ago) to establish independent board committees to explore the idea of reuniting.The two companies have had very different fortunes since they went separate ways: CBS has been buoyed by strong ratings at its television network, while Viacom’s cable networks, like Comedy Central and MTV, have suffered from slumping ratings.Americans should not have to choose between forfeiting their legal rights and getting adequate medical care, a government agency has decided.AdvertisementIt issued a rule barring nursing homes that receive federal funding from requiring residents to resolve disputes through arbitration — a move that would affect 1.5 million residents of nursing homes.AdvertisementArbitration clauses have helped the nursing home industry to reduce its legal costs, but they have also stymied the course of justice, even in  a case of murder.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The nursing home industry, however, has been critical.Mark Parkinson, the president and chief executive of the American Health Care Association, a trade group, said the rule was “wholly unnecessary to protect residents’ health and safety.”“It is not advisable to ignore the potential risk that the present overhang may continue to weigh negatively well into the future.”— A statement from OPEC, the cartel of 14 oil producing nations, which agreed to modestly cut its collective output. The group does not think the market glut is going away any time soon.Market confidence: there one moment, gone the next.It can be fickle, something that Deutsche Bank knows well — the most fashionable trade right now is the bet that the German bank’s stock price will fall.The noise in the echo chamber of doom keeps getting louder, helped by reports that the German government might step in to help the bank (which officials have denied).Shares rallied briefly when Deutsche said it had sold a British insurance unit, but the prospect of a fine of billions of dollars from regulators in the United States has only added to negative sentiment — especially as it has one of the thinner cash cushions among its peers.• John G. Stumpf, the chief executive of Wells Fargo, will testify before the House Financial Services Committee on the unauthorized opening of customer accounts. John Chiang, California’s state treasurer, suspended the state’s ties with the bank, citing its “venal abuse of its customers.” • Janet L. Yellen will speak with participants at a forum for minority bankers run by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Ms. Yellen faced tough questions on Wednesday over how regulators will respond to the Wells Fargo scandal.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.