AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelThe Redstones are playing hardball.The ailing 93-year-old mogul Sumner M. Redstone and his daughter, Shari Redstone, on Thursday made their intentions for the future of their $40 billion media empire crystal clear: They are calling for the reunification of CBS and Viacom in an all-stock deal that would leave the family in control of the combined company.The father-daughter duo outlined their plans for the proposed deal in a 251-word letter sent Thursday to the boards of CBS and Viacom, instructing the directors to consider combining the two media companies. While the Redstones encouraged “full and fair deliberation and negotiation” on the potential transaction, the subtext of the letter was that the family would determine the fate of the two companies and that it wanted those two companies to become one.The Redstones left the directors of CBS and Viacom with few other options besides continuing as independently controlled entities. In the letter, the Redstones stated that they would not “accept or support” any acquisition by a third party of either CBS or Viacom. They also said they would not support a deal that would “result in National Amusements surrendering its controlling position in either company or not controlling the combined company.”The blunt and public nature of the letter was not only a signal of Shari Redstone’s vision for the two companies but also a way to build momentum toward having them combined under the leadership of Leslie Moonves, the chief executive of CBS. Mr. Moonves, 67, has expressed doubt about a corporate reunion, and winning him over is crucial to the plan to combine them.Kannan Venkateshwar, an analyst with Barclays, said in a research note that the benefits of a deal were predicated on “CBS management expanding its curation expertise to Viacom’s platform and being successful at it.”“In our view, it is unclear if Mr. Moonves would want to undertake such a turnaround project and spread his time across a bigger portfolio of assets when he is in a relatively strong position competitively with one major asset,” Mr. Venkateshwar continued. He said the likely solution would be for the Redstones “to allow complete strategic and operational freedom to Mr. Moonves across the portfolio.”The Redstone family controls about 80 percent of the voting stock in CBS and Viacom through National Amusements, the private theater chain company started by Mr. Redstone’s father. National Amusements directors who hold board positions at the two companies — Mr. Redstone, Ms. Redstone and David Andelman — would not participate in board discussions related to the proposed deal or vote the transaction.The development on Thursday continues the intense drama over the future of the Redstone media empire that has played out during the last year. At one point, the caustic fight for control included legal battles in three states, all centering on the question of whether or not Mr. Redstone had the mental capacity to make decisions about his businesses.War has spread across the empire of Sumner Redstone, one of the entertainment industry’s most tenacious titans. At stake are the fortunes of his family and confidants, as well as the fate of Viacom and CBS.So far, Ms. Redstone has largely prevailed. Long-estranged from her father, she worked her way back into his good graces and was back at her father’s side when his former lover Manuela Herzer filed suit challenging his competency.After the abrupt dismissal of that suit in May, without any decision on Mr. Redstone’s mental capacity, Ms. Redstone then turned her attentions to the battle for control of her father’s $40 billion media empire.In quick order, the Redstones moved to reorder the board of National Amusements, then the board of Viacom, ultimately leading to the ouster of Philippe P. Dauman as chief executive of Viacom. Ms. Redstone had clashed with Mr. Dauman, her father’s longtime confidant.Now, Ms. Redstone’s attentions appear to be turned to the reunification of Viacom and CBS.In 1987, Mr. Redstone took control of Viacom through National Amusements in a hostile corporate takeover, then went on to acquire CBS in 2000 in a nearly $40 billion deal. Mr. Redstone then split the two companies apart in 2006 as questions were being asked about the future of both businesses.Since then, it has been a tale of two companies for CBS and Viacom as each tried to secure its place in an increasingly digital world. Today, CBS stands in a position of strength, with solid ratings at its TV network and experiments with new streaming ventures. In contrast, Viacom has struggled, with its cable networks like Comedy Central and MTV suffering ratings declines and its Paramount Pictures film studio delivering disappointment after disappointment at the box office. While CBS’s stock price is up about 40 percent in the last year, Viacom’s stock price has tumbled about 11 percent.In their letter Thursday, the Redstones stated that reuniting CBS and Viacom “would allow the combined company to respond even more aggressively and effectively to the challenges of the changing entertainment and media landscape.”Yet several hurdles remain beyond Mr. Moonves’s role, including whether the transaction would be structured to benefit all shareholders and not just the Redstone family. Mr. Redstone and Ms. Redstone stated in the letter that they thought the optimal structure for a potential CBS-Viacom deal would be an all-stock transaction, with the stockholders of each company receiving shares in the new company in the same class that they now own.CBS said in a statement: “CBS is in receipt of the letter, and its management and independent directors will take appropriate action to evaluate what is in the best interest of the company and its shareholders.”Separately, Viacom announced that its board had “received a letter from National Amusements requesting that it explore a combination.” The company said the board was expected to create a special committee of independent directors to “carefully consider” the National Amusements request.Viacom is under a somewhat tight deadline to determine its future and settle on new leadership. Tom Dooley, the interim chief executive who succeeded Mr. Dauman, has said he will leave his position in November.Advertisement