By ANDREW POLLACKDEC. 1, 2015
Turing Pharmaceuticals’ effort to charge $750 a pill for a 62-year-old drug is facing a new headwind: The nation’s largest prescription drug manager plans to back an alternative that costs only $1 per pill.The prescription drug manager, Express Scripts, was expected to announce on Tuesday that it will promote use of a compounded medicine that contains the same active ingredient as the Turing drug, Daraprim.“This could become a solution for the vast majority of patients,” Dr. Steve Miller, chief medical officer of Express Scripts, said in an interview.The compounded medicine is already being made and sold by Imprimis Pharmaceuticals in San Diego. But the move by Express Scripts, which manages prescriptions for tens of millions of Americans, could increase sales considerably.Advertisement“From our perspective, it’s a tremendous endorsement of the business model” of offering alternatives to high-priced drugs, said Mark L. Baum, chief executive of Imprimis. Mr. Baum said Imprimis was also developing compounded alternatives to older drugs whose prices have been raised sharply by other companies, including Valeant Pharmaceuticals International.AdvertisementTuring, which is run by the former hedge fund manager Martin Shkreli, set off a furor in September after it acquired the rights to Daraprim and raised its price overnight to $750 a pill from $13.50.Daraprim, known generically as pyrimethamine, is the treatment of choice for toxoplasmosis, a parasitic infection that can be serious for babies and people with AIDS. While there is no patent protection on such an old compound, there are no generic versions approved for sale in the United States, in part because the market is small.Compounded drugs are customized formulations made by pharmacies for particular, named patients.That requirement restricts how directly Imprimis can compete with Turing. For instance, hospitals cannot stock the compounded version to use for patients coming to the emergency room.Imprimis, which is publicly traded, is not allowed to make a direct copy of Daraprim. So its capsule contains both pyrimethamine and leucovorin, a drug that is often prescribed with Daraprim to ease certain side effects.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If a doctor writes a prescription for Daraprim, Express Scripts or pharmacies cannot substitute the compounded drug produced by Imprimis. So physicians will have to write a prescription specifically for the compounded drug and fax it to Imprimis.Express Scripts said it would work with the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the HIV Medicine Association to inform doctors about the process.While Daraprim has become a symbol of pharmaceutical industry pricing practices, use of the drug is low, estimated at 2,000 patients a year in the United States. Dr. Miller said Express Scripts had only 350 patients who used Daraprim last year.Last week, Turing said that it would offer discounts of up to 50 percent to hospitals. It also said that it was offering financial assistance to patients so that no one needing the drug would go without it.AdvertisementMedicaid and certain hospitals already pay as little as a penny a pill for Daraprim because of federal pricing rules. But Turing declined to lower the $750-per-tablet list price.Turing said on Monday that compounded drugs were not demonstrated to be safe and effective, while drugs like Daraprim had been approved by the Food and Drug Administration.At least one of the compounding pharmacies owned by Imprimis received a warning letter from the F.D.A. last year for deficiencies in manufacturing and other practices.A version of this article appears in print on December 1, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Top Prescription Plan to Back $1 Alternative to $750 Pill.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.