AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelA California judge decided on Monday to go forward with proceedings in a lawsuit filed by a former companion of the 92-year-old media mogul Sumner M. Redstone who has challenged his mental competence, but rejected a petition to treat the case as urgent.Probate Judge Clifford L. Klein of the Los Angeles County Superior Court set a new hearing date, tentatively for late January, to consider the motion from Mr. Redstone’s lawyers to dismiss the suit. The judge said that he found no urgency in the matter because of the quality of health care that Mr. Redstone now receives. Meanwhile, no other action is being taken.Mr. Redstone is the executive chairman of Viacom and CBS and controls about 80 percent of the voting stock in the two media companies. While the legal dispute concerns his personal life, the questions about his health have raised broader issues about his role leading a media empire that has a combined market value of $45 billion. Mr. Redstone’s total compensation for the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, 2014, was $13.2 million at Viacom and $10.8 million at CBS.In the suit, filed last week, Manuela Herzer, who once had a romantic relationship with Mr. Redstone, said that he had been unable to “communicate reliably or competently manage his own health care” for weeks. The petition specifically asked that the court decide whether Ms. Herzer was improperly removed on Oct. 16 from control of an advanced health care directive that put her in charge of his health decisions. Philippe Dauman, the chief executive of Viacom, has since been put in control of Mr. Redstone’s medical care.The petition included personal details, including claims that Mr. Redstone is incontinent, requires suctioning to remove phlegm up to 20 times day, is “obsessed with eating steak” even while on a feeding tube, and “demands, to the extent he can be understood, to engage in sexual activity every day.”Lawyers for Mr. Redstone called the suit “a meritless action, riddled with lies, and a despicable invasion of his privacy.” They said that it was inspired by Ms. Herzer’s fear that she would be eliminated from Mr. Redstone’s estate plan after her removal from his home.“We are pleased the court today expressly rejected Ms. Herzer’s claims of urgency and granted our request to stay discovery pending next year’s hearing on our motion to dismiss,” Gabrielle A. Vidal, of the Loeb & Loeb law firm, which represents Mr. Redstone, said in a statement.On Monday, Pierce O’Donnell, one of the lawyers representing Ms. Herzer, said that the case was about Mr. Redstone’s health care. “Money is not what all of this is all about,” he said. “She is spending a substantial amount of money on lawyers to vindicate his rights.”Advertisement