AdvertisementSupported byBy Kevin Granville and Pradnya JoshiThe United States dollar was once the standard reserve currency for the International Monetary Fund. But in the 1960s and early ’70s, as the Vietnam War dragged on and the United States ran persistent trade deficits, the dollar came to be seen as overvalued.Rising trade in the 1960s was putting stress on the supply of two key assets – gold and the United States dollar – that were needed to support the global monetary standard developed at Bretton Woods after World War II.To ease the strain, the I.M.F. in 1969 created special drawing rights. Each S.D.R. was equivalent to 0.888671 gram of fine gold — which, at the time, was the amount of gold one United States dollar could buy. Although an S.D.R. is not a “currency” as such (it is really just an accounting entry), it can be used by member countries as a reserve asset. S.D.R.s may also be used when the I.M.F. lends money to its member countries or is repaid for loans. A country holding S.D.R.s converts them into one of its component currencies (like dollars or sterling) before they can be spent on goods or services.The dollar’s peg to gold formally ended on Aug. 15, 1971, when President Richard M. Nixon said the government would no longer convert foreign-held dollars into gold. The new policy, announced in a televised speech to the country, was part of a sweeping new economic plan aimed at reducing inflation and unemployment. By 1973, all the major world currencies were floating in value against each other.Responding to the changes, the monetary fund in 1975 based its system on a basket of 16 widely used currencies. Six years later, the basket was simplified to the currencies of the Group of Five industrial nations: the United States dollar, the Japanese yen, the German mark, the British pound and the French franc.In 1999, the collection of reserve currencies was juggled again when the euro was introduced. The euro replaced the French franc and German mark as part of the special drawing rights. The change would be the last until the addition of China’s renminbi, which will take effect on Oct. 1, 2016.After the change, the weightings of one S.D.R. will be: 41.73 percent for the American dollar, 30.93 percent for the euro, 10.92 percent for the Chinese renminbi, 8.33 percent for the Japanese yen and 8.09 percent for the British pound.According to the I.M.F., as of today, 204.1 billion S.D.R.s (equal to about $285 billion) have been created and allocated to member countries.Many central banks use the system in calculating the value of their reserves. By adding the renminbi to this group, the I.M.F. effectively considers the currency to be safe and reliable. Besides the symbolic weight the inclusion carries, there are ways China will gain greater global clout. For example, China will have somewhat more influence in international bailouts, like Greece’s debt deal.Advertisement