AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ProtessAs authorities around the globe grapple with the threat of terrorism, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo is preparing to impose new regulations on New York State banks to prevent illicit money from flowing through Wall Street and into the hands of militants and criminals.Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, plans to propose rules this week that would clarify and expand the responsibility of New York State banks to thwart money laundering and the financing of terrorist groups, according to Cuomo administration officials.The rules — a jolt to New York banks as well as to the federal regulators who typically police such transactions — would force a chief compliance officer to certify that a bank maintains systems to “detect, weed out and prevent illicit” money transfers. If compliance officers file an “incorrect or false” certification, they could face criminal charges under the rules, a rare effort to hold financial executives criminally liable.At its core, Mr. Cuomo’s proposal aims to block terrorists from using the New York financial system, the center of dollar-based finance and global capitalism. The effort, though, could prove challenging, as New York banks process billions of dollars in payments on behalf of clients who often hide behind layers of legitimate front groups.“Money is the fuel that feeds the fire of international terrorism,” Mr. Cuomo said in a statement. “At a time of heightened global security concerns, it is especially vital that banks and regulators do everything they can to stop that flow of illicit funds.”More broadly, the policy represents the Cuomo administration’s latest push onto the turf of federal regulators like the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, a tactic that can score political points in New York but cause consternation in Washington.The New York State Department of Financial Services, the regulatory agency writing the rules, has adopted an aggressive stance on Wall Street, occasionally putting the agency at odds with its federal counterparts.The agency’s policy to prevent money laundering, which is stricter than existing federal rules, gained traction in recent weeks after militants tied to the Islamic State killed 130 people in Paris. Although the New York agency was drafting the rules for months beforehand, the Paris attacks provided a deadly reminder of the Islamic State’s military capability as well as its financial strength.The Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS, earns tens of millions of dollars a month, according to some estimates, potentially providing financing for attacks around the world. And as it smuggles oil and loots the towns it controls, the group has become what is possibly the world’s wealthiest militant organization.In September, the Treasury Department placed sanctions on 15 people it called “terrorism facilitators” linked to the Islamic State. And it continues to enforce sanctions involving Syria, Iran and other nations tied to the financing of militant attacks.The New York agency has been one of several regulators to take aim at banks for processing transactions with those entities facing sanctions. The banks, typically European financial giants like Deutsche Bank and Standard Chartered, were accused of processing the illicit transactions through their New York branches. The biggest case came last year against BNP Paribas, France’s biggest bank, which pleaded guilty to criminal charges and paid a record $8.9 billion penalty.The New York agency muscled its way into those cases, even though the investigations originated with either federal authorities or the Manhattan district attorney’s office. In the case of Standard Chartered, the big London-based bank, the state regulator actually ran ahead of its federal and local counterparts, threatening to revoke the bank’s license in New York.“The new rule demonstrates that the agency’s broad and aggressive focus on antimoney laundering and financial crime will continue, and if anything expand,” said Polly Greenberg, who worked alongside the agency when she led the major economic crimes bureau at the Manhattan district attorney’s office.Ms. Greenberg, who now advises banks as a managing director of regulatory consulting at Duff & Phelps, added, “I expect the industry will react with intense concern, as institutions and executives work to understand the breadth of the new rule.”Banks will have 45 days to comment on the proposal.The New York agency is known to resist attempts to water down regulation, but the proposed rule comes at a time of transition. Benjamin M. Lawsky, whom Mr. Cuomo appointed in 2011 to create and lead the agency, stepped down in June. His interim successor, Anthony J. Albanese, said he plans to leave the agency soon. Shirin Emami, who now leads the agency’s banking division, will temporarily step into the role until the governor names a successor.Even if a lobbying campaign falls short, banks could mount legal challenges to the rule, a strategy that had some success in Wall Street’s attack against the Dodd-Frank regulatory overhaul passed in the aftermath of the financial crisis.Some banks could also choose a more drastic route — abandon their New York State license altogether to become a nationally chartered bank with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.That strategy, however, has logistical hurdles. And the comptroller’s office, which has ramped up its enforcement, could balk at a bank’s attempts to give up its state charter.But some banks might welcome new rules that clarify their responsibilities under New York law. In large part, the proposed rules would codify de facto policies and existing federal rules, providing some clarity to the banks as they grapple with overlapping statutes and regulations.For example, banks have automated filters to catch suspicious transactions. Yet those filters have failed to catch billions of dollars in illicit transactions.New York’s proposal goes further in what it would require of banks. For one thing, it would clarify that banks must regularly test their “watch list filtering program,” whereas some banks previously failed to update data and verify its effectiveness. The proposal would also clarify that banks must not alter the filters to intentionally catch fewer suspicious transactions.Under the rules, perhaps the strictest provision takes aim at chief compliance officers, requiring them to certify annually that their systems are performing as required. The rule mirrors the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, a law passed after the Enron and WorldCom scandals that, among other orders, requires top corporate executives to attest to the accuracy of an annual report.The proposed rules could carry a number of penalties for compliance officers. If banks fail to prevent illicit transactions, the New York agency could enforce financial penalties or force the officers’ dismissal. Additionally, the executive “also may be subject to criminal penalties” for a false or inaccurate filing.Mr. Lawsky first hinted at this requirement in a speech several months ago, stating that since the agency “cannot simultaneously audit every institution, we are also considering making senior executives personally attest to the adequacy and robustness” of the banks’ filters.“The stakes are incredibly high,” he said. “Without moving massive amounts of money around the globe, international terrorism cannot thrive.”Advertisement