AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaMonday morning, Los Angeles Times employees were greeted with an unusual message from their corporate parent company, Tribune Publishing.“Over the Thanksgiving weekend a rumor was reported in social media and the press regarding a potential purchase of Tribune Publishing Company,” wrote Matthew Hutchison, a senior vice president for corporate communications. He was referring to a post on Twitter, by Rupert Murdoch, that suggested the company was about to be bought by a big Wall Street firm, while the billionaire philanthropist Eli Broad would take control of The Times.Tribune Publishing, Mr. Hutchison said, “remains committed to its strategy and transformation plan and is not engaged in discussions or a process to sell the company.”The exchange was a public hint of behind-the-scenes tumult that has surrounded the company in recent months. In September, The Times’s publisher, Austin Beutner, was fired. Shortly afterward, the company announced staff reductions. In all, 82 newsroom employees left, from a total of about 500, according to a list maintained by staff members.“The companywide Employee Voluntary Separation Plan was designed to allow employees across all of Tribune Publishing to make the best decisions for their own personal and professional situations, while reinvesting in the areas that will accelerate our transition,” the company said in a statement.Since the dismissal of Mr. Beutner, a group that includes Mr. Broad, Apollo Global Management and others has been trying to find a way to gain control of the company before further staff cuts erode what they see as the vital core of its newspapers, according to two people with knowledge of the process, who spoke on condition of anonymity.Mr. Broad, a prominent Angeleno, has retained the investment bank Evercore to explore a purchase. His primary interest is in The Times, and he is seeking a partner for the other newspapers in the group, which include The Baltimore Sun and Chicago Tribune. Apollo is among those interested.Tribune Publishing executives have declined to meet with potential suitors, or to provide detailed financial information, to the frustration of those suitors, the two people said. Tribune faces pressure from a diminished stock price and the prospect that one of its major shareholders, Oaktree Capital Management, will seek to sell its 18 percent stake in the company.Any potential discussion about a sale is thus stalled. Mr. Murdoch, who is not directly involved, may have had dated information, one person said.Tribune Publishing’s stock had risen nearly 8 percent on the rumor of the potential deal.Advertisement