By VINOD SREEHARSHANOV. 30, 2015
RIO DE JANEIRO — Shares of BTG Pactual tumbled on Monday in the face of reports that federal prosecutors in Brazil have evidence that may link the investment bank to a suspicious payment.The stock was down nearly 12 percent in late trading in São Paulo on top of a sharp slide last week after the man who built the bank into a trading and deal-making powerhouse, André Esteves, was arrested. Mr. Esteves, BTG Pactual’s largest shareholder, resigned as chairman and chief executive of the bank late Sunday.Mr. Esteves and Senator Delcídio do Amaral were arrested on Wednesday on accusations of obstruction of justice in a broad investigation into corruption involving the state-owned oil giant Petrobras. In seeking to calm investors last week, BTG Pactual sought to distance itself from Mr. Esteves, emphasizing the bank’s financial strength and that it was not the target of an investigation.But federal prosecutors are now said to have found evidence in the house of Diogo Ferreira, the chief of staff to Mr. Amaral, suggesting that BTG Pactual paid 45 million reais, or nearly $12 million, to an influential politician, Eduardo Cunha, the speaker of the lower house of Congress, with the hope of watering down financial legislation.AdvertisementThat new allegation, reported by the Brazilian newspapers O Globo and Folha de São Paulo, led Teori Zavascki, the high court justice overseeing the Petrobras case, to order that Mr. Esteves, who was expected to be released on Monday, to remain in jail for what is now an indefinite period.AdvertisementBTG Pactual has denied the new allegations. In a statement, it said, “BTG Pactual vehemently denies having made any type of payment for an alleged benefit relating to Provisional Measure No. 608, dated March 1, 2013.” It also said that it was “fully available to clarify and cooperate with authorities.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bank said that Marcelo Kalim and Roberto Sallouti would take over and act as co-chief executives of BTG Pactual.Mr. Kalim, an M.B.A. graduate from the Sloan school at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, had been the bank’s chief financial officer.Mr. Sallouti, a graduate of the Wharton School and a co-founder of the bank, was previously chief of asset management. Before that, he was its chief operating officer.Pérsio Arida, who had been interim chief executive last week, was elected executive chairman and John Huw Jenkins was made vice chairman, the statement said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.