By HIROKO TABUCHIOCT. 5, 2015
American Apparel, the onetime arbiter of made-in-America cool, filed for bankruptcy protection early Monday, its business crippled by huge debts, a precipitous fall in sales, employee strife and a drawn-out legal battle with the retailer’s ousted founder, Dov Charney.The Chapter 11 petition, approved by the board, was filed in federal bankruptcy court in Delaware. The filing followed a deal struck with most of American Apparel’s secured lenders to reduce the retailer’s debt through a process known as a debt-for-equity conversion, where bondholders swap their debt for shares in the company.The deal, which includes extra financing from the participating bondholders, would enable American Apparel to keep its manufacturing operations in Los Angeles and its 130 stores in the United States open, the company said.No layoffs were announced in the filing, which still requires approval by the bankruptcy court. The retailer’s overseas operations are unaffected by the restructuring, which American Apparel expects to complete within six months.AdvertisementStill, the bankruptcy would wipe out American Apparel’s current shareholders, including Mr. Charney, whose stake in the retailer, which he founded in 1989, was worth about $8.2 million as of Friday. It would instead put the company’s creditors in full control, including Standard General, the little-known hedge fund that is also leading the turnaround at RadioShack, which went bankrupt in February.AdvertisementAmerican Apparel and RadioShack join numerous peers that have succumbed to intense retail competition. Some analysts say that the United States simply has too many brands — and too many brick-and-mortar stores — chasing consumer spending that is growing sluggishly at best.Stores that cater to teenagers, like American Apparel, Abercrombie & Fitch and Aeropostale, have especially struggled in the face of an onslaught of “fast-fashion” labels and an increasingly fickle demographic more interested in the latest app or device than a pair of jeans. In the past year, Wet Seal, Deb Shops, Delia’s and Body Central have all gone under.American Apparel’s own bankruptcy had become inevitable, as the retailer posted quarter after quarter of steep losses. Its sales fell 17 percent in the second quarter compared with last year, a slump attributed to a dearth of new styles. American Apparel’s losses over the last five years have topped $340 million, and it has lost $45 million more this year.
            A series of scandals have tainted the once-strong clothing brand.        
        Dov Charney, a Montreal native, enrolls at Tufts University (he later drops out) and comes up with an idea to make T-shirts in America.
      
        Mr. Charney moves to Columbia, S.C., where he learns the T-shirt trade from textile and garment producers. 
      
        He moves to Los Angeles, opening a factory as a wholesale business.
      
        American Apparel opens retail stores and becomes an instant sensation.
      
 An article  in Jane, a  now-defunct magazine, recounts that Mr. Charney masturbated during an interview with the reporter, who is a woman. The article portrayed him as an enthusiastic Lothario who preyed upon his staff.
      
        Three former employees filed lawsuits saying that Mr. Charney had created an environment fostering sexual misconduct. 
      
        The company’s shares trade publicly. Another former employee, Sylvia Hsu, says she was sexually harassed by an unidentified co-worker and was fired as a result of a hostile working environment. 
      
        Mr. Charney is forced to lay off 1,800 factory workers as part of an immigration sweep. 
      
        With 273 retail stores around the world, the company says it might not have enough funds to stay afloat. The company’s accounting firm, Deloitte & Touche, resigns, citing “material weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting.”
      
        Five former female employees file sexual harassment lawsuits against Mr. Charney, including accusations that he had asked some of them to engage in sex acts against their will. Mr. Charney denies the allegations repeatedly. 
      
        Mr. Charney is sued by a former employee who claimed that Mr. Charney had choked him, thrown dirt at him and called him an antigay slur.
      
        At risk of having its stock delisted over its financial troubles, American Apparel secures an investment from FiveT Capital, a Swiss asset management firm.
      
        The board  removes Mr. Charney as chief executive and chairman because an internal investigation found that he had misused company money and had allowed an employee to post naked photographs of a former female employee who had sued him.
      
        Mr. Charney enters  a partnership with the investment firm Standard General  that gives him a 43 percent stake in American Apparel, but he hands over his ownership control to Standard General.

      
        American Apparel reaches a deal with its largest shareholders to remake the board of directors and try to shore up the company’s finances while keeping manufacturing in the United States.
Mr. Charney's future at the company remains unclear.
      
        American Apparel  names a new board  that does not include Mr. Charney.
      
        A longtime retail executive, Paula Schneider, takes over as the new chief executive,  replacing Mr. Charney. 
      
        The Securities and Exchange Commission says it has opened an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the departure of Mr. Charney, American Apparel says in a filing.
      
        American Apparel starts  laying off about 180 employees, mainly in manufacturing, as part of an effort by Ms. Schneider to streamline the company’s operations. 
      
        Mr. Charney files a defamation lawsuit against Standard General, calling the internal probe that led to his ouster a “witch hunt” and a “whitewash.” He later sues American Apparel and the chairwoman of the board, Colleen B. Brown, as well as another board member, David Danziger. 
      
        American Apparel says it has been granted a restraining order against Mr. Charney, temporarily prohibiting him from breaching the terms of a previous standstill agreement, including calling for the removal of the company's board members or making negative statements to the press against the company or its employees. 
      
        Standard General sues Mr. Charney for not fulfilling the promises he made as part of their June 2014 agreement. The hedge fund says Mr. Charney put up his original stake in American Apparel as collateral and promised to surrender the new shares he bought, but failed to do so. 
      
        American Apparel warns investors that it may not have sufficient funds to stay in business for the next 12 months, and that it may not be able to raise additional capital.
      
        American Apparel files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. 
      
        The board of American Apparel rejects a takeover offer from the investment funds Hagan Capital Group and Silver Creek Capital Partners that would have returned Mr. Charney to the company.
      The New York Stock Exchange warned last week that American Apparel was at risk of being delisted, saying it had suffered losses so substantial, and its financial condition had become so impaired that it was questionable whether the retailer could stay in business. At the close of markets on Friday, its shares were worth just 11 cents.A $13.9 million interest payment due on Oct. 15 had loomed large on the horizon; as of mid-August, American Apparel had just over $11 million in cash on hand. The shortfall prompted the company itself to warn it may not have enough capital to cover its costs over the next year.Under the financing agreement, five American Apparel bondholders would convert some $200 million in bonds into equity in the reorganized company. Participating bondholders would also provide $90 million in debtor-in-possession financing, as well as $70 million in new liquidity.The fresh financing would reduce American Apparel’s debt to $120 million from $311 million, and its annual interest expenses would fall by $24 million, the company said. The participating bondholders are Standard General, Monarch Alternative Capital, Coliseum Capital, Goldman Sachs Asset Management and Pentwater Capital Management, all hedge funds or investment firms specializing in distressed debt. Together, they represent 95 percent of the retailer’s secured lenders.AdvertisementBankruptcy proceedings would also temporarily delay numerous lawsuits against the company, giving its management some breathing room to get the company’s financial house in order. The retailer had been in the middle of a turnaround plan that included freshening up its product lineup, overhauling its supply chain and reining in American Apparel’s notoriously risqué advertising.Paula Schneider, a longtime retail executive brought in last year to salvage American Apparel’s ailing operations, is expected to stay on as chief executive through the bankruptcy proceedings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In an interview on Sunday, Ms. Schneider said that free of its crippling debt and interest payments, American Apparel could finally put that turnaround plan into action. The retailer was able to bring to the store only 15 to 20 percent of its planned lineup for the fall season, because it could not afford to do more, she said.“Our debt load simply wasn’t sustainable. You can’t do a turnaround plan without cash,” Ms. Schneider said. “Every day, we would make choices on what we were going to buy, even though we needed more for everyone. Every day, I have to pick between what I’m buying for retail or wholesale, or giving e-commerce enough money to develop a mobile app,” she said.“And it was all to get to the point where we could make these massive interest payments, and nothing that was really moving the company forward,” she said. “Not having the nuisance lawsuits, not having this massive debt, these are all extremely important things for the company to thrive.”It is a stark turn of events for a retailer that began as a T-shirt label in 1989 and whose bodysuits and disco pants came to define the alternative look of the 1990s and early 2000s. The retailer’s commitment to keeping local garment jobs in Los Angeles, and its championing of progressive causes from immigration reform to marriage equality, also set it apart from its retail peers.Behind the energy of those early years was Mr. Charney, the kinetic executive whose lifestyle seemed to embody American Apparel’s anti-establishment flair. But soon, the founder’s antics appeared to cross a line.A 2004 profile in the magazine Jane described Mr. Charney repeatedly masturbating in front of the reporter. Other articles quoted Mr. Charney calling women “sluts,” and suggesting that “ugly” store managers be fired. A series of lawsuits against Mr. Charney made claims of sexual harassment of female employees. Mr. Charney’s lawyers steadfastly maintained, however, that the accusations were unfounded and that the founder was a deep-pocketed target for litigation.Still, in June last year, American Apparel’s board of directors ousted Mr. Charney as chairman, saying an internal investigation had found that he had misused company money and had allowed an employee to post naked photographs of a woman who was a former employee who had sued him. The board also pointed to the mounting expense of defending Mr. Charney in the lawsuits filed against him, and said that his reputation was making lenders skittish about working with the company. Mr. Charney has disputed the investigation’s conclusions, saying they are unfounded.AdvertisementMr. Charney then teamed up with Standard General to increase its hold on the company’s stock to 43 percent, and to potentially pave the way for Mr. Charney to return to the company. But that alliance soon fell apart. Standard General has blocked a return by Mr. Charney and each side has sued the other for breaching mutual agreements.At the same time, some American Apparel workers have started staging weekly protests, complaining of layoffs and reduced hours. In one heated protest, a small group of workers beat and destroyed a piñata resembling Ms. Schneider, the chief executive.Workers have filed a string of complaints with the National Labor Relations Board, including one by a group of workers claiming that they were wrongfully terminated after attempting to unionize. The board has dismissed many of these complaints, however.Distracted by the drama, the retailer has struggled to remain relevant to young consumers, who have flocked to H&M, Zara and other “fast-fashion” retailers with a quicker turnaround of cheap styles manufactured overseas.Ms. Schneider said that American Apparel remained committed to keeping manufacturing jobs in the United States. She said rumors that the retailer would move its factory jobs to El Salvador or Mexico were unfounded.“We will continue to manufacture in America,” she said. “That’s what the brand is. That’s what it’s about.”A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: American Apparel, Hurt by Weak Sales, Files for Bankruptcy .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.