AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan HorchSÃO PAULO, Brazil — The energy giant Petrobras received another blow on Monday, as its chairman, Murilo Ferreira, resigned.Mr. Ferreira, who had been on a leave of absence since September, did not cite a reason for his departure, nor did the company. Mr. Ferreira was said to have clashed with the chief executive, Aldemir Bendine, over cost-cutting and how to put into effect the company’s plan to raise more than $57 billion through asset sales by the end of 2017. The asset sales may now be harder to carry out, especially since the company is entangled in a corruption scandal that has reached into the highest levels of government and finance. Past corruption probably cost the company 42 billion reais, or $11 billion, according to Brazil’s federal police.“Right now the company has to be fairly clean, with all the arrests going on, but after the police activity calms down, management has to inspire confidence,” said Mariana Bertone, an energy analyst with the São Paulo brokerage GBM. “Ferreira’s presence had given investors some security. His exit increases uncertainties.”Mr. Ferreira is also chief executive of the mining company Vale. Before a recent environmental catastrophe, the company had been widely considered well run and investor-friendly. It has not been implicated in the current corruption scandal.Mr. Bendine came to Petrobras in February from the government-owned Banco do Brasil, and investors interpreted his appointment as a sign that government interference in company management would continue.Despite a weak market, Petrobras probably has no choice but to try to sell off billions of dollars in assets. The company had about $128 billion in debt at the end of the third quarter and at current oil prices, it is cash-flow negative.J. P. Morgan estimated in November that Petrobras needed about $79 billion in cash by the end of 2019 to cope with its debt and investment needs.An attempt in October to sell bonds on the local market proved a failure, though the company has arranged $12 billion in financing from Chinese banks this year, and there are recurrent rumors in Brazil’s financial news media that the company will issue shares to raise money.But since the company’s total stock market value is only about $32 billion, issuing new shares could be only a partial solution to its financing needs.Petrobras has made some progress in cutting costs, and most of its offshore reserves are probably profitable, even at current oil prices, said Bruno Piagentini, a petroleum analyst at the São Paulo brokerage Coinvalores. He also said the company had room to further improve operations.“But when you look at the company’s history of management and its current corporate governance,” he said, “it’s hard to be confident that the improvement will happen.”Advertisement