
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

NOV. 30, 2015
BTG Pactual, Brazil’s No. 1 investment bank, may do fine without André Esteves, who quit as chairman and chief executive on Sunday. But that will depend on the bank retaining the trust of trading partners and customers through the crisis caused by Mr. Esteves’s arrest as part of Brazil’s wide-ranging investigation into corruption at the national oil giant Petrobras.Mr. Esteves owns a controlling stake. Over time, though, he has made the firm, which had total assets of 303 billion reais, or $79 billion, at the end of September, less dependent on its home market and more diversified.BTG Pactual has branched out, both in Latin America and further afield. It has also strengthened its wealth-management division, most recently with the acquisition of the Swiss private bank BSI. As a result, the company should now derive some 60 percent of its earnings from outside Brazil, Mr. Esteves told shareholders recently.The new co-chief executives, Roberto Sallouti and Marcelo Kalim, are no slouches. They’re veterans of the firm. Mr. Sallouti, until now the chief operating officer, used to run its trading desks. Mr. Kalim started as a trader before moving to BTG Pactual’s buyside division, which he headed before becoming chief financial officer.AdvertisementThat suggests no problem continuing business as usual. The trouble is, that’s not always how banking works. Investors had pulled some 4.2 billion reais from its fixed-income funds by the end of last week, Bloomberg reported. BTG Pactual’s shares are down about a third since Mr. Esteves’s arrest. Funding for trading can dry up quickly, as Bear Stearns learned in 2008, albeit as the broader market experienced turmoil.BTG Pactual is exposed in a few ways. Repo trades financed just over 10 percent of its balance sheet at the end of the third quarter, and these short-term credit lines are often the first to be pulled. Some 15 billion reais of debt for its banking arm comes due in the next 90 days, according to Reuters. In a worst-case situation, those funding needs could eat through the company’s 40 billion reais in cash and easy-to-sell securities. The 73 billion reais of deposits, mostly thanks to BSI, may be a flight risk, too.AdvertisementAlthough the company has the necessary management depth, that may not stop some shareholders, lenders and clients running away from the connection with the Petrobras scandal. That’s the danger the new top brass now has to head off.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »