By REUTERSNOV. 30, 2015
TOKYO — Japan’s industrial output rose in October for a second straight month, and retail sales grew much faster than expected, according to data released on Monday.The latest numbers should ease concerns among policy makers after reports last week showed weakness in household spending and consumer inflation. Those areas have kept pressure on the Bank of Japan to increase its already huge stimulus efforts.The Trade Ministry said on Monday that factory output rose 1.4 percent in October from the previous month, while economists had estimated 1.9 percent. The figure rose 1.1 percent in September. The increase was led by general-purpose machinery, cars and electronics.Separate data showed retail sales rose 1.8 percent in the year ended October, more than the expected gain of 0.8 percent, driven by sales of clothes, food and cars.AdvertisementThe data underlines analysts’ expectations that the economy is headed for a modest rebound over the current October-to-December quarter, after it went through a second straight quarter of contraction through September, a technical recession.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Factory output is expected to bottom out gradually, led by the electrical machinery sector, reflecting a recovery in shipments centering on exports,” said Junichi Makino, chief economist at SMBC Nikko Securities. “I expect consumption will pick up in line with improving real household income.”Manufacturers surveyed by the ministry expected output to rise 0.2 percent in November and decrease 0.9 percent in December.AdvertisementThe ministry maintained its assessment on factory output, saying it is seesawing. Officials noted that output levels remain low, although a downward trend may be reversed.A version of this article appears in print on December 1, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.