By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 30, 2015
TOKYO — Japan’s central bank governor and other officials are stepping up appeals to corporations to do more to help the country’s faltering economic recovery.A flurry of recent comments aimed at business leaders coincides with a push by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe to attack broader trends that slow Japan’s growth: shrinking and aging of the population and a corporate culture heavy on overwork.Soon after taking office nearly three years ago, Mr. Abe introduced a three-pronged recovery strategy focused on reviving the Japanese economy through strong public spending, extensive monetary easing and reforms of a post-war industrial structure that is not delivering the growth and productivity gains it brought in the past.The so-called Abenomics policies have weakened the yen, helping to fatten corporate earnings and share prices, and have made some headway in countering deflation.AdvertisementWith the economy in its second recession since Mr. Abe took office, the appeals to big business to share more of its wealth have gained urgency.Advertisement“This issue comes down to a chicken and egg situation,” the Bank of Japan’s governor, Haruhiko Kuroda, told business leaders Monday in Nagoya, the heart of Japan’s thriving auto industry.“Taking actions now is a prerequisite for firms to be among the winners in the future,” Mr. Kuroda said, arguing that companies could afford to weather a slight downturn, given their recent “extremely high” profits.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Katsunobu Kato, an Abe ally who recently was appointed to head his campaign to counter the falling birthrate, voiced a similar appeal.“There is a limit to what government can do. We are expecting the private sector to help,” said Mr. Kato, who is assigned to ensure that the country’s population, now at 126 million, does not fall below 100 million.Mr. Kato urged companies to raise wages, increase permanent hiring of workers, and invest more at home, rather than in foreign factories and acquisitions, to ensure a “positive economic cycle led by private-sector demand.”China’s slowdown has reverberated in Japan, contributing to a contraction of 0.8 percent in gross domestic product in the July-to-September quarter.The government said last week that it would draft a supplementary budget and provide cash handouts to retirees to encourage consumer spending.A version of this article appears in print on December 1, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.