AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonHouse Republicans are trying to shut down the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s attempt to regulate the $900 billion auto finance industry. It’s a political battle that just might lead to the end of the fledgling agency’s mission to regulate every nook and cranny of consumer finance.The C.F.P.B., which began in 2011, was created by the Dodd-Frank Act, fulfilling Elizabeth Warren’s desire to have a federal agency devoted to protecting the consumer in financial decisions and dealings.Consumer financial protection had been viewed as the province of the states, something that had fallen through the cracks of the federal regulatory apparatus.Ms. Warren’s idea was astoundingly simple but controversial. A number of Republicans spoke out against the new agency not just because of the additional regulation it imposed, but because the C.F.P.B. was created as an independent body under the Federal Reserve, removed from presidential oversight.Unlike other agencies, it had a guaranteed budget and no board of commissioners, only a head appointed by the president.Under the leadership of Richard Cordray, the C.F.P.B. has seized upon its mission to protect consumers. The agency has cracked down on for-profit college lending by arranging for $480 million in loan forgiveness in connection with the failure of Corinthian Colleges, ordered Citigroup to repay customers $700 million related to illegal credit card practices for add-ons and fined numerous mortgage lenders for discrimination violations. All told, the agency’s actions in just a few years have provided for $11 billion in relief for over 25 million consumers.Since its formation, the agency has issued about a regulation a month — for mortgage financing, students loans, debt repayment and fund transfers, among others.Now it is trying to enter the auto finance realm. This seems logical, given that auto finance is the third-largest category of finance in the country, after housing and student debt. And who hasn’t had to wade through an auto loan, puzzling over the terms. For many reasons, this is a natural area for the C.F.P.B. to police.Yet the agency is forbidden from regulating auto finance. When the Dodd-Frank Act was negotiated, the auto dealers successfully lobbied to deprive the C.F.P.B. of jurisdiction over auto dealer financing. The move was blatantly political and then-Representative Barney Frank, who led the charge on the bill in the House, protested, but with auto dealers in virtually every congressional district, the dealers got their way.The C.F.P.B. did not go away quietly. The Dodd-Frank Act left the agency with the ability to regulate the actual banks providing auto loans but not the dealers themselves who negotiated with the customers.The agency has aggressively acted to impose extensive regulation on these banks to indirectly regulate the dealers. It has also fined entities that issue loans but look more like dealers. The C.F.P.B. recently imposed an $8 million fine against a “buy here, pay here” dealer for making harassing phone calls to collect delinquent debt.The move is in response to allegations that auto dealers pump up interest rates for customers, make excessive numbers of high risk subprime loans, engage in shady debt collection practices and sometimes discriminate in lending by adding different markups to these loans. (Auto dealers often charge a markup to loans they disburse to customers. The amount is at the discretion of the dealer.)But by sidestepping the restriction on overseeing auto dealers, the regulator may have tripped a political land mine.In 2013, the C.F.P.B. issued guidance intended to prevent banks from permitting auto dealers from having discretion to mark up loans. The agency argued that this prohibition was necessary because of discrimination in lending and markups by dealers, a move that appears to have had some internal opposition at the C.F.P.B. itself.The guidance has been met with a fierce pushback in the House of Representatives. The House Financial Services Committee recently issued a report attacking the guidance — not just for being on questionable legal footing, but also for use of disparate impact techniques, a statistical sampling method. The report, entitled Unsafe at Any Bureaucracy: C.F.P.B. Junk Science and Indirect Auto Lending, criticized the regulator’s guidance for being “misguided and deceptive,” claiming that the agency did not find actual discrimination and instead implied that discrimination had occurred because some minorities had received worse lending terms.The House has also voted 332-96 to repeal this guidance, with 88 Democrats joining, showing that the auto dealers still have significant political power.It is uncertain whether the bill will go anywhere, particularly since President Obama would most likely veto such a law, but it shows that the C.F.P.B. is on an increasingly contentious path as it pushes to regulate in more areas.The agency has published a study on arbitration clauses, finding them to be ubiquitous and recommending that bans on class actions in these clauses be prohibited. The study is no doubt in anticipation of more regulation on the subject.If the C.F.P.B. acts on arbitration it will also ignite a more powerful reaction, this time by the federal courts. The Supreme Court has been vigorous in allowing for arbitration in almost all cases as provided by the Federal Arbitration Act. If the agency seeks to limit arbitration it will be setting itself up for a collision course with the top court.This will be the same court that could ultimately decide the fate of the C.F.P.B. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia has allowed a lawsuit to proceed that challenges the structure of the agency as unconstitutional.And as the C.F.P.B. moves forward, it is also running into other battles with Congress. For example, 26 of the 27 members of Florida congressional delegation, including Debbie Wasserman Schultz, the chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, has sent a letter to the agency protesting proposed payday regulations because they might interfere with Florida’s own less restrictive rules.Such controversy is no surprise, given the aggressiveness of the C.F.P.B., but it is making the agency a punching bag for Republican presidential candidates. Ben Carson, for one, has criticized the C.F.P.B. as “the ultimate example of regulatory overreach,” and “a nanny state mechanism asserting its control over everyday Americans that they did not want, did not ask for and do not need.”It leaves the regulator in a tenuous position. The need for some regulation of the auto dealer space seems rather clear. Consumers often are “captive” customers and frequently fail to compare or shop around for rates. . This may be one area where clearer disclosure could actually help.Nonetheless, the C.F.P.B. is trying to do everything at once, and that typically ends badly. Nor does it work well when one regulator says it knows best over both parties. As it tries to regulate all areas of consumer finance, the agency is increasingly clashing with Congress — both Republicans and Democrats.The question now is whether the agency can continue its mission when a new president arrives in the White House, or whether it will be curbed by Congress.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter. Advertisement