By MATTHEW GOLDSTEIN and BEN PROTESSDEC. 1, 2015
When Lindsey Williams lost her job, the news arrived abruptly, in a voice mail message from her boss. A co-worker, Richard Renner, said he was given just an hour to hand in his keys, collect his personal effects and leave.The dismissals in their office that day, five employees in total, might evoke a steely corporate culture that thrives on cost-cutting layoffs. And yet, the employees worked not for a big bank or insurer, but for a nonprofit legal group that often holds those types of corporate giants accountable.Three years ago, the National Whistleblowers Center in Washington dismissed Ms. Williams and Mr. Renner, who are both lawyers, citing mandatory layoffs that stemmed from funding woes and a staff reorganization.The downsizing, however, came just weeks after the center had helped secure a $104 million whistle-blower award for Bradley Birkenfeld, a former UBS banker who alerted federal authorities to the Swiss bank’s longstanding tax evasion strategies. Some employees expected the center to receive a cut of that reward.AdvertisementNow, previously unreleased documents show that the layoffs coincided with an effort by Ms. Williams and Mr. Renner to unionize the whistle-blower center’s small work force. That effort, Ms. Williams and Mr. Renner contend, touched a nerve with the center’s leadership, including Stephen M. Kohn, a prominent lawyer who was a co-founder of the center and has become a national expert on whistle-blower cases.AdvertisementAfter their dismissals, Ms. Williams and Mr. Renner took their concerns to the National Labor Relations Board, the documents show. After initially balking at the case, the agency ultimately filed a complaint of unfair labor practices against the whistle-blower center, blaming it for “interfering with, restraining and coercing employees” not to assemble a union.In effect, Ms. Williams and Mr. Renner became whistle-blowers on their own boss.“I immediately recognized the irony of getting fired by the National Whistleblowers Center,” said Mr. Renner, now a partner with a law firm in Washington that represents whistle-blowers.The case, the details of which were sealed until Ms. Williams and Mr. Renner shared them with The New York Times, ended late last year when the whistle-blower center agreed to settle with Ms. Williams and Mr. Renner for an undisclosed sum. As a condition of the deal, the center also had to inform its remaining employees that they were permitted to unionize.Yet under the terms of the settlement, neither the whistle-blower center nor a related private law firm where Mr. Kohn is a partner admitted any wrongdoing. The center — which has attributed the layoffs to a “complete reorganization” and losing out on grant money it previously received — has consistently denied wrongdoing and not faced other labor complaints.“Companies and employers who do good things have discrimination claims filed against them and it doesn’t distract from the respective missions of those companies because it doesn’t mean they discriminated,” Gil A. Abramson, a lawyer who represented the center in the labor dispute, said in an interview.The center, he said in a subsequent statement, “wishes all of our former employees the best in their future pursuits.”The settlement is the latest unexpected twist in the case of Mr. Birkenfeld, who served 31 months in prison after pleading guilty for his role in a tax evasion scheme despite having blown the whistle on UBS. It also put the whistle-blower center, a group accustomed to shining a spotlight on problems elsewhere, in a rare position: on the defensive.AdvertisementEven so, the employment dispute does not appear to have slowed Mr. Kohn, who remains a visible force testifying before Congress and representing whistle-blowers from inside the government and across the corporate world. His cases have involved the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing and no-bid contracts in Iraq. Just recently, a publicist emailed the news media to promote Mr. Kohn as an expert about a sharp rise in whistle-blower tips to the Securities and Exchange Commission.The center’s dispute with Ms. Williams and Mr. Renner surfaced soon after the Internal Revenue Service announced the $104 million award to Mr. Birkenfeld in September 2012.Days later, Mr. Renner and Ms. Williams attended a staff meeting with long-term employees from the center and from Kohn, Kohn & Colapinto, the related law firm that handled Mr. Birkenfeld’s case. At the meeting, Ms. Williams and Mr. Renner said, the firm’s partners discussed possible bonuses and raises for some of the employees, some of whom were paid less than $60,000 at the time.The bonuses arrived soon after, but not the raises, a decision that was attributed to funding problems. The partners would not disclose the amount the firm received in the Birkenfeld case, Mr. Renner said, but “they claimed it was not as much as we might think.”So some of the center’s employees, including Ms. Williams and Mr. Renner, raised concerns with their bosses, mentioning that if they formed a union they would have the right to inspect the center’s books. (Ms. Williams said she had mentioned unionization once before, recalling that for an April Fool’s Day joke one year she and some other employees marched into Mr. Kohn’s office holding fake picket signs and chanting “Strike! Strike! Strike!”)Over the following weeks, the employees continued to discuss their union plans, until early November 2012, when four of them were called into a meeting with Mr. Kohn.Mr. Kohn informed the four employees that the center “had run out of money and was laying off its staff, effective immediately,” according to Mr. Renner. Mr. Kohn told Ms. Williams of the news in a voice mail message because she had already left the office that day.“I never expected it,” Ms. Williams said in an interview. “These were people I respected and a job I loved.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Kohn offered a severance package. But accepting those payouts required that the employees keep quiet about their experience.AdvertisementThat condition struck Mr. Renner and Ms. Williams as hypocritical coming from the whistle-blower center, which typically advises its clients not to sign such confidentiality clauses. Mr. Kohn’s own book, “The Whistleblower’s Handbook,” specifically advises prospective whistle-blowers, “Don’t take hush money.”Nevertheless, three of the employees accepted the deal. Ms. Williams and Mr. Renner did not, and they soon filed a formal charge of unfair labor relations practices with the National Labor Relations Board, documents show.Initially, the labor agency rejected the case, ruling that Ms. Williams and Mr. Renner were in management. But they appealed, and the federal agency eventually filed a complaint against the whistle-blower center and the affiliated law firm in October 2014.The labor dispute was headed to a hearing before an N.L.R.B. administrative judge until, with a few weeks to spare, Mr. Kohn’s firm and the whistle-blower center agreed to settle. The settlement papers were signed last December and the money paid to the former employees in January.In the statement, Mr. Abramson said the center “maintains it did nothing wrong, and stands behind” the original decision at the labor agency to reject the case. He added that the center was “thankful to the N.L.R.B. for assisting the parties in reaching a mutually agreeable resolution of all claims and disputes, and avoiding the time and expense of litigation.”“The center reached a successful resolution with all of the employees impacted by the reorganization,” he said.In interviews, Ms. Williams and Mr. Renner said their experience made them appreciate better the personal risks that whistle-blowers take long before any award from the government.Mr. Renner, now a partner at Kalijarvi, Chuzi, Newman & Fitch, described the episode as a “gift to my career as a whistle-blower advocate.” It allowed him, he said, to “experience the retaliation that other whistle-blowers face.”Advertisement“I recognized that I could wear it as a badge of honor,” he said.Ms. Williams, who became the communications director for the Pittsburgh Federation of Teachers, called the experience a “rude awakening.”Her work at the center was her first full-time job after law school. And after a few years there, Ms. Williams was devising a media strategy for Mr. Birkenfeld’s case, which brought a good deal of publicity to the center and Mr. Kohn.Mr. Kohn trumpeted the award and the center’s work in securing it during a news conference in 2012 at the National Press Club in Washington.At the time, an Internal Revenue Service spokeswoman said the “award reflects our commitment to the law” and the importance of the federal whistle-blower statute.But the news of the settlement was not received well by everyone in the federal government. Kathryn Keneally, who was then the assistant attorney general for the Justice Department’s tax division, said the amount of money handed over by the I.R.S. to Mr. Birkenfeld astounded her.“I was in a meeting with colleagues and I saw it on my BlackBerry and I flung it in frustration across the table,” said Ms. Keneally, now a partner with the law firm DLA Piper. “The department obtained a tax conviction against a person and the settlement with him was equivalent to the budget I was running the tax division on.”A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Complaint Directed at Whistle-Blower Group.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.