AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaThe dean of Columbia’s Graduate School of Journalism published a letter on Tuesday strongly disputing accusations by Exxon Mobil that journalists from the school had produced inaccurate and misleading articles about the company’s knowledge of the risks of climate change.The school had collaborated with The Los Angeles Times and foundations including the Rockefeller Brothers Fund on two articles published in October that examined “the gap between Exxon Mobil’s public position and its internal planning on the issue of climate change.” The articles had helped add momentum to an investigation by the New York attorney general into the matter. And in the days and weeks following publication, the company was subject to criticism from politicians like John Kerry and Hillary Clinton.Late last month, the company wrote a detailed, six-page letter to Columbia’s president, Lee C. Bollinger, calling the two lengthy investigative reports “inaccurate and deliberately misleading.”In his response, Steve Coll, the dean of the journalism school, said that he had carefully examined the detailed allegations made by Exxon Mobil.“Your letter disputes the substance of the two articles in a number of respects, but consists largely of attacks on the project’s journalists,” Mr. Coll wrote. “I have concluded that your allegations are unsupported by evidence.”Underlying the exchange of letters are complex connections among the people, institutions and companies involved in the pair of articles. The dispute also highlights the possibility that some of the new ways that expensive accountability reporting is being funded can, in terms of perception at least, be called into question.The dean of Columbia’s Graduate School of Journalism rebuts suggestions that journalists from the school had produced inaccurate and misleading articles on Exxon Mobil.Exxon Mobil contended in its letter, written by Kenneth P. Cohen, a vice president for public and governmental affairs, that some of the foundations that supported the reporting of the articles, including the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, had “a stated position and bias against the oil and gas industry.”The letter also accuses one of the journalists, Susanne Rust, of ignoring information favorable to the company or not giving it proper emphasis, of misrepresenting certain materials and of not giving the company access to documents she cited or adequate time to provide a substantive response. It also accused another reporter of misrepresenting herself in interviews.The articles themselves, Mr. Cohen wrote, “bear no resemblance to the source materials” they cite. And in the final paragraph of his letter, he refers to the “numerous and productive relationships” that Exxon Mobil has with Columbia. (In 2014, according to Exxon Mobil’s own figures, the company donated nearly $220,000 to Columbia University.) Some read that as a subtle hint that Exxon Mobil might review its relationship with the university. The company said on Tuesday that there was no threat intended.In his response, Mr. Coll said he had been troubled to discover that Mr. Cohen had “made serious allegations of professional misconduct” even though “you or your media relations colleagues possess email records showing that your allegations are false.” He went on to rebut many of the detailed points in Exxon Mobil’s letter, writing that Ms. Rust gave the company plenty of time to respond to her questions and that the reporters had clearly identified themselves as journalists.The article was indeed funded, in part, by the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, Mr. Coll wrote, but that fact was disclosed and the fund had no impact on the articles that were ultimately published. Though the accusations are presented as factual errors, he wrote, “in fact what you dispute is the emphasis of the articles. You have dressed up this rather commonplace criticism of investigative reporting in academic clothing.”“What your letter advocates really is that the factual information accurately reported in the article, and unchallenged by you, be interpreted differently,” Mr. Coll wrote.Alan T. Jeffers, a spokesman for Exxon Mobil, said on Tuesday that the company felt the articles still fundamentally misrepresented the source documents. When it has tried to engage with The Los Angeles Times it has consistently been referred to Columbia, he said, and the company has asked for an opportunity to meet with university representatives to discuss what possible actions remain available, he said.The Los Angeles Times said that its editors had “carefully reviewed Exxon Mobil’s complaints and concluded that the articles we published in collaboration with Susanne Rust and her team at Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism were accurate, fair and balanced. We will continue working with the Columbia reporting team to publish journalism on this very important subject.”Advertisement