By DANNY HAKIM and JACK EWINGDEC. 1, 2015
LONDON —  German regulators said on Tuesday that the software Volkswagen used in many of its diesel vehicles constituted illegal cheating on emissions tests, deepening the company’s problems.Volkswagen admitted in September that it had installed software in 11 million diesel vehicles worldwide aimed at cheating emissions tests, after an investigation by American regulators. But the company had said it was unclear whether use of the software counted as cheating under European rules.It was a turbulent day for the company. About 50 Volkswagen employees have stepped forward in an amnesty program to offer information about who was responsible for the emissions scandal, the company also said on Tuesday. This figure suggested that knowledge of the cheating may have been more widespread than previously thought.Furthermore, Volkswagen’s auto sales in the United States fell 25 percent in November, the company said. And Standard & Poor’s downgraded VW’s debt to BBB+ from A-, three notches above a so-called junk rating. The ratings agency said the move “reflects our view that VW’s manipulation of engine emissions exposes the group to material, wide-ranging adverse credit impacts.”AdvertisementThe determination by German regulators that VW had cheated could affect a flurry of European consumer litigation, though it is unclear what fines the company might face in Europe. While European Union member states were supposed to enact penalties for cheating on automotive tests several years ago, few have done so.AdvertisementUsing so-called defeat devices to thwart emissions tests is banned in Europe and in the United States, but European regulations are particularly porous and permit a range of loopholes. Manufacturers and their contractors conduct the tests themselves, use preproduction cars that won’t be sold and are allowed to use engine settings that may not reflect real driving.Volkswagen’s software was designed to detect when a car was being tested in a lab, activating a special eco-friendly mode with lower emissions of nitrogen oxides. Even so, in a recent letter to the British Parliament, a top Volkswagen official said, “It is still being determined whether the software in question officially constituted a ‘defeat device’ in the E.U.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But on Tuesday, the German Federal Motor Transport Authority, known by the initials K.B.A., said in an email that the software used in the EA189, the original diesel engine implicated in the scandal, “is an illegal defeat device according to the K.B.A.’s legal interpretation.”Volkswagen officials did not respond to calls for comment Tuesday evening about the K.B.A. action.In an effort to bring the scandal under control, the company had set Monday, Nov. 30, as the deadline for employees to voluntarily reveal, without fear of company punishment, what they know about who might be responsible for the cheating scandal. Eric Felber, a VW spokesman, said that interviews of the whistle-blowers had begun, but he declined to provide information about what they have said.The amnesty program, which was announced in mid-November and which was a relatively unusual step in corporate investigations, was seen as a sign that Volkswagen was having trouble persuading its own employees to talk.While Volkswagen promised that it would not fire employees who came forward with information, it does not have the legal authority to protect them from criminal prosecution. Only workers who are part of collective bargaining agreements were eligible for amnesty, meaning that top managers were excluded.Matthias Müller, the carmaker’s chief executive, has said it will take months to come to conclusions about the decision-making process that led to the scandal. But he is expected to present an interim report on the internal investigation around the middle of this month.Danny Hakim reported from London and Jack Ewing from Frankfurt. Claire Barthelemy contributed reporting from London.A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Volkswagen’s Software Was ‘Illegal Defeat Device,’ German Regulator Determines.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.