AdvertisementSupported byBy Mary Williams WalshWASHINGTON — Puerto Rico avoided its first major default by making payments of $354 million on its debt on Tuesday, but the island’s governor said that he had already taken steps to halt certain payments on other debt coming due on Jan. 1.“This is a distress call, from a ship of 3.5 million people that is adrift at sea,” said Gov. Alejandro García Padilla, referring to the population of the island.He said the island had, in effect, been able to meet Tuesday’s deadline as a result of a trade-off. It made this month’s payments on a class of bonds that have constitutional guarantees by using money that otherwise would have been earmarked for next month’s payments on a lower tier of bonds. It is a move that will probably set off lawsuits from creditors if Puerto Rico makes good on the threat.The announcement of the repayment, by the island’s Government Development Bank, came as Governor García Padilla and other officials were testifying before the Senate Judiciary Committee, which is considering whether Congress should give the island the right to seek relief in bankruptcy court. Current law specifically excludes Puerto Rico, because of its legal status as a United States territory. The governor reiterated during the hearing that Puerto Rico had run completely out of cash. He said that as of Tuesday, he had ordered the island to “claw back” some of the revenue dedicated to paying some of its lower-ranked debts.The governor did not specify which lower-ranking debts would go unpaid. But other experts at the hearing said the vulnerable bonds included Puerto Rico’s highway bonds; bonds sold for general infrastructure, which are backed by a rum tax; and bonds that financed a convention center. It was unclear on Tuesday which entities or individuals had purchased those bonds.The bonds subject to the clawback have payments due to investors every six months, with the next payment due on Jan. 1. By putting the clawback mechanism into effect on Tuesday, the governor halted a process in which the island’s monthly prepayments are placed in a sort of “lockbox” to ensure that the next round of payments is made. That move could give bondholders the grounds to sue immediately, even though they would not see a loss on their investment until Jan. 1.The payments that were made on Tuesday involve a class of debt that was issued by the island’s Government Development Bank, but sold to investors with an extra layer of protection — a guarantee from the island’s government, based on its “full faith and credit” pledge. While it is certainly still possible to default on these bonds, doing so outside of a bankruptcy proceeding would most likely lead to a court ruling that the move was unconstitutional. Some people who oppose giving Puerto Rico bankruptcy protection have argued that the island might use it to impair even its general obligation bonds, as Detroit did during its financial crisis. General obligation bonds have for more than 100 years been marketed as a state or municipality’s best credit, safe enough for widows and orphans.But Governor García Padilla’s move seems to signal that Puerto Rico remains willing, at least for now, to keep its general obligation bonds high on their pedestal, above other types of debt. (During the current emergency, the governor has the final say on which bonds will be paid.)“In simple terms, we have begun to default on our debt in an effort to attempt to repay bonds issued with the full faith and credit of the commonwealth,” he said in written testimony, “and to secure sufficient resources to protect the life, health, safety and welfare of the people of Puerto Rico.”As Puerto Rico’s troubles have worsened, fears have mounted that default will give rise to a cascade of creditor lawsuits, with investors jockeying to get to the top of the repayment hierarchy. Puerto Rico’s debt has an extraordinarily complex structure, with nearly 20 separate governmental bond issuers, guarantees between varying branches of government and unresolved questions about priorities.In bankruptcy, lawsuits filed by creditors are generally held in abeyance while the restructuring process unfolds. Bankruptcy also has legal tools for forcing holdout creditors to accept repayments that are lower than the bond sale initially promised, and even lower than the holders expect at the start of the proceedings.In his spoken remarks to the committee, Governor García Padilla made clear that he did not relish invoking the clawback, and hoped that the senators would finally see it as proof that Puerto Rico was deserving of help from Congress.“We have taken this difficult step in the trust that Congress will act soon,” he said, speaking slowly and clearly so his meaning would not be misunderstood. “But do not be misled. We have no resources left. Puerto Rico cannot keep this up longer.”The top-ranking Democrat at the hearing, Senator Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut, said that Puerto Rico’s move was an “extraordinary financial gymnastic.” But Republicans, the biggest opponents of bankruptcy for the island, were less appreciative.Even before the hearing, the committee’s Republican chairman, Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, had expressed skepticism about bankruptcy for Puerto Rico. On Tuesday, he opened the hearing saying he had read in The New York Times on Monday that some of the governor’s advisers had been urging him to default, because “only a catastrophe would move Congress — especially Republicans — to help.”“I hope the governor will tell us whether this is accurate,” Senator Grassley said. “It would trouble me greatly if true.” But the governor stayed with his prepared remarks and did not reveal any tactical recommendations from his advisers.The other Puerto Rican official who testified, the island’s nonvoting member of Congress, Pedro Pierluisi, said that it had already explained its predicament to five different committees and was entitled to a response.Neither the governor nor Mr. Pierluisi took questions from the committee, which turned directly to a second panel of witnesses who discussed various aspects of bankruptcy for Puerto Rico.Other Republicans on the relevant committees have said they want to help Puerto Rico but can do nothing until it provides audited financial statements and reveals how much the assistance will cost. Besides extending bankruptcy to Puerto Rico, ideas in play include putting it under a federal control board, helping residents by letting them apply for a tax break under the earned-income tax credit, and changing the Medicare rules so that Puerto Rican doctors and hospitals are paid on a par with their counterparts on the mainland.One witness, Carlos Colón de Armas, a finance professor at the University of Puerto Rico, said he believed bankruptcy could hurt Puerto Rico over the long run, because the island needed fresh capital, and bankruptcy would scare off potential financiers.“The public debt of Puerto Rico can be paid,” he said, adding that he questioned whether the numbers Puerto Rico had provided to illustrate its debt burden had been calculated correctly.Another witness, Stephen Spencer of Houlihan Lokey, said that Detroit still needed support from the State of Michigan to borrow at affordable rates. He pointed to a consensual restructuring deal he had been working on with Puerto Rico’s electric power authority, and said it showed that lenders would reward borrowers who stayed at the table. Although the deal is not yet finished, he said it would eventually give the electric authority both debt relief and fresh capital.“The agreement happened precisely because Puerto Rico did not have access to Chapter 9,” he said.But another witness, Richard Carrion, the chief executive of Puerto Rico’s Banco Popular, said he had slowly reached the conclusion that bankruptcy was the island’s only hope.“Mr. Senator, this is truly painful,” he said in response to a question from Richard Durbin, Democrat of Illinois. “I’m a banker. I like people to pay their debts. But let us bear in mind, the money will run out. I am all for trying to do voluntary restructurings, but there just is not enough time.”Advertisement