By ALEXANDRA STEVENSON and MATTHEW GOLDSTEINDEC. 1, 2015
Less than three years ago, BlueCrest Capital Management was one of the biggest hedge funds in Europe, managing $37 billion of investor money.Now, with just $8 billion under management, Michael Platt, its billionaire founder has decided to shut its doors to outside money, quietly ending a bumpy few years for the firm and its investors.BlueCrest, a 15-year-old hedge fund based on the Isle of Jersey, announced the decision to return outside capital on Tuesday. It is the latest in a rapid succession of announcements by hedge funds closing their doors, returning capital to investors or liquidating.The move is also a somber illustration of how the hedge fund industry has evolved as managers of some longstanding funds appear to have tired of having to meet clients, negotiate reductions in fees with institutional investors and deal with the negative publicity that comes with lackluster returns.AdvertisementHedge fund titans like Stanley F. Druckenmiller, George Soros and Julian Robertson have in recent years decided to manage their own wealth without the concern of investors.AdvertisementBlueCrest said it planned to transition into a “private investment partnership” that would manage money for its partners and employees. The move means BlueCrest will morph into a private trading platform.“We like this new structure for us a lot more than the one we are leaving behind,” Mr. Platt, who will turn 47 next week, said in an interview. “The investor base has become increasingly institutional and they want lower levels of risk and lower levels of fees.”Many large, big-name hedge funds have recently underperformed and or closed down altogether. Firms that specialize in wagering on macroeconomic trends or trading commodities have been particularly hard hit.Just a year ago, BlueCrest sought to expand its office in New York by hiring away traders from other hedge funds.In a statement on Tuesday, BlueCrest said changes in the hedge fund industry “have weighed on hedge fund profitability,” and it specifically noted the cost of hiring top outside talent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The firm has been on a slow decline over the last two years as investors steadily withdrew their money. The amount of money the firm invested on behalf of outside investors peaked at $37 billion in late 2013. It lost a chunk of its assets and a big driver of performance when BlueCrest spun out its $9 billion quantitative trading fund run by Leda Braga, which at its peak had as much as $16 billion in assets under management.In December 2014, BlueCrest sued Meredith Whitney, the founder of Kenbelle Capital, asserting that she had refused to return its investment worth $46 million. The lawsuit was later settled, and the terms were not publicly disclosed.This year, the New Jersey State Investment Council said it would redeem about $284 million from BlueCrest because of disappointing results.AdvertisementOne of the biggest concerns for investors in hedge funds is the large fees they charge, a worry that has grown in recent years as the industry at large has performed poorly. Hedge funds typically follow a “2 and 20” model: Investors pay an annual management fee of 2 percent of assets under management and 20 percent of returns. The model has helped managers like Mr. Platt become very wealthy. In 2014, Mr. Platt made an estimated $800 million, according to Institutional Investor’s Alpha magazine.In recent years, however, institutional investors have pushed for lower fees, creating a challenge for BlueCrest as it continued to bring in fresh talent and offer lucrative pay packages, Mr. Platt said.“It’s much more profitable to have 0 and 100 rather than 2 and 20,” he said, referring to the firm no longer having to share its profits with outside investors.BlueCrest has also come under scrutiny from consulting firms in recent years. A year ago, the hedge fund consulting firm Aksia recommended that its clients withdraw money from BlueCrest largely because of poor returns from its flagship BlueCrest International, which is said to be flat this year, according to a person briefed on BlueCrest’s performance. Early in the year, the fund suffered steep losses because of volatility in the Swiss franc after the Swiss central bank unexpectedly delinked the currency from the euro.Assets in BlueCrest’s flagship fund have shrunk from $10 billion to just over $2 billion. The firm’s AllBlue fund, which is its largest and invests in other hedge funds, is up 3.6 percent through Nov. 20, according to another person briefed on the firm’s performance.This year, BlueCrest announced the start of a new equity-focused trading fund and took new office space in Manhattan to house those traders and analysts. It is not clear what will become of that office space.An article on Wednesday about the closing of BlueCrest Capital Management, once one of the biggest hedge funds in Europe, misstated the current size of the firm’s flagship fund. The fund has shrunk to just over $2 billion, not $1 billion.A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: BlueCrest to Close Hedge Fund and Give Investors’ Money Back .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.