By CHAD BRAYDEC. 1, 2015
LONDON — The Bank of England singled out two of Britain’s largest lenders on Tuesday for failing to meet certain capital thresholds in the latest round of tests examining the banking sector’s ability to withstand future global financial shocks.Despite the shortfalls, the central bank said that the two lenders, Standard Chartered and the Royal Bank of Scotland, passed the exercise, and that neither would be required to raise additional capital.Both banks announced plans this year to strengthen their capital positions, with Standard Chartered saying in November that it would raise up to $5.1 billion.The central bank exercise examined the balance sheets of seven of Britain’s largest banks, with this year’s crisis situation focused on a potential deterioration in economic conditions in Asia and the eurozone.Advertisement“The stress-test results suggest that the banking system is capitalized to support the real economy in a severe global stress scenario, which adversely affects the United Kingdom,” the Bank of England said in a report on Tuesday. “The capitalization of the system has improved further over the course of 2015.”The other banks tested were Barclays, HSBC, the Lloyds Banking Group, Nationwide Building Society and Santander.AdvertisementUnder the test, the lenders were required to have a common equity Tier 1 ratio to risk weighted assets of 4.5 percent. All of the lenders were able to meet that requirement, which is a measure of their ability to weather financial turbulence.The Bank of England said that R.B.S. did not meet its “individualized capital guidance,” but it noted that the lender had taken several actions to improve its capital position, including planning to issue additional bonds.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We are pleased with the progress we have made relative to the 2014 stress test, but recognize we still have much to do to restore R.B.S. to be a strong and resilient bank for our customers,” Ewen Stevenson, the chief financial officer of R.B.S., said in a news release.The central bank also found that Standard Chartered was below an important capital threshold, but it said the lender had moved to improve its balance sheet and capital position.“The test was conducted on our balance sheet as at the end of 2014,” William T. Winters, the chief executive of Standard Chartered, said in a news release. “Since then, we have made further significant progress in strengthening our capital position. We are operating at capital levels above current minimum regulatory requirements, and have a number of additional levers at our disposal to further manage capital.”A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; 2 British Banks Singled Out for Performance in Stress Tests.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.