AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelOne of the largest shareholders in Viacom and CBS voiced concerns on Wednesday about the health of the 92-year-old media mogul Sumner M. Redstone and whether he should continue in his role as executive chairman of the companies.One week ago, a former companion of Mr. Redstone filed a lawsuit challenging his mental competence. Mr. Redstone’s lawyers have asked the court to dismiss the suit, calling the claims a “meritless action, riddled with lies.” On Wednesday, a Viacom director said Mr. Redstone was “mentally capable.” Mario Gabelli, whose investment firm, Gamco, is the second-largest voting shareholder in Viacom and CBS behind Mr. Redstone, said that he sought more information about Mr. Redstone’s health and involvement at the companies after reading through the suit. The court filings included claims that Mr. Redstone was incontinent, required suctioning to remove phlegm up to 20 times a day and was “obsessed with eating steak” even while on a feeding tube.Mr. Gabelli said that if Mr. Redstone “got paid anything in 2015, it would have a hard time passing any smell test” based on the descriptions in the suit.“Do I think he should be drawing any money?” Mr. Gabelli asked. “Clearly, one has to look at how much a chairman gets paid relative to the value added.”Mr. Redstone controls about 80 percent of the voting stock in the two media companies, which have a combined market value of $45 billion. His total compensation for the 2014 fiscal year was $13.2 million at Viacom and $10.8 million at CBS. His compensation for the fiscal 2015 year will be disclosed in regulatory filings. Mr. Gabelli added that he had received calls from clients about Mr. Redstone, which spurred him to ask Viacom for clarification about Mr. Redstone’s role at the companies. “They have got to say something,” he said. “You can’t run a public company like this.”He said that the same questions applied to CBS, but that he did not call the company.In response, Viacom released a statement on Wednesday from William Schwartz, chairman of its board’s governance and nominating committee.“As has been widely and publicly disclosed, Mr. Redstone’s physicians have publicly attested that he is mentally capable, and this information is consistent with other medical and other information available to me,” he said in the statement.Court filings from Mr. Redstone’s lawyers also included statements from his doctors who said that while Mr. Redstone had various ailments, the results of a recent brain scan were “quite good.” A statement from Philippe Dauman, Viacom’s chief executive, said that Mr. Redstone was engaged and attentive.A spokesman for CBS declined to comment.Advertisement