AdvertisementSupported byBy Graham BowleyLawyers for Bill Cosby argued in a court filing on Wednesday that a federal judge in Philadelphia had violated Mr. Cosby’s rights and set a dangerous precedent for other public figures by unsealing court records from a 2005 lawsuit against the entertainer.In the filing, the lawyers argued that the judge had been wrong in July to release the documents, which included an acknowledgment, under questioning, by Mr. Cosby that in the 1970s he obtained quaaludes to give them to young women with whom he wanted to have sex. Mr. Cosby’s team is seeking to have the documents resealed.Mr. Cosby’s lawyers had fought the release of the court records after The Associated Press requested that they be unsealed.But Judge Eduardo C. Robreno of United States District Court decided that Mr. Cosby had less of a right to privacy because he had fashioned himself as a public moralist, who spoke out about issues like “child-rearing, family life, education and crime.”“The district court’s novel, self-created rule of law — that celebrities who opine on any social or moral issue lose their privacy rights when accused of any form of wrongdoing — makes no sense and serves no civic purpose,” the lawyers for Mr. Cosby wrote in the court filing.“Moreover, it discourages positive social leadership by nongovernmental, but influential citizens, which is a foundational component of our society.”The records were part of a civil case brought in 2005 by Andrea Constand, who had been a staff member with the basketball program at Temple University, Mr. Cosby’s alma mater. Ms. Constand accused Mr. Cosby of drugging and molesting her. The case was later settled.But Mr. Cosby’s lawyers argued that by releasing excerpts from Mr. Cosby’s deposition in the case, the ruling violated his right to free speech and privacy.Citing George Clooney and Ben Affleck as other entertainers with strong opinions, the appeal said the decision to unseal the documents could discourage other public figures from speaking out.Mr. Cosby’s lawyers argue that the judge would apparently have allowed Mr. Cosby greater privacy if he had “preached infidelity and irresponsible parenting.”In the filing, Mr. Cosby’s legal team also detailed for the first time how Mr. Cosby had been harmed as a consequence of the deposition becoming public.It said his “admissions of infidelity and recreational drug possession” were widely disseminated by the news media, and “many in the public arena treated the news as tantamount to a confession of rape.” Mr. Cosby did not admit drugging unwitting women in his deposition and has never been charged with a crime.“This devastating blow to defendant’s reputation manifested itself in specific injuries, as various institutions and individuals moved quickly to distance themselves from defendant after the unsealing,” his lawyers wrote, listing moves by Mr. Cosby’s high school, Drexel University and others. “Even Disney World has expelled his statue from its park.”These events were embarrassing, but also damaging financially, Mr. Cosby’s lawyers argued, since the star’s career depends heavily on his reputation.A lawyer for Ms. Constand, Dolores M. Troiani, declined to comment.Advertisement