By JACK EWINGDEC. 2, 2015
FRANKFURT — If there were any lingering doubts that the European Central Bank would ratchet up its stimulus of the sluggish eurozone economy, they probably evaporated on Wednesday.New official data showed that the region’s dangerously low inflation rate remained at an annual pace of 0.1 percent in November. That was unchanged from October’s reading, and still far below the central bank’s target of just below 2 percent.And so, on Thursday, when the central bank’s governing council meets, the policy board is expected to expand the stimulus program that it began in March — so far with little to show for it. In fact, the new inflation data showed that the core rate, which factors out volatile prices like energy and food, actually shrank last month.The question is whether any new action by the central bank will have much additional impact, as eurozone growth remains moribund and unemployment demoralizingly high — 10.7 percent in October, according to the latest data.AdvertisementMario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, last month all but promised more action if economic indicators continued to disappoint. “We will do what we must to raise inflation as quickly as possible,” he said in Frankfurt. “That is what our price stability mandate requires of us.”AdvertisementAnalysts expect the governing council to increase the volume of its purchases of government bonds and other assets, which have been 60 billion euros, or about $63 billion, a month since April. The central bank may also tinker with interest rates, for example, by reducing the benchmark rate to zero from 0.05 percent and increasing the penalty that banks must pay to park money in the central bank’s virtual vaults.Any new stimulus and rate cuts by the central bank would come as its American counterpart, the Federal Reserve, is on the verge of raising rates in the United States for the first time since 2006. The Fed could act as soon as its meeting on Dec. 15 and 16.The trans-Atlantic divergence in monetary policy has helped push the euro to its lowest level against the dollar in a dozen years — around $1.06 on Wednesday — as investors move money to the United States in search of higher returns.So far, many economists doubt that the European Central Bank stimulus measures, known as quantitative easing, have done much to meet one of its main goals — improving the flow of credit in countries like Italy where loans are hard to come by.Because there have been few of the hoped-for benefits from the stimulus program, almost no one is complaining about the likelihood that Mr. Draghi will announce plans to take further measures on Thursday. The lack of protest from conservatives in Germany and some other eurozone countries contrasts with the howls that preceded the central bank’s decision in the spring to begin the bond-buying program.The dire consequences predicted by the critics, like runaway inflation or profligate spending by governments because of low interest rates, have not materialized.The most visible effect of the central bank measures has been to provoke a decline in the value of the euro. The euro, at Wednesday’s exchange rate, was worth 15 percent less against the dollar than it was a year ago. That makes eurozone products cheaper for foreign buyers and can help eurozone companies sell their products abroad — although China’s slowing economy has made times tougher this year for most global exporters.AdvertisementIn the meantime, central bank demand has probably lowered the cost for banks to raise money on the bond market, which in theory should lead to more lending.On Thursday, the central bank is expected to increase the size of its monthly bond purchases, to €70 billion or so, and to say it will keep buying bonds beyond the previously announced cutoff date of September 2016.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In an article published Wednesday in its monthly bulletin, the European Central Bank defended its efforts so far, arguing that the money it has spent on assets has been converted into loans that are available to businesses for expansion or to households for purchases.The asset purchases, as well as an earlier program allowing eurozone banks to borrow money from the central bank practically interest free, have encouraged lenders “to pass on the cost relief to final borrowers by granting more credit at better conditions,” the bank said.In addition, since June 2014 the European Central Bank has been imposing a penalty on banks that seek safety by storing cash in its vaults. Banks used to earn interest on the cash but now must pay interest of 0.2 percent annually. The so-called negative deposit rate is the equivalent of a bank customer’s having to pay interest to keep money in a savings account.Many analysts expect the central bank to increase the penalty on Thursday. Carsten Brzeski, an economist at ING Bank in Frankfurt, said he expected the negative deposit rate to increase to at least 0.35 percent. But he questioned whether the negative rate was having the desired effect of pressuring banks to lend the money rather than hoard it.Many banks in the eurozone are still struggling with the effects of the financial crisis and increasingly strict regulations. They are reluctant to lend at any price and may also suffer from a lack of customers optimistic enough about their own futures to want to borrow.The negative deposit rate “has not worked and probably won’t work, because there are more variables that determine whether a bank gives out credit or not,” Mr. Brzeski said.Even the decline in the euro against the dollar could start to have negative effects.George Saravelos, an analyst at Deutsche Bank, estimated that during the last year investors have pulled €500 million out of the eurozone and put it into bonds in the United States and other interest-bearing securities. Mr. Saravelos forecast that the euro would fall to 85 United States cents in 2017.AdvertisementAt some point, the negative effects of a weak euro could outweigh the positive. “The weaker euro means there is capital flowing out of the economy,” Mr. Brzeski said. “We need more investment.”Some economists, frustrated by the tepid effect of European Central Bank stimulus so far, have begun urging Mr. Draghi to take more radical action.On Thursday, a group called Quantitative Easing for the People issued a statement calling on the central bank to print money and spend it directly on public works projects or hand it out to citizens.The proposal is considered far-fetched by many economists, in part because the European Central Bank is not equipped for the huge logistical challenge of distributing cash to 338 million eurozone residents in an equitable way.Still, Mr. Draghi did not completely rule out the idea when asked about it during an appearance before members of the European Parliament in September.Said Mr. Brzeski, “That would be a real Christmas present.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.