By BILL VLASIC and MARY M. CHAPMANSEPT. 30, 2015
DETROIT — Hourly workers at Fiat Chrysler Automobiles appear to have soundly rejected a proposed new union contract that set no limit on the number of lower-paid workers and that contained no mechanism to move them up to top-wage status.While a few plants had yet to complete voting as of Wednesday, unofficial tallies indicate that a majority of the company’s 36,000 factory workers had already rejected the new four-year deal. In some cases, it was a lopsided vote. At the Sterling Heights Assembly Plant in Michigan, for example, 72 percent of workers voted no, according to photos of the final tally posted to social media.It would be the first time in more than 20 years that Chrysler workers have turned down a tentative contract negotiated by their union, the United Automobile Workers.The rejection is a setback for Dennis Williams, the U.A.W.’s president, and forces him to decide whether to return to the bargaining table at Fiat Chrysler, call a strike or suspend talks there while the union starts negotiations with either General Motors or Ford.AdvertisementWorkers at several of the company’s biggest plants said the primary reason the deal was rejected was that it did not include a limit on so-called entry-level jobs that pay less than the current wage of $28 an hour earned by veteran employees.AdvertisementOthers said they were concerned about Fiat Chrysler’s plans to move passenger car production from the United States to Mexico, and the impact on workers of a proposed health care cooperative that would pool the purchasing power for medical services of all three Detroit automakers.While the proposed contract called for raises and bonuses for all hourly employees, it did not address the critical issue of how newer workers could graduate to the top-tier wage scale.That is a particularly sensitive topic at Fiat Chrysler, where more than 40 percent of the workers are entry-level. By contrast, the proportion of lower-paid workers at G.M. and Ford is in the range of 20 to 30 percent.“I’d like everybody be made whole in a reasonable amount of time, but the second tier can’t even get to where my wages are,” said Brett Ward, a veteran worker at the company’s assembly plant in Sterling Heights, Mich. “I don’t find that acceptable.”The proposed deal called for raises that would increase the entry-level pay scale, which is currently $16 to $19 an hour. Under the deal, those workers would receive gradual increases that would top out at $22 to $25 an hour by 2018.Veteran workers were also in line for pay raises that would increase their wages to just under $30 an hour, from $28, over the life of the agreement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The deal also included a signing bonus of $3,000 for all workers, and other bonuses of up to $13,000 if certain quality and productivity targets are met.Despite these incentives, though, union members voted against the deal by unusually large margins in some plants. According to unofficial results circulated among workers, a few factories turned down the deal by a two-to-one margin.Advertisement“The margins of defeat in some of the plants are just breathtaking,” said Harley Shaiken, a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, who has worked with the U.A.W. “Dennis Williams is a seasoned negotiator, but he underestimated his members’ feelings about the need for a cap on entry-level jobs.”Mr. Williams has been unavailable for comment since last week, when he convened local union leaders from across the country to endorse the proposed contract.On Thursday, Mr. Williams is scheduled to meet again with the same local leaders, but this time to plot strategy about their next move.Mr. Shaiken said it appeared unlikely that the U.A.W. would immediately go back to Fiat Chrysler and try to modify the agreement in negotiations with the company’s chief executive, Sergio Marchionne.He also discounted the idea that Mr. Williams would call a nationwide strike against the company. Union members are currently working under an extension of the previous contract, which expired on Sept. 15.“What is most likely is they will go to Ford or G.M. at this point, and then come back to Fiat Chrysler when they have those agreements in place,” Mr. Shaiken said.Getting a cap on lower-paid workers should be easier to negotiate with Ford and G.M.Ford had a 25 percent cap on entry-level workers in the previous contract, and has already begun moving hundreds of lower-tier employees up to top-wage status.G.M. did not have a cap because of conditions agreed to by the union as part of the company’s $49 billion government bailout in 2009. However, G.M. has the smallest entry-level contingent among the three carmakers, and could accept a cap without the immediate need to move newer workers up to the higher-pay bracket.A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: U.A.W. Is Said to Flatly Reject Fiat Chrysler Contract Offer .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.