AdvertisementSupported byBy David Leonhardt and Steve DuenesThe digital revolution has upended the economics of news, creating challenges for publishers around the world. But this new era also offers the potential for substantially better journalism.Today, we can track down information that was once all but hidden, and we can tell stories in ways that we couldn’t just a few years ago. As a result, The New York Times is producing a stronger news report.This week, The Times is celebrating a milestone in our digital evolution: We recently passed one million digital-only subscribers. With this support from our readers, we are creating vibrant forms of storytelling that are digitally native on any platform or device.The Times’s newsroom is full of developers, designers and others with deep visual and technical skill. They work side by side with reporters and editors.Consider how we cover the Olympics.Last year, when we profiled the American skier Ted Ligety, we did not rely on just text and photographs. We put together an interactive graphic that brought readers onto the slopes to explain his approach to the giant slalom, turn by breathtaking turn.After Ligety won the gold medal, he was repeatedly asked how he did it. He responded by directing people to look at The New York Times.You can find similar examples every week.A series of map projects, each regularly updated, has allowed for dynamic coverage of stories that range from local prison escapes to the rise of ISIS, from the recent advance of the Taliban in Afghanistan to Russian airstrikes in Syria.An online calculator that lets people compare the costs of renting and buying a home has been used millions of times.A review of a major new museum, the Whitney, became a kind of living article, with multimedia that took readers inside and outside.All of these projects illuminate the world — and none existed in the 20th century. They don’t use technology for the sake of technology or merely to make our journalism look more appealing. They use technology to solve problems.The Internet isn’t a magical machine that automatically creates good journalism. Only journalists can do that.But all of the questions about the future of journalism, legitimate as many are, have obscured the good news. When we do our jobs right, we are able to produce an even better version of The New York Times than our predecessors could.David Leonhardt is editor of The Upshot, which covers politics, policy and everyday life. Steve Duenes is an assistant masthead editor who oversees graphics.Advertisement