By LIZ MOYERDEC. 2, 2015
A brokerage firm associated with the troubled real estate investment empire AR Capital will shut down its operations nationwide and pay $3 million to Massachusetts’ securities regulators after being charged with faking proxy votes.Realty Capital Securities, the brokerage based in Boston, is ending its registration in the state by the end of the week and then across the country, laying off about 150 workers in the process.The development casts doubt on Realty Capital’s $6 million sale to the private equity giant Apollo Global Management, a transaction that was connected to an even bigger $378 million deal between Apollo and AR Capital that unraveled last month.The brokerage’s shutdown comes just weeks after Massachusetts’ securities regulator, William F. Galvin, said workers were faking proxy votes in shareholder elections that were crucial to the success of the bigger deal between AR Capital and Apollo.AdvertisementRealty Capital Securities is a brokerage that distributed real estate investment trust products to advisers. It is associated with AR Capital, a firm that creates real estate investment trusts. The brokerage was under the umbrella of RCS Capital, which is shifting its focus to retail financial advisory services..AdvertisementIn a statement on Wednesday, RCS Capital’s nonexecutive chairman, Mark Auerbach, said the decision to wind down the wholesale brokerage “was essential to our continuing efforts to create a leaner, more efficient organization.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On the agreement with Massachusetts, RCS Capital’s Andrew Backman, a managing director of investor relations, said the company was “pleased that this matter has been resolved in an efficient and timely manner.”An Apollo spokesman had no comment on Wednesday.It is the latest twist in the roller coaster ride of AR Capital, one of the biggest sponsors of real estate investment trusts and a firm built by Nicholas S. Schorsch and William M. Kahane. Last month, after the Massachusetts charges were made public, AR Capital said it would stop creating new investment products and close existing ones to new investors to concentrate on managing the $19 billion it has in current investments.The company cited “regulatory and market uncertainty” that was affecting its ability to raise investor money.AR Capital’s troubles began piling up a year ago, after Mr. Schorsch resigned from the management and boards of affiliated companies because of an accounting scandal.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.