AdvertisementSupported byBy Vinod SreeharshaRIO DE JANEIRO — André Esteves, long the force behind BTG Pactual, ceded financial control in the firm he founded to a group of seven partners, the Brazilian investment bank said in a regulatory filing on Wednesday.Rather than selling his shares in an operation that would have required a major cash outlay, the move appears to have been made through an exchange of shares between those Mr. Esteves had in the holding company BTG Pactual Participations and those his partners hold in BTG Pactual itself.In the filing, the bank said that a group of seven participated in the exchange and will now hold control. They are the co-chief executives, Marcelo Kalim and Roberto Sallouti; the executive chairman, Persio Arida; and Antonio Carlos Canto Porto Filho, James Marcos de Oliveira, Renato Monteiro dos Santos, and Guilherme da Costa Paes, all partners at the bank. It did not provide any other details.Mr. Esteves was arrested on Nov. 25 on accusations of obstruction of justice in a broad investigation into corruption involving the state-owned oil giant Petrobras. Initially, Mr. Esteves was thought be the focus of the investigation rather than the bank. But over the weekend, federal prosecutors were said to have found evidence suggesting that BTG Pactual paid 45 million reais, or nearly $12 million, to Eduardo Cunha, the speaker of the lower house in the Brazilian legislature, with the hope of watering down financial legislation.Those accusations led Brazil’s high court on Sunday to extend Mr. Esteves’s stay in jail in Rio de Janeiro for an indefinite period. That same day, he resigned as the firm’s chief executive and chairman.BTG Pactual has denied the most recent accusations, but it still faces enormous pressure.Late Tuesday, Moody’s stripped the bank of its investment grade rating, cutting it to junk. The ratings agency cited “the challenges the bank faces to conserve liquidity and preserve its franchise.”Moody’s noted that the bank was making efforts to conserve cash, sell some assets and temporarily suspend originating new loans.Standard & Poor’s followed suit on Wednesday, saying that “the bank has a material liquidity gap in meeting its financial obligations in the next 60 days, unless BTG is able to sell assets or access credit facilities with Brazilian financial regulators.”BTG Pactual has also sold its stake in the Brazilian hospital chain Rede D’Or São Luiz to GIC, a Singapore sovereign wealth fund, for 2.38 billion reais, or $617 million. That transaction is subject to regulatory approval.Shares of BTG Pactual have fallen 35 percent since the arrest. On Wednesday morning, the shares closed down 1.5 percent after being suspended on the São Paulo bourse as the exchange sought more information on the changes in ownership. The changes will also require approval from Brazil’s central bank.Advertisement