AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Oil & MoneyBy Chris HortonHONG KONG — The days of China’s relying on export manufacturing and infrastructure construction as drivers of economic growth are gone. China’s service sector is now larger than its manufacturing sector and growth of gross domestic product is slowing, fueling seismic shifts in current and future energy demand against a background of complex developmental and political factors.China’s official G.D.P. growth in the second quarter of this year was 7 percent, but power demand growth for the same period was a mere 1.6 percent. Oil consumption is growing at half the rate of just a few years ago, and in the first four months of 2015, coal consumption dropped 8 percent year on year.On the surface, these numbers paint a picture of a more drastic slowdown than official G.D.P. statistics suggest. But the reality isn’t that simple, said Zhou Xizhou, senior director and head of China Energy at IHS Energy.“If you look one level deeper, you can see a pattern,” Mr. Zhou said. “The structure of G.D.P. and that of power demand are very different. The numbers are painting a very clear picture of the heavy industrial sector’s energy consumption slowing down.” Because heavy industry represents such a large percentage of energy consumption, small shifts in consumption have a big impact on overall data. Notably, heavy manufacturing accounts for 17 percent of G.D.P., but 41 percent of power demand. Data for the second quarter of this year showed a 0.9 percent year-on-year decline in power consumption by heavy industry, compared with growth in consumption by light industry and the commercial sector of 2.4 percent and 8.7 percent, respectively.“China went through an extraordinarily high-energy growth period, driven by energy-intensive investments in heavy industries and infrastructure,” said Edward C. Chow, senior fellow at the Energy and National Security Program of the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. “That was bound to slow down.”Chinese energy demand has exaggerated and extended global cycles, Mr. Chow said. During a period of high oil prices, Chinese imports grew at a high rate, including a spike of one million barrels per day in 2010, a result of the government stimulus in response to the recent financial crisis.“Now that oil prices have dropped by more than half, along with lower international coal and gas prices, Chinese energy demand and import growth seem to be slowing at a rate lower than official G.D.P. growth numbers,” he said.China’s economy has experienced a bumpy ride this year, when compared with most of the preceding quarter century. This will put the economy front and center for the short term.“The prospects for the economy will be the most powerful factor shaping China’s energy plan, especially the next five-year plan between 2016 and 2020,” said Tao Wang, resident scholar in the Energy and Climate Program at the Carnegie-Tsinghua Center for Global Policy in Beijing. The plan is being completed and is expected to be adopted in March 2016.Cheaper oil also raises other issues. How the major state-owned oil companies will fare is a big question, but not as big as in a country like Russia, where oil revenues are vital for the government. An additional question is how much Beijing has done to build up strategic and commercial reserves. “China appears to be taking advantage of lower prices to build strategic oil stocks, although not much data is available on this,” Mr. Chow said. “Data availability, accuracy and transparency in general are challenging in China, including for the authorities themselves.”In terms of Beijing’s short- to mid-term oil and gas strategy, “there is general policy confusion at this point, although long-term objectives of diversifying supply sources and routes are unlikely to change,” he added.With major pipeline projects with Russia and other countries either on line or on the way, energy security, once a prime concern for China, is beginning to yield to other more pressing problems. “In the short term, there will be much less concern regarding security of supply for oil and gas,” Mr. Wang said. The economics of existing deals and investment and how to reform the country’s oil and gas sector in the context of low prices — and profits — are moving to the forefront, he said.Because of China’s large consumption base, incremental demand volumes for oil remain large. IHS expects China to continue to be significant in terms of global oil consumption growth, accounting for 30 percent to 40 percent of new oil demand growth through 2020.Last year was a turning point for coal consumption in China’s coastal region, where the first phase of intensive economic development began in the late 1970s. In 2014 coal consumption along the coast peaked, with consumption rising in the central and western regions, Mr. Zhou of IHS said.“The coast has already peaked for several reasons, including slower growth but also environmental pressure, which has made it difficult to site new coal-fired power plants and industrial boilers,” he said. However, he added, coal consumption will continue to grow, peaking in the 2020s. Now new facilities are being built in the interior, both for power transmission to the coast and to serve indigenous consumption growth.The days of China’s reliance upon coal to produce as much as 75 percent of its electricity are coming to a close, for two reasons. The first is the shift away from an economy focused on industry, which currently accounts for 80 percent of China’s coal consumption. The second is political: Last November, China and the United States agreed to reduce greenhouse emissions, with China pledging to hit a peak for carbon dioxide by 2030.Renewable energy sources such as wind, solar and tidal power plus hydropower have received much attention and investment during the past three years. China is the largest investor in renewables, although like other countries, it is struggling to deal with challenges such as enabling the electric grid to handle the intermittency of wind and solar power.“The renewable energy industry is growing fast in China, despite the slow economy,” Mr. Wang said. “The government is determined to make it a strategic industry for the future, and it will increasingly play a more important role in China’s energy system in the coming decade.”China has won praise for pushing renewable technology forward, but in terms of immediate environmental impact, it will still be minimal. Renewables account for less than 1 percent of China’s current energy mix.Richard Brubaker, founder of the Shanghai-based consulting firm Collective Responsibility, said that reducing demand by improving building energy efficiency in China’s cities, which will add 300 million residents in the coming decade, should be a developmental focus.“Cities really need to start implementing energy efficiency programs, be it through glass curtains, HVAC systems, insulation or other areas,” Mr. Brubaker said. “These are investments that are nearly impossible to make if relying on developers or investors alone, because of the motive to invest in lowest tech benefits investors who are only concerned in short-term gains.”Instead of heavy investment in renewable energy sources, putting that money into improving building efficiency will have greater returns, he said.“Reduce their load 40 percent and you have done far more to improve the sustainability of energy than any investments in solar,” he said. “Then, make the investments in renewable to clean up the remaining supply.”Advertisement