AdvertisementSupported byBy Nathaniel PopperJohnny Burris, a former broker at JPMorgan Chase, might have known he was walking into a minefield when he decided to go public with his concerns about his former employer.Mr. Burris complained in 2013 that JPMorgan was pressuring brokers like him to sell the bank’s own mutual funds even when the offerings from competitors were more suitable. A few weeks after an article in The New York Times about Mr. Burris’s concerns appeared, complaints from some of his former clients in Arizona began showing up on his disciplinary records that are maintained by a regulatory agency and publicly available.The client complaints made it hard for Mr. Burris to get another job and helped scuttle his case against JPMorgan for wrongful termination. But when Mr. Burris recently reached two of the clients whose names had been on the complaints, they told him they had not, in fact, written the complaints — a JPMorgan employee had.Carolyn Scott, the ostensible author of one of the letters complaining about Mr. Burris, said in a recent interview with The Times that she had not written the document, but had signed it without knowing the contents after a JPMorgan employee had told her it was something that could help her “get some money back.”“I was stupid enough I didn’t read it myself,” Ms. Scott said. “I had no problems with Johnny. No problems whatsoever.”Another man who supposedly wrote a letter of complaint was, it turned out, essentially unable to read or write, and said in an interview that he had never had an issue with Mr. Burris.“I would never have known how to draft a complaint letter, nor could I have drafted the letter in question,” the man said in a declaration that he recently signed in front of a notary public to support Mr. Burris — after the declaration was read back to him aloud.For Mr. Burris, the explanation behind these complaints was clear: This was retaliation for his criticism of JPMorgan, though retaliation carried out poorly.“How do you believe I feel knowing that the bank solicited, drafted false, erroneous complaints about me?” he wrote to JPMorgan in late October, after speaking with his old clients.During the arbitration in 2014, Mr. Burris’s lawyer asked his former supervisors if anyone at JPMorgan had helped draft the complaints and was told: “Absolutely not.”This week, though, a spokeswoman for JPMorgan, Patricia Wexler, said that one of Mr. Burris’s former colleagues, Laya Gavin, had, in fact, assisted the clients as a courtesy “by typing up what they told her verbally, reading it back to them for accuracy, and submitting them for review.”Both clients involved disputed that description of the events and said that the complaints Ms. Gavin wrote up did not reflect their sentiments and added that Ms. Gavin had not read the complaints to them before having them sign the documents.A spokeswoman for the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, Michelle Ong, said that her organization was “aware of these allegations” about the complaints and was looking into them. Finra is the agency that maintains broker disciplinary records. It is not difficult to understand why JPMorgan employees might have been unhappy with Mr. Burris. In 2012, he made secret recordings of his supervisors at the bank pressuring him to sell the JPMorgan mutual funds instead of similar funds from competitors.After he shared these recordings with journalists and regulators, the Securities and Exchange Commission began investigating the issue. JPMorgan is now preparing to pay more than $100 million to settle an investigation into the bank’s marketing of proprietary funds, according to people briefed on the negotiations.Mr. Burris has a pending whistle-blower case before the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, arguing that he was fired because of the concerns he had raised about the JPMorgan proprietary funds.Mr. Burris’s case is a continuing headache for JPMorgan in a business line — financial advice and asset management — that has been seen as among the primary sources of growth for it and other big banks. Since the financial crisis, the kind of work that Mr. Burris did, managing money for clients, has been seen as relatively risk-free revenue for the banks.But his case has been a reminder of how the asset management business can expose the banks to conflicts of interest, especially when they run their own mutual funds. It also shows how hard it can be for the banks to police the far-flung multitudes of brokers and financial advisers they are assembling.Mr. Burris worked as a financial adviser in Arizona at the JPMorgan Sun City West branch, outside Phoenix, mostly serving retirees in the area. His problems at the firm mounted quickly in 2012.At the beginning of the year, he received a glowing employee review from the same woman who later wrote up the complaints against him, and he was promoted to work in the elite Chase Private Client division. At the time Mr. Burris had no client complaints on his regulatory records.But Mr. Burris says he began to push back internally when his supervisors urged him to sell his customers JPMorgan-branded mutual funds in so-called managed accounts. Other JPMorgan brokers complained publicly around the same time about facing similar pressures from their superiors.It was soon after Mr. Burris began raising these concerns that his supervisors voiced unhappiness with some of his practices as a broker and within a few months he was fired.Mr. Burris said that he was fired because he refused to sell in-house mutual funds. He questioned the supposed misdeeds that the bank cited for dismissing him. In a few cases, Mr. Burris’s supervisors said he had encouraged a client to make a trade but then marked it down as if the trade had been initiated by the client — suggesting that Mr. Burris was hiding his activity.Mr. Burris has received signed declarations from the clients on whose behalf he made the trades. Both men stated that the trades were their ideas, not Mr. Burris’s, contrary to what his supervisors said.“I never found him to push me into anything,” Paul Hudson, one of Mr. Burris’s former clients, said in an interview. “I made no complaints. I wasn’t aware that I had anything to complain of myself.”The state judge overseeing Mr. Burris’s unemployment claim questioned JPMorgan’s explanation of Mr. Burris’s firing and said that it appeared to have been done in a rushed manner that bypassed JPMorgan’s “progressive disciplinary procedures.”The more serious criticisms of Mr. Burris began to show up on his disciplinary record soon after he went public with his grievances against JPMorgan. In the course of two weeks, three client complaints showed up on his regulatory records.During his arbitration case, Mr. Burris’s lawyer asked a JPMorgan supervisor at his old branch in Arizona whether the client complaints were “written by someone at JPMorgan” or if any JPMorgan employee had “helped” draft them.“Absolutely not,” the JPMorgan employee, Umbreen Kazmi, responded to both questions.It was only after the arbitration case was over that Mr. Burris tracked down the clients and learned that the letters had, in fact, been drafted by one of his old colleagues at JPMorgan, Ms. Gavin, a close associate of Ms. Kazmi.Ms. Wexler, the JPMorgan spokeswoman, said this week that during the hearing Ms. Kazmi “answered truthfully based on what she knew — she did not realize that anyone had provided the customer with the courtesy of typing up a verbal complaint or issue.”The clients who spoke with The Times all said that they felt bad when they heard that Mr. Burris had been affected by the complaints that they ostensibly had made, because they had not had negative experiences with Mr. Burris.“It disturbs me to no end,” said Leona Weakland, who made a declaration on Mr. Burris’s behalf.After Mr. Burris was fired, Ms. Weakland and her husband took their money from JPMorgan to have it managed by Mr. Burris again.Advertisement