By LIZ MOYERDEC. 3, 2015
The federal regulator examining technical issues at the prepaid debit card firm RushCard says the company has not lived up to its pledges to cooperate in an investigation that began in October, shortly after a systems malfunction blocked thousands of customers from access to their money.The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau sent a civil investigative demand to UniRush, the firm’s parent company, on Oct. 27, asking for information dating back to Jan. 1, 2015, including reports and documents connected to the reasons for the planned system conversion.The purpose of the demand, the regulator said, was to determine whether any laws were violated.In correspondence with the regulator last month, UniRush called the requests overly broad and burdensome. The company said it would provide information as it became available and tried to have the deadline to reply pushed back to Jan. 15 from Nov. 10, but the bureau denied the request in an order dated Wednesday and posted to its website on Thursday.The regulator says the company, based in Cincinnati, “failed to engage with the bureau in any meaningful way” on turning over information requested in the demand and ordered it to meet with the bureau by the end of next week to set a time frame to answer specific requests.AdvertisementA RushCard spokesman said on Thursday, “We are committed to working cooperatively with the C.F.P.B. and have already begun to produce the documents they’ve requested.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The investigation is broader than just the events of Columbus Day weekend, when a systems conversion gone awry created a number of customer service issues at RushCard. The company’s products are popular with hundreds of thousands of low-income Americans who don’t want traditional bank accounts or have limited access to credit.AdvertisementRushCard’s disruption has also drawn the scrutiny of lawmakers. Two senators demanded more information about the problems in a letter to RushCard’s chief executive, Rick Savard, last month.The company has promised to set up a $2 million to $3 million fund to reimburse customers for any late fees or costs associated with not being able to access money or pay bills during the blockage.As of late October, RushCard told customers through social media sites that its problems had been fixed and that it had suspended all fees through February for new and existing card users.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.