By LIZ MOYERDEC. 3, 2015
Three Chicago-based options traders are under scrutiny over a manipulative form of electronic trading called spoofing that has garnered increasing attention by regulators.On Thursday, the Securities and Exchange Commission accused the three — twin brothers and a friend— of fraud. The S.E.C. also says that Behruz Afshar and Shahryar Afshar and a former broker, Richard Kenny, tricked the market by spoofing, where orders are made and then canceled to make it look as if there is genuine activity in a certain security when there actually is none.It also accuses them of misrepresenting themselves to take advantage of trading rebates that exchanges offer to traders for participating in their markets.“We allege these individuals tricked the exchanges into giving them benefits not meant for professional traders, and fooled other market participants by spoofing the market with non-bona fide orders,” said Robert A. Cohen, the co-chief of the regulator’s market abuse unit.AdvertisementThe charges appear to be a caution flag for so-called high frequency traders. These firms make money by using computers to push out a continual stream of orders and reap profits from minuscule market movements as well as exchange rebates.AdvertisementIn spoofing, a trader sends orders never intended for execution, but rather to attract other traders to help move the price of a given security. The S.E.C. says the traders spoofed the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, which is owned by Nasdaq.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Spoofing has been frowned upon for a long time but financial-crisis era regulations offered Wall Street overseers a way to go after traders. In one prominent case, a jury convicted a New Jersey trader, Michael Coscia, last month of 12 cases of fraud and manipulating the futures market.In addition, the S.E.C. accused the three traders of misrepresenting themselves to get higher rebates than they would have. Professional traders in the options market and “customers,” or regular retail investors, are given different priorities. Customers earn higher rebates than professionals and get priority in the execution of their orders.The S.E.C. says the three traders placed “customer” orders, not “professional” orders by shifting the accounts they used to place the trades. The exchanges are the victims, the agency said. The traders reaped $2 million in avoided transaction fees and wrongly received higher rebates.Lawmakers have pushed back against exchanges in the last year, calling on them to end rebate payments as the agency has tried to rein in high-frequency trading.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.