AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressGlobal markets sank on Thursday after the European Central Bank announced stimulus plans that fell short of what investors had forecast. The bond market was especially roiled by the central bank’s move, with bond prices in the United States and Europe falling sharply, and yields jumping.The Dow Jones industrial average lost 252.01 points, or 1.4 percent, to 17,477.67. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index fell 29.89 points, or 1.4 percent, to 2,049.62, and the Nasdaq composite fell 85.70 points, or 1.7 percent, to 5,037.53. The selling pushed the S.&P. 500 back into the red for 2015.The European Central Bank announced a slight cut in one of its key interest rates in an attempt to stimulate lending and help a modest economic recovery. Investors had expected the bank to step up its monthly purchases of bonds as well.“Financial markets were expecting the E.C.B. to do ‘whatever it takes’ to stimulate inflation, and instead the E.C.B. did ‘maybe what it’ll take’ to stimulate inflation,” said Guy LeBas, head of fixed-income strategy at Janney Montgomery Scott.Europe’s economy has lagged that of the United States since the financial crisis, and policy makers have struggled to keep the 19 countries that use the euro from falling into deflation or an economic contraction. But the president of the bank, Mario Draghi, has been far more aggressive than his predecessors in trying new ways to push the economy, including its current program of negative interest rates and bond-buying. Expectations were high for this week’s meeting.After the announcement, European stocks had one of their worst days in months. Germany’s DAX plunged 3.6 percent, its biggest drop since September. France’s CAC-40 index lost 3.6 percent, and Britain’s FTSE lost 2.3 percent.European bond prices fell sharply, sending yields higher. If the central bank had announced more stimulus, it would have had the effect of putting downward pressure on interest rates. The yield on the 10-year German government bond gained 0.20 percentage point to 0.67 percent, a huge move in the bond market. The yield on the 10-year French government bond rose 0.20 percentage point to 0.99 percent, also a substantial move.The sell-off in the dollar also hit American bonds. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note jumped to 2.32 percent, up sharply from 2.18 percent the day before.Investors now turn back to the United States. While the European Central Bank is easing policy, the Federal Reserve looks set to raise interest rates this month for the first time in nine years. In comments Wednesday, Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chairwoman, gave an upbeat assessment of the economy’s progress since the bank’s last meeting in October, describing the economy’s behavior as in line with the Fed’s expectations for the labor market and inflation. She also was careful to point out the need to review coming data, including the November jobs report, coming Friday.Economists forecast that employers created 200,000 jobs in November, and the jobless rate was steady at 5 percent.In other markets, benchmark United States crude oil jumped $1.14, or 2.9 percent, to settle at $41.08 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Brent crude, used to set prices for international oils, climbed $1.35, or 3.2 percent, to $43.84 a barrel in London.Advertisement