By JACK EWINGDEC. 3, 2015
The European Central Bank president, Mario Draghi, said stimulus measures were to strengthen the eurozone’s resilience to “global economic shocks.”FRANKFURT — Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, has been regarded as a master of the dark art of managing market expectations.But the reaction to stimulus measures the central bank announced on Thursday — steps more timid than had been widely expected — suggested that Mr. Draghi somehow miscommunicated with the traders, pundits and prognosticators who set the course of financial markets.Around Europe, stock prices fell on Thursday after the central bank said it would extend its program of buying bonds and other assets by six months but would not raise the amount of monthly purchases. The central bank also changed a key interest rate to encourage banks to lend more, but did not cut key borrowing rates.Based on recent statements by Mr. Draghi and other top officials at the European Central Bank, investors had thought there would be much, much more.Advertisement“He typically has underpromised and overdelivered,” said Mujtaba Rahman, practice head for Europe at the consultancy firm Eurasia Group. “That is not the case this time around. What we’ve got is the bare minimum of what people were expecting.”AdvertisementIt was either a rare case of Mr. Draghi failing to send clear enough signals, or a sign that his proposals had met unexpected resistance among the 25 members of European Central Bank’s Governing Council, which met in Frankfurt on Thursday morning. At a news conference explaining the new steps, Mr. Draghi would say only that the moves had been approved by a “very large majority’’ of the Governing Council.The central bank is trying to give the lumbering eurozone economy a shove at the same time the Federal Reserve is getting ready to risk slowing down the United States economy by raising interest rates.The eurozone economy grew at an annual rate of 1.2 percent in the third quarter — compared with a 2.1 percent rate in the United States. And unemployment across the 19-country euro currency union is 10.7 percent — more than double the United States’s jobless figure.Mr. Draghi rebutted reporters’ questions about why the new measures seemed more limited than what the economy might need. He described the steps as a recalibration of the central bank’s stimulus program, which he said had been a success since it began in March.“We are doing more because it works, not because it fails,” he said. “We want to consolidate something that has been a success.”But some analysts said that Mr. Draghi had probably been unable to win over members of the Governing Council who think more stimulus is unnecessary, or who want to keep some monetary weapons in reserve in case the economic situation gets worse. Mr. Draghi acknowledged that terrorist attacks in Paris, along with the European influx of migrants from Syria, presented risks to the eurozone economy that are not yet possible to gauge.“Draghi is now evidently coming up against more opposition,” Jörg Krämer, chief economist at Commerzbank, said in a note to clients. Mr. Draghi “does not have sufficient support within the E.C.B. Council to act on a grand scale,” Mr. Krämer said.AdvertisementThe Governing Council did decide to extend monthly purchases of government bonds and other assets, a way of pumping money into the economy, at least through March 2017.The bank also said it would increase the penalty it charges banks to keep money in its vaults as a way of pressuring them to lend more. Banks will pay interest of 0.3 percent to keep money at the central bank, compared with the previous rate of 0.2 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And the central bank expanded its purchases of bonds to include debt issued by regional and local governments.But the central bank did not announce an outright increase in its monthly spending on bonds beyond the current level of 60 billion euros, or about $63.6 billion, as many analysts had expected. And though it said it would be spending more as it reinvests repayments of principal from the bonds and other assets it acquires, the central bank provided no estimate of how big those receipts might be.Nor did it take other steps on interest rates that might encourage commercial banks to increase lending that might help revive the nearly dormant eurozone economy. Some analysts had expected a cut in the rate that banks pay to borrow short-term funds from the central bank. Their hope had been that the rate would drop to zero from its current 0.05 percent.The bond-buying program was originally planned to run at least through September 2016. Mr. Draghi said on Thursday that it could be extended beyond March 2017, “if necessary.”The Euro Stoxx 50 index of eurozone equities, a key indicator, began falling even as Mr. Draghi was still speaking and ended the day off 3.6 percent. The euro rose more than 2 percent against the dollar, to $1.09, as investors raised their expectations of the returns they are likely to receive on money kept in European assets.A stronger euro is generally negative for the eurozone economy because it makes exports from the region more expensive for foreign customers. In addition, the central bank is trying to make market interest rates go down. A stronger euro means investors expect the rates to go up.Mr. Draghi had signaled in recent months that he was dissatisfied with the performance of the eurozone economy and that the central bank would intensify its already significant efforts to energize the economy and raise the region’s worrisomely low inflation to a healthier level. Whether the measures announced on Thursday will make a difference remains to be seen.AdvertisementEurozone inflation, at an annual rate of only 0.1 percent in November, is far below the European Central Bank’s official target of just below 2 percent. Mr. Draghi and other members of the bank’s governing council had all but promised that more stimulus measures would be coming on Thursday unless there was a substantial improvement in economic data.To skeptical questions from reporters on why the central bank was not doing more, in light of the recent data, Mr. Draghi defended the measures and the effects of the stimulus program so far.He said that eurozone government bond yields, a measure of governments’ borrowing costs, had fallen since the stimulus program began, and that commercial bank lending rates were also lower.Economists are skeptical that the bank’s stimulus measures so far have had a substantial effect on increasing the availability of credit in the eurozone, which is one of the program’s goals. Many banks have other problems, like large numbers of troubled loans, that are keeping them from lending, no matter how cheaply they can borrow from the central bank.But on Thursday, Mr. Draghi could only urge the skeptics to wait and see.“All these measures have had an effect on the economy,” Mr. Draghi said. “I don’t think our communication was wrong,” he said. “These measures need time to be fully appreciated.”A version of this article appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Investors Are Unimpressed With Further Stimulus Measures in Europe.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.