AdvertisementSupported byBy James KanterBRUSSELS — European Union authorities said on Thursday they were formally investigating whether Luxembourg had granted McDonald’s overly generous tax breaks, another front in their efforts to crack down on corporate tax avoidance.Three multinational companies with operations in Luxembourg, a tiny European Union member state that has grown rich on financial services in recent decades, have already been ensnared by recent inquiries, including Amazon and Fiat.The cases examine whether some European governments let major companies shift profits and pay lower tax rates than those available to other companies. Countries like France and Germany say the practices potentially deprive them of corporate tax revenue.In the McDonald’s case, competition regulators from the European Commission will investigate deals that Luxembourg granted McDonald’s that may have led to the restaurant’s paying less in taxes than it owes. The commission did not indicate how much unpaid tax McDonald’s might have to repay if it rules against Luxembourg.The European investigators said Luxembourg in 2009 granted a so-called tax ruling to one of the company’s units, McDonald’s Europe Franchising, allowing it to avoid taxes in Luxembourg on the basis that its profits were to be taxed in the United States. The unit made its earnings from franchisees operating restaurants in Europe and Russia that pay for the right to use the McDonald’s brand and other services. Luxembourg then granted a second tax ruling in 2009, exempting the unit from the need to prove that the income had actually been taxed in the United States.While the commission did not specify how much unpaid tax might be at stake, it could be tens of millions of euros, because Luxembourg has a nominal corporate tax rate of 29 percent and the unit earned substantial profits including, according to the commission, more than 250 million euros in 2013.“A tax ruling that agrees to McDonald’s paying no tax on their European royalties either in Luxembourg or in the U.S. has to be looked at very carefully under E.U. state aid rules,” said the bloc’s competition commissioner, Margrethe Vestager. “The purpose of double taxation treaties between countries is to avoid double taxation — not to justify double nontaxation.”Luxembourg’s Ministry of Finance described the inquiry as “preliminary” and said it would fully cooperate in the investigation. “Luxembourg considers that no special tax treatment nor selective advantage have been granted to McDonald’s,” the ministry said in a statement.In a statement, McDonald’s said that it “complies with all tax laws and rules in Europe, and pays a significant amount of corporate income tax.”“From 2010-14, the McDonald’s companies paid more than $2.1 billion just in corporate taxes in the European Union,” the statement said, adding that its independent franchisees also paid corporate and other taxes. “We are subject to the same tax laws as other companies, and are confident that the inquiry will be resolved favorably,” the statement said.A group of American and European trade unions and an antipoverty charity have heavily lobbied the European Commission to open the McDonald’s case. In February, they issued a report accusing Luxembourg of allowing McDonald’s to avoid paying more than €1 billion in taxes from 2009 to 2013 in Britain, France, Italy, Spain and other countries.Scott Courtney, organizing director at the Service Employees International Union, which is based in Washington and provided evidence to the commission in the case, said the investigation would not have a direct impact on raising the wages of McDonald’s employees around the world. But he suggested that the case could give them, and others, added leverage.“This is one step in sending a message and holding them accountable,” said Mr. Courtney, referring to McDonald’s and its tax arrangements in Luxembourg. “If things like this are in the public eye, it helps hold them accountable on wages and their treatment of workers” and “what they do with suppliers,” said Mr. Courtney, who added that McDonald’s had shortchanged governments just as they were adopting austerity policies that made life even tougher for ordinary citizens and workers.Luxembourg has previously denied granting unfair state aid to multinational companies. But the formal opening of the case involving McDonald’s is a sign that Ms. Vestager believes she has enough evidence that the company may have benefited from such treatment.In October, Ms. Vestager ordered Luxembourg to recover up to 30 million euros, or about $31.8 million, from Fiat Finance and Trade, and she is still investigating the country for its tax treatment of Amazon. Fiat has said that its financing unit had not received any state aid from Luxembourg. Also in October, Ms. Vestager ordered the Netherlands to retrieve a similar amount from Starbucks. The Dutch government said late last month that it would appeal the Starbucks ruling.In Ireland, Ms. Vestager is investigating tax rulings granted to Apple. And in Belgium, her inquiry is focused on a special tax break granted to dozens of subsidiaries of Belgian-based multinational companies that include a unit of Anheuser-Busch InBev, the world’s largest brewer.The cases against Luxembourg are awkward for Jean-Claude Juncker, the country’s former prime minister. He is now president of the European Commission and Ms. Vestager’s boss. Mr. Juncker has been accused by his opponents of helping to turn Luxembourg into a tax haven during his nearly two decades leading the nation.The tax cases are different from those Ms. Vestager has against Google and Gazprom, among other companies, because they are not based on antitrust regulations and are directed at countries that use tax rulings to gain an advantage in attracting investors.Unlike in antitrust cases, companies found to have received such aid do not face fines or a finding of wrongdoing. Instead, the European Commission would impose penalties on the country that granted the aid.Advertisement