By CHAD BRAYDEC. 3, 2015
LONDON — General Electric said on Thursday that it had signed a memorandum of understanding to sell its equipment finance and receivable finance businesses in France and Germany to Banque Fédérative du Crédit Mutuel, a unit of Crédit Mutuel of France.The deal represents the latest move in G.E.’s effort to retreat from banking and refocus on its industrial roots. The conglomerate said in April that it planned to sell the bulk of GE Capital within two years.GE Capital’s commercial lending and leasing platforms in France and Germany provide so-called factoring services, or financing related to the sale of accounts receivable, and leasing products to a broad range of commercial customers.“As we continue to execute on our strategy to significantly reduce the size of GE Capital, we are excited that our longtime partner for French factoring would take forward our C.L.L. business in France and Germany,” Keith S. Sherin, the GE Capital chairman and chief executive, said in a news release, referring to commercial lending and leasing.AdvertisementThe transaction is subject to regulatory approval.General Electric has agreed to a variety of asset sales this year as it pulls back from banking and financing that is not directly related to its industrial businesses.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In June, G.E. agreed to sell the bulk of a division that finances leveraged buyouts to the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board in a $12 billion deal. That same month, it sold its fleet-financing businesses in the United States, Mexico, Australia and New Zealand to Element Financial Corporation of Canada for $6.9 billion.AdvertisementIn September, BMO Financial Group agreed to acquire G.E.’s transport finance business in the United States and Canada.After its various asset sales, G.E. said that it had targeted a return of about $35 billion in capital to shareholders through dividends.The sale of the equipment finance and receivable finance businesses in France and Germany is expected to contribute about $1.3 billion to that amount, G.E. said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.