By BILL VLASICDEC. 4, 2015
DETROIT —  General Motors said on Friday that it would sell its first Chinese-made vehicle in the United States next year in an effort to expand the product lineup of its struggling Buick brand.G.M. said it would introduce the Buick Envision, a compact sport-utility vehicle built in China, to the American market. It would be the first time that any of the three Detroit automakers have brought a Chinese-made vehicle to the American market. G.M. is the largest automaker in the United States.The volume of Envisions to be imported is not expected to be large. But the move highlights G.M.’s strategy to maximize its global production capacity by funneling some models to markets that can absorb excess capacity.The Envision is made in G.M.’s Chinese joint-venture plant in Yantai in northeastern Shandong Province. The vehicle is currently sold only in China, and G.M. has sold more than 120,000 since it was introduced last year.AdvertisementThe company said the vehicle would add a needed model to the brand at a time when sales of carlike S.U.V.s called crossovers are soaring industrywide. The Buick brand has struggled this year with falling sales of passenger cars because American consumers are increasingly choosing S.U.V.s and trucks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When it goes on sale in 2016, it will play an important role in a crossover lineup that represents 60 percent of Buick sales in North America,” said Duncan Aldred, a G.M. marketing executive.AdvertisementThrough November, Buick sales are down 3 percent for the year, compared with an increase of more than 5 percent for the total American industry. Sales of its LaCrosse, Regal and Verano sedans are down substantially. But its two current S.U.V. models have posted gains.G.M. has additional capacity for the Envision in its Chinese plant and is testing the vehicle for possible changes to tailor it to American consumers.Volvo, which is owned by a Chinese company, already exports a sedan made in China into the United States.A version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: G.M. Will Import Buicks Made in China to the U.S. .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.