AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberChipotle Mexican Grill’s stock took a hit on Friday, falling about 8 percent in after-hours trading, when the company rescinded its 2016 forecast after an E. coli outbreak that has sickened dozens of people across the United States.In a regulatory filing, the company said its sales fell by about 20 percent in the days after it announced in early November that it had voluntarily closed 43 restaurants in Washington State and Oregon because of the outbreak. It expects its comparable-restaurant sales to fall 8 to 11 percent in the fourth quarter.“Future sales trends may be significantly influenced by further developments, including potential additional announcements from federal and state health authorities,” the company said in the filing. “Sales trends during the quarter so far have been extremely volatile.”On Friday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said seven more people had fallen ill in October and November, bringing the total to 52 cases across nine states. Forty-seven of the people reported eating at Chipotle in the week before they became sick. The C.D.C. said an investigation had not yet identified what food was tied to the E. coli outbreak.Chris Arnold, a spokesman for Chipotle, said the company did not comment on day-to-day stock movements. Regarding the new cases reported on Friday, he said: “It’s important to note that, while these cases are newly reported, they aren’t really new in that the illnesses occurred during a period between mid-October and early-November, and are just now making their way through the reporting process.”E. coli bacteria typically live in the intestines of animals and people, but some strains can cause illness or even death if they are transmitted through contaminated water or food, according to the C.D.C. The strain of bacteria identified in the Chipotle outbreak is Shiga toxin-producing E. coli O26.It is different from the virulent strain linked to chicken salad from Costco that sickened people in November. That strain, STEC O157:H7, can cause hemolytic uremic syndrome, a type of kidney failure, and can be fatal, particularly among children. Also on Friday, Chipotle introduced a new food safety program, including testing the quality of fresh produce before it is sent to restaurants. The company also said it was improving internal training to “ensure that all employees thoroughly understand the company’s high standards for food safety and food handling.”Advertisement