By ALEXANDRA ALTERDEC. 4, 2015
In 1992, two debut novelists gave a joint reading at a Manhattan bookstore. One of them was Ken Siman, whose novel, “Pizza Face,” sold decently, but was hardly a blockbuster. He eventually went on to pursue a career in publishing.The other novelist was Wally Lamb. His first novel, “She’s Come Undone,” was selected for Oprah Winfrey’s book club, and went on to sell more than three million copies.Nearly 25 years later, the two have reunited to collaborate on Mr. Lamb’s sixth novel, “I’ll Take You There,” which is being released next year exclusively as a digital app by Metabook, a new e-book publishing company for which Mr. Siman is the co-founder and publisher.Landing a new work from Mr. Lamb is a major coup for Metabook, which was founded last year and specializes in multimedia, interactive storytelling. With an original novel by Mr. Lamb, author of best sellers like “I Know This Much Is True” and “We Are Water,” Metabook is establishing itself as a serious player in the growing marketplace for book apps.Advertisement“We said, ‘Our first original title has to be by someone huge,’ ” Mr. Siman said.“I’ll Take You There” centers on a film professor who runs a Monday night film club in an old theater that turns out to be haunted by the ghost of Lois Weber, a trailblazing actress, producer and director from the silent film era. Lois’s ghost becomes a guiding spirit of sorts for the narrator, Felix. In addition to the written narrative, which makes up the core of the story, the app weaves in other features, including an original soundtrack, a full cast audio drama narrating the story, and a documentary about Mr. Lamb, shot in the movie theater that inspired the novel.There are obvious downsides to releasing a book exclusively as an app. “I’ll Take You There” won’t be available in bookstores or even from e-book retailers like Amazon or Barnes & Noble when it comes out next spring. Instead, Mr. Lamb’s fans will have to buy it from the iTunes app store, and it will work only on Apple devices.AdvertisementMr. Lamb said that as a music and film lover, he was excited by the prospect of enhancing a narrative with music, film clips and video.“I’m thinking to myself, wow, this is really cool, it’s something a little bit different,” he said.Mr. Lamb is the latest fiction writer to venture into the realm of interactive, multimedia book apps, an area that is still relatively new terrain for novelists. When the first wave of enhanced e-books arrived a few years ago, most stuck to areas like nonfiction, science, history and current affairs, where add-ons like interactive graphics, audio and video clips and enlargeable maps and photographs could help deepen readers’ understanding of the topic. Interactive children’s books have become another booming genre, with everything from Dr. Seuss to an app based on Rick Riordan’s Percy Jackson & The Olympians series. But when it came to adult fiction, interactive bells and whistles often seemed like noisy distractions that pulled users out of the immersive experience of reading a story.That attitude is slowly starting to change. Some writers have created apps that allow readers to play a role in the plot or become a character. Others have developed apps that deliver tailored content depending on the reader’s geographic location.A few months ago, the British novelist Iain Pears released his genre-bending novel “Arcadia” as an experimental app that allows readers to toggle through 10 different characters’ story lines. It has been downloaded more than 20,000 times, outselling the hardcover edition of the novel.Eli Horowitz, a former editor and publisher at McSweeney’s, has also found an avid audience for his interactive digital novels. His serialized app “The Silent History,” which he co-created, has been bought and downloaded more than 30,000 times. This fall, Mr. Horowitz published an app version of “The Pickle Index,” his farcical, dystopian novel about a circus troupe. “The Pickle Index” app, which Mr. Horowitz designed with the programmer Russell Quinn, is a serialized story that releases chunks of the narrative over 10 days, and includes pickle recipes, mini-games and dynamic maps. The novel was simultaneously released as a lavishly designed paperback and a two-volume hardcover that told two separate story lines, but the app generated the most enthusiastic responses from readers and reviewers.Advertisement“At its core, it’s all about finding fresh ways to engage the reader,” Mr. Horowitz said in an email. “The challenge here is to make sure any flexibility or interaction is strategically designed — substantial enough to feel relevant, but limited enough to preserve the larger narrative.”Mr. Lamb said he was sold on the Metabook concept as soon as Mr. Siman showed him a prototype for the company’s first title. It was an interactive app based on John Berendt’s 1994 true crime book “Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil.” The app, which came out this March, pairs the text of the book with an audio dramatization, crime scene photos with commentary by Mr. Berendt, original music and audio recordings of Jim Williams, a central figure in the drama.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the release of “I’ll Take You There,” Metabook will publish another original work of fiction, Kathleen R. Sand’s short-story collection “The Face Phantom,” with tales that were inspired by exhibits in the Mutter Museum, a medical museum in Philadelphia. The company, which has about 15 employees, is offering authors advances of six figures or higher. Eventually, Metabook aims to publish six to 12 Metabooks a year, in a range of genres, said Benjamin Alfonsi, the company’s creative director and co-founder. “The whole concept is very new, in terms of how it’s reimagining the way to experience a book,” Mr. Alfonsi said.For all the tantalizing creative promises that technology holds, many novelists and publishers are still wary of the expense and risk involved in creating a fictional app. The retail opportunities are narrow, and the concept of a multimedia book is still foreign, or unappealing, to readers who would rather be immersed in a single narrative.But Mr. Horowitz and other novelists say there is an appetite for new forms of fictional narrative.“I think plenty of writers are interested and capable of exploring these areas, but there isn’t yet much of a network to support the projects,” Mr. Horowitz said. “But I do feel there’s already a real audience of eager readers, curious to see more experimentation.”A version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Novelist’s Page-Turner Will Take Swipes Instead .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.