
Breakingviews By                     
JEFFREY GOLDFARB

DEC. 4, 2015
Avon’s fading beauty is in the eyes of two different financial beholders.The struggling makeup company has come under fire from an aggressive investor and may call on a buyout shop for help. The growing role of private equity firms as white knights against activist investors suggests that target companies are not the only ones with troubles.It has been a swift decline for Avon Products, the 130-year-old American symbol of door-to-door perfume sales. After snubbing an $11 billion bid from rival Coty some three years ago, the company’s sales and shares have tumbled, leaving it worth just $1.8 billion now. A hedge fund, Barington Capital, sees value in Avon, but only with a new board and management willing to slash costs and reinvest in its global brand.The current boss, Sheri McCoy, has other ideas. Avon is in talks to sell its North American business to Cerberus Capital Management, which would simultaneously make a minority investment in the public company’s capital. That’s an increasingly popular playbook for companies under siege.In August, the walkie-talkie maker Motorola Solutions, in which Jeffrey W. Ubben’s ValueAct Capital is both an investor and director, turned to the private equity firm Silver Lake for assistance. Silver Lake invested $1 billion in the form of convertible bonds that pay 2 percent, which helped Motorola buy back its stock. Silver Lake also put two managing partners on Motorola’s board.NCR pulled the same trick a couple of months later. A failed sale process led to the Blackstone Group pumping $820 million into NCR using a preferred security that carries a 5.5 percent dividend, payable in kind for the first four years. The deal, which also partly paid for a share repurchase, led to the resignation of one activist, Richard McGuire’s Marcato Capital Management, from NCR’s board and raised concerns from another of its investors, Peter Schoenfeld.These private investments in public equities, so-called PIPEs, may come with some attractive terms, but they undermine a primary objective of the buyout business model. Taking control and restructuring companies away from the uncomfortable glare of public markets has been a winning strategy. With so much dry powder stockpiled, however, private equity firms are getting more creative. The danger is that too much of this lipstick gets applied to a variety of pigs.Jeffrey Goldfarb is United States editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »