By JOHN KOBLIN and RAVI SOMAIYADEC. 4, 2015
On Wednesday at 2:28 p.m., the CNN anchor Brooke Baldwin was in a split-screen conversation with a network legal correspondent on a story about Guantánamo Bay when her producer started talking into her earpiece. There had been another shooting, this time in San Bernardino, Calif., he said. There was not much information, but she would have to break away and relay it to viewers immediately.Ms. Baldwin could not believe what she was hearing. “And now we turn to this,” she said. “Here we go. Again.”A “Breaking News” graphic hit the screen, and for the second time in six days, Ms. Baldwin was telling viewers about a mass shooting in the United States.In an interview, she described the difficulty of balancing a calm professional facade with her frustration at having to report on another scene of carnage.Advertisement“I’ve done it enough,” she said. “I’m sick of doing it. I know what questions to ask. My heart aches for these people.”AdvertisementAs word of the San Bernardino attack spread on Wednesday, the news media set into motion the reporting of a story that has become all too familiar. This time, two attackers had killed 14 people and wounded 21 others, just five days after a man had killed three and injured nine in a shooting at a Planned Parenthood clinic in Colorado. What once seemed like a uniquely tragic event was becoming a regular drill for editors and correspondents; like Ms. Baldwin — who wrote about her frustration in an article for CNN’s website on Thursday — they are well versed in what to do.“There are people that we go to, sources that we go to, angles that we go to over and over again,” said Rashida Jones, the managing editor of MSNBC. “It’s like we’re almost doing a mental checklist of ‘who do we talk to, what questions to ask, and what’s the care or touch or perspective we need to put on this story.’ You almost mentally build a playbook as you do it over and over again.”Alison Mitchell, the national editor of The New York Times, had just finished working on and publishing an in-depth profile of Robert L. Dear Jr., the suspect in the Planned Parenthood attack. “Hours later,” she said, “we’re doing this,” referring to the California shooting.There is something of a playbook now, Ms. Mitchell said: She knows to send many more reporters than she had originally thought, in part to identify the victims, and “find out why the gunman did it, if there is ever an answer.”But at the same time, she said, “each one has its own horrible uniqueness.”The shootings in the United States are part of a wave of prominent, sometimes searing, breaking news stories — the Paris attacks, Islamic State atrocities, protests against racial discrimination in Chicago and elsewhere — that have consumed newsrooms over the last year.“It used to be the exception,” said Jay Wallace, a senior vice president of news at Fox News. “It felt like before, ‘O.K., there’s a plane crash.’ The news cycle has been very intense.”Mr. Wallace said social media had significantly accelerated the story line, affecting Fox’s on-air coverage.Advertisement“The game has changed,” he said. “We know people know about the story, so we’re not having to reset the story every two minutes.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Editors must also decide which shootings are most newsworthy. On Wednesday, there was a shooting that left three injured and one dead in Savannah, Ga., that received scant coverage as news organizations focused on California.Many editors said they considered factors such as the number of people killed, where the violence occurred, the motivation for the attacks — if it is known — and how it intersected with broader policy issues, including gun laws, terrorism and mental illness. “Part of it is a question of resources,” said Shani Hilton, executive editor for news at BuzzFeed. “We see it bubbling up, all these decisions get made in the moment: Are there multiple suspects? Are a lot of people injured?”Shelby Grad, an assistant managing editor and the metro editor of The Los Angeles Times, said that to some extent, there was an institutional muscle memory that kicked in for a story like this. “We get a team together, we send people, there will be a victim profile, a suspect profile, the breaking news will kind of churn away,” he said.In California, he said, in addition to at least two major mass shootings in recent years, “we have a lot of mayhem and disaster things — earthquakes, fires — so we’re used to swarming the scene and trying to figure out what happened.”At the same time, he said, “there are so many sociological and societal issues that surround this violence — mental illness, gun control — and when something big like this happens, everyone suddenly pays attention.”Cameron Barr, the national editor of The Washington Post, said he, too, looked at “what’s relevant to the public debate, what has social, political or even geopolitical resonance.”Local news stations as well as national ones have learned how to respond to tragic events. KUSA-TV, the NBC affiliate in Denver, has had to cover three mass shootings over the last 16 years: Columbine in 1999, a movie theater shooting in Aurora in 2012 and the Planned Parenthood attack in Colorado Springs last week. When the Columbine school shooting unfolded, Patti Dennis was running the news department at the station.Ms. Dennis, now the vice president of news for Tegna Media, which owns KUSA, said that after last week’s shooting, “I think we’re experienced at doing it.”AdvertisementEven if news organizations are prepared, a playbook does not necessarily help on a case-by-case basis; each story is distinct in some way.“This one was unusual,” said David Rhodes, the president of CBS News. The mother of a 6-month-old would not ordinarily fit the profile of a suspect, he said, referring to Tashfeen Malik, the wife of Syed Rizwan Farook, both of whom were killed in a shootout with the police after the San Bernardino attack.“They are not routine, though they are certainly familiar, and they are certainly not routine to the people who are caught up in them,” Mr. Barr said. “Our job is to find what is distinctive and reveal it.”Sydney Ember contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2015, on Page A15 of the New York edition with the headline: Journalists Follow Grim Playbook to Cover Repeated Mass Killings .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.