AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerCanadian Pacific has been rebuffed in an another ambitious attempt to buy a large railroad operator, showing again the regulatory hurdles to rail-carrier consolidation.Norfolk Southern  said on Friday that its board had rejected Canadian Pacific’s $28 billion offer, which was made last month, saying that it undervalued Norfolk Southern and that the chance for achieving regulatory approval was too low.Rail carriers must demonstrate to the Surface Transportation Board, an agency that is part of the Department of Transportation, that a deal is in the “public interest” and will not raise antitrust issues.Using advisers who used to work at the agency, Norfolk Southern determined during its review that Canadian Pacific’s proposal would not pass muster. The company insinuated that it was not worth even trying, given the two-year process for approval, which would divert management’s attention and potentially disrupt service.The company also said that Canadian Pacific’s cost-cutting targets would require reducing employee levels and investments, which the Norfolk Southern board said would concern regulators.“There is a high probability that after years of disruption and expense, the proposed combination would be rejected by the Surface Transportation Board,” James A. Squires, Norfolk Southern’s chief executive, said in a statement on Friday. “Even if the proposed combination were ultimately to be cleared, it would be subject to a wide range of onerous conditions that would reduce the value of the stock consideration that has been proposed.”To dispel Norfolk Southern’s concern about the timeline for regulatory approval, Canadian Pacific suggested putting its own shares in a voting trust, led by an independent trustee. This way of achieving an earlier close for deals has not been approved for a rail merger since the modern rules were established in 2001, according to a presentation published on Friday by Norfolk Southern.“We are reviewing the response from N.S. and have no further comment at this time,” a spokesman from Canadian Pacific wrote in an email, referring to Norfolk Southern.The process started in early November, when Mr. Squires received a call from E. Hunter Harrison, the chief executive of Canadian Pacific, who said his board had authorized a written proposal to combine, Mr. Squires said in a phone interview.The two sides met in person shortly thereafter, and within hours of the meeting ending, The Wall Street Journal reported that Canadian Pacific met with Norfolk Southern about a potential merger, citing an unidentified person with knowledge of the matter.Canadian Pacific then sent its proposal to Norfolk Southern. The bid valued Norfolk Southern at $46.72 in cash and 0.348 of a Canadian Pacific share for each of its own shares. The offer represented a 9 percent premium to the closing prices on Nov. 17, when the offer letter was sent.Norfolk Southern said that Canadian Pacific’s bid was timed to capitalize on its depressed stock price, which has suffered under the weight of the commodity price slump.When asked on a Friday conference call about whether Norfolk Southern would be willing to entertain a higher bid, Mr. Squires said “at any price, the regulatory risks remain the same.”The rejected bid is the latest hurdle for Canadian Pacific, which has argued that the industry needs more consolidation. In October 2014, Canadian Pacific and CSX Corporation called off merger discussions, hinting that the risk of opposition from regulators was too high.Morgan Stanley and Bank of America provided financial advice to Norfolk Southern, while Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, Hunton & Williams and Morrison & Forrester provided legal advice.Advertisement