By CHAD BRAYDEC. 4, 2015
LONDON — The British government said on Friday that it would extend a plan to sell its stake in the Lloyds Banking Group for six months as it prepares to exit ownership of the lender as early as next year.The sale plan, which is being managed by Morgan Stanley, would be extended until June 30 but could end earlier to ensure the government has enough Lloyds shares available for an offering to retail investors next year, the Treasury said on Friday.In 2008, in the midst of the financial crisis, Lloyds received a bailout of 17 billion pounds, or about $25 billion, from the British government, and Royal Bank of Scotland received £45 billion.But the government is now eager to terminate its ownership of the two lenders.George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, has pledged to sell £25 billion in R.B.S. shares over the next five years, even if the government has to sell some at a loss. The government owns about 73 percent of R.B.S. after it began winding down its stake this year.Advertisement“The trading plan has been a huge success, with over £9 billion raised for the taxpayer so far,” Mr. Osborne said in a news release, referring to the Lloyds holdings. “This means we have now recovered over £16 billion in total, and we now own 9.2 percent of the bank.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The government held as much as 40 percent of Lloyds after the bailout, but it has pared its holdings since September 2013 as the bank’s prospects have improved.AdvertisementLloyds returned to an annual profit last year and paid its first dividend since the government bailout in May.The government has sold 11.2 billion shares at an average price of more than 81 pence a share since the trading plan began in December 2014, according to U.K. Financial Investments, which oversees the government’s holdings in Lloyds and R.B.S. The government paid an average of 73.6 pence a share when it first took a stake in Lloyds.Proceeds from the sale are being used to reduce Britain’s debt.Shares of Lloyds rose less than 1 percent to 73.15 pence in early trading in London on Tuesday.A version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Britain Extends Its Lloyds Bank Stake Sale.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.