By CHOE SANG-HUNDEC. 4, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea —  South Korean financial regulators on Friday said they were investigating whether nine executives from Samsung, the country’s largest conglomerate, used insider trading to profit illegally from a merger of two subsidiaries.The country’s stock exchange reported the suspected insider trading, prompting the Financial Services Commission to investigate the Samsung executives, Kim Hong-sik, director of the commission’s capital markets investigation unit, told reporters on Friday.Mr. Kim did not elaborate. But South Korean news media reported that nine executives from several Samsung companies bought 40 billion to 50 billion won, or $34.5 million to $43.1 million, worth of shares of a subsidiary, Cheil Industries, shortly before the plan to merge it with Samsung C&T was announced in May.Cheil Industries shares rose sharply until the merger plan was announced on May 26.“We understand the investigation involving certain individuals is still in its early stage,” Samsung said in a news release. “We will wait until the authorities conclude their investigation.”AdvertisementThe merger between Cheil Industries and Samsung C&T drew attention because of its role in a father-to-son transfer of power in the family that controls the conglomerate, or chaebol. The activist hedge fund Elliott Associates, which had accumulated 7.12 percent of Samsung C&T before the merger, campaigned to scuttle the deal. The fund said the merger wronged minority shareholders by grossly undervaluing Samsung C&T shares in an unlawful attempt to help Lee Jae-yong, the son of Samsung’s chairman, Lee Kun-hee, inherit leadership of the conglomerate.The Lee family held a controlling stake in Cheil and wanted to use it as a de facto holding company for the entire group. The merger enabled Cheil to absorb Samsung C&T’s shares in other Samsung units, including the flagship Samsung Electronics, further consolidating the family’s grip on the entire group.AdvertisementThe merger was completed after Samsung C&T shareholders voted in favor of it in July.A version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: 9 Samsung Executives Tied to Insider Trading Inquiry.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.