

      By SYDNEY EMBER

DEC. 6, 2015

Bad, bad, they all are bad. The ads here are perhaps the baddest of the bad. They pop up and take over, expand and confound. Oh, were you reading that? The Fickle Floater does not care. These pop-up ads open in the middle of the page, blocking text like rain clouds in an otherwise clear sky. The Fickle Floater prompts an immediate search for the “X” button, followed by frantic mouse clicks and index-finger jabs. The “X” is often so tiny that successfully hitting it requires not a small bit of luck. The worst kind of Fickle Floater? One without any “X” at all.This is the Fickle Floater’s evil cousin. The Belligerent Blockade appears out of nowhere and takes over the entire page, obscuring anything and everything you were viewing. When these ads invade, it is best to sit back and let them run their course. Don’t even think about looking for an “X.” These ads will eventually disappear by themselves. Do not lose hope!At first, this looks like a normal banner ad, sitting innocently enough at the top of the page. But do not be fooled. The ad extends from the top of the page and pushes the text down as it expands. Unlike the Belligerent Blockade, the Brash Bulldozer does not typically take over the entire page. Rather, it tends to stretch halfway down. The Brash Bulldozer can merge with the Vexing Video (see below) for a truly infuriating experience. Whence that sound? The Vexing Video runs somewhere on the page and is nearly impossible to locate. These ads start playing once the page loads, often with the sound on, and require Sherlock Holmes-ian sleuthing to find and mute. Most of the time, it is better to close the page than to try to silence the sound. The Adamant Anchor sticks itself to the bottom of the mobile screen and does not budge. These ads resemble the banner ads of the early web, but they are perhaps more annoying because they are smaller than their desktop brethren. The “X” is minuscule, if there is one. The Adamant Anchor makes the occasional appearance in desktop browsers, too.Illustrations by Jake ReevesAdvertisement