AdvertisementSupported byFair GameBy Gretchen MorgensonAfter seven years of keeping United States interest rates at rock bottom, the Federal Reserve has signaled that Dec. 16 could be D-Day for a long-awaited increase. That was the message Janet L. Yellen, chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, conveyed in two public presentations last week.With a 0.25 percent rise in the Fed’s main tool for influencing interest rates a near certainty, investors are already beginning to focus on rate increases that may lie ahead. Will they be gradual, as Ms. Yellen has suggested? Or will economic developments push the Fed to be more aggressive?Answering these questions requires a crystal ball, which no one has. But they are worth exploring, given the market dislocations that can occur when policy moves take investors by surprise.Ms. Yellen alluded to this challenge both in her speech on Wednesday and in congressional testimony on Thursday. Waiting too long to raise rates, she said, could force the Fed to “tighten policy relatively abruptly” and risk “disrupting financial markets and perhaps even inadvertently push the economy into recession.”A slow and gradual approach to rate increases is what the Fed has telegraphed and is very much what investors expect and desire. But this may not be what they get.That’s the view of Ian Shepherdson, chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics. Investors who think the Fed’s rate increases will be modest and come over a prolonged period may be incorrectly assessing three elements of the economy, he contends. These errors could be fostering a more negative outlook about economic growth than is justified, reinforcing the view that rate increases will be few and far between.More than seven years ago the Federal Reserve put its benchmark interest rate close to zero, as a way to bolster the economy. But that policy is about to change, perhaps this week.The first mistake investors are making relates to their excessive fears about the slowdown in domestic manufacturing and the oil industry. While these downturns are genuine and painful — and the spending drop in these arenas have been huge — their negative impact over all is limited, Mr. Shepherdson said.The entire manufacturing sector generates 12 percent of the nation’s gross domestic product, but the oil sector and related manufacturing accounts for less than 5 percent.Moreover, the beneficiaries of this collapse far outnumber its victims. “What’s happened over the last 13 months is a giant transfer of resources from oil producers to consumers,” Mr. Shepherdson said. “Consumers are much more important to the U.S. economy, and the very things that have hurt manufacturing and oil have given consumers a great boost.”The second assumption that investors may be wrong about involves inflation and their belief that a stronger dollar will keep it in check in the United States. Such a situation would help put a lid on rate increases.A rising dollar certainly makes imported goods less expensive for American buyers. But only 15 percent of the core Consumer Price Index is dollar-sensitive, Mr. Shepherdson said.Rents make up 41 percent of the index, for example, while 34 percent consists of services, including medical costs, leisure and education. Expenditures on some of these items — especially rents and health care — are rising faster than other prices.Wage increases pose another wild card on inflation, Mr. Shepherdson said. Labor compensation has grown only modestly in recent years, Ms. Yellen pointed out in her speech, at annual rates of 2 to 2.5 percent. Now that may be changing.“We have seen a welcome pickup in the growth rate of average hourly earnings for all employees and of compensation per hour in the business sector,” she said.If inflation heats up, it will represent a big shift. Core inflation is running at 1.25 percent for the 12 months that ended in October, the Fed said, well below its 2 percent inflation objective.Friday’s healthy jobs report — 211,000 workers hired in November, more than forecast — showed only a modest increase in compensation last month, but it suggested that rising wages may become even more of a factor as the job market continues to tighten. “If nominal wages accelerate, then the Fed’s fervently held belief in gradual rate increases will come under pressure,” Mr. Shepherdson said.Finally, investors seem convinced that retail sales, a major economic bellwether, are in trouble. This may not be the case.It’s true that growth in nominal retail sales, those measured in current dollars, is declining. But, Mr. Shepherdson said, if you look at retail sales in real terms, which are not adjusted for price changes, the growth is impressive. In the latter part of 2014, such sales were registering a 4 percent gain. Today, it’s trending at about 5.5 percent, suggesting that the American consumer is better off than many investors think.If Mr. Shepherdson is right, that means that tens of millions of Americans will be seeing substantial improvement in their own financial well-being. That’s worth celebrating, but it may unnerve many on Wall Street.Each economic data release has the potential to roil the market if it appears to counter the prevailing view of a more modest recovery. Investors who play down healthy trends in the economy are likely to be caught offsides if the Fed becomes more proactive.Right now, the market is forecasting only a 50-50 chance of a second rate increase by April. Mr. Shepherdson is predicting such a move in March, as unemployment continues to fall and wage gains pick up further.By raising rates, the Fed clearly signals its belief that the economy has recovered from the devastation of 2008. That, too, is great news. But the policy shift will also require investors to make a fairly significant attitude adjustment, so don’t be surprised if the ride gets bumpy.Advertisement