AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Aileen Lee, founder and partner of Cowboy Ventures, a venture capital firm, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences for you?A. I’m the firstborn child of parents who immigrated here from China. They came from pretty much nothing in terms of financial resources and education. My dad moved to the United States when he was in high school and was able to go to college and med school, even though he had only been learning English for a couple of years.I’ve heard lots of stories of how many jobs everyone in my family had and how hard they worked. And so I always grew up feeling a lot of gratitude for all the sacrifices and all the hard work they had gone through so that I would not have to work so many jobs. I have a real sense of motivation from wanting to make sure that everything that they went through was worth it.When you were younger, what kind of things did you do outside of class?I grew up in New Jersey and played sports and rode my bike around. It was a really nice time — kids didn’t have cellphones then — and you knew everyone in the town. From a pretty early age, I developed an interest in travel. I told my parents I wanted to live abroad, and they said, “Well, you have to have money to do those things.”I had some friends who had the same interest, so we started lots of little businesses to try to make money. We used to tie-dye T-shirts and sell them to classmates. We used to make egg rolls and sell them at street fairs. I worked at the mall. My parents probably spent more money on the gas driving me to different jobs than I made.Did you have an idea what you wanted to do for a career when you went to college?No. I did not grow up thinking that I wanted to be an engineer. I had read some articles about girls becoming increasingly scientifically illiterate and that girls lacked confidence in their capabilities when it came to quantitative skills. And I just thought that was kind of wrong.I was underprepared academically when I first went to M.I.T., though. It was definitely a rude awakening. But it had a big impact on my career because I realized I could swim with these really smart people. I wound up being president of my class for three years.And after college?I worked at Morgan Stanley as a financial analyst for two years in M.&A., and then I did a third year living in China, just teaching English and kind of riding around on a bicycle with a backpack and studying Chinese. I wanted to reconnect with my Asian roots, then I came back to the States for business school.After graduation, I worked for Gap. In my second year, I was chosen to become chief of staff for Mickey Drexler, the C.E.O. at the time, and just an amazing merchant.I was very fortunate because I was probably the only person at my age and at my level who had the exposure to board-level discussions. I got to understand how he spent his time and see his superpowers and the superpowers of his direct reports.You spent 13 years at Kleiner Perkins before starting your own venture capital firm. I’m sure you’ve spent time with hundreds of founders, trying to assess whether to bet on them. What do you look for?There’s not a formula. I’ve learned that you really cannot judge a book by its cover. You have to get under the hood and spend some quality time with someone to understand what they’re really good at. If you don’t, then you’re only going to back extrovert, Type A people who are really good at selling. And it’s not clear that that’s a requirement for building a great company. You could be a creative genius or a product genius, or you might have an insight into a market that is really special but you’re not that good at explaining it.Sometimes you just know in the first five minutes when you meet someone. Your heart is beating faster, you love the way they’re describing something, they really understand the market and have an insight and approach to solving a problem for customers that no one has thought of before. That’s a no-brainer, but that only happens a couple of times a year.The next category is the harder one where the founders, especially at the seed stage, haven’t figured everything out yet. The fun part is figuring out whether the C.E.O. has enough of the raw material for the long haul. And so I ask questions like, “What do you think you’re really good at and where do you have areas where you want to grow or where you might have blind spots?” And have they even thought about those questions before?Other questions?I like to talk about how, in a group setting, people often take on different roles — someone’s the curmudgeon, someone’s the class clown, someone’s the consensus builder. And then I’ll ask what role they usually play in a group dynamic like that.What career and life advice do you give to aspiring entrepreneurs?First, I don’t think starting a company should be a goal. It really has to come from a place of having an insight about a problem that you personally have a connection to, or a problem that you see customers are having where you feel like you’ve got a mousetrap that’s much better, not marginally better, than what’s out there already.Starting a company and being a founder is really hard, and most companies fail. You really have to have a deep commitment and belief in it and be willing to see it through many ups and downs.I’m often skeptical of people who say, “I’ve decided to start something, and I’ve spent the last year getting a lot of different ideas and I’ve settled on this one.” I just don’t think that’s the right formula.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement