By THE NEW YORK TIMESDEC. 6, 2015
Here is what to look out for this week:Ministers from the eurozone meet on Monday afternoon to discuss further funding for Greece and to review a loan program for Ireland. The focus is most likely to be on Greece, and on how soon the government in Athens can unlock a payment of 1 billion euros. But no decisions on the payment were expected. The Eurogroup should be joined on Tuesday by finance ministers from European Union member states outside the eurozone. The agenda items for that meeting include a discussion on how to close corporate tax loopholes and a proposal for a European system to share the cost of protecting savers during banking crises. —James Kanter The fate of Staples’s more than $6 billion proposed acquisition of its rival office supplier Office Depot may be decided by Tuesday. That’s the deadline set by the Federal Trade Commission in October for deciding whether the deal would produce an anticompetitive combination. The last time the two companies tried to combine, in 1996, they were blocked. The F.T.C. may also decide to extend its review of the deal. —Leslie PickerHome Depot will hold an analyst and investor conference on Tuesday morning, when it is expected to lay out its three-year strategic vision. The presentation follows strong third-quarter results last month from the retailer, which reported that same-store sales rose 7.3 percent compared with the same period last year. The company also posted net earnings of $1.36 a share, beating analysts’ expectations. Those numbers have helped ease concerns about the rebounding financial health of the American consumer. —Rachel Abrams The supervisory board of Volkswagen will meet at company headquarters in Wolfsburg, Germany, on Wednesday and is expected to receive an update on an in-house investigation into the emissions cheating scandal. Matthias Müller, the Volkswagen chief executive, has said it will take several more months to reach final conclusions about who was responsible for the software designed to provide misleading pollution readings. But he has said he would provide an interim report. —Jack EwingAdvertisementThe week will be a big one for central bank watchers in Britain as the Bank of England releases the minutes of the November meeting of its Financial Policy Committee on Wednesday and announces on Thursday its monthly decision on whether to raise a crucial interest rate. In its semiannual financial stability report last week, the committee identified several potential risks to the stability of the financial system in Britain, including a global economic environment that remains “challenging” and strong growth in so-called buy-to-let lending, where investors take out loans to buy rental properties. On Thursday, the bank’s Monetary Policy Committee is expected to leave the benchmark rate steady at 0.5 percent, where it has been since March 2009. —Chad Bray Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Senate Special Committee on Aging will hold a hearing on Wednesday to examine sudden spikes in the prices of older pharmaceuticals. These include Turing Pharmaceuticals’ overnight increase to $750 per pill from $13.50 for a 62-year-old drug that treats a parasitic infection. The committee, headed by Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, with Claire McCaskill of Missouri, the top Democrat, requested information last month from four companies that acquire the rights to neglected drugs and then substantially increase prices. These include Turing and Retrophin, both of which were founded by the former hedge fund manager Martin Shkreli. Also asked was Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, whose stock has plummeted on concerns about its pricing practices and its now-severed relationship with a mail-order pharmacy. The executives of the drug companies are not expected to testify. Rather, the hearing, which is described as the first of a series on the matter, is scheduled to get testimony from academic experts and the chief executive of a trade group representing pharmacy benefit managers. —Andrew PollackAdvertisementThe European Commission will unveil proposals on Wednesday to allow people across the region to gain access to digital content like movies on Netflix when they travel beyond their national borders. Currently, access to digital content cannot be gained outside a person’s home country. The rules, which will come into force in early 2017, are part of a long-awaited copyright overhaul that could also force the likes of Google to pay publishers when they include articles in Google News, its online news aggregation service. —Mark Scott Retail sales numbers for November, due from the Commerce Department on Friday, are expected to show a stronger rebound in consumer spending and to give the Fed further impetus to raise interest rates this month. Economists expect overall retail sales to have climbed 0.3 percent, compared with 0.1 percent the previous month, spurred by higher spending on cars and homes. Some apparel retailers are suffering this holiday season, however, as unseasonably warm weather across much of the country has hurt sales of winter coats and boots. —Hiroko Tabuchi On Friday morning, the University of Michigan will report the preliminary results of its survey of consumer sentiment for December. Consumer attitudes improved in November, and economists are expecting another rise in the index. Besides a rebounding stock market, falling gas prices and a healthier job market have also reassured Americans about the economy’s course after a rocky summer and early fall. —Nelson D. Schwartz A version of this article appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.