AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack Ewing, Graham Bowley and Melissa EddyWOLFSBURG, Germany — With Volkswagen’s emissions-cheating scandal nearing an important milestone — the chief executive this week is expected to deliver his first public update on VW’s internal investigation — some critics doubt Germany’s willingness to be tough on the automaker.Earlier this year, Volkswagen admitted to installing “defeat devices” in more than 11 million diesel vehicles so that their engines temporarily ran cleaner when being tested for pollution. The scheme, exposed by regulators in the United States, has spawned investigations and lawsuits around the world.One of the main European investigations is being conducted by the German Transport Ministry, although there is concern about government reluctance to take on one of the country’s most important companies — one that employs nearly 280,000 people in Germany and is a symbol of the nation’s economic success. Cars and trucks are the nation’s biggest export.“I don’t have confidence it will be a tough investigation,” said Caren Lay, a leader of the Left Party, an opposition party that has been critical of VW’s crisis leadership but generally supportive of the automaker because of the company’s strong relationship with labor and unions.At the same time, among the German public there are signs of resentment and skepticism toward the United States, where VW’s cheating was exposed. Even if Volkswagen cars were programmed to conceal their emissions of harmful nitrogen oxide, that view goes, America is still the land of gas guzzlers.“There is this general notion that the U.S. is overstating the case in order to damage one of the major competitors of the U.S. carmakers,” said Nils Stieglitz, a professor at the Frankfurt School of Finance who studies corporate strategy.A satirical video produced recently by ZDF, a publicly funded broadcaster, captured some of this sentiment. The video begins with an announcer intoning, “We interrupt this broadcast for an official threat to autoland Germany from the United States of America.”What follows is a montage of American pickup trucks splashing through mud bogs and spewing black smoke. There is a shot of women in bikinis firing guns, in line with stereotypes of Americans as lovers of weapons and big cars.Volkswagen admitted that 11 million of its vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat on emissions tests. This is how the technology works and what it now means for vehicle owners.The announcer says sarcastically: “American cars — not manipulated. For the good of the environment.”On Thursday, Matthias Müller, the chief executive of Volkswagen, is expected to present an interim report on the company’s internal inquiry. It has been nearly three months since the Environmental Protection Agency in the United States first announced VW’s violations. Mr. Müller has said previously it will take several months or more before VW’s internal auditors present their final conclusions.Both the Environmental Protection Agency and the Justice Department in the United States are conducting their own investigations. That puts some pressure on the German authorities to move more quickly or risk being upstaged if investigators in the United States produce results first.“We’re working intensively to shed light on the manipulation,” Alexander Dobrindt, the German transport minister, said in a statement. There has been some action recently. Last week, in a setback for VW, the arm of the German Transport Ministry that regulates motor vehicles definitively stated that it considered VW’s emissions-cheating software to be an illegal “defeat device” under European rules. Previously, Volkswagen had argued that it was not technically a defeat device.Separately, prosecutors in Munich who specialize in economic crimes last week took over responsibility for part of the investigation involving Volkswagen’s Audi division. The Munich prosecutors have more resources and experience than those in Ingolstadt, Audi’s home base, who had been handling the investigation.German prosecutors in the past have been known to aggressively investigate homegrown corporate icons. Almost a decade ago, a different team of Munich prosecutors pursued claims that Siemens, one of that city’s largest employers, engaged in bribery of foreign officials in order to win contracts. Siemens admitted guilt and paid fines of about $1.6 billion. Volkswagen has hired Jones Day, an American law firm with offices in Germany, to conduct its internal inquiry of how the illegal software was installed in 11 million diesel vehicles. About 500,000 of those vehicles were sold in the United States, with most of the rest sold in Europe.The internal inquiry showed some results last month when Volkswagen revealed it had also understated carbon dioxide emission levels on some cars in Europe. The disclosure was hailed by Mr. Müller and German politicians as proof that they were serious about finding out how the cheating occurred.About 50 Volkswagen employees have volunteered information under an amnesty program that protects whistle-blowers from being fired.The company has also suspended eight managers — six at Volkswagen and two at the Audi division — including several of the top executives in charge of engine development. On Friday, Ulrich Hackenberg, a member of the Audi management board who played a key role in designing Volkswagen engines in recent years, became the first of the eight managers to resign.Jörg Bode, a leader of the Free Democratic Party in the State Parliament of Lower Saxony — where VW has its headquarters — and a former member of the Volkswagen supervisory board, said he thought many local politicians, as well as people inside Volkswagen, hoped the scandal would go away by itself.“They’re still hoping it will die down,” Mr. Bode said.German prosecutors in Braunschweig, a city near Volkswagen’s headquarters in Wolfsburg, are investigating possible criminal wrongdoing, working with a 20-member police team based in Hanover and coordinating with the Munich prosecutors. The team has seized computers and documents from the company’s headquarters and has interviewed witnesses.Besides pursuing possible fraud charges in connection with manipulation of emissions tests, the prosecutors are investigating possible tax evasion. By understating carbon dioxide emissions for 800,000 vehicles, Volkswagen allowed its customers to potentially collect tax incentives from European governments to which they were not entitled.The investigations are expected to take many months. No arrests have been made.Mr. Bode said he was confident that prosecutors would conduct an impartial investigation. But he noted the absurdity of having government prosecutors investigate a company that is partly owned by the government, particularly when one of the accusations is tax evasion. The state of Lower Saxony owns 20 percent of Volkswagen, and any eventual fines could affect profits at a company that is one of the biggest contributors to state tax revenue.The closeness between the government and Volkswagen is underlined, critics say, by Volkswagen’s use of a law firm, SZA Schilling, Zutt & Anschütz, to fight claims by shareholders. One of the firm’s partners is also a member of Parliament for Chancellor Angela Merkel’s party.In an email, the lawyer, Stephan Harbarth, said the Volkswagen case was being run by another partner who had a long-term relationship with the company. He said his own work in Parliament was unrelated to Volkswagen. “Thus, a conflict of interest does not exist,” Mr. Harbarth said.The Transport Ministry’s investigating commission is being led by a longtime ministry official, Michael Odenwald. Some critics questioned whether he should lead the inquiry, given that he served at the ministry during the years when, they said, the German government helped build a testing process that failed to catch Volkswagen’s cheating. “He is someone who belongs to the system,” said Oliver Krischer, a Green politician. The ministry declined to comment on Mr. Odenwald or to make him available for an interview. Advertisement