AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.22 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.48 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.18 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:  MONDAYKing County, Wash., $175.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYChandler, Ariz., $70 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Hempstead, N.Y., $67.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. Las Vegas, $164.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New York State Urban Development Corporation, $1.14 billion of revenue bonds. Competitive. Newport News, Va., $53.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Puyallup School District, Wash., $70.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. WEDNESDAYClemson University, S.C., $191 million of higher education revenue bonds. Competitive. ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKBrighton School District, Colo., $160 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Clayton, N.M., $57.3 million of jail project improvement and refinancing revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Columbus, Ohio, $155 million of sewerage system revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Cuyahoga County, Ohio, $60.5 million of excise tax revenue bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets.Fulton County, Ga., Development Authority, $51.5 million of arts center project revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia, $200 million of bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Hartnell Community College District, Calif., $88.9 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Illinois State Toll Highway Authority, $340 million of revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Indiana Municipal Power Agency, $385 million of power supply system revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. Kaweah Delta Health Care District, Calif., $97 million of debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.Missouri Environmental Improvement and Energy Resources Authority, $106.1 million of refinancing revenue bonds. Jefferies.Metropolitan Nashville Airport Authority, $197 million of debt securities. Raymond James.New Haven, $53.8 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.New Jersey Health Care Facilities Financing Authority, $266.7 million of revenue and refunding bonds. Morgan Stanley.New York City Housing Development Corporation, $180.7 million of multifamily housing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York City Housing Development Corporation, $197.3 million of multifamily housing revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.New York State Housing Finance Agency, $145 million of affordable housing revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Northwest Local School District, Ohio, $66.8 million of school improvement general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Park Creek, Colo., Metropolitan District, $252.7 million of revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Phoenix Industrial Development Authority, $84.7 million of revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Shreveport, La., $120 million of water and sewer system revenue and refinancing bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Water Replenishment District of Southern California, $160 million of debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.Southwestern Illinois Development Authority, $50.8 million of revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Union County, N.C., $50 million of general obligation bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Virgin Islands Public Finance Authority, $91.2 million of grant anticipation revenue bonds. Jefferies.Advertisement