By JONATHAN SOBLEDEC. 7, 2015
TOKYO — Japan’s latest recession turns out not to have been a recession at all.The government said on Tuesday that the economy grew at a relatively robust pace last quarter, reversing a more pessimistic estimate it published three weeks ago.Output in Japan, Asia’s second-largest economy, expanded at an annualized rate of 1 percent in the three months through September, according to the revised assessment by the Cabinet Office. The office had originally said the economy contracted by 0.8 percent.The latest report, which reflected more buoyant data on business investment and a rosier view of consumer spending, painted a broadly positive picture of the economy’s recent performance. Estimates for previous quarters were also lifted, showing stronger gains and less severe reversals.The report could relieve the pressure on Japan’s central bank to do more to support growth. Some economists had been predicting that the bank would soon be forced to expand a stimulus program under which it injects trillions of yen into the economy by buying up government bonds.AdvertisementThe strategy is meant to lower borrowing costs and encourage consumers and businesses to spend, but the apparent recession, and an accompanying decline in consumer prices, had raised questions about its effectiveness.AdvertisementThe report also could cheer Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who gained office three years ago on a pledge to ramp up growth. So far his “Abenomics” program, in which the central bank’s stimulus efforts have played a crucial role, has lifted the stock market and helped multinational companies by lowering the yen’s exchange rate. But it has been less successful in passing the gains on to average workers.Sharp revisions to Japanese gross domestic product numbers are not unusual, though the change announced on Tuesday was larger than some in the past. The government’s first estimates are announced before data on certain kinds of economic activity are fully available — notably changes in corporate investment and inventories.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In an economy where trend growth is only slightly above zero, like Japan’s, revisions can more easily make the difference between an increase in output and a decline.The latest numbers will be subject to further review in the future, though revisions tend to grow smaller as time passes.The Japanese stock market opened higher after the report was announced, but quickly gave up those gains, possibly reflecting lower expectations for fresh central bank stimulus. In late morning trading, the Nikkei 225 average was down roughly 0.2 percent.In the biggest change from the initial estimate last month, businesses appeared more confident in their production plans. According to the revised gross domestic product data, spending on new factories and equipment by businesses rose at an annualized rate of 0.6 percent last quarter, compared with an initial estimate of a 1.3 percent decline.Household spending increased 0.5 percent, slightly more than the first estimate of 0.4 percent, and businesses reduced their inventories less aggressively than initially believed.Through the first three quarters of the year, the economy grew at an average rate of about 1.6 percent, according to the latest data — roughly twice its typical pace of growth over the past two decades. The performance was volatile, however: Output contracted 0.5 percent in the second quarter after surging 4.4 percent in the first.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Japan’s Economy Shows Growth in Third Quarter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.