AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel E. SlotnikRay Gandolf, a genial sportscaster for CBS who went on to become co-anchor of the acclaimed but short-lived historical series “Our World” for ABC, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan. He was 85.His family confirmed the death, but did not specify a cause.An experienced actor, Mr. Gandolf broke into television news to support his family in the early 1960s. He worked for years as a news writer at CBS before he started reporting sports scores and anchoring segments in 1974.In 1979 he became the first sportscaster for “Sunday Morning,” the CBS News program anchored by Charles Kuralt.“Compared to the blow-dried, macho chest-thumpers who populate sportscasting, Gandolf is the Charles Kuralt of the locker room, all folksy charm and offbeat insight,” an article in TV Guide said.He left CBS to become the weekend sports anchor for ABC in the early 1980s, and was co-host of “Our World” with Linda Ellerbee for a year starting in 1986. That program used archival footage and interviews with people who had witnessed historical events to recreate the feel of a particular time.“If you have any recollection of the American pastiche during World War II, watch ‘Our World’ at 8 o’clock tonight,” John Corry wrote in The New York Times in 1986. “If you have no recollection, watch it anyway. It is living, breathing history.”Mr. Gandolf, Ms. Ellerbee and Richard Gerdau won a writing Emmy Award in 1987 for an “Our World” episode, but many in broadcasting thought the program was doomed from the start. ABC broadcast the program on Thursday nights, at the same time as “The Cosby Show,” the hugely popular NBC sitcom.“Our World” went off the air in 1987. The Los Angeles Times reported that year that ABC had received at least 7,300 letters asking that it bring the program back, more than the network had ever received for a news program. Mr. Gandolf retired in the early 1990s.Raymond L. Gandolf (the “L” does not stand for anything, his daughter said) was born on April 2, 1930, in Norwalk, Ohio. He received a bachelor’s degree in speech from Northwestern University in the early 1950s, then traveled to New York City to work on the stage.He married Blanche Cholet in the mid-1950s. They had five daughters, Alexandra, Jessica, Victoria, Amanda and Susanna, and five grandchildren. They all survive him.Advertisement