By JACKIE CALMESDEC. 7, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The announcement on the Export-Import Bank’s website proclaimed in big blue letters “Ex-Im Bank Reauthorized” — but the fight is not over yet for the government’s embattled export credit agency.The 81-year-old agency that helps finance many American exports reopened for new business on Monday, ending a five-month hiatus forced by conservative Republicans who have condemned the bank as a prime example of corporate welfare and so-called crony capitalism. President Obama late Friday signed legislation tucked into a highway bill that extended the agency’s life four years, through September 2019.Yet an obstacle remains: With three empty seats on its five-member board, the bank lacks a quorum. Until Mr. Obama nominates members, and the Republican-controlled Senate confirms them, Ex-Im Bank can only approve small export deals, not the big orders for aircraft, satellites and major manufacturing equipment the bank is best known for — leaving the likes of Boeing, General Electric and Caterpillar in limbo.For opponents of the bank, “this is again their chance to try to kill Ex-Im. It’s not fully resurrected yet,” said Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio, a supporter of the agency and the most senior Democrat on the Senate banking committee, which oversees it.AdvertisementWhen the bank closed to new business after June 30, with its reauthorization blocked by House conservatives, about 200 transactions worth more than $9 billion were stopped in the pipeline, said Fred P. Hochberg, the chairman of the Ex-Im Bank since the start of the Obama administration.AdvertisementThe White House will send nominees for the board to the Senate soon. With Mr. Hochberg and the agency’s vice chairwoman, Wanda Felton, the only members on the board, there are vacancies for another Democrat and two Republican appointees. The two Republicans to be named did not want to be announced before the bank’s future was assured, said people with knowledge of the issue.The confirmation question means more work for the major corporations that bankrolled the lobbying effort to revive the bank. Senate Republicans have bottled up a number of Obama nominees, including picks for the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department’s office for terrorist financing, for reasons generally unrelated to the specific nominations.While people in both parties predicted Republicans would not block the nominations, others were not so sure.Mr. Brown said in an interview, “We’ve seen a dysfunctional Senate in recent months when it comes to nominations, and a banking committee that has not voted on any single appointee from the Obama administration since January.”Most bank supporters nonetheless have been in a celebratory mood, having prevailed in a fight over the agency’s renewal that was one of the more memorable legislative face-offs of recent years.In an interview, Mr. Hochberg chose to emphasize what his agency can do again for American businesses, even without a board quorum: accept and review any applications, no matter how large, for loans, loan guarantees and credit insurance for their foreign buyers; provide working capital needed for small businesses to buy material to fill export orders; and approve transactions that do not exceed $10 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The monthslong impasse, he said, “certainly hurt a lot of small businesses,” and created opportunities for scores of countries with export credit agencies to promote their products. “The Chinese said this was a good thing, and the Indians publicly said, ‘This is more business for India,’ ” Mr. Hochberg added. During the hiatus, three satellite manufacturing deals went to Canada and France.From the banking agency’s creation during the New Deal to 2012, Congress reauthorized its charter with bipartisan ease, typically for five years at a time. Then Tea Party supporters made the agency of just over 400 employees a target of their demands for smaller government and markets free of government intervention.AdvertisementThe bank’s opponents were allied with deep-pocketed conservative groups, and by this year they had gained strength among onetime bank supporters — including most congressional Republican leaders. Representative Jeb Hensarling of Texas, chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, refused to have his committee consider legislation for the bank since a majority of Republicans on his panel opposed it. (A majority of all House Republicans were in favor.)It took a rare procedural gambit — a so-called discharge petition from a bipartisan majority of the House — to wrest a bill from Mr. Hensarling’s committee and send it to the floor, where it ultimately was passed last week. House and Senate proponents were able to attach the measure to the more popular highway construction bill that they knew would clear Congress.“American workers should be on a level playing field with competitors around the world. We brought the Export-Import Bank back to life so more American made products — not jobs — move overseas,” said Senator Mark Kirk of Illinois, a Republican on the Senate banking committee, who defied its chairman, Senator Richard Shelby of Alabama, to push for the bank’s renewal.Mr. Shelby and Mr. Kirk, both of whom face re-election next year, reflect the variable politics that split Republicans in the Ex-Im Bank debate.Mr. Shelby, who came out against the bank after years of supporting it, does not want to encourage conservative opposition ahead of Alabama’s Republican primary.Mr. Kirk, considered perhaps the most endangered Senate incumbent, must worry more about the November election in Democrat-leaning Illinois; he needs support from moderate voters, business groups and the employees of companies in his state that rely on the bank’s financing.Despite the Ex-Im Bank’s lack of a quorum, opponents have conceded defeat. “Ending this bank was a huge win for free-market conservatives, and resuscitating it now represents a major blow to the conservative movement and to conservatives’ credibility in ridding the federal government of favoritism for special interests,” the conservative group Heritage Action for America said in a statement.Mr. Hensarling, however, suggested the fight will resume one day. “Given that nearly all Democrats and about half the Republicans support Ex-Im, I didn’t expect to win this round of the fight, but I certainly wasn’t going to back away from it,” Mr. Hensarling said in a statement. He added, “I know if I was the C.E.O. of a Fortune 50 corporation, I would think twice before building my long-term business plan on Ex-Im.”Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Im Bank Is Reopened, but Big Loans Are Stalled.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.