By EMILY STEELDEC. 7, 2015
Addressing concerns about the health of Sumner M. Redstone, Viacom’s 92-year-old executive chairman, its chief executive said on Monday that Mr. Redstone had an “incredible will to live and an enjoyment of life with some physical disabilities.”Philippe P. Dauman, the chief, said that he talked with Mr. Redstone several times a week and met with him frequently. He said that Mr. Redstone had physical ailments that required him to be under medical supervision, but that he remained in control of decisions related to his health.“Contrary to what some people suggested, no one other than Sumner Redstone is making health care decisions for him as it relates to his physical condition,” Mr. Dauman said.Speaking at the UBS Global Media and Communications Conference, Mr. Dauman called recent talk on Mr. Redstone’s condition “disturbing.” Mr. Dauman added that he was seeking to “get away from some of the hyperventilation that has occurred over the last week or so.”AdvertisementHe was alluding to the attention given to a lawsuit filed nearly two weeks ago by a former companion of Mr. Redstone that challenges the media mogul’s mental competence. The suit portrays Mr. Redstone as unable to make decisions on his own care and to reliably communicate with others, and it offers embarrassing claims about his physical condition and things like his sexual appetite.AdvertisementLawyers for Mr. Redstone have asked a judge to dismiss the suit, calling the claims “riddled with lies.” A Viacom director, meanwhile, has said that Mr. Redstone was “mentally capable.”In his address Monday, Mr. Dauman also requested a “sense of humanity and decency” from people talking and writing about Mr. Redstone, calling him “someone who has accomplished a whole lot and created a lot of value over his life.”Mr. Redstone controls about 80 percent of the voting stock in Viacom and CBS through his private holding company, National Amusements, and is executive chairman of both Viacom and CBS. The lawsuit has prompted broader questions on whether Mr. Redstone should continue at the helm of the media empire, and on the future of the companies. Industry analysts have said that Viacom or CBS could be sold after Mr. Redstone dies.Mr. Dauman also addressed succession plans for the Viacom and CBS, which he said Mr. Redstone put in place more than two decades ago to “ensure continuity.” If Mr. Redstone dies or is deemed to lack capacity, his stake in National Amusements will be held by a trust, and voting control will go to seven trustees made up of two family members and five nonfamily members.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The trustees include Mr. Dauman and Shari Redstone, Mr. Redstone’s daughter who owns 20 percent of National Amusements. Mr. Dauman has also been designated by Mr. Redstone to be put in charge of his health care decisions, if needed.“The group of trustees would have to make fiduciary decisions for the benefit of the trust and the companies it controls,” Mr. Dauman said. “No one individual will control the trust. It will operate by a majority vote. There is no individual, and it’s by design.”Last week, one of the largest shareholders in the companies raised questions about Mr. Redstone’s health and his ability to fulfill his duties. Mario Gabelli, whose investment firm, Gamco, is the second-largest voting shareholder in Viacom and CBS, said last week that if Mr. Redstone “got paid anything in 2015, it would have a hard time passing any smell test” based on the descriptions in the suit.On Monday, Mr. Gabelli said that Mr. Dauman “did what he was supposed to do” in addressing the structure of what will happen when Mr. Redstone leaves the company.AdvertisementLeslie R. Moonves, the chief executive of CBS, said that the drama surrounding Mr. Redstone was neither distracting the company nor impeding its business. He reiterated Mr. Dauman’s comments about Mr. Redstone’s ownership stake going to a trust and said that the company had a strong management team and board of directors.“Nothing is going to change,” Mr. Moonves said during a session at the UBS conference later in the afternoon. “We are very secure.”“I hope Sumner lives to be 150,” he added.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Viacom Chief Addresses Concerns on Redstone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.