AdvertisementSupported byBy William GrimesCarole Little, a Los Angeles fashion designer whose sportswear found an eager audience among working women looking for affordable style, died on Sept. 19 at her home in San Diego. She was 80.The cause was cancer, her daughter, Jennifer Heft, said.In 1974, Ms. Little and her future husband, Leonard Rabinowitz, started California Fashion Industries with $20,000 borrowed from his parents. The company, which initially sold clothing under the label Saint Tropez West, lost $250,000 in its first year.A trip to France turned out to be an eye-opener. Everywhere in Paris, Ms. Little saw shop assistants who somehow managed to put together chic outfits on limited budgets. “Instead of all these throwaway clothes, they would wear a very expensive designer blouse and jeans,” she told The St. Louis Post-Dispatch in 1993. “The next day, it would be the same blouse with different accessories.” This approach, she decided, could do wonders for working women in the United States, who were searching in vain for stylish yet affordable clothes that could make the transition from day to evening. Ms. Little soon hit pay dirt when she modified a man’s loosefitting crepe de Chine shirt, with epaulets and two front pockets, which she had bought for herself in Paris. Priced at $68 and sold in six colors, it was paired with linen pants, a tapered skirt and an oversize jacket. Sales took off after the fashion model Lauren Hutton wore it on the cover of People magazine in 1975. By 1979, the year Jane Fonda wore Ms. Little’s signature shirt in the movie “The China Syndrome,” California Fashion Industries recorded retail sales of $30 million. By 1994, with its clothes in more than 2,000 stores including Bloomingdale’s and Saks in New York, sales reached $375 million. Mary Carole Lenski was born on Sept. 27, 1934, in Chicago, and grew up in San Francisco and Los Angeles. Her father was a shoe executive at Sears.After earning a bachelor’s degree in English at U.C.L.A., she studied fashion design at Los Angeles Trade-Technical College. She started in the fashion business as a secretary at Rose Marie Reid, a swimsuit company, where she married her boss, James Little. It was her second marriage.While designing junior sportswear at Jasper Bros., she met Mr. Rabinowitz, her division manager, and the two decided to strike out on their own.In the 1980s, Ms. Little’s casually chic styles in fabrics like silk linen and wool gabardine, and her bold, floral silk prints, helped define the decade. They were staples in the wardrobe of Laura Holt, Pierce Brosnan’s detective partner, played by Stephanie Zimabalist, on the television series “Remington Steele.” On the side, Ms. Little designed for celebrities like Joan Collins, Dyan Cannon and Donna Summer. Ms. Little and Mr. Rabinowitz briefly ventured into the film business, producing the 1997 horror thriller “Anaconda,” starring Ice Cube and Jennifer Lopez.In 2000, after several struggling years, California Fashion Industries merged with Chorus Line, a maker of moderately priced junior and misses labels, to form CL Fashion. The new company closed its doors in a matter of months.A year later, Ms. Little and Mr. Rabinowitz, now divorced, started Studio CL, a fashion consultancy to help manufacturers and retailers start new lines or freshen up old ones. She retired in 2013. In addition to her daughter, she is survived by two granddaughters.Advertisement