By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINDEC. 7, 2015
The criminal case against three former leaders of the once-mighty Dewey & LeBoeuf law firm is shrinking fast.A Manhattan prosecutor on Monday moved to dismiss dozens of charges against the defendants related to falsified business records, meaning that a planned retrial of two of those defendants would be considerably shorter than an earlier six-month trial that ended with a hung jury in October.The prosecutor also confirmed in court that Steven H. Davis, the law firm’s former chairman, would not be retried along with his two former colleagues, and that the case against Mr. Davis would soon be resolved.Peirce Moser, an assistant prosecutor working for Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, declined to discuss in detail how the case against Mr. Davis would be settled.AdvertisementBut a lawyer for Mr. Davis, speaking outside the courtroom, said he and prosecutors were negotiating a deferred prosecution agreement in which the former Dewey chairman would not admit any wrongdoing.Advertisement“Mr. Davis is relieved the people are agreeing to a deferred prosecution,” said the lawyer, Elkan Abramowitz, to reporters outside the courtroom in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan. “We believe he never should have been indicted in the first place.”The defendants are scheduled to next appear in court on Jan. 8 before Justice Robert M. Stolz. The terms of the deferred prosecution agreement are expected to be disclosed at that time.The decision not to retry Mr. Davis, 62, is significant, given that he was an architect of the 2007 merger of Dewey Ballantine and LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene & MacRae, which created a firm with more than 1,200 lawyers. The law firm collapsed in bankruptcy in the spring of 2012.In announcing the filing of criminal charges against Mr. Davis and four others in March 2014, Mr. Vance said the defendants had overseen a “massive effort to cook the books at Dewey & LeBoeuf.” He added that the scheme “contributed to the collapse of a prestigious international law firm, which forced thousands of people out of jobs and left creditors holding the bag on hundreds of millions of dollars owed to them.”The charges against the Dewey defendants represent one of the most significant white-collar cases brought by Mr. Vance during his tenure in office.Now, there is even a chance that the two other former Dewey executives who were tried along with Mr. Davis this year — Stephen DiCarmine, 59, and Joel Sanders, 57 — may also never be tried again.Mr. Moser, in a move that surprised Justice Stolz and the lawyers for the defendants, said that Mr. Vance was prepared to offer plea deals to Mr. DiCarmine, Mr. Sanders and a fourth defendant, Zachary Warren, a former low-level employee at Dewey who has yet to go to trial.AdvertisementMr. Moser said the office would allow Mr. DiCarmine to serve 500 hours of community service if he pleaded guilty to a single felony count of scheme to defraud, and would demand that Mr. Sanders serve a term of one year to three years in state prison in return for pleading guilty to a charge of scheme to defraud.As for Mr. Warren, prosecutors are prepared to let him plead guilty to a misdemeanor charge in return for performing 200 hours of community service.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Joan Vollero, a spokeswoman for Mr. Vance, said in a statement: “The offers presented to the four defendants at this stage are fair and appropriate. The dismissal of some of the less serious charges in the indictments is an effort to streamline the cases, based, in part, on valuable feedback from jurors in the first trial.”Lawyers for the three men indicated outside the courtroom that their clients were not willing to immediately accept the plea deals, which were offered by Mr. Moser just before the court hearing finished. But the willingness of prosecutors to resolve the matter with sentences that would not require jail time, at least for Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Warren, may leave the door open to further plea negotiations.If the case against Mr. Warren, 31, goes to trial, it is scheduled to start on March 14. The case against him has been pared back considerably as well.Still to be resolved are pending motions from lawyers for Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders to dismiss the remaining charges of grand larceny, scheme to defraud, conspiracy and state securities law violations that the jury could not reach a verdict on after 21 days of deliberation.Justice Stolz told the lawyers that he had some questions about the grand larceny charges filed against the defendants, and whether Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders had the necessary intent to steal money from the banks and insurers that provided financing to Dewey.Prosecutors have argued that the Dewey executives had the intent to commit grand larceny because they knew the law firm could never pay back the hundreds of millions of dollars it had borrowed from lenders and creditors.Justice Stolz, however, wondered whether the knowledge that a debt could never be repaid was sufficient to establish “larcenous intent.”Lawyers for the defendants and the prosecutors are expected to file additional legal briefs on that issue in advance of the Jan. 8 hearing. If Justice Stoltz were to dismiss some of the grand larceny charges, it would further whittle down the prosecution’s case at any future trial.AdvertisementMr. Davis, Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders also face a separate Securities and Exchange Commission lawsuit.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Prosecutor in Dewey Case Moves to Dismiss Dozens of Charges.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.