By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDDEC. 7, 2015
Carl C. Icahn, unhappy with Pep Boys’ decision to sell itself to Bridgestone, the tire company, is fighting back with his own takeover offer.Mr. Icahn, the billionaire investor, disclosed on Monday that he had offered to buy Pep Boys, the car parts retailer, for $15.50 a share in cash, topping the $15 a share Bridgestone had bid.Mr. Icahn’s offer casts some doubt on the deal by Pep Boys, formally known as Pep Boys — Manny Moe & Jack, to sell itself to Bridgestone, announced in late October. That proposed transaction would have added about 800 stores to the Bridgestone network of 2,200 tire and car service centers.That takeover had lifted the spirits of Pep Boys’s shareholders, many of whom had become frustrated with roughly flat revenue in the last four years. The money manager Mario Gabelli had threatened to wage a fight over the company’s board before settling in June.Yet even the Bridgestone offer, which represented a premium of nearly 24 percent to the company’s previous closing price, apparently has failed to win over major investors, including Mr. Icahn.AdvertisementIn a letter to Pep Boys, an executive at his investment vehicle argued that Monday’s offer was “clearly superior” and was not contingent on due diligence or financing.AdvertisementMr. Icahn disclosed on Friday that he owned about 12 percent of the retailer, making him the second-largest shareholder behind Mr. Gabelli’s firm.In a news release issued before Mr. Icahn’s latest disclosure, Pep Boys said that he had previously refused to raise his own takeover bid for the company above $13.50 a share, and until that point had not presented any alternative offer.Shares of Pep Boys were up 2.5 percent in midafternoon trading on Monday, after Mr. Icahn disclosed his offer.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: More Pep.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.