AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerProposed changes to an obscure Depression-era law are causing a ruckus among the Wall Street investment funds that are battling over the debt restructuring at Caesars Entertainment and other companies.Tucked away in the omnibus spending bill in Washington is an amendment to that law, the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, that critics say would hand a victory to Apollo Global Management, which owns the casino company, at the expense of some bondholders.Hedge funds and other bondholders have been at odds in the Caesars restructuring, which concerns about $10 billion in bond indentures. Six other restructurings could also be affected if the amendment is approved, including that of for-profit college operator Education Management Corporation, which is backed by the private equity giant Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company. Andrew Milgram, the managing partner of Marblegate Asset Management, a bondholder in the Education Management case, said in a statement, “It is a great concern to us that a 79-year-old law would be amended retroactively, without legislative review or public debate, by the back-room lobbying efforts of one or two special interest groups.”Bondholders often work with companies to negotiate out-of-court debt restructurings that help the companies avoid bankruptcy. But not all bondholders are involved in those talks, and not all bondholders necessarily agree to deals uniformly.In the case of Caesars and other restructurings, some bondholders have battled over the guarantees they had on their debt and the transfer of certain assets, citing the Trust Indenture Act, which protects creditors from transactions that limit their ability to collect principal or interest payments.The amendment that made its way into the omnibus spending bill aims to make it harder for some bondholders to challenge restructuring arrangements.Just before Thanksgiving, an earlier version of the amendment appeared in highway spending legislation. But that version was not in the highway bill Congress approved last week.Another version of the Trust Indenture amendment was added to the omnibus spending legislation last weekend. Congress must vote on the spending bill by the end of this week. Several people said support for the amendment is coming from the office of Senator Harry Reid, the Nevada Democrat. Calls to Mr. Reid’s office seeking comment were not returned. The current amendment makes the changes retroactive to Dec. 1. The earlier version made them retroactive to any restructuring that had not been approved and completed in court.Several restructurings are still in play that would be affected by the amendment’s fate. It has incited debate on each side of the issue.Courts recently have favored the dissenting bondholders. The cases are being appealed, but passage of the amendment to the Trust Indenture Act would bypass the court proceedings. That has led the funds to complain that powerful private equity interests are trying to alter important aspects of the restructuring process without public debate.Mark J. Roe, a professor at Harvard Law School, said he agreed that the Trust Indenture Act could use changes, like adding a provision that says bondholders should be able to vote on whether to accept a debt modification deal. But, he said, the proposed amendment “isn’t a good result for the bond market in general.”Others say the recent court decisions give bondholders too much leverage in the form of veto power over debt negotiations, which is bound to complicate restructuring efforts and could force more companies into costly Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Advertisement