
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

DEC. 7, 2015
The more complex a system is — the federal tax code, for example — the easier it will be to exploit. The financial markets have become much more fragmented in the last 20 years, which has led the Securities and Exchange Commission to start trying to crack down on those who try to profit from the complexity.But it can be difficult to separate out those who play the loopholes in the system to their advantage from someone engaging in fraud. Just ask any tax lawyer, who will tell you there sometimes is not all that much difference between good planning and improper avoidance.The S.E.C. filed administrative charges last week against twin brothers, Behruz and Shahryar Afshar, and their close friend, Richard F. Kenny IV, over exploiting stock exchange rules to reap more than $2 million. They are accused of using trading strategies to bilk the exchanges out of rebates and avoiding fees for equity options orders that disadvantaged others traders. The question is whether they just pushed against the edge of the rules or crossed over into committing securities fraud.Trading in stocks and options takes place on 11 exchanges and dozens of alternative trading systems that have become so highly automated that most orders are entered and filled in milliseconds. Trading that was once done by telephone and reported on a ticker tape hours later has been transformed into lightening execution by firms looking to exploit price discrepancies of less than a penny.AdvertisementTo deal with the fragmentation in the markets, the S.E.C. issued Regulation NMS in 2005, which requires the execution of orders at the best available price across all markets. Attracting trades to a particular venue requires offering something more than just a good price because everyone has to do that.AdvertisementWhat has developed in the securities markets is the “maker-taker” model for pricing in which exchanges pay rebates to draw orders that add liquidity to the market, called the maker, and impose an access fee, which can be no more than 30 cents per 100 shares, for orders that remove liquidity, the taker. The typical rebate is 20 cents for a 100 share order, so the exchange makes money by seeking out a roughly equal number of maker and taker orders, giving it about 10 cents for each trade of 100 shares.This pricing structure has drawn criticism because it creates a potential conflict of interest for brokers to route customer orders to the market that pays generous rebates, which can result in higher costs for investors even though they get the best price. It has also led to a proliferation of different types of orders that go far beyond the basics of a market or limit order to attract firms to trade there. For example, there are “market to limit” orders or “auction-only” orders intended to draw high-frequency trading firms seeking out rebates to supplement their trading profits.The charges against the Afshar brothers and Mr. Kenny reflect how they played the markets to take advantage of the rebate system. One tactic involved using the rules for filling options orders that give priority to ordinary customers ahead of professional traders and impose lower fees on their trades. The exchanges put this in place because they want to give a small measure of protection to individual investors from the sophisticated firms that look for every slight advantage.Qualifying as a customer means placing no more than 390 options orders per day. If that number is exceeded, then at the end of the quarter the designation of “professional” is attached to the account and its orders do not receive priority treatment.The defendants created two limited liability companies and told their broker that they were separately owned by each of the twin brothers when, according to the S.E.C., Behruz Afshar had an ownership interest in both. One company would engage in heavy trading until it was designated as a professional, and then they would shift their trading to the other to have its orders designated as receiving customer priority. By switching back and forth, they received about $2 million worth of rebates and fee reductions.The second way they generated rebates involved figuring out how to enter large “AON orders,” or all-or-nothing orders, at a price just above or below the current market price that was not displayed to other traders. They would then place a small order on the opposite side to try to attract others to put in similar orders so that their AON order would be filled, then canceling the small order once the larger one was filled. Under the exchange’s rules, this was a “maker” order that qualified for a rebate, generating about $225,000.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The S.E.C. described this as spoofing, a tactic that has recently drawn more attention from market regulators looking to put a stop to practices aimed at fooling others into trading by entering orders with the intent of quickly canceling them to give the impression of greater market activity than actually exists.In November, Michael Coscia was convicted in the Federal District Court in Chicago in the first prosecution for spoofing and faces a prison term for using an algorithm to enter and cancel numerous orders in less than a second.AdvertisementIn spoofing cases, the victims are other traders who were misled by the orders resulting in losses or at least higher costs. But in this case, it is the exchanges that are the immediate victims, even though they are the ones that set up the system of rebates and order types that allowed this to take place.What the Afshars and Mr. Kenny did can be seen in one way as taking “front cuts” – as we used to call it in elementary school – to get their trades executed before others and reap the benefits that come from being first. At what point does that constitute securities fraud rather than just a sharp practice exploiting a gap in programs created by the exchanges to strengthen their own business?The actual trades were not fraudulent because the Afshars and Mr. Kenny completed the transactions, so the exchanges got the liquidity they sought in exchange for the rebates and reduced fees. The S.E.C.’s cases focuses on the tactics used to take advantage of the rebates being offered and priority afforded to smaller investors, not the message sent out by the orders that might have deceived investors about the market.The Afshars and Mr. Kenny figured out a way to make their trading more valuable by using marketing tools employed by the exchanges to increase their volume of transactions. There is no requirement that exchanges provide rebates or allow for so many different order types.Indeed, some question whether rebates skew the market in favor of certain traders to the detriment of ordinary investors. An Another View column in 2014 advocated limiting or even getting rid of the access fee charged for some orders because it has added to the complexity of the markets as exchanges compete for market share. The New York Times reported recently that Investors Exchange, or IEX, which was celebrated in Michael Lewis’s book “Flash Boys,” will not offer rebates and limit the number of order types in an effort to make its market more investor-friendly.The fact that the defendants were able to take advantage of the rules that cost exchanges more than $2 million certainly gives the appearance of being deceptive. One instant message cited by the S.E.C. quotes Behruz Afshar telling another trader that “you should see all the [expletive] we are doing here . . . too funny.”More than anything else, the case focuses on whether going too far in taking advantage of the rules is a violation by customers trolling the markets for any edge. If it does, then this is another warning shot to traders that they must tread carefully when using strategies intended to exploit the market.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »