By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINOCT. 6, 2015
After 13 days of deliberation, the Manhattan jury in the criminal trial of three former executives of the Dewey & LeBoeuf law firm may be at an impasse.On Tuesday afternoon, the jury of seven women and five men sent a note to the judge saying that they were unable to come to a unanimous agreement on a majority of counts against the three men: Steven H. Davis, Stephen DiCarmine and Joel Sanders.They have been on trial since late May. Prosecutors contend the three men — all of whom were trained as lawyers — orchestrated an accounting fraud at the once-prominent New York law firm that collapsed in bankruptcy in May 2012. The three are accused of causing tens of millions of dollars in losses for the banks and insurance firms that provided financing to Dewey.The inability of the jury to reach a unanimous verdict on dozens of criminal counts of grand larceny, scheme to defraud and filing false business records is a potentially unsettling development for one of the signature white-collar cases that have been brought by Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney.AdvertisementThe jury sent out its note shortly after the trial judge, Justice Robert Stolz of New York Supreme Court in Manhattan, had asked prosecution and defense lawyers whether he should instruct the jury about the possibility of reaching a partial verdict on some of the counts facing the defendants.AdvertisementJustice Stolz decided to send the jury home and told them to resume their deliberations in the morning. The judge and the prosecution and defense lawyers will separately discuss on Wednesday how to proceed.Before sending the jurors home, Justice Stolz acknowledged that they had been “working hard” on a “long trial.” The judge said he would give them instructions on how to proceed on Wednesday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One possibility is for the judge to give the jurors what is known as an Allen charge, which essentially directs jurors to go back to the task at hand and keep trying to get a unanimous verdict. Another possibility is for the jurors to be asked to deliver their verdict on any counts on which they have reached agreement.A third possibility is that the jury is hopelessly deadlocked and the judge is forced to declare a mistrial.While the deliberations by the jurors have been unusually long, the trial itself was a marathon, with testimony lasting more than three months. The prosecution called more than 40 witnesses, but the defense took the rare tactic of resting without calling a single one.The jury’s task in reaching a verdict has been complicated by the fact that each defendant was charged with dozens of felony counts, and some of the witness testimony appeared to be stronger against Mr. Sanders, the firm’s former chief financial officer, than against Mr. Davis and Mr. DiCarmine. Mr. Davis was the firm’s chairman and Mr. DiCarmine was the executive director.The unusually long process has clearly taken its toll on the jury. One juror sent out a note on Monday mentioning a visit to the emergency room over the weekend to receive treatment for a bad back after sitting too long in the jury room chairs.During the deliberations, the jury asked for much of the physical evidence introduced at trial, including dozens of internal emails and spreadsheets. But the jury has asked only twice to have trial testimony read back, which some legal experts found unusual given the dozens of witnesses who testified.A version of this article appears in print on October 7, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Dewey Jurors Tell Judge They’re Stuck After 13 Days of Deliberation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.