By CELESTINE BOHLENDEC. 7, 2015
PARIS — The weeks leading up to the United Nations global climate conference here could have been one of the finest hours for France’s ecology movement, which is one of the oldest in Europe and was, for one brief, shining moment, one of the Continent’s most politically successful.That moment came in 2009, when the country’s main green party, Les Verts, scored 16.28 percent of the vote in French elections to the European Parliament, the highest total ever for a French environmental party in any election.Since then, the party, now known as Europe Écologie Les Verts, or E.E.L.V., has imploded. Some of its leading members have split to found a new group, and others are casting about for a political future before French regional elections this month and a presidential vote in 2017.This tumult pushed the E.E.L.V. party off the stage as France was preparing to host the ambitious COP21 climate conference, which is viewed as a chance for President François Hollande and his Socialist government — still loosely allied with the greens — to shine in the international spotlight.AdvertisementFor Daniel Cohn-Bendit, who headed the French ecologists’ list in 2009, the collapse of E.E.L.V. is a painful memory. “We created an incredible hope and then that hope was destroyed,” he recalled in a recent telephone interview.AdvertisementBut Mr. Cohn-Bendit, known for his leading role in the May 1968 student protests in Paris, takes the long view on the influence of the ecologist movement on the climate-change debate.“Old Europe — France included — is deeply conscious of the problem, and about the necessity to do something,” he said. “The software is there; now we have to put in the hardware. The thinking is done; now is the time for doing.”He credits a grab bag of associations, local groups and old-fashioned “militants,” or activists, with having raised consciousness about the environment, food safety and climate change.The movement in France has been helped by such media-savvy personalities as Nicolas Hulot, a television host who is Mr. Hollande’s envoy to the COP21 conference, and José Bové, an activist whose causes have included battling the spread of fast food. Even Pope Francis has had an affect, with his insistence on the need to act on climate issues.“The terrain was prepared and that is what has allowed society to move forward,” Mr. Cohn-Bendit said.One result is that a large majority of citizens in most European countries — from 64 percent to 82 percent — blame human activity for global warming, compared with only 54 percent in the United States, according to an Ipsos Mori global poll in 2014.Another is that Europe is widely considered to be in the lead on climate change, despite some glaring setbacks.AdvertisementIn October, the European Union’s 28 countries were collectively able to show that they were on track to meet, or even surpass, the goal of reducing 1990-level greenhouse-gas emissions by 20 percent by 2020. Such an achievement was “unimaginable” just five years ago, Mr. Cohn-Bendit said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In his view, the ecologists’ most significant advances and influence have in fact taken place on the European — rather than national — level.National debates in European countries have varied widely. In Germany, which historically has had a strong environmental party, Chancellor Angela Merkel’s decision to close the country’s nuclear reactors by 2022 has spurred not only the search for alternative energy but also a greater reliance on coal — an industry that is both a major cause of pollution and a major employer.In France, by contrast, where more than 75 percent of electricity is produced by nuclear power, the debate about a nuclear-free future gets little political traction.Mr. Hollande’s record on the environment has been inconsistent. A 2012 campaign promise to close an aging nuclear plant at Fessenheim in eastern France remains unfulfilled, though government support for renewable energy has been increased.In late October, the French government’s claim to be a leader in the fight against pollution and climate change took a beating when it joined with a majority of European governments in backing a European Union measure to allow the maximum levels of nitrogen oxide emissions from diesel cars to double from the current level until 2017.The vote in Brussels was quickly and widely denounced by opponents as a concession to Europe’s automobile industry.Mr. Cohn-Bendit attributes the E.E.L.V.’s political failure to its refusal to open the ecologist movement to the entire political spectrum, as has happened in Germany. Instead, the French party got swept up in the clannish politics of the French left — what Mr. Cohn-Bendit calls “leftist infantilism” — resulting in amoeba-like splits along personal and ideological lines.(It is interesting to note that two major figures in France’s ecological movement are not French-born: Mr. Cohn-Bendit, born in France of German parents, chose German nationality as a youth, and Eva Joly, who ran for president in 2012 — garnering just 2.28 percent of the vote in the first round — is a native of Norway. Both now have French citizenship.)AdvertisementMr. Cohn-Bendit believes that as a political force, French environmentalists have difficulty translating popular awareness into the kind of political action that can hold its own against powerful lobbies and economic interests at a time when the French economy is stagnant.“There is resistance from industry, from oil companies and producers,” he said. “We also need to reduce consumption, which is not always popular.”Like temperatures, awareness levels have been rising around the world. “With Obama, the U.S. is going in the right direction, and now China is going in the right direction for the simple reason that its cities are suffocating,” Mr. Cohn-Bendit said. “Now we have the momentum to go forward.”A version of this special report appears in print on December 8, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.