By CHAD BRAYDEC. 7, 2015
LONDON —  General Electric has called off a deal to sell its century-old appliance division to Electrolux of Sweden for $3.3 billion after the United States Justice Department moved to block the transaction, Electrolux said on Monday.It is the second time in recent years that General Electric has tried to sell the division, which gave birth to the washing machine, the clothes dryer and the toaster oven. The company has shed other units as it refocuses on its core industrial businesses.The all-cash deal would have combined Electrolux’s Frigidaire, one of the best-known brands of refrigerators, with General Electric’s stable of products, including its Monogram line of luxury appliances. The purchase would have allowed Electrolux to expand its reach in North America, one of the largest markets for home appliances.The companies agreed to the transaction in September 2014. The Justice Department sued to stop the deal in July, saying it would lead to less competition and higher prices for buyers of stoves, ovens and other kitchen appliances.Advertisement“We disagree with the Department of Justice’s narrow view on a transaction that would have benefited consumers,” General Electric said on Monday. “The appliances market is dynamic and highly competitive.”AdvertisementElectrolux said on Monday in a news release that it had “made extensive efforts to obtain regulatory approvals, and regrets that G.E. has terminated the agreement while the court procedure is still pending.”Electrolux said “reasonable” settlement proposals offered to the Justice Department would have addressed competition concerns. “Unfortunately, these proposals were rejected,” Electrolux said.Shares of Electrolux fell 15 percent to 200 Swedish kronor, or about $23.40, in Stockholm on Monday. General Electric shares fell 0.4 percent.Under the terms of the deal, Electrolux will now have to pay General Electric a termination fee of $175 million.Electrolux said on Monday that it had also incurred transaction and preparatory costs from January to September this year of 402 million kronor. The company said it expected fourth-quarter transaction and integration costs of about 175 million kronor, and expenses of about 225 million kronor related to a loan facility.General Electric, based in Fairfield, Conn., tried to sell the appliance division seven years ago, with Electrolux and the Asian appliance manufacturers Samsung and LG among companies taking part in negotiations. But those talks fell apart with the onset of the financial crisis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The latest transaction would have been the largest ever for Electrolux, which began as a maker of vacuum cleaners in the early 1900s and expanded into home appliances in the 1920s.The unit in question, G.E. Appliances, based in Louisville, Ky., derives more than 90 percent of its revenue from North America. Its products include refrigerators, dishwashers, air-conditioners, washing machines, dryers and water heaters. The division employs about 12,000 people.AdvertisementElectrolux, one of the world’s biggest manufacturers of home appliances and industrial equipment, posted revenue of about $13 billion last year. G.E.’s appliance and lighting divisions generated $8.4 billion in revenue in that period.Sales of major appliances in North America accounted for about 30 percent of Electrolux’s revenue in 2014, the company said.“The group’s operations in North America have proved to be strong on its own merits, with good organic growth and a recovery in earnings during 2015,” said Keith R. McLoughlin, the Electrolux president and chief executive. He added that the company had “a strong presence in the U.S. under the brands Frigidaire and Electrolux, and we are confident that this position will be maintained and strengthened.”Electrolux said it would continue to seek ways to expand its operations globally, including through acquisitions.Electrolux’s predecessor company, Elektromekaniska, was founded in Stockholm in 1910 and introduced its first vacuum cleaner, the Lux I, two years later.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Opposition Compels G.E. to Abandon Deal With Electrolux .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.