By DANIEL VICTORDEC. 8, 2015
Diane Rehm, who has interviewed prominent newsmakers as an NPR radio host since 1979, announced on Tuesday that she planned to retire next year from her two-hour current affairs show.Ms. Rehm, 79, will continue to host “The Diane Rehm Show” through the 2016 presidential election.A post on the show’s website said that WAMU, the Washington public radio station that produces the show, and NPR, its distributor, “are committed to finding a successor who will honor Diane’s legacy and the qualities listeners treasure about her show — civil discourse and deep conversations about the issues of the day with listeners as part of the conversation — while also reflecting changing audience needs and habits.”Ms. Rehm said she was considering several options once she leaves the show, including a speaker series, a new show and a podcast.Advertisement“Maybe I’ll get to sleep until 7 or 7:30 a.m., like other people do,” she told The Washington Post.“The Diane Rehm Show” is distributed to nearly 200 public radio stations and has more than 2.4 million on-air listeners per week, according to a biography on the show’s website.Ms. Rehm began as a volunteer at WAMU, which broadcasts from American University, in 1973 and took over its morning talk show, “Kaleidoscope,” six years later. It was renamed “The Diane Rehm Show” in 1984.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 2000, she became the first radio talk show host to interview a president in the Oval Office, and in 2010 she won a Peabody Award.President Obama presented her with a National Humanities Medal in 2014. “In probing interviews with everyone from pundits to poets to presidents, Ms. Rehm’s keen insights and boundless curiosity have deepened our understanding of our culture and ourselves,” Mr. Obama said during the ceremony.In June, Ms. Rehm told NPR she experienced “the most difficult two days of my professional life” after an interview with Senator Bernie Sanders, in which she incorrectly said the Democratic presidential candidate had Israeli citizenship. She apologized, explaining that she had gotten the information from “a comment on Facebook.”AdvertisementMs. Rehm learned in 1998 that she had spasmodic dysphonia, which strained her speech and forced her to take time off from the show.“I don’t love my voice. That’s the hard part. I don’t love my voice anymore,” she said in 2009.Her memoir, “On My Own,” is expected to be published early next year.Jonah Bromwich contributed reporting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.