By BEN SISARIODEC. 8, 2015
Since it started in 2008, the streaming service Spotify has clung fiercely to its so-called freemium model, arguing that the best way to get people to buy a subscription for unlimited music online is to make the same catalog of songs also available free to listeners, but with ads.That strategy has helped Spotify grow into the biggest service of its kind, with what the company says is more than 20 million paying users and another 55 million who use its free version. But in recent negotiations with the band Coldplay, the company showed a new openness to making exceptions to that model, according to people briefed on the talks.During negotiations, Spotify was willing to restrict access for the band’s new album, “A Head Full of Dreams,” to the service’s paid version and keep it off its free tier for a limited time. That strategy, sometimes called windowing, is something that record labels have long been lobbying for, but Spotify has resisted, said the people, who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the talks publicly.Ultimately, Coldplay and its record label, Warner Music, decided not to split the album’s availability on Spotify. When “A Head Full of Dreams” comes to Spotify on Friday — a week after it was released on iTunes, Apple Music, Tidal and elsewhere — it will be available to free users as well as its subscribers, who pay up to $10 a month to eliminate ads and get other perks like full access on mobile devices.Advertisement“We are 100 percent committed to our model because we believe that a free, ad-supported tier combined with a more robust premium tier is the best way to deliver music to fans, create value for artists and songwriters and grow the industry,” Jonathan Prince, a spokesman for Spotify, said in a statement.AdvertisementWarner and representatives for Coldplay declined to comment.A band or record company pushing Spotify to make an exception to its policy is nothing new. Streams on Spotify’s paid version pay much higher royalties than on its free version, and music executives often argue that the absence of music on free sites will help drive sales.But lately Spotify has been under greater pressure to accommodate major acts. Last year Taylor Swift pulled her entire catalog from the service over its policy on free music, and last month Adele decided to withhold her new album, “25,” from all streaming outlets — moves that helped those artists break sales records but left Spotify without the music that fans want the most.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“They were staring down the barrel of having the third big record in a row not on Spotify,” said one major-label music executive, who spoke on condition of anonymity to protect industry relationships.What Spotify’s dealings with Coldplay mean for the service and for other acts and record companies is unclear. People briefed on the company’s talks with record labels said that Spotify had no immediate plans for such changes with upcoming releases.Yet the company’s talks with Coldplay, which were first reported by The Wall Street Journal, may be a sign of greater flexibility. Other big acts will probably push for changes with Spotify, but having too many gaps in its free version could make the service less attractive to new customers, said Richard Greenfield, a media analyst at BTIG Research.“Being flexible for a couple of artists sounds like a rational strategy,” Mr. Greenfield said. “The question is going to be, how do you draw the line where the free service doesn’t become a poor user experience.”But aside from a handful of major acts like Adele and Ms. Swift, who have defied industry trends by selling huge numbers of CDs and downloads, it is also unclear how many artists would want to remove themselves from Spotify’s free version, which for many acts has become an immensely valuable form of promotion.Listeners who discover an act’s music on Spotify’s free tier may go on to buy a concert ticket, a CD or something else — or, as Spotify argues, subscribe to its paid version.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.