AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonCritics love to complain about private equity and its exorbitant fees. But imagine if retail investors — people like you and me — were suddenly allowed to invest in the funds managed by private equity giants like the Blackstone Group, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company and Apollo Global Management.If all the barriers and regulations came down, you could probably guess what would happen. Hordes would flood the offices of these firms, racing to invest. It would make a Black Friday line at Target look Zen.The reason is obvious. As an asset class and with the right fund, private equity is nigh unbeatable, well worth the fees paid.Take, for example, the California Public Employees’ Retirement System, or Calpers, the nation’s largest pension system. It recently disclosed that it had paid $3.4 billion in fees for the last 25 years for private equity funds. Such a large number revived a debate about whether pension funds are getting what they pay for from Wall Street. The Los Angeles Times asked “whether private equity returns are worth it.”It’s a big check to write, to be sure, but the money is worth it if private equity earns its keep. And private equity certainly did for Calpers.During the same time period, the pension fund’s private equity portfolio earned $24.2 billion. It returned 12.3 percent over the last 20 years after fees. Last year, Calpers earned 1 percent investing in stocks, compared with a gain of 8.9 percent from private equity. This is well above any other asset class that the pension fund invested in during this time period and significantly above the 7.5 percent target it has set for itself for annual returns for the entire fund.Without private equity, Calpers — which is only 77 percent funded as of year-end 2014 — and California retirees would be in much worse shape than they are today.Could Calpers have negotiated a better deal on fees? Perhaps, but we don’t know the breakdown of the fees, and in any case about 12 percent of the total is far less than the standard 20 percent in profits private equity firms charge.Then consider what Yale has done with private equity. Over the last 20 years, Yale has had a 36.1 percent return from its private equity portfolio. And the endowment has made a huge bet on private equity with about a third of its $24 billion in assets devoted to the class. Last year Yale beat Harvard with a return of 11.5 percent to Harvard’s 5.8 percent.This Yale model, pioneered by its investment chief investment officer, David F. Swensen, has become famous. It assumes that since an endowment has infinite life, the illiquidity of private equity is a tolerable concern.The returns show that the strategy to date has been astoundingly successful and explain how Yale has kept up with its rivals. (Yale has also benefited from astoundingly successful venture capital investments over the last decade, something that will most likely not last in an age of dead unicorns.)It is not all unicorns and roses with private equity. Academics like Josh Lerner and Steven Kaplan have found that those seeking such fantastic returns do not always find it.Studies have shown that when it comes to private equity, not all funds are the same, and further that the bigger and longer-lasting funds are the more profitable. Superachievers in the top quartile include Kohlberg Kravis, which has had a 26 percent net return for its long-term funds since inception in 1976, and Apollo, with a 25 percent net return since inception.Newer funds tend to find it a harder oar to row and have lower returns. In addition, endowments historically have benefited more from private equity most likely because they can invest in the better funds, thanks to better access. And private equity returns have come down a bit in recent years, though the last few years have been exceedingly good for private equity as the stock market bubbled along.The higher returns of private equity are justified in part as extra compensation to satisfy investors for the illiquidity and theoretical higher risk. But how much more this return should be is subject to some debate. Some, including Mr. Swensen, have suggested that private equity should outperform a leveraged investment in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index since that is after all what a private equity investment is — a fund borrowing money to buy companies.The gurus, though, may be overestimating the return required of private equity for both its illiquidity and risk. There are benefits to having a fund manage your investment, and private equity is quite a capable manager. During the financial crisis many of these funds were able to salvage near bankrupt investments and turn them into profits.Take Calpers again. Much has been made of the fact that the fund’s private equity investments have not exceeded its benchmark in recent years, although they have done so over a 20-year period. But the benchmark itself may be at fault. It is an amalgamation of domestic and foreign stock market indexes with a random number — 3 percent — tacked on. Whether this benchmark captures the risk and steady return potential of private equity seems unclear. Calpers is re-evaluating this benchmark and will probably change it.Even with all of these caveats, there is no doubt that the private equity asset class has been a savior for many pension funds and endowments. Small pension funds (a billion dollars or less) still beg to get into larger private equity funds and are regularly turned down. It is only a lucky few that get access to the right private equity firms.The fact that private equity has performed so well over the decades also puts the recent Securities and Exchange Commission investigations into private equity fees into perspective. In June, the regulator accused Kohlberg Kravis of improperly assigning more than $17 million in expenses from “broken deals,” or unsuccessful buyouts, to investors but not to co-investors that included executives of the firm. Kohlberg Kravis agreed to pay nearly $30 million to settle the charges, an amount that included a $10 million penalty. Over a six-year period, the firm had $338 million in expenses from deals that did not succeed.The S.E.C. has also gone after firms like Blackstone (a $39 million settlement) and Fenway Partners (a $10.2 million settlement) over their fee practices.It is hard to gauge how important all this is. These companies ought not to be engaging in these practices. But these are small amounts amid the billions of dollars of fees. One also has to wonder where the investors are. These are all sophisticated investors who can ask about and deal with these fees. Was there a practice that investors didn’t know about?More important, a key ingredient of private equity’s success is that it can earn those returns and take its share of the profit. If private equity’s profits are narrowed, the question is whether returns will also be reduced. Perhaps not, but one suspects that private equity firms will simply increase their normal fees to compensate.And so, in the debate about private equity perhaps we should balance the criticism of private equity firms for excessive fees with the great demand for private equity investments and the important role they play in meeting investors’ and pensioners’ needs. It brings to mind a line from when private equity first became prominent in the 1980s: Where’s the beef? The answer is, it’s with those stellar returns.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.Advertisement