By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 8, 2015
United States employers advertised fewer jobs in October, though overall hiring picked up and people quitting rose slightly, adding to evidence that the job market is slowly improving.The number of job postings fell 2.7 percent to a still-healthy 5.4 million in October compared with the previous month, the Labor Department said Tuesday in its Job Openings and Labor Turnover survey. That figure is not far from July’s record high of 5.7 million.Hiring increased to 5.1 million, the most since June. And the number of people quitting their jobs, a sign of confidence in the job market, rose to 2.78 million. Still, that figure has been mostly flat this year.Even with the drop in job openings, the data suggests companies are still seeking more workers. The number of available jobs has increased 11 percent in the last year. That suggests businesses are still confident enough in future demand to increase their staffs, despite drags from slower overseas growth.AdvertisementThe report is “broadly consistent with our view that the labor market will continue to improve but that the rate of job growth will moderate somewhat in the coming quarters,” said Daniel Silver, an economist at JPMorgan Chase.AdvertisementJanet L. Yellen, the chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, is said to closely monitor the openings, hiring and quits figures as the Fed moves closer to raising short-term interest rates. Most analysts expect the Fed to move at its meeting next week.Other surveys indicate that companies intend to keep hiring at a solid clip early next year. The staffing agency ManpowerGroup said in a separate report Tuesday that 20 percent of 11,000 employers it surveyed expected to add workers in the first quarter of 2016.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company’s hiring index reached the highest level for a first quarter since the beginning of 2007 just before the recession, the ManpowerGroup said.Rising quits can also help broadly lift wages. That is because most people quit their jobs when they have another one lined up, usually at higher pay. More quitting also forces companies to provide raises for their existing workers to keep them from leaving.Quits plummeted to just 1.6 million in August 2009, two months after the recession ended as Americans clung to the jobs they had. The figure has rebounded since then but remains below the prerecession level of about 2.9 million.The data comes after last Friday’s robust jobs report, which showed that employers added 211,000 jobs in November and the unemployment rate was unchanged at 5 percent.Those figures are a net total: Jobs gained minus jobs lost. The data reported Tuesday is more detailed, calculating total hires as well as quits and layoffs.A version of this list appears in print on December 9, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; U.S. Hiring Rose in October, Though Job Ads Flagged.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.