By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONDEC. 8, 2015
Michael R. Milken, once known as the king of junk bonds, captivated Wall Street when he pleaded guilty to securities fraud in 1990 and broke down crying in front of a packed Manhattan courtroom.More than 25 years later, he is still a draw to a New York crowd.Titans of Wall Street, including the billionaire hedge fund managers John Paulson, Daniel S. Och and David Einhorn, joined 1,900 people at the Hilton New York Grand Ballroom on Monday night for an annual Wall Street dinner held by the UJA-Federation of New York, a charitable organization focused on Jewish causes. Security was tight, as attendees in tailored suits and the occasional fur shawl were asked to hand over their bags and walk through metal detectors, with precautions taken because of one guest, the mayor of Jerusalem, Nir Barkat.The focus of the evening was on charity and contributions made to the UJA-Federation, which raised a record $27 million. Honored at the event were Andrew V. Rechtschaffen of Greenlight Capital, the multibillion-dollar hedge fund founded by Mr. Einhorn, and Steven A. Tananbaum, chief investment officer of GoldenTree Asset Management.But there was another unspoken theme: second chances.This was underscored by the keynote address, given by Mr. Milken, who made a name for himself as the head of junk bonds at Drexel Burnham Lambert in the 1980s and who later pleaded guilty to six felony charges of securities fraud and conspiracy. He was barred for life from the securities industry.AdvertisementMr. Milken has done much to restore his image. These days, he is focused on philanthropy and spends his time on the West Coast holding the annual Milken Institute Global Conference.AdvertisementDaniel S. Och, the chief executive of the hedge fund Och-Ziff Capital, praised Mr. Milken for his philanthropy in a short speech. Mr. Och called Mr. Milken “the man who changed medicine” because of his fund-raising efforts and donations in the field.Mr. Milken told the audience that as a young man he set out to study math and physics in 1964 at Berkeley University with the dream of running the country’s space program. One year later, after meeting a man who told Mr. Milken he could never be part of the American dream because he did not have access to money, Mr. Milken said he changed his major.“I chose to go to Wall Street to change the flow of capital with thousands of others so we could bring the opportunity of the American dream to those with talent,” Mr. Milken said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Later, when Greenlight’s Mr. Rechtschaffen took the stage and addressed the “breathtakingly awful markets like this year,” it was the first and only mention of the tumultuous year for Wall Street.Greenlight, once a darling of investors, has had a gut-wrenching year, with performance down more than 16 percent as of the end of October. It is not the only hedge fund licking its wounds; across the industry managers have closed their doors, returned money to investors and sometimes written apology letters for steep losses.This did not stop many of Wall Street’s biggest names from singing one another’s praises on Monday.In a glossy book — several inches thick — compiled by the UJA with pages of messages from family, friends and business, there were letters of congratulations from Senator Chuck Schumer and Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, both Democrats of New York. One of the attendees, Senator Lindsey Graham, of South Carolina, was given a special shout-out.Even as most of the evening was solemn, there were moments of levity. While addressing the room, Mr. Milken poked fun at himself, recalling how shortly after he arrived at Berkeley in the 1960s, the free-speech movement started.“There always seems to be a commotion wherever I go,” he said, drawing laughs across the ballroom.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.