AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robert Cyran and Kevin AllisonWilliam A. Ackman’s convoluted North American rail merger is a tough sell.Canadian Pacific revised its offer for the American railway operator Norfolk Southern on Tuesday to include an interim trust structure and some finger-in-the-air calculations about possible future valuations. Mr. Ackman, the billionaire hedge fund manager who is Canadian Pacific’s biggest shareholder and a director, contributed 23 pages of slides and joined a conference call with analysts.Canadian Pacific, which operates railways along the United States-Canada border, offered shareholders in East Coast-focused Norfolk Southern — worth $27 billion at Monday’s closing share price — less cash but sooner in its new proposal, as well as a heftier 47 percent share in the combined company. Closing earlier would involve a voting trust intended to allow combined ownership but separate operation of the two railroads while the United States regulator, the Surface Transportation Board, considers the full merger.Norfolk Southern rebuffed Canadian Pacific once again even before Mr. Ackman had finished his presentation. It’s curious that the target won’t even negotiate, because the record of Canadian Pacific’s chief executive, E. Hunter Harrison, in creating operating efficiencies at three different railroad companies is strong — and under the proposal that’s on the table, he would move over to run Norfolk Southern as soon as the interim trust merger was set, potentially by mid-2016.One of the objections of Norfolk Southern’s chief executive, James A. Squires, objections is that even the voting-trust structure, never mind the merger itself, is unlikely to be approved by the regulator. There are precedents, but part of Mr. Squires’s reasoning is that the regulator’s criteria have become tighter, including the need to meet “an untested public-interest standard.”Making the argument that combined ownership and Mr. Harrison’s planned job switch would still leave the two railroads notionally independent certainly requires mental acrobatics. But Canadian Pacific does have a case that Norfolk Southern has room to improve efficiency. Mr. Harrison reckons he could save $1.3 billion annually — a decent value uplift in itself. Mr. Ackman’s broader argument posits a greatly enhanced market valuation a couple of years hence.Yet Canadian Pacific’s contortions to craft a deal suggest that approval by rail regulators won’t come easy. Shareholders may also discount the prognostications made by Mr. Harrison and Mr. Ackman. Both companies’ shares were down on news of the revised offer and rejection. Maybe investors are just confused, too.Robert Cyran and Kevin Allison are columnists for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement