AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerA strategy that became popular with retailers, shopping mall operators and restaurant groups in the last few years has come under fire from House Republicans, who submitted a bill late Monday that would remove the tax advantages.The chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Kevin Brady, a Texas Republican, proposes to prevent spinoff companies from converting to real estate investment trusts for 10 years. His proposal also prevents a R.E.I.T. from qualifying as tax-free unless it is spun off from another R.E.I.T.The R.E.I.T. spinoff strategy has received a lot of attention in tax circles. In September, the Internal Revenue Service said it would stop issuing private letter rulings on these transactions, suggesting it is giving such deals added scrutiny. The agency said the spinoffs raised “significant concerns.”A real estate investment trust is a publicly traded company that owns property. Income is not taxed as long as most of it is distributed to shareholders.Activist investors have pushed big property-owning companies — like Macy’s and McDonald’s — to spin off their real estate holdings into R.E.I.T.s to free up cash for other purposes, though those companies have resisted.Other companies have not, however. Darden Restaurants, for one, completed the spinoff of Four Corners Property Trust last month, while Sears Holdings spun off Seritage Growth Properties in July.Lawyers who work with companies to set up R.E.I.T.s say the legislation, which would apply to any transactions as of Dec. 7, could cast uncertainty over deals that are currently underway.“What’s troubling is that it has an immediate effective date,” said Michael J. Brody, co-chairman of the R.E.I.T. industry group at the law firm Latham & Watkins.The proposal was part of 175 pages of amendments intended to extend individual and corporate tax breaks through next year. It is a placeholder while Congress decides which ones to make permanent. The amendments include extending research credits for corporations and modifying the definition of hard cider.Advertisement