AdvertisementSupported byBy Vinod SreeharshaRIO DE JANEIRO — Shares of the Brazilian investment bank BTG Pactual slumped again on Tuesday a day after formal charges were filed against its former leader, André Esteves.BTG Pactual stock fell nearly 15 percent in late trading on the São Paulo bourse. The shares have now fallen by half since the arrest of Mr. Esteves on Nov. 25.On Monday, Brazil’s attorney general, Rodrigo Janot, charged Mr. Esteves and Delcidio do Amaral, a Brazilian senator, with obstruction of justice.The two men were arrested on accusations of interfering with a broad investigation into corruption involving the state-owned oil giant Petrobras, including trying to pressure a key witness, Nestor Cervero, a former Petrobras executive, from signing a plea agreement.Mr. Esteves subsequently resigned as the bank’s chief executive and chairman and then gave up financial control in a share swap with seven other current partners. He maintains his innocence.Others charged on Monday by Mr. Janot are Edson Ribeiro Filho, formerly Mr. Cervero’s lawyer, and Diogo Ferreira Rodrigues, Senator Amaral’s chief of staff.For now, Mr. Esteves appears to be the focus of the investigation, rather than BTG Pactual. Yet the bank is facing greater scrutiny over several direct investments it made in the oil and gas sector, including in companies that have been hit hard by the corruption investigation. It also has assets in Petrobras Africa it acquired in a deal that raised concern.Additionally, since the arrests, federal prosecutors were said to have found evidence suggesting that the bank paid 45 million reais to an influential politician, Eduardo Cunha, the speaker of the lower house, with the hope of watering down financial legislation. BTG Pactual has denied those accusations.The firm is under pressure to maintain liquidity. On Friday, it said it obtained a line of credit of six billion reais, or about $1.6 billion, from the Fundo Garantidor de Credito, which is funded by Brazilian banks.It is also looking to sell assets. In a filing last week with the CVM, Brazil’s securities regulator, it acknowledged it was in discussions and considering selling its equity stakes in several Brazilian companies, including BR Properties, Leader and the fitness chain BodyTech. It said that was seeking to “increase further its liquidity and strengthen its cash flow.”The bank also said it is open to selling its stake in BSI, the Swiss bank it recently acquired, and Recovery, BTG Pactual’s distressed assets arm.Few expect BTG Pactual to survive in its current form.In a report on Monday, Goldman Sachs said it expected that BTG Pactual’s cumulative funding gap as measured by funding maturing versus securities and loans to reach 1.6 billion reais by the end of the fourth quarter. It estimates that number will widen to 11 billion reais by the end of the third quarter in 2016.Assets under management since the arrest of Mr. Esteves are down about 15 percent, the same report noted.Advertisement