By LIZ MOYERDEC. 8, 2015
A federal appeals court has overturned the 2014 conviction of a former Jefferies Group trader, Jesse C. Litvak, striking a blow to the government’s efforts to crack down on abuses in bond trading.The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit said in an 84-page decision on Tuesday that there was a lack of evidence that misstatements made by Mr. Litvak were material to the government and that the lower court erred in excluding expert witness testimony. Mr. Litvak was accused of lying about mortgage bond prices to bolster profits.The case was returned to the Federal District Court in New Haven for a new trial on securities fraud charges.In a statement on Tuesday, Deirdre M. Daly, the United States attorney in Connecticut, said the government would proceed with a retrial.Advertisement“Today’s opinion affirms the government’s ongoing efforts to investigate and prosecute fraud in the fixed-income markets,” she said.AdvertisementIn September, the Securities and Exchange Commission accused three former bond traders at Nomura Securities of misleading customers about bond prices. Those traders also face criminal fraud charges from Ms. Daly’s office.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bond prices are not always clear, and brokers who facilitate trading between parties make money off differences in the prices when they are bought and sold.In March 2014, a federal jury in New Haven found Mr. Litvak guilty of deceiving his customers about the prices of mortgage-backed securities he sold to them in the years after the 2008 financial crisis. Prosecutors said the trades generated more than $2 million in revenue for his firm, where he worked until December 2011.In October 2014, the appellate court, in a ruling that determined that the former Jefferies trader could be free pending his appeal, said Mr. Litvak had raised “a substantial question of law or fact likely to result in” a reversal.“We’re very pleased with the decision this morning in Jesse’s case,” Kannon K. Shanmugam, Mr. Litvak’s lawyer and a partner at Williams & Connolly, said on Tuesday.A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Court Overturns Conviction of Ex-Jefferies Bond Trader.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.