By LESLIE PICKER and CHAD BRAYDEC. 8, 2015
Canadian Pacific’s pursuit of Norfolk Southern has gotten personal.In a conference call to outline a new bid for Norfolk Southern on Tuesday, Canadian Pacific and its largest shareholder, William A. Ackman, hammered away at the track record of its rival’s chief executive, James A. Squires.Mr. Ackman, whose Pershing Square Capital Management holds a 9 percent stake in Canadian Pacific, said in the conference call that Mr. Squires’s background in law made him less qualified to fix what the billionaire investor said were operational problems at the railroad operator.Mr. Ackman said that if he were not on the board of Canadian Pacific, he would be buying stock in Norfolk Southern and would consider putting up a slate of directors as a shareholder activist. He called out to the “Carl Icahns of the world” and the “Dan Loebs of the world” to see Norfolk Southern as an “ideal activist situation.”When pressed on the call about whether it would pursue a proxy contest, Canadian Pacific’s chief executive, E. Hunter Harrison, did not rule it out.AdvertisementYet investors appeared to focus not on the personalities but on the complexity of the new offer, which received a chilly reception on Tuesday. Norfolk Southern’s stock price declined 5.7 percent to $86.32, while Canadian Pacific’s slipped 3.3 percent to $126.13.AdvertisementUnder the proposed transaction, the two companies would be run separately and be held in a temporary trust while the Surface Transportation Board, a regulatory agency that is part of the Department of Transportation, reviewed the merger. In addition, to prove the deal does not violate antitrust laws, the Surface Transportation Board must also believe it to be in the best interest of the public.Norfolk Southern, which rejected an earlier offer, quickly snubbed the revised proposal, saying that it “creates substantial regulatory risks and uncertainties that are highly unlikely to be overcome.” The company also said that the revised proposal was lower in value than the previous one and “grossly inadequate.”In the revised bid, Norfolk Southern investors would receive $32.86 in cash in 18 months and 0.451 shares of stock in a new holding company that would own both railroads. That compared with the 0.348 shares in the new company and $46.72 in cash in two years that Canadian Pacific offered last month.Based on Canadian Pacific’s closing price on Monday, the new offer would value Norfolk Southern at $91.62 a share, or $27.4 billion, Norfolk Southern said. The previous proposal, which included a larger amount of cash and shares in Canadian Pacific, valued Norfolk Southern at about $28 billion.Canadian Pacific, however, estimated that the new offer would value Norfolk Southern at $125 to $140 a share, or as much as $42 billion. That is based on its estimated value of the new holding company in mid-2016, Canadian Pacific said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Ackman said that most of the value creation would be driven by management change at Norfolk Southern, rather than corporate consolidation, he said.His proposal includes putting Mr. Harrison, the chief executive of Canadian Pacific, in charge of Norfolk Southern. Then, Canadian Pacific’s current president, Keith Creel, would become chief executive of Canadian Pacific, according to the presentation.“I’m sure Mr. Squires would prefer to keep his job, and he’s fighting awfully hard,” Mr. Ackman said in the conference call. “But this is not about Mr. Squires’s job and this is not about the prestige of being on the Norfolk Southern board. It’s about what’s in the best interest of the owners of the Norfolk Southern railroad and it’s about what’s in the public interest in terms of the railroad infrastructure of the country.”AdvertisementMr. Ackman estimated that the fair value of the Norfolk Southern shares in mid-2016 would be about $90 each under Mr. Squires’s plan, compared with $140 apiece if the deal with Canadian Pacific is approved, and $125 per share even if regulators do not approve it.Canadian Pacific said the new proposal would “dramatically” reduce the regulatory risk for Norfolk Southern’s shareholders and would give them a larger ownership stake in the combined company, about 47 percent.On Monday, Norfolk Southern released a report by two former chairmen of the Surface Transportation Board who found that it would be “highly unlikely” that the regulator would approve the trust.Last week, when asked in a conference call whether Norfolk Southern would be willing to entertain a higher bid, Mr. Squires said, “at any price, the regulatory risks remain the same.”Morgan Stanley and Bank of America provided financial advice to Norfolk Southern, while Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, as well as Hunton & Williams and Morrison & Foerster, provided legal advice.Canadian Pacific expected the transaction would close in May.Pershing Square Capital Management reported a $2 billion stake in the Canadian rail operator at the end of the third quarter.A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Norfolk Southern Railway Snubs Competitor’s Bid.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.