By VINOD SREEHARSHADEC. 9, 2015
RIO DE JANEIRO — The private equity firm CVC Capital Partners plans to open an office in São Paulo and take on a prominent Brazilian investment banker to run it.Jean-Marc Etlin will join as head of the Latin America operation, beginning in January, CVC said in a statement on Wednesday. Mr. Etlin is the longtime chief executive of Itaú BBA Investment Bank, part of Banco Itaú, which he joined in 2005.In the decade that followed, he played a key role in its rise, both when Brazil’s economy boomed and experienced a record number of initial public offerings but also in recent years, when mergers and acquisitions have become the only viable exits for companies here and when private equity’s role in those deals grew.CVC, based in Luxembourg, said it expected to look for opportunities throughout Latin America from its São Paulo office and make investments from the CVC Capital Partners VI fund. The fund was raised in 2013, pulling in about 10.9 billion euros, or $15 billion based on exchange rates at the time, according to the firm.AdvertisementBrazil is mired in recession, with the economy contracting for three consecutive quarters, and Goldman Sachs recently warned of a possible depression. Nevertheless, Bertrand Meunier, a managing partner at CVC, said in the statement that “we believe now is the right time to build a strong, local and experienced team” in Brazil and Latin America.AdvertisementCVC, which has 23 other offices worldwide, has yet to make an investment in Brazil, a person close to the firm said. Its website names more than 250 companies that make up its historical portfolio, but not one is from Latin America.Compared with other international private equity firms, CVC appears to be making a late entry into Latin America. Advent International, where Mr. Etlin’s brother Patrice Etlin is a managing director, has been making investments here since the late 1990s. The Carlyle Group formed a South America team in 2008.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last year, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and Bain Capital each made their first direct investments in Brazil.Still, there remains space for private equity here, especially as capital and financing become more and more scarce amid few signs of improvement in the economy.Deals continue to take place even if the dollar volume is down. According to Dealogic, the number of deals in Brazil so far this year is 643, only one less than the 644 made during the same period last year.Mr. Etlin, a former rugby player and advisory board member at Sotheby’s, has been an adviser on numerous deals for Itaú BBA that involved private equity firms.“Jean-Marc’s reputation and experience will be of great value to CVC Capital Partners and allow us to build out our presence in this exciting market,” Mr. Meunier said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.