By BEN SISARIODEC. 9, 2015
The Weeknd’s song “The Hills” became one of the biggest hits of the year with a slithery electronic bass line. But according to a copyright infringement lawsuit filed on Wednesday, that bass line was taken without permission from the soundtrack of a little-noticed science-fiction thriller.The suit was filed in United States District Court in Los Angeles by Cutting Edge Music on behalf of Tom Raybould, a Welsh composer who wrote the music for “The Machine,” directed by Caradog James, which had its premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival in 2013 but was not widely distributed in theaters in the United States.Still, the suit asserts, the music for “The Machine” reached associates of the Weeknd, whose real name is Abel Tesfaye. On March 9, according to the suit, Mr. Raybould received a direct message on Twitter from Emmanuel Nickerson, a producer and writer known as Million Dollar Mano, that said: “I sampled your music might make it 2 the weeknd next album. Huge fan of what u did 4 the machine movie!”According the suit, both “The Hills” and a track on “The Machine” soundtrack called “Revolution” feature “bass lines performed with almost identical idiosyncratic sounds at the same register and using the same pitch sequence, melodic phase structure and rhythmic durations,” along with other similarities. The suit seeks unspecified damages, and it names as defendants several record labels and music publishers involved with the song.“The Hills,” which was released as a single in May, lists as its songwriters Mr. Tesfaye; Mr. Nickerson; Ahmad Balshe, better known as Belly; and Carlo Montagnese, known as Illangelo. The song spent six weeks at No. 1 on Billboard’s singles chart, and according to Nielsen it sold 2.4 million downloads and has been streamed nearly 400 million times in the United States on audio and video services. This week, the Weeknd was nominated for seven Grammy Awards, including album of the year for “Beauty Behind the Madness,” on which “The Hills” appears.A representative of Songs Music Publishing, the publisher that represents the Weeknd, declined to comment on Wednesday, saying that the company had not been served with the complaint. Representatives of Republic Records, the Weeknd’s label, did not respond to a request for comment.A version of this article appears in print on December 10, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Copyright Lawsuit Is Filed Against the Weeknd.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.