AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackSenators from both parties on Wednesday denounced huge overnight price increases for decades-old drugs that have been made by some pharmaceutical companies lately, calling them unconscionable and detrimental to patients.“These companies are to ethical pharmaceutical companies as a loan shark is to a bank,” said Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, quoting an unnamed industry specialist with whom she had spoken. She discussed the matter at a hearing of the Senate’s Special Committee on Aging, which she leads.The hearing focused on two companies in particular, Turing Pharmaceuticals, which acquired an old drug for a parasitic infection and raised the price to $750 a pill from $13.50, and Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, which has sharply increased the prices of various drugs it has acquired, including two used by hospitals to treat serious heart conditions.The chief executives of these companies were not at the hearing, but that did not stop them from being criticized. Senator Claire McCaskill of Missouri, the ranking Democrat on the committee, mocked Martin Shkreli, the chief executive of Turing, by calling him “Mr. Wu-Tang.” That was a reference to the news that Mr. Shkreli, 32, a former hedge fund manager, was revealed as the mystery buyer of the only known copy of a new album by Wu-Tang Clan. Most of the hearing, which was described as the first in a series, was devoted to looking at the impact of the sudden price increases on doctors, patients and hospitals.Erin R. Fox, director of the drug information service at University of Utah Health Care, said that the price of Isuprel, a heart drug acquired by Valeant early this year, was now $2,700 a vial compared with $440 before the acquisition and $50 two years ago. The hospital system would have had to spend $1.6 million extra a year just on that drug, she said, unless it curtailed it use.So Isuprel was removed from the crash carts that are used in emergencies, Ms. Fox said, though it is still available from the pharmacy if doctors really need it. “Our physicians are incredibly frustrated” that they have to think twice about using the drug, she said.Dr. David Kimberlin, a pediatric infectious disease specialist at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, recounted a case in which a baby needed Daraprim, the drug acquired by Turing, which increased its price to $750 a pill. Daraprim, acquired in August, treats toxoplasmosis, a parasitic infection that can cause blindness and brain damage.Since Daraprim is a pill, it had to be turned into a liquid form that a baby could swallow. But the compounding pharmacy the hospital relied on to do that could not obtain the drug because of new restrictions Turing had placed on distribution. The huge price increase, which would bring the cost of a yearlong course of treatment for a baby to more than $69,000 from $1,200, was also a deterrent.“Babies’ lives literally hang in the balance here,” Dr. Kimberlin said. He said that infectious disease societies had surveyed members and found more than 30 cases in which people had trouble obtaining Daraprim promptly.In a statement, Turing said it was committed to developing innovative therapies and was making sure that no patient was denied access to Daraprim. Valeant said in a statement that “broad conclusions about the company’s pricing cannot be drawn from any one drug” and that most hospitals use small amounts of Isuprel, limiting any impact of price increases. Ms. Fox and others who testified said that companies like Turing and Valeant were able to increase prices so rapidly because of a lack of competition in the market for generic drugs, which stemmed in part from consolidation in that industry. The lack of competition plus manufacturing problems have led to shortages and price increases for antibiotics, anesthetics and some other drugs that are more widely used than Daraprim and Isuprel.Various suggestions were made for dealing with the issue. Gerard Anderson, a professor at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, said the Food and Drug Administration should expedite approval of generic drugs for economic reasons.Daraprim and Isuprel have no patent protection but there are no generic competitors either, because the market was small until the big price hikes. If a generic company wanted to enter now, it could take two to three years to get F.D.A. approval. But if that time could be reduced to six months, it would provide a deterrent to huge price hikes, he said.Express Scripts, the largest pharmacy benefit manager, is encouraging use of an alternative to Daraprim that is made by a compounding pharmacy and sells for about $1 a pill. But witnesses at the hearing were reluctant to recommend more use of compounding to save money because such drugs are not approved by the F.D.A. and have had safety issues in the past.“Compounding should not be a blanket, one-size-fits-all solution,” said Ms. Fox of the University of Utah.Mark Merritt, chief of the Pharmaceutical Care Management Association, which represents pharmacy benefit managers, called for a watch list of drugs with no generic competition that would be vulnerable to huge price increases. He said there were about 200 such drugs.“The hedge funds have these lists, the government may as well too,” he said.Advertisement