AdvertisementSupported byBy Nelson D. SchwartzCindy Whitehead, who oversaw a long, but ultimately successful, effort to bring to market the first prescription drug to enhance women’s sexual drive, is leaving her post as chief executive of Sprout Pharmaceuticals.In August, the Food and Drug Administration approved Sprout’s Addyi, often referred to as the “little pink pill,” after rejecting it in 2010 and in 2013 on concerns about side effects and limited effectiveness.Shortly after the approval, Sprout, which was privately held, agreed to be acquired by Valeant Pharmaceuticals for $1 billion.“Thanks to the efforts of Cindy and her team, Valeant has the opportunity to make Addyi broadly available to patients in need of this important medical treatment,” Valeant’s senior vice president for investor relations, Laurie Little, said in a statement. “Having built a team to take Addyi to market, we mutually agreed that it was the right time to transition to new leadership for the next phase of global commercialization.” After Addyi, also known as flibanserin, was initially rejected by the F.D.A., the pharmaceutical company Boehringer Ingelheim dropped it. Ms. Whitehead and her husband, Robert, both pharmaceutical industry veterans, formed Sprout in 2011 to acquire it.For the Whiteheads and other executives, the Valeant acquisition was a financial coup. But the drug has gotten off to a slow start. In the weeks after its October debut, just a few hundred prescriptions were filed for Addyi, according to Bloomberg. That is in sharp contrast to the introduction of Pfizer’s Viagra, the so-called little blue pill aimed at treating erectile dysfunction in men. Viagra was a blockbuster from the start in 1998 and last year Pfizer sold nearly $1.7 billion of it.With financial help from Sprout, women’s groups and other supporters started a campaign to win F.D.A. approval for Addyi, noting that the agency had approved comparable treatments for men.Sprout’s effort succeeded but the F.D.A.’s approval came with a boxed warning, alerting patients not to take the drug with alcohol. Women with impaired liver function were also advised not to take it.Ms. Whitehead will continue to consult with Valeant and Sprout executives after her departure, according to the statement from Valeant.Advertisement