AdvertisementSupported byBy Hala Droubi, Julie Creswell and Nelson D. SchwartzDUBAI, United Arab Emirates — At Lifestyle, an inexpensive home furnishings store tucked inside the Mall of the Emirates here, shoppers on Wednesday examined lamps and picked up picture frames.But they did not see any Trump Home mirrors or lotion dispensers.Just hours after the Republican presidential candidate Donald J. Trump called for a ban on the entry of Muslims into the United States, one of his Middle Eastern business partners, the Dubai-based Landmark Group, responded by removing all Trump-branded products from the shelves of its Lifestyle retail stores.In the Middle East, as in other parts of the world, the foundation of Mr. Trump’s business is his name, a brand that for many there is synonymous with American success and luxury. Regarding the Middle East as a critical avenue for growth, the Trump Organization signed numerous deals in recent years to put the Trump brand on upscale golf courses and residences in Dubai, hotel properties in Turkey, and home furnishings, accessories and décor sold in stores across the region.But the value of the Trump name in the world’s vast Muslim population has been thrown into question since he made his comments.“I now feel ashamed to live in a building associated with such a vile man,” said Melek Toprak, 38, who lives with her sister at Trump Towers Istanbul, an asymmetrical glass commercial and residential complex developed by the Turkish billionaire Aydin Dogan that soars over the city’s central business district.“He insulted 1.8 billion Muslims worldwide, and he has business in the Arab world,” Khalaf al-Habtoor, another Middle Eastern billionaire, said in an interview. “He will lose because respectable Muslims will refuse to work with him.”Mr. Khalaf, the head of a conglomerate based in the United Arab Emirates, says he regrets writing an article this summer in which he supported Mr. Trump, who remains the Republican presidential front-runner in most polls.Unbowed, Mr. Trump says he is not worried about the impact his comments may have in terms of canceled visits to his golf courses and hotels, or lost business at stores that sell Trump-branded merchandise.Instead, Mr. Trump insists he has been told by his Muslim friends and Middle Eastern business partners that they are grateful he has addressed a difficult subject that other world leaders would just as soon avoid.“I have so many friends who are Muslim, they are thankful that I’ve been able to bring it up,” he said in a telephone interview. “It is a subject they say everybody else is afraid to bring up.”Mr. Trump said he envisioned barring Muslims from entering the United States only as a temporary measure.“This can go rapidly, and I expect it should,” he said. “We’re really talking about a limited period of time.”Still, Mr. Trump said if he lost business because Muslim customers or others were angry about his statements, he would be prepared to live with that. “This is much more important than any single thing,” he said. “This is far more important than anything I’m doing.”It is not the first time Mr. Trump’s incendiary remarks in this election season may have cost his business interests. Mr. Trump’s anti-immigration stance cost him millions, if not tens of millions, of dollars in lost licensing and other deals.Mr. Trump has been down this road before. This summer, the Professional Golfers Association of America canceled its Grand Slam of Golf tournament at Trump National Golf Club Los Angeles, following Mr. Trump’s statement that Mexican immigrants were bringing crime and drugs into the United States and committing rape.NBC labeled those comments derogatory and dropped him as host of “The Celebrity Apprentice” in June while also canceling plans to broadcast the Miss USA pageant, which at the time was part of a joint venture between Mr. Trump and the network.But with Mr. Trump showing more staying power politically than many experts had anticipated and his popularity growing in parts of the electorate, some businesses that once sought to distance themselves now fear losing out. Last month, despite protests, Mr. Trump was invited to host the NBC program “Saturday Night Live.”One Middle Eastern business leader said on Wednesday that he did not think Mr. Trump even believed what he was saying.“Look, Donald is my friend, and we have been friends for a long time,” said Akbar al-Baker, the chief executive of Qatar Airways. “I think it is an exercise only to gain political mileage. Nothing more. This is the opportune time to excite more extremist people so that they could give him their votes.”So far, only one of Mr. Trump’s business partners with roots in the Middle East, the Landmark Group, has distanced itself from him.One afternoon this week, a black-and-cream bedroom set and a sleek dining room table from the Trump Home by Dorya collection were still on display alongside upscale brands like Ralph Lauren and Versace in an Aati showroom in the Karama area of Dubai.The Trump Home galleries opened only a few months ago at the retailer, which is operated by Al Tayer Group of Dubai.One of Mr. Trump’s biggest and most prominent relationships in the area is with Damac Properties, which is building Akoya, a 42-million-square-foot development that includes the Trump International Golf Club Dubai, luxury Trump Prvt mansions and villas, and a Trump Spa & Wellness Center. Damac did not respond to an email seeking comment about its relationship with Mr. Trump.Just how far Mr. Trump’s comments will reverberate among Muslims in the Middle East and beyond is not yet clear.On Wednesday, Guray Guraz, a 43-year-old Turkish teacher sitting at a restaurant in Trump Towers Istanbul, weighed Mr. Trump’s comments.“I think he is an idiot, but it does not prevent me from coming here,” he said. “I do not feel very happy that he gave his name to this building, and when he made those remarks, I was expecting a protest in front of this building. But either people are not aware of the situation or they do not care.”Ultimately, Mr. Trump’s stance could boomerang, not just overseas but in the United States as well, critics said.“The comments are very unfortunate because they have the potential to dampen foreign trade,” said Gordon Gray, executive vice president of the National-U.S. Arab Chamber of Commerce. “To adopt a posture that would hurt economic activity is shortsighted, at best.”Mr. Gray said he had not heard any other business leaders welcoming the idea of a ban on Muslims entering the country, notwithstanding Mr. Trump’s claims.“The people with whom I’ve spoken are offended, and their concern is calibrated to the degree they think Mr. Trump might be elected president,” he said. “I’ve not yet met anyone who agrees with him. But it’s possible that he’s a billionaire and people tell him what he wants to hear.”Hala Droubi reported from Dubai and Julie Creswell and Nelson D. Schwartz from New York. Jad Mouawad contributed reporting from New York, and Ceylan Yeginsu and Safak Timur contributed reporting from Istanbul.Advertisement