AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedThis year has proved a tough one for stock market debuts. But the year is poised to end on a high note, thanks to a software company born in Australia.Atlassian, a maker of business development and collaboration software, priced its initial public offering at $21 a share on Thursday, above its expected price range of $19 to $20, and raising $462 million.At the I.P.O. price, the company was valued at $4.38 billion, making it the fifth biggest company to go public this year, according to Renaissance Capital. The software maker’s last private investment round valued it at $3 billion.The stock sale is a rare bright spot for companies looking to go public. Even prominent names have struggled to win the valuations that they had sought. That has chilled a once-heated market, with the number of I.P.O.s filed this year down 32.6 percent from the same time last year, according to data from Renaissance Capital.Companies as varied as the luxury department store Neiman Marcus and the Caribbean telecommunications company Digicel postponed their market debuts after investors proved reluctant to pay up.And many of those who did make it to the public markets have suffered from faltering performance. Over all, the average I.P.O. that priced this year has fallen 2.4 percent from its offer price, according to Renaissance Capital.Tech companies, which had flown high over the last several years with intense investor enthusiasm, have proved no exception. Square, the payments company co-founded by the Twitter co-creator Jack Dorsey, took a steep discount when it priced its I.P.O. last month, and after an initial trading pop its shares have fallen 8 percent, to $11.99. (They are still above their offer price of $9.)Unlike many other tech “unicorns” — companies valued above $1 billion — Atlassian was founded not in Silicon Valley but in Australia, begun in 2002 and initially financed in part by some $10,000 in credit card debt.Since then, the company has grown to 51,000 customers and more than 1,200 employees.The company makes a number of products meant to make life easier for software developers, like its JIRA project management tool — a name derived from the Japanese moniker for Godzilla — its HipChat chat software, and its Bitbucket code management tool.Among its most notable traits is that Atlassian has not actually collected money from outside investors. Instead, it is a “bootstrapped” company, financed by its own profits. (Several financial firms, including Accel Partners and T. Rowe Price, bought shares from employees in so-called secondary transactions, but never actually invested directly in the company.)The company has been profitable for the last three years. In the fiscal year that ended June 30, the company earned $6.8 million on revenue of $319.5 million, compared with net income of $19 million on revenue of $215 million in the previous year.Another distinguishing feature of Atlassian is that it does not employ a huge sales force, bucking the trend of software companies hawking their products as far and wide as possible. Instead, the company relies on word-of-mouth marketing, as teams within a client persuade others to adopt its software.The company is expected to begin trading on the Nasdaq stock market on Thursday under the ticker symbol “TEAM.”Its offering was led by Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley.Advertisement