AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromYum Brands, the restaurant company that owns Taco Bell, KFC and Pizza Hut, on Tuesday reported weaker earnings than Wall Street had expected, as it continued to struggle to overcome the damage caused more than a year ago by a food safety scandal at a supplier in China.Sales nonetheless rose 2 percent to $3.43 billion in the quarter that ended on Sept. 5, while profits grew to $421 million, or 97 cents a share, compared with $404 million, or 91 cents a share in the same period a year ago.Greg Creed, chief executive of Yum, said in a statement that the company would be “well below” its target of a 10 percent increase in earnings this year. The stock closed at $83.42, up 0.5 percent, on Tuesday, but plunged in after-hours trading.The “pace of recovery in our China division is below our expectations,” Mr. Creed said. “Outside of China, our Taco Bell and KFC divisions continued to sustain their positive sales momentum while Pizza Hut was relatively flat.”In July 2014, a Chinese television station aired a program accusing workers at Shanghai Husi, a division of the OSI Group, of extending expiration dates on chicken and beef products and returning meat that had fallen on the ground to conveyor belts for processing.The Chinese government temporarily shut down Shanghai Husi, leaving Yum, McDonald’s and other American companies scrambling to find other sources of meat. Jonathan Blum, a spokesman for Yum, said the company got only a small amount of its meat from OSI and was able to replace that quickly.KFC had more than 4,800 stores in China at the end of last year, compared with almost 4,400 in the United States. Taco Bell, which has only a handful of international stores, is the strongest performing of Yum’s brands, while Pizza Hut is struggling.The varied performance of the company’s units has caused investment analysts, who like clean “stories” in the businesses they assess, to call for a breakup.The stronger dollar is shaping up as the story of the earnings season that began on Tuesday. Yum said its operating profits were $29 million lower on a reported basis as a result of currency conversion, while PepsiCo, the food and drink giant that used to own Yum’s restaurant brands, said that reporting its results in dollars had knocked about 12 percent off its reported revenues.Sales at PepsiCo dropped 5 percent, to $16.3 billion, in the third quarter, which ended on Sept. 5, PepsiCo said on Tuesday. Earnings fell, too, to $533 million, or 36 cents a share, compared with $2 billion, or $1.32 a share, in the same period last year.Despite the drop, the results beat analysts’ expectations, and PepsiCo shares rose 1.3 percent, to $97.07, on Tuesday.The company, like many others, has had to change the accounting method it uses for its Venezuelan operations, and it said that adjustment had erased $1.4 billion from its bottom line.“We are pleased with our performance for the third quarter of 2015,” Indra Nooyi, chief executive of PepsiCo, said in a statement. Ms. Nooyi said that revenue had grown in spite of weakness in international markets, which account for roughly half of its business, and that profit margins had increased.In particular, PepsiCo has benefited from strong sales in its North American beverage business, which no longer includes Latin America. While sugary soda continues to struggle to attract consumers, Gatorade, the company’s workhorse sports drink brand, has done well, and executives have said Mountain Dew Kickstart — a new, less caffeinated version of the popular soft drink that incorporates fruit juices — is doing well.PepsiCo also has quietly raised prices on some products, including reducing the size of bags of chips it sells, without lowering the price. It has also cut more than $1 billion in costs out of its operations so far this year.Advertisement