AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaYahoo’s core business might fit with Barry Diller’s menagerie.The company said on Wednesday that it was scrapping plans to spin off its stake in the Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba and that it might instead separate out its division that houses search, advertising and the like. Mr. Diller’s IAC/InterActive, with assorted online endeavors, could be a logical home, as might Verizon, the owner of AOL.Yahoo said it had not determined whether to sell anything. Yet if the board does spin out the advertising and search unit, the company could be ripe for a takeover. Yahoo is worth about $33 billion, but most of its value lies with its equity position in Alibaba. The search and ad business is worth only about $3 billion, according to Jefferies.Talk of a deal has been going on ever since Yahoo rebuffed Microsoft’s $44.6 billion offer in 2008. The firm has been floundering for several years, and a revolving door in the executive suite – there have been six chief executives in the last decade – has made it tough for the company to change strategy.There are plenty of potential buyers, however. Yahoo would probably fit right in with IAC’s various aging Internet businesses. They include Ask.com – formerly Ask Jeeves, a Yahoo competitor – About.com and CityGrid. IAC said on Wednesday that it was creating IAC Publishing, which it called a “new digital operating entity” that would combine online brands like The Daily Beast and About.com to reach an estimated 100 million monthly customers in the United States. Yahoo has 200 million visitors, according to the Internet tracking company comScore.Don’t count out Verizon, either. Its chief financial officer, Francis J. Shammo, said during an investor conference on Monday that the wireless carrier would consider buying Yahoo’s search and ad business. Verizon paid $4.4 billion in June for AOL, another limping Internet brand.There has been lots of talk in recent years about how Yahoo and AOL might make a good marriage, reaching far more customers together than they do in total separately. At this point, though, almost any deal would probably look like the right move for Yahoo.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement