
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

DEC. 9, 2015
Yahoo remains stuck in the deal cycle, putting off what looks like an inevitable sale for another year.Still, a year gives its chief executive, Marissa Mayer, another chance to increase a price tag on the once-great Internet company.And there is still much to save. Yahoo has roughly one billion users. It has 81 million users of its mail service in the United States alone. This type of reach would have investors salivating were Yahoo a privileged member of the unicorns, those rare start-ups valued privately at $1 billion or more, particularly because Yahoo actually has revenue of nearly $5 billion a year.But alas, Yahoo’s core business has been struggling. Yahoo has yet to find a core purpose other than being an Internet destination. Ms. Mayer has adopted multiple strategies, which ReCode called “convoluted,” to try to turn the company into a media content business.AdvertisementYahoo needs new products, but it is instead showing just how hard a turnaround is in technology. AOL sort of did it but was only able to claw back a few billion dollars of value from the more than hundred billions lost.Yahoo’s turnaround may work, it may not. But what has really been going on here for the last year is an attempt to deal with Yahoo’s investments in Alibaba and Yahoo Japan. These investments saved Yahoo, but they are also hastening its demise.AdvertisementYou may be scratching your head at this point. Yahoo’s investment in Alibaba is valued at $32 billion, and the Yahoo Japan investment is valued at $8.6 billion. How could such stellar investments doom Yahoo? The sad fact is that Yahoo is being assigned negative value by the stock market, and certainly not the value of $4 billion to $8 billion assigned to it privately.The Alibaba stock holdings make invisible any gains or losses at the real Yahoo business.With no real stock market value for Yahoo, rumor and sentiment appear to be driving Yahoo’s fate. It also means that Yahoo must appease the market by unleashing this value, something it has been trying to do for years.But even a valuation of up to $8 billion probably has Yahoo’s board gnashing its teeth — after all, one billion Internet users has to be worth more. Twitter’s revenue is less than Yahoo’s with far fewer users, and even that company is worth $17 billion. (Twitter, however, is growing in revenue.)And so the Yahoo board’s decision to continue to pursue a spinoff of Yahoo’s core business is part of its attempt to deal with the Alibaba problem, but in truth, it is to crystallize Yahoo’s value. And that is a value that will immediately place Yahoo as a target as the other Internet companies salivate about buying one billion users on the cheap.It all came to a head this year, when Yahoo proposed a spinoff of the Alibaba stake and the I.R.S. countered that it would not provide a favorable private letter ruling on the tax-free nature of that spinoff.Marissa Mayer, chief executive of Yahoo, and Maynard Webb, the chairman, discuss the company's decision to spinoff of its core Internet business, leaving the Alibaba stock in the old company.Yahoo’s lawyer, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, was willing to give a tax opinion, but the risk became too much.AdvertisementAnd so the move backed Yahoo into a corner. The only tax-efficient plan left was to hive off Yahoo’s core business. This is harder than the Alibaba spinoff because it essentially involves creating a new Yahoo, which will take a year at least. There must be I.R.S. approvals, Securities and Exchange Commission clearance and a shareholder vote.In the meantime. Ms. Mayer will have more time to improve Yahoo’s business as the real value of Yahoo will be obscured. And when the value emerges, Yahoo will be ready for sale, stripped of its Alibaba shares.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It will be a difficult road for Ms. Mayer. The announcement on Wednesday was not about a sale, but it is still likely to create more uncertainty. Sale announcements often spur employees to look for new jobs and can reduce morale. And it also scares off customers and suppliers who worry for the future. As of now, Yahoo is going to struggle mightily to retain talent.But the gamble is probably worth it: Yahoo’s user base is enormous, and the board is betting it can be further monetized. This is most likely why the announcement was not about an outright sale. There is too much potential value, and even a $10 billion Yahoo is a minnow among Internet whales, likely not long for this world.The question is whether Ms. Mayer can use this additional year to fulfill Yahoo’s potential.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »