AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsC. Gerald Fraser, who covered the aftermath of the bloody Attica prison uprising in upstate New York and the pioneering presidential campaign of Shirley Chisholm in his 24 years as a reporter for The New York Times, died on Tuesday in the Bronx. He was 90.His partner, M. Phyllis Cunningham, said the cause was complications of cancer.Before joining The Times in 1967, Mr. Fraser reported for The Daily News in New York, covering riots in Harlem and civil rights marches in Alabama.The Times hired him as a metropolitan reporter; one of his beats was covering the courts. He also wrote about the condition of black prisoners, including those involved in the 1971 Attica rebellion. His reporting on the Chisholm campaign, in 1972, traced the making of political history: Ms. Chisholm, the first black woman to serve in Congress, was the first woman to seek the Democratic presidential nomination.He later worked in The Times’s cultural news department and wrote columns for the weekly television guide and the Sunday Book Review.When Mr. Fraser joined the paper, he became one of only two black reporters on the staff at that time. The other, Thomas A. Johnson, had been hired a year earlier. Mr. Fraser became a vocal advocate for improving coverage of issues important to blacks and expanding opportunities for black journalists.When he was hired by The Times in 1967, “it was the summer in which Newark exploded,” he recalled in an interview with the Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education, adding that many blacks in and out of newsrooms across the country were stirred by appeals for black power.“We wanted to identify with a community and people who were calling themselves black,” he said.Charles Gerald Fraser Jr. was born in Boston on July 30, 1925, the son of Caribbean immigrants. His father, a cook, came from Guyana. His mother, the former Bernice Love, was a seamstress from Jamaica. A great-grandfather had founded the newspaper The Jamaica Advocate, and Mr. Fraser recalled that his family subscribed to three newspapers, which he read cover to cover.Attending the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Mr. Fraser worked on the student newspaper and earned a bachelor’s degree in economics in 1949. He later earned a master’s degree at what was then the New School for Social Research in New York.In another interview with the Maynard Institute, Mr. Fraser recalled that most mainstream newspapers were not hiring blacks in the 1950s. But the Urban League, he said, managed to arrange an interview for him at The Boston Globe, where he had worked as a copy boy in high school.Arriving for the interview, he said, he was met by a man who asked him, “in a rich Irish brogue,” his purpose for being there.“I want to get a job,” he told the man. The man replied: “Oh, you can’t get a job here. You’re not in the janitors’ union.’ ”After nearly three years of washing pots and pans and working in a post office, Mr. Fraser landed a job in 1952 as a reporter for The Amsterdam News, the Harlem-based weekly, whose editor was also a Wisconsin alumnus. He worked there until 1956.Mr. Fraser later edited a hotel workers union newspaper and covered the United Nations for West Indian periodicals before being hired by The Daily News.He left The Times in 1991 and joined Earth Times, a monthly that reported on environmental and development issues at the United Nations. He became a senior editor there.Mr. Fraser also taught at Columbia University’s Graduate School of Journalism and at John Jay College of Criminal Justice of the City University of New York.Mr. Fraser, who died at Calvary Hospital, lived in Manhattan.He married Geraldine McCarthy, who died in 1981. They had two children, who survive him: Charles Gerald Fraser III and Jetta Christine Fraser. Besides Ms. Cunningham, he is survived by their daughter, Maurella Cunningham-Fraser; three grandchildren; and a brother, Walter.Advertisement