AdvertisementSupported byBy Adam LiptakWASHINGTON — When the Supreme Court agreed to decide whether unhappy customers of DirecTV could band together in a class action, the court’s purpose seemed clear: to reverse and rebuke a California appeals court that had allowed the class action and refused to send the case to arbitration instead.The Supreme Court is generally hostile to class actions and partial to arbitration, in which parties resolve disputes before private bodies. In 2011, in another case from California, it allowed companies to escape class actions by insisting on one-by-one arbitrations, even over trivial amounts of money, in standard-form contracts.It was something of a surprise, then, that the case, argued on  Tuesday, seemed to strike many of the justices as difficult. While there appeared to be a consensus that the appeals court had gone astray, there was also a sense that the Supreme Court had bitten off both less and more than it wanted to chew.On the one hand, some justices questioned why they had volunteered to answer a trivial and idiosyncratic question about early termination fees. The arbitration agreement at issue has been abandoned by DirecTV and is not used by any other major company. Simply deciding the meaning of that defunct contract did not warrant the court’s attention, Justice Elena Kagan suggested.The appeals court “probably got the answer wrong,” she said. “Strike the ‘probably.’ Got the answer wrong. But, you know, wrongness is just not what we do here.” She meant that the Supreme Court is in the business of determining broad legal principles rather than correcting all manner of errors committed by lower courts.If Justice Kagan was worried that the case was too small, other members of the court were concerned that it might be too big. Justice Stephen G. Breyer said the cost of reversing the appeals court would be to encourage countless other lawsuits.“Once we start with this case,” he said, “even if this is not too difficult under state law, we’ve got every arbitration contract in the world where one lawyer or another will suddenly be saying, ‘Oh, the interpretation of the contract here by the state court judge is not favorable enough to arbitration.’ ”“And suddenly,” he said, “we have federalized, if not every area, a huge area of state contract law.”Christopher Landau, a lawyer for the company, agreed that contract interpretation is typically a matter of state law. But he added that Congress had enacted the Federal Arbitration Act to encourage arbitrations and to override interpretations of contracts animated by hostility to them.Justice Breyer was in dissent in the 2011 case, AT&T Mobility v. Concepcion, which favored arbitration. But he said he was worried that the lower courts were not complying with it, and he alluded to the difficulty of enforcing the court’s 1954 decision in Brown v. Board of Education to underscore his point.“I think it’s an extremely important thing,” he said, “in a country which has only nine judges here and thousands of judges in other places who must follow our decisions — and think of the desegregation matters, et cetera — that we be pretty firm on saying you can’t run around our decisions, even if they’re decisions that I disagree with.”The contract the justices were considering barred mass arbitration, a form of class actions pursued before an arbitrator. But the contract added that the entire arbitration agreement — including provisions concerning one-by-one arbitrations — would be void if “the law of your state would find this agreement to dispense with class arbitrations unenforceable.”Much of the argument was devoted to trying to puzzle out the meaning of that phrase and in particular its reference to state law.Thomas C. Goldstein, a lawyer for the plaintiffs, said the provision was a “blowup clause,” sending his clients to court if state law allowed mass arbitration. Mr. Landau countered that the 2011 decision had altered state law and that the appeals court ruling to the contrary was like “saying black means white.”Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.Advertisement