AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsArthur R. Taylor, a former corporate wunderkind who became president of CBS at 37, unloaded an underperforming network-owned property, the New York Yankees, and then, as a sometimes nettlesome overachiever, was fired by William S. Paley, the imperious CBS chairman and founder, died on Dec. 3 in Salisbury Township, Pa. He was 80.The cause was pulmonary failure, his wife, Kathryn, said.Mr. Taylor was also instrumental at CBS in instituting television’s family viewing hour, a short-lived effort, pushed by the Federal Communications Commission and adopted voluntarily by the networks, to reduce prime-time programming deemed unsuitable for children.His ouster in 1976, four years after he had been recruited from outside the company, startled the broadcasting industry, coming as it did as the Columbia Broadcasting System was reporting record earnings for the 24th consecutive quarter.While ratings were disappointing, sales and revenue hit new highs. But Mr. Paley was said to have been personally vexed by the independence and lack of deference of Mr. Taylor, his handpicked president and potential successor, and by an exodus of creative executives.After the ouster Mr. Taylor became the founding president of the New York City Partnership, a business and civic lobbying group formed by the banker David Rockefeller and affiliated with the Chamber of Commerce. (It is now called the Partnership for New York City.)Mr. Taylor was also the founding president of the Entertainment Channel, a joint venture by the RCA Corporation and what is now the Rockefeller Group. A premium cable channel that offered quality programming, it  lasted less than a year, but it led to another joint cable venture, the Arts and Entertainment Network, better known as A&E.In addition, Mr. Taylor was dean of Fordham University’s Graduate School of Business Administration in New York for eight years and president of Muhlenberg College in Allentown, Pa., for a decade.Arthur Robert Taylor was born in Elizabeth, N.J., on July 6, 1935. His father, also named Arthur, was a telephone repairman and later a company manager. His mother was the former Marion Scott.Mr. Taylor was raised in Rahway, a blue-collar city known for a state prison and a Merck pharmaceutical plant. It was a place, he recalled, where if you could survive high school, “you were a pretty tough nut.” Two students in his graduating class went to college, he said; 10 wound up in Sing Sing, the New York State penitentiary.Mr. Taylor majored in Renaissance history at Brown University and earned a master’s degree there in American economic history. He was two courses and a dissertation shy of earning a doctorate, intending to become a teacher, when he was hired as a trainee in investment banking by First Boston Corporation.He rose meteorically in the corporate world, becoming vice president for finance and then executive vice president of International Paper before he was recruited by CBS to be its president in 1972.When he arrived at the network’s headquarters in Manhattan, known as Black Rock, Mr. Taylor became the second consecutive successor to the legendary Frank Stanton to be hired from outside the broadcasting industry, a manifestation of Paley’s effort to diversify the company. (Charles T. Ireland Jr. had died after just 18 months in the job.)Mr. Taylor went on to acquire Gulbransen Organs (he had been first clarinetist in the New Jersey All-State Orchestra and played the organ in his CBS office) and initiated the $50 million purchase of Fawcett Publications.In 1973 he oversaw the sale of CBS’s share of the Yankees to a group of investors led by George M. Steinbrenner for $8.7 million. CBS had purchased 80 percent of the team for $11.2 million in 1964. Two years later, the team finished last in the American League for the first time since 1912, and it had never ranked higher than fourth by the time CBS sold its share.As president of CBS, Mr. Taylor also urged the House Judiciary Committee to let the networks present live coverage of its hearings on the impeachment of President Richard M. Nixon, and he rejected Mobil’s proposal to broadcast message advertising (rather than product advertising) on energy issues. Message ads, he said, “mean that those with the most money would get to talk loudest.”But he did sign on to the family viewing hour (from 8 to 9 p.m. Eastern time). The courts overturned the viewing hour on First Amendment grounds after a year, though some networks remained guided by it voluntarily.After leaving CBS, Mr. Taylor formed the Sarabam Corporation with Nelson A. Rockefeller, the former vice president and New York governor, and George Woods, the retired chairman of the World Bank, to help Middle Eastern countries invest in the United States. He then established Arthur Taylor & Company, a private investment company.As president of Muhlenberg, beginning in 1992, Mr. Taylor was credited with reducing the college’s debt by half, tripling its endowment and doubling enrollment. But he was ousted in a clash with trustees over his management style after he had, among other things, taken firm disciplinary action against an offending but popular fraternity.Mr. Taylor is survived by his second wife, the former Kathryn Pelgrift; three daughters from his first marriage, Martha Josephson, Anne Madden and Sarah Rountree; and four grandchildren.After being fired at CBS, late in 1976, Mr. Taylor became more publicity shy. Before then, though, he acknowledged being opinionated, ambitious and blunt. “People either like me or they don’t,” he told The New York Times in 1972.He maintained that a corporation could fulfill a socially responsible agenda only if was profitable, and he encapsulated that philosophy in an anecdote he told about coming to CBS.“Someone called and said, ‘Now you can have a good seat at Yankee Stadium,’ ” he recalled. “I said, ‘Let’s have some paying customers instead.’ ”Advertisement