AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackA dengue fever vaccine developed by the French pharmaceutical giant Sanofi has been approved for use by Mexico, the first approval in the world for any vaccine for the disease, which afflicts tens of millions of people around the world and is becoming an increasing threat.Sanofi said in a news release Wednesday that the vaccine, which it is calling Dengvaxia, was approved by Mexico’s Federal Commission for the Protection against Sanitary Risk for prevention of dengue in people 9 to 45 years old living in endemic areas.“We are making dengue the next vaccine-preventable disease,” Olivier Charmeil, executive vice president for vaccines at Sanofi, said in an interview.But it is still uncertain how widely the vaccine will be deployed, both in Mexico and other countries, because of limits to its effectiveness and national budgets.Also known as breakbone fever, dengue can cause high temperature and intense joint and muscle pain. In severe cases, it causes hemorrhagic fever, which is marked by bleeding and shock and can be fatal.A viral disease that is transmitted by mosquitoes, the number of cases has been increasing sharply and the disease has been spreading out of its traditional home in developing countries in the tropics and subtropics. There is now an outbreak in Hawaii, and there was one last year in Tokyo, the first one in Japan in nearly 70 years. The Florida Keys had some cases in 2009 for the first time in decades.In clinical trials, the vaccine reduced the risk of developing dengue by about 60 percent, which some experts have said is less effective than desired. The vaccine seems least effective in children younger than 9, particularly those younger than 6, and may even increase their risk of having more severe disease in the long run, according to a longer term follow-up from the clinical trials.“The bumpy road to a vaccine-based solution for dengue continues,” Cameron P. Simmons of the University of Melbourne in Australia, wrote in a commentary in the New England Journal of Medicine in September.But Sanofi itself and some other experts said that that level of effectiveness would be welcomed, given that there is now no treatment for dengue. In one trial involving children 9 to 16 in Latin America and the Caribbean, the vaccine reduced the risk of hospitalization from dengue by 80 percent.An estimated 50 million to 100 million people a year are sickened by dengue, though that might be an underestimate. One study said about 400 million people are infected each year, with about 100 million of them feeling sick to some degree.Mr. Charmeil said the vaccine would be available early next year in Mexico for people who want to buy it for themselves, though the price has not yet been announced. But much greater use would come if the government decides to deploy a public vaccination campaign. The government has not decided what to do yet.Mr. Charmeil said that by the end of this month, Sanofi will have applied for approval in 20 countries in Latin America and Asia. He said the company already had 2 million doses available and by 2017 should have the capacity to make 100 million doses a year, should that much be needed.Mr. Charmeil said the price of the vaccine would be reasonable based on its value. He said the world now spends $9 billion treating dengue and almost as much to control mosquitoes. He declined to estimate the sales of Dengvaxia but said he would not dispute estimates by others that sales could reach $1 billion a year.Sanofi has been hurt by declining sales in its big diabetes drug business, the result of new competition and heavier discounting by manufacturers.Dengvaxia is a live virus vaccine consisting of an attenuated yellow fever virus genetically engineered to produce proteins from the dengue virus and stimulate the body’s immune system to make antibodies to those proteins. The vaccine works against all four subtypes of the dengue virus, but better for some subtypes than others. Others are developing dengue vaccines but are thought to be at least a few years behind Sanofi.OpinionTina RosenbergAdvertisement