AdvertisementSupported byBy David JollyKABUL, Afghanistan — Its chief export is opium and its main “import” is international aid. But Afghanistan is about to join the World Trade Organization, in what officials hope is a sign of better things to come for this impoverished, war-ravaged country.Afghanistan, along with the West African nation of Liberia, is expected to get the approval of member nations at a ministerial conference of the trade organization next week in Nairobi, Kenya.It may be hard to see how membership would make much of a dent in Afghanistan’s economic woes. But optimists hope that the trade body’s seal of approval would provide a lift for Afghanistan, which gets three-quarters of its gross domestic product from foreign aid and derives more than half of the remainder from the production and export of opium and related products like heroin. Most of the rest comes from agriculture and services.“This is really positive news for Afghanistan and the W.T.O.,” the director general of the trade body, Roberto Azevêdo, said in a statement. “W.T.O. membership will help to create new trading opportunities and boost economic development.”President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan said membership would create “a catalyst for domestic reforms and transformation to an effective and functioning market economy that attracts investment, creates jobs and improves the welfare of the people of Afghanistan.”Still, the crucial roadblock to economic rebirth is the perilous security situation: The Taliban, the group waging war with the government, have control of more territory than at any time since before the United States-led coalition ousted them in 2001, and road travel is unsafe in much of the country. Other challenges include endemic corruption and a lack of basic infrastructure.As the International Monetary Fund put it succinctly in a recent report, Afghanistan “remains a poor, fragile state far from self-reliance.” The country ranks 194th of 213 countries by income per capita, the report said, while “a large illicit narcotics sector, difficult security conditions, corruption and weak institutions undermine development, constrain growth, and weigh on poverty reduction.”While economists generally agree that more trade is a good thing, there are concerns that in desperately poor countries, the benefits of World Trade Organization membership can come at a substantial cost. A United Nations study found that membership would not be an unalloyed positive. While consumers would benefit from lower prices as tariffs on imports fall, the study found, the country’s emerging producers would suffer from new competition, even as government revenues might decline on lower tariff receipts.If approved, Afghanistan and Liberia would become the 163rd and 164th members of the World Trade Organization, and two of the poorest countries to join.The trade group itself might have little else to celebrate at the Nairobi meeting. The so-called Doha Round of talks, begun with great fanfare in 2001 and meant to achieve lower trade barriers for all members, have been stalled for years. Mr. Azevêdo was quoted by Reuters as warning on Nov. 26 that moving forward in those talks was “impossible at this point in time.”Even as those discussions have gone nowhere, the United States and some of its biggest trading partners have been negotiating agreements outside the trade organization. Such pacts include the Trans-Pacific Partnership, involving 12 Pacific Rim nations, and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership between the United States and the European Union.Rod Nordland contributed reporting.Advertisement