By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSSEPT. 30, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The head of the International Monetary Fund said on Wednesday that global growth would probably be weaker this year as the world economy confronts a host of problems, including a refugee crisis in Europe, an economic slowdown in China and a pending rise in United States interest rates.The fund’s managing director, Christine Lagarde, predicted a moderate rebound in growth in advanced economies such as those of the United States, Europe and Japan. But she said emerging economies would experience a fifth consecutive year of slowing activity.Ms. Lagarde said potential growth was being held back by low productivity, aging populations and lingering problems, like high debt levels, from the 2008 financial crisis. She said it would be critical to properly manage the transition in China to consumer-led growth and the likely move by the Federal Reserve toward higher interest rates.In a speech previewing next week’s annual meetings of the 188-nation I.M.F. and its sister lending agency, the World Bank, Ms. Lagarde said global growth was “disappointing and uneven,” as many emerging-market nations lost revenue from falling prices of commodities like oil.AdvertisementMs. Lagarde said the I.M.F. would release its updated economic forecasts next week. While she did not reveal specific figures, she said growth was expected to be weaker this year than last year and that modest improvement was expected in 2016.AdvertisementThe global economy expanded by 3.4 percent in 2014. The I.M.F.’s previous forecast was for growth of 3.3 percent this year.In her speech, Ms. Lagarde called India a bright spot for the global economy. But she noted that Russia and Brazil were facing “serious economic difficulties,” and that growth also slowed sharply in many Latin American countries.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The meetings next week will be held in Lima, Peru — the first time since Rio de Janeiro in 1967 that the annual meetings of the two international lending agencies will be held in Latin America.Ms. Lagarde said China’s transition from export-led growth to a focus on domestic-led growth presented challenges for Chinese officials. They are faced with a need to make difficult reforms, while at the same time protecting growth and financial stability.China consumes 60 percent of the world’s production of iron ore, Ms. Lagarde noted. But as it switches to lower production, its demand for various commodities will decline.“This will contribute to what could be a prolonged period of low commodity prices,” she said.The second major transition the world will have to manage is a change in interest rate policies in the United States, as the Fed prepares to raise rates for the first time in nearly a decade, she said.“Rising U.S. interest rates and a stronger dollar could reveal currency mismatches, leading to corporate defaults,” Ms. Lagarde said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.