By AMIE TSANGDEC. 9, 2015
HONG KONG —  Shares started trading in six newly listed companies in China on Wednesday after a five-month hiatus for initial public offerings and just weeks before rules governing investors in new listings are set to change.Shares in all the companies surged by their daily limit of 44 percent, a typical increase for listings in China. The Shenzhen and Shanghai stock indexes both rose about 0.1 percent.The companies had filed to go public between February and June, but the Chinese government had banned new share sales in July in an effort to stem a plunge in the markets. The move created a backlog of nearly 700 companies that have been waiting to make their debuts.Public offerings were a popular investment before the ban, with companies often reaching the limit of how much their shares could rise on the first day. That effect was partly because of speculation and partly because of government policies meant to ensure that businesses were not overvalued when they went public.AdvertisementUnder current rules, buyers must back their order with cash up front, even though the entire share order is unlikely to be filled. That can temporarily tie up hundreds of billions of dollars that might be invested elsewhere.AdvertisementAbout 3.978 trillion renminbi, or about $606 billion, was locked up for initial public offerings in June, while 42 billion renminbi was actually raised, according to ANZ Research.But the China Securities Regulatory Commission said the deposit requirement for initial public offerings would be different in 2016. That may make more funds available for investing in new listings, and stocks in general, analysts said.Changing the rules could make new listings more inviting, said David Qu, a rates strategist at ANZ Research.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The old requirements, however, apply to the companies that started trading on Wednesday and the other 22 expected to list before the end of the year. Nonetheless, Mr. Qu says there is little to worry about.“The P.B.O.C. is definitely going to maintain accommodative liquidity in the market in spite of the I.P.O.s,” he said, referring to the People’s Bank of China. “They will inject liquidity when necessary, so I’m not worried about the I.P.O. tightening this year.”Shanghai’s main share index plunged 5.5 percent at the end of November, after Beijing cracked down on fraud and insider trading in the financial sector. But the resumption of I.P.O.s may also have contributed to sagging shares, as investors cashed out of their holdings to prepare for the new offerings.Herald van der Linde, an equities strategist at HSBC, said the government was working hard to make the process of going public more efficient. He added that it would take a while to see how the market responded to the resumption of public offerings.“Sometimes when equity markets are hot, you see them do phenomenally well,” he said, referring to new listings. “I don’t really expect that at the moment; you get that when there is liquidity. It will be much more muted from what we’ve seen for some of the past.”Anji Foodstuff, a condiment maker; BanBao, a toy manufacturer; and Bomin Electronics, which makes printed circuit boards, were listed on the Shanghai stock exchange on Wednesday.AdvertisementThe Shenzhen listings were Hubei Kailong Chemical Group, which makes explosives; Zhejiang Zhongjian Technology, which makes gardening machinery; and Beijing Sanfo Outdoor Products, a manufacturer of camping items.A version of this article appears in print on December 10, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: 6 Companies Make Stock Market Debut in China After a 5-Month I.P.O. Hiatus.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.