

      By PRADNYA JOSHI and 
    
BINYAMIN APPELBAUM

UPDATED December 16, 2015

20%Paul A.VolckerAlanGreenspanJanet L.YellenBen S.Bernanke15Each Fedchairman’stenure1050’80’90’00’1020%Paul A.VolckerAlanGreenspanBen S.BernankeJanet L.Yellen15Each Fedchairman’stenure1050’80’85’90’95’00’05’10’1520%Paul A.VolckerAlanGreenspanBen S.BernankeJanet L.Yellen15Each Fedchairman’stenure1050’80’85’90’95’00’05’10’1520%Paul A.VolckerAlanGreenspanBen S.BernankeJanet L.Yellen15Each Fedchairman’stenure1050’80’85’90’95’00’05’10’15Janet L. Yellen, the chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, is about to take the central bank into a new era by beginning a process of raising short-term interest rates, which rested near zero for seven years. How the economy responds to the Fed’s actions will go a long way toward defining Ms. Yellen’s tenure as the chief architect of the nation’s monetary policy. Her three predecessors in recent decades all put their own distinctive stamp on the economy. Here is a brief look at their significant milestones and policy shifts in office: Mr. Volcker inaugurates the Fed’s modern era, in which it has focused on moderating inflation, by raising interest rates relentlessly until the economy falters and prices start to rise more slowly. October 1979: Mr. Volcker raises the Fed’s benchmark rate by 4 percentage points in a single month, to 15.5 percent. The first increase is announced after a secret and unscheduled meeting. It is a striking debut that signals the beginning of a new era at the Fed: The Fed targets the growth of the money supply as the best means to control inflation, allowing interest rates to swing more. The next year, Mr. Volcker tightens policy enough to push rates to 20 percent. August 1982: The Fed eases off the monetary brakes, allowing interest rates to fall and the economy to begin a strong recovery. June 1983: Inflation falls to 2.5 percent, after peaking at 14.6 percent just three years earlier. Mr. Volcker’s campaign fostered a pair of recessions (in 1980 and 1981-82) and led to a spike in unemployment. But by the middle of the decade, both joblessness and inflation are at low levels – an exact reversal of the high unemployment and high inflation that prevailed in much of the 1970s.  Mr. Greenspan presides over a “Great Moderation” – nearly two decades of strong growth, modest inflation and low unemployment, with just a few bumps along the way. October 1987: Shortly into Mr. Greenspan’s tenure, the Fed eases rates after the stock market crashes. July 1988: In Mr. Greenspan’s early years as Fed chairman, inflation rises above 5 percent amid strong growth and doubts about the Fed’s post-Volcker backbone. Mr. Greenspan’s response, a sharp increase in interest rates, pushed the economy into recession in the early 1990s, but it consolidates the Fed’s control. Neither inflation nor interest rates have returned to those heights in the last 25 years, and the recession is followed by the longest peacetime expansion in the nation’s history. July 1996: Mr. Greenspan makes a winning bet in the mid-1990s, resisting pressure to raise interest rates as unemployment declines. He argues that increased productivity, including the fruits of the computer revolution, have increased the pace of sustainable growth. Indeed, the Fed finds itself debating whether there is such a thing as not enough inflation, and a new Fed governor named Janet L. Yellen plays an important role in convincing Mr. Greenspan that a little inflation helped to lubricate economic growth. December 1996: Mr. Greenspan warns of the danger of “irrational exuberance” in financial markets, an admonition that goes unheeded. The Fed decides that popping bubbles is not part of its job description, leading critics to charge that Mr. Greenspan’s monetary policies spawned an era of booms and busts, culminating in the 2008 financial crisis. June 2003: Struggling to revive the economy after a brief recession, the Fed cuts its benchmark rate to 1 percent, then regarded as the lowest viable level. Ben S. Bernanke, in his first stint at the Fed, presents a paper exploring supplemental strategies a central bank could use to stimulate the economy after pushing rates to the floor.  Mr. Bernanke presides over a Great Recession caused in large part by the collapse of an overheated home mortgage market. Both interest rates and inflation tumble to historic depths as the Fed struggles to revive the economy. June 2006: The Fed, after raising interest rates at 17 consecutive meetings, beginning in 2004, ends its campaign to slow the economy and forestall inflation. Some economists now argue that the Fed should have moved more aggressively and that its slow and predictable increases helped to bolster the housing bubble. Mr. Bernanke arrives in time to preside over the final three rate increases. December 2008: Starting in 2007, the Fed reduces interest rates as economic growth collapses. After the demise of Lehman Bros. brings the financial system to the brink of disaster, Mr. Bernanke enters uncharted territory, pushing interest rates nearly to zero. He also persuades colleagues to start buying bonds, a supplemental strategy to stimulate the economy that is popularly known as quantitative easing. January 2012: The Fed formally adopts a 2 percent inflation target, although it now finds itself trying to raise inflation to that level rather than driving it down. The Fed is increasingly worried that sluggish inflation is restraining economic growth.  Ms. Yellen presses the Fed’s stimulus campaign, seeking to reduce unemployment and revive inflation, amid questions about what complete recovery will look like. October 2014: The Fed concludes its last round of bond-buying after acquiring more than $4 trillion of Treasuries and mortgage securities. How well did it work? Opinions vary. November 2015: Ms. Yellen signals the Fed is ready to start raising its benchmark interest rate. She says, however, that the Fed does not expect the rate to reach pre-crisis levels in the foreseeable future, citing both the weak condition of the domestic economy and the long-term decline in global interest rates. Dec. 16, 2015: The Fed raises interest rates for the first time since the financial crisis. How the economy responds to the Fed’s actions will go a long way toward defining Ms. Yellen’s tenure. Coverage of the Federal Reserve, which is expected to raise short-term interest rates for the first time since 2008.AdvertisementCoverage of the Federal Reserve, which is expected to raise short-term interest rates for the first time since 2008.