

      By AMIE TSANG

DEC. 11, 2015

Alibaba’s deal to buy The South China Morning Post has raised questions about the direction of the newspaper. The English-language publication is based in Hong Kong, where freedom of the press is guaranteed by law. Although some critics say the newspaper has turned increasingly pro-Beijing in recent years, it has taken aim at controversial topics in China.The South China Morning Post, also known as The SCMP, reported that pro-Beijing candidates in district elections in November had arranged free rides for elderly residents and influenced their voting. When asked for whom they had voted, one resident said, “They will teach us whom to vote for when we get upstairs.” The paper also reported that Daniel Lam Tak-shing, a candidate for the pro-establishment Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong, gave out gifts to residents at a home for the elderly and encouraged them to register as voters. From SCMP Coverage: Pro-establishment supporters bused elderly people to polling stations and directed them to vote in Hong Kong elections The newspaper provided extensive coverage of the Occupy Hong Kong protests in 2014, a movement that drew the ire of the Chinese government. Its intensive coverage also included a live blog. The SCMP followed up with two free e-books on how the so-called Umbrella Movement grew; one year after the protests, it interviewed Hong Kongers about their experiences. From SCMP Coverage: Hong Kong one year after Occupy The South China Morning Post covered the annual vigil in Hong Kong to mark the crackdown on June 4, 1989, of the protests at Tiananmen Square in Beijing. On the 25th anniversary in 2014, the paper published a retrospective with accounts from witnesses, student leaders and former government officials. State media in China does not cover the anniversary or even acknowledge it. SCMP Coverage: Voices from Tiananmen The South China Morning Post published exclusive interviews with the former National Security Agency contractor Edward J. Snowden when he fled to Hong Kong. Although Beijing benefited from some of Mr. Snowden’s disclosures, he also created a diplomatic problem. The Chinese government had to consider its relationship with the United States, despite many in China and Hong Kong feeling that Mr. Snowden should be protected from the reach of the United States government.The Chinese state news media initially seized on Mr. Snowden’s leaks. But the media were less quick to report on a United States government presentation, leaked later, that said China had stolen data on a stealth jet. The SCMP has a wire article covering this on its website. From SCMP Coverage: Edward Snowden in Hong Kong The columnist and China editor Willy Wo-Lap Lam left in 2000 after a public spat with the paper’s owner, Robert Kuok. Mr. Lam wrote that tycoons, including Mr. Kuok, had been invited to Beijing by the Chinese government and had been offered lucrative business deals in return for supporting Tung Chee-hwa, then the chief executive of Hong Kong, who had been appointed by Beijing. The SCMP published a letter from Mr. Kuok scolding Mr. Lam. Mr. Kuok wrote that “Mr. Lam this time has not only gone overboard, he has fallen into a trap of innuendo that is not supported by events. The article is full of distortions and speculation.” The newspaper published a response by Mr. Lam, saying he stood by his column. “Those articles were what got me into trouble,” Mr. Lam said of his columns. “The propaganda department and liaison office complained about my articles when they met with senior executives at The Post.”The SCMP reported the death of Li Wangyang, a pro-democracy activist who was found dead in 2012, but its coverage stirred controversy. Wang Xiangwei, the editor in chief, was reported to have reduced the length of the article in the paper. Alex Price, a senior copy editor at The SCMP, shared emails with The Asia Sentinel, a web-based regional publication, showing that when he had questioned the decision, Mr. Wang said: “I made the decision, and I stand by it. If you don’t like it, you know what to do.”From SCMP Coverage: Li Wangyang Under the editor Jonathan Fenby in 1999, the newspaper published an editorial criticizing the Hong Kong government’s decision to ask China to overturn an immigration ruling by the territory’s highest court. Mr. Fenby wrote that Hong Kong had eroded the rule of law by politicizing its judiciary. After the editorial was published, Anson Chan, the Hong Kong government’s No. 2, visited The SCMP to explain the administration’s position.Advertisement