By STEPHANIE STROMDEC. 10, 2015
Labels on Tropicana Pure Premium orange juice and four of its brand siblings will begin carrying early next year an increasingly familiar certification — the butterfly seal conferred by the Non-GMO Project, a nonprofit group that verifies products as being free of genetically engineered ingredients.The decision to add the seal to Tropicana is notable because its parent, PepsiCo, has been one of the biggest opponents of state efforts to impose labeling requirements on such foods.“Consumers today have a desire for transparency from brands, and that desire is only going to increase,” said Björn Bernemann, vice president and general manager for the Tropicana brand in North America.PepsiCo has not had to make any changes in the products to meet the verification because the only thing in Tropicana is orange juice — and as yet, there are no genetically engineered orange trees.Advertisement“Tropicana Pure Premium is non-G.M.O., and it always has been,” Mr. Bernemann said. “Some consumers, however, are expressing a desire to get beyond what brands are actually telling them, and we felt having external verification would give our consumers assurance.”AdvertisementSmaller PepsiCo product lines like Naked Juice, as well as Smartfood and Stacy’s snacks, also have Non-GMO Project certification, but Tropicana represents the largest of the company’s brands to win it so far.Mr. Bernemann said PepsiCo had been in the process of getting certification when he took over the Tropicana brand about six months ago. The products to be labeled represent 92 percent of the Tropicana Pure Premium portfolio.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Duane Stanford, the editor of Beverage Digest, said it made sense for PepsiCo to get outside verification.“A company with the visibility of PepsiCo is absolutely going to have to take an extra step to make sure consumers trust the label,” Mr. Stanford said. “You can make a case that G.M.O.s are safe for human consumption, and there’s a lot of science that says they are, but certain consumers are still skeptical.”In 2013 and 2014, PepsiCo spent almost $9 million to oppose ballot measures that would have imposed labeling in California, Colorado, Oregon and Washington State, according to research by the Environmental Working Group, which favors labeling. All those measures were defeated.The advocacy group also found that the company had spent more than $11.45 million over 2013, 2014 and the first quarter of 2015 on lobbying against labeling at the federal level, either directly or through the trade group the Grocery Manufacturers Association.Mr. Bernemann said PepsiCo felt that a national labeling law was needed.“We are in favor of the Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act,” he said, referring to legislation pending in Congress that would pre-empt state regulation on G.M.O. labeling, “which would create a uniform standard on the federal level for labeling foods and beverages.”A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Non-GMO Certification for Tropicana.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.