
Common Sense By                     
 JAMES B. STEWART
 
DEC. 10, 2015
The New York Times columnist weighs in on news that Third Avenue is liquidating its junk bond fund and how JPMorgan Chase reacted to a whistle-blower.“Whistle-blowers often face the difficult choice between telling the truth and the risk of committing career suicide,” said a Senate report on the Dodd-Frank Wall Street reform act, which bars retaliation against whistle-blowers.At JPMorgan Chase, as at nearly all major companies, the law is enshrined in the bank’s code of conduct: “We strictly prohibit intimidation or retaliation against anyone who makes a good faith report about a known or suspected violation of the code or any JPMorgan Chase policy or procedure, or any law or regulation.”Then there’s the case of Johnny Burris.Mr. Burris, 44, worked as a broker at JPMorgan’s Sun City West, Ariz., branch office beginning in 2010, where he was a top producing broker and earned glowing performance reviews, at least in his first few years. Most of his clients were retirees who were unsophisticated about the financial markets.So Mr. Burris avoided what he considered unsuitable, expensive and underperforming investment products, including some offered by JPMorgan, which drew criticism from his bosses. Troubled that he was being pressured to push JPMorgan’s products rather than act in his clients’ best interests, he went so far as to secretly record his colleagues. He complained repeatedly to his supervisors.AdvertisementNone of this exactly endeared Mr. Burris to his employer or co-workers. In late 2012, Mr. Burris was suspended and then fired. The firm gave him no explanation or chance to defend himself, he said. But his entry in the broker database for the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or Finra, states that he was dismissed because he “failed to follow firm procedures” in a matter that cost a client $635 and erroneously described an order as “unsolicited” rather than “solicited.”AdvertisementMr. Burris claims those charges were trumped up by his superiors as an excuse to get rid of him, and he was actually fired for refusing to push JPMorgan investment products and then calling attention to the issue.He took his accusations and evidence, including the recordings, to the Securities and Exchange Commission. Mr. Burris also publicly raised the issue in an article in The New York Times in March 2013.He became, in other words, a whistle-blower. Which makes his subsequent treatment by JPMorgan all the more puzzling. Soon after The Times article appeared, JPMorgan lodged three customer complaints against Mr. Burris with Finra. The complaints and their resolutions — Mr. Burris was exonerated in two, and wasn’t given a chance to respond to the third — are publicly available. They are the only customer complaints during his 25-year career.That he was the subject of three complaints is significant, because that is a threshold at which a broker may be subjected to “heightened scrutiny” by regulators. Most brokerage firms won’t consider hiring a broker with three or more such complaints, no matter what the disposition, according to Douglas J. Schulz of Invest Securities Consulting. “It’s a very serious black mark,” he said.After he was fired, Mr. Burris filed an arbitration claim against JPMorgan on wrongful dismissal grounds. Among the issues were whether customers had complained about Mr. Burris, including a complaint filed April 10 on his Finra record and another dated April 1 in his file at the brokerage office. Mr. Burris was suspicious, because the letters had identical typefaces and seemed to have come from the same printer.At the arbitration hearing, a crucial witness was Umbreen N. Kazmi, a JPMorgan vice president and supervisory manager who oversaw Mr. Burris. Testifying under oath, she denied that any of the complaints had been fabricated. Then Mr. Burris’s lawyer asked — twice — whether “someone at JPMorgan” had written them. Ms. Kazmi testified, “absolutely not.”Ms. Kazmi also denied that she had played any role in instigating a separate May 14 complaint.On Aug. 12, 2014, the arbitration panel ruled in JPMorgan’s favor. Mr. Burris’s lawyer had told him not to talk to potential witnesses such as his former clients, so he hadn’t. But figuring he had nothing to lose, Mr. Burris contacted William Wiley, who filed the April 1 letter, and Carolyn Scott, who filed the one on April 10.AdvertisementAs my colleague Nathaniel Popper reported last week, Mr. Wiley and Ms. Scott both denied they had had any problem with Mr. Burris — and said the letters had been drafted not by them, but by Laya Gavin, the office manager and broker who took over Mr. Burris’s accounts after he was fired.Despite the risk of going up against JPMorgan, both gave Mr. Burris sworn affidavits. “To be absolutely clear, I did not draft that letter dated April 1, 2103,” Mr. Wiley declared. Said Ms. Scott: “I did not draft that letter.” Both identified Ms. Gavin as the author. Added Ms. Scott: “There should never have been a complaint against Mr. Burris at any time.”Mr. Burris said he also met with the source of the May 14 complaint, Greg Rodvelt, who told him he filed a complaint only after Ms. Kazmi called him.To Mr. Burris, both his firing and what he sees as an attempt to smear his reputation after he went to the S.E.C. and the media, are clear-cut examples of retaliation against a whistle-blower. He said it made it difficult for him to find employment (he briefly worked at Oppenheimer and is now self-employed), but more importantly, sent a powerful warning to any other JPMorgan broker contemplating cooperating with the S.E.C. or speaking out about unethical behavior. He has turned over his findings to Finra, which is investigating the matter, and to the S.E.C.’s whistle-blower office.JPMorgan sees the matter entirely differently. Mr. Burris was a rogue broker who was fired for legitimate reasons having nothing to do with his reluctance to sell JPMorgan products, a view backed by the arbitration panel. “His story is utterly wrong. He was terminated because he broke serious compliance rules in important ways and on numerous occasions,” said Patricia Wexler, a JPMorgan spokeswoman.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The firm acknowledges that Ms. Gavin actually drafted the Wiley and Scott letters after the customers came into the branch with complaints, but said she was doing so simply as a courtesy.Even though the bank determined that neither complaint had merit, it was nonetheless obligated by law to file Mr. Scott’s letter with Finra. And, with respect to Ms. Kazmi’s testimony that no one at JPMorgan had drafted the letters, she “answered truthfully based on what she knew — she did not realize that anyone had provided the customer with the courtesy of typing up a verbal complaint or issue,” Ms. Wexler said. She said no one at JPMorgan had interviewed any of Mr. Burris’s clients to get their version of events.At the center of these differing views is Ms. Gavin. On her website — moneywisdomandfaith.com — she describes growing up in a mobile home outside Chicago and putting herself through college and business school. She says her mission is to “work with purpose-driven Christian women and help them understand and apply the biblical financial principles of stewardship, wealth building and legacy thinking.”She was interviewed by JPMorgan lawyers and originally listed as a witness in the arbitration, but after Ms. Kazmi’s testimony and the questions about the letters’ origins, was never called to testify.AdvertisementSome questions: Did Ms. Gavin routinely write up complaints for other customers who came into the branch? Or were the sole instances those involving Mr. Burris? Was it Ms. Gavin’s idea to draft and file the letters, or did others encourage her to be on the lookout for evidence that could be used against Mr. Burris?Ms. Wexler declined to answer these questions and denied my request to interview Ms. Gavin.Mr. Schulz, the securities industry expert, said he was shocked by Ms. Gavin’s actions.“Written customer complaints can only be written by a client,” he said. “It’s a very serious document that triggers all kinds of regulatory requirements. No broker should be writing them.”It’s not so surprising that JPMorgan has circled the wagons, which is how institutions often respond to whistle-blowers. “It’s a disconcerting story,” said Joe Badaracco, a professor of business ethics at Harvard Business School. “It just reinforces the word on the street, which is, if you’re a whistle-blower, you’re going to have a hard time finding a job, and if there’s anything in your file, it will be used against you.”“Those anti-retaliation policies are laughable,” said Amy Block Joy, an emeritus professor at the University of California, Davis, and the author of two books about her exposing fraud at the University of California. “Companies and institutions do retaliate. And then they stigmatize the whistle-blower.”When all the evidence is in, and regulators complete their investigations, JPMorgan may be vindicated. It appears to be using every weapon in its vast legal and public relations arsenal to challenge Mr. Burris’s claims.But in raising questions about how the bank was pressuring him and other brokers to sell its own mutual funds, Mr. Burris appears to have been onto something. JPMorgan is on the brink of paying as much as $200 million to resolve S.E.C. claims that it failed to make adequate disclosures when its brokers promoted its own products.That may mean a big payday for Mr. Burris. If the S.E.C. deems he gave it “original information” the leads to a successful enforcement action, he and any other whistle-blowers cooperating in this case would be entitled to a bounty of 10 to 30 percent of the sanction collected. On $200 million, that would mean an award of $20 million to $60 million.The Common Sense column on Friday, about Johnny Burris, a former JPMorgan Chase broker now involved as a whistle-blower against the bank, rendered incorrectly in some editions an excerpt from an affidavit by a former client, Carolyn Scott. Ms. Scott, in denying that she had written a complaint against Mr. Burris, said, “There should never have been a complaint against Mr. Burris at any time,” not “against Mr. Gavin.” (The affidavit said that the complaint had been written by Laya Gavin, the broker who took over Mr. Burris’s accounts after he was fired.)A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: He Blew the Whistle, Then Came Blowback.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »