By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDDEC. 10, 2015
In going public on Thursday, Atlassian, a maker of business collaboration and development software, did two things many other market debutantes have been unable to do this year.It priced its initial public offering above its expected range, and its shares enjoyed a healthy pop in their trading debut.Shares in Atlassian were $27.22 in late-afternoon trading on Thursday, up nearly 30 percent above their offer price of $21. That valued the software maker at nearly $5.7 billion.The price gains bring an upbeat close to what has been a generally dismal year for initial offerings, as many well-known names either suffered disappointing trading debuts or postponed their stock sales altogether because of lukewarm investor interest.AdvertisementThat malaise has affected a variety of companies, including the payments issuer Square and the luxury retailer Neiman Marcus, and has dampened appetite for once highflying tech companies.AdvertisementYet Atlassian, whose wares run from project and code management tools to chat software, is different from many of its tech brethren, as its co-founder and co-chief executive, Michael Cannon-Brookes, was quick to note in a telephone interview on Thursday.Most notably, the company, which is based in Australia, has been profitable virtually since its inception in 2002, whereas many Silicon Valley darlings post losses and promise big profits down the road. It also spends less on marketing and has no sales team, relying primarily on word-of-mouth to bring in new customers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is a huge validation of what we’ve built,” Mr. Cannon-Brookes said.And unlike many Bay Area companies, Atlassian has never taken a direct investment from outside financiers. Its external investors, including Accel Partners and T. Rowe Price, bought their shares from employees. That helped eliminate pressure on management to chart any course other than what it wanted to do, according to Mr. Cannon-Brookes.The company initially was self-financed out of necessity, since few venture capital firms would bet on two young Australians who wanted to create a software company in 2002.Instead, Mr. Cannon-Brookes and his fellow co-founder Scott Farquhar took out roughly $10,000 in credit card debt to get their business off the ground, and then eventually ran off the profits their start-up began generating.But while Atlassian became a profitable private company that had still found ways for employees to sell their stock, Mr. Cannon-Brookes said going public was always in the company’s plans. It organized itself internally to run as a public company several years ago.Going public was less about raising money to finance operations or growth, he said, than getting recognition for what the company had built.“The great companies of the world are public companies,” he said. “We always wanted to be a great public company.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.