AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Richard BealesJohn Thain once spent $1.2 million of Merrill Lynch’s money remodeling his office there, including $35,000 for an antique commode.He turned out to be the last boss of the Wall Street brokerage firm, which was sold to Bank of America during the financial crisis, and vowed to reimburse the firm for the costs. Mr. Thain eventually went on to run the CIT Group, a midmarket lender, and did a creditable job turning it around, but his tin ear hasn’t left him.Mr. Thain, the chief executive of CIT, is retiring at the end of March. His board just changed its definition of retirement in a way that allows Mr. Thain to keep stock that he might otherwise lose. Awards to employees that are not yet available to them — unvested equity, as it is called — often are forfeited when they quit. Under CIT’s long-term incentive plan, people could keep such awards if they retired at 55 with at least 11 years of service, or at 65 after five years at the company.Neither set of parameters fit Mr. Thain. He turned 60 this year, and when he retires, he’ll have just wrapped up six years in the job. The company said this week that those precise criteria had been added to the retirement provisions that allow shares to keep vesting. The change may not cover all of Mr. Thain’s unvested stock. If it does, though, the value of those awards, as shown in CIT’s proxy statement in April, could be as much as $13 million.At a conference on Wednesday, Mr. Thain said that the shift was to “rationalize” the retirement definition to a “rule of 66” reflecting the sum of retirement age and years of service. That may be reasonable, but would be better changed for the next chief executive than to hand him a potential multimillion-dollar windfall on the way out. The approval by CIT’s board also would be more convincing if Mr. Thain were not also chairman.The former Merrill chief has largely accomplished the needed restructuring of the $8.5 billion CIT. For his efforts, Mr. Thain was paid $8.8 million in 2014 after taking home $8.2 million the year before. It’s perhaps in character, though, that his final bow at CIT should include the fine-print equivalent of a decorative cabinet.Richard Beales is assistant editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com. Advertisement