By MICHAEL FORSYTHEDEC. 10, 2015
HONG KONG —  As Chinese authorities intensify their scrutiny of the financial industry, the billionaire chairman at one of the country’s biggest private conglomerates is missing, a local financial news magazine reported on Thursday.The billionaire, Guo Guangchang, described by the domestic press as “China’s Warren Buffett,” may have been taken away by police, either under arrest or in custody for questioning, the news magazine Caixin reported, citing people familiar with the matter. He is the chairman of the Fosun Group, which owns the Club Med chain of resorts and a stake in the Canadian entertainment company Cirque du Soleil, as well as positions in insurance companies and property holdings.Mr. Guo’s disappearance is the latest in a series of mysterious circumstances surrounding an anticorruption investigation into the financial industry. Since August, many executives have been arrested or detained by the police, while others have disappeared.The investigation follows the sharp decline in the Chinese stock market this summer, with stocks in Shanghai plunging by more than 40 percent. Instead of letting markets take their course, the central government in Beijing undertook a major effort to bolster prices.AdvertisementThe government limited short-selling, restricted share sales by major shareholders, and corralled brokerage firms into a “national team” that shored up share prices at the behest of the state. It was an attempt by the government in Beijing — accustomed to controlling the levers of the economy — to impose discipline on the stock market.AdvertisementWhile the intervention helped stabilize the markets temporarily, stocks soon continued their slide and authorities started cracking down.In August, a reporter for the financial magazine Caijing, run by the brother of the chairman of Citic Securities, confessed on national television to spreading “market rumors” in an article about the stock market. Investigators have also detained top executives at brokerage firms and several officials at the country’s securities regulator.Last month Yim Fung, the chairman of Guotai Junan International, the Hong Kong unit of one of China’s biggest brokerage firms, disappeared. He had not been reachable since Nov. 18, the company said in a statement to the stock exchange.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Sunday, Citic Securities, the country’s biggest brokerage firm, which is often likened to Goldman Sachs, said it was “not able to get in touch” with two top executives overseeing investment banking, Chen Jun and Yan Jianlin. In its statement, the company cited news media reports saying the two “were suspected of being requested to assist in an investigation.”Several top executives at Citic Securities have been detained since August. Chinese authorities are investigating company officers, including its president, Cheng Boming, for an insider trading case. “Investors are advised to exercise caution in their investments and be aware of risks,” Citic Securities said in the announcement about Mr. Chen and Mr. Yan’s disappearance after reports about their situation appeared in Chinese news media last Friday.In the case of Mr. Guo, the company’s listed arm, Fosun International, whose shares trade in Hong Kong, has not made any announcement about its missing chairman. Calls to the company’s offices in Hong Kong and Shanghai were not answered. Liang Xinjun, the company’s vice chairman, told Bloomberg News that the company was “handling” the situation.On Friday trading in Fosun International shares in Hong Kong was halted, with no further explanation or announcements made by the company.In some cases, executives are released after working with investigators, as was the situation with several Citic Securities executives. Li Yifei, who is China head for the Man Group, one of the world’s biggest hedge funds, returned to work after meeting with authorities, her husband told The South China Morning Post.Others are arrested and detained. Xu Xiang, a hedge fund manager, was apprehended by police after a car chase. The government said he was suspected of insider trading.AdvertisementLast Friday in Wuhan, a Chinese billionaire detained over a political corruption scandal, Xu Ming, 44, was found dead in his prison cell. Chinese news media reported that he died of a heart attack. His body was cremated the next day. It is not known whether an autopsy was performed.A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Another Chinese Mogul Is Reported to Be Missing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.