AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonDelaware’s courts have put the sometimes questionable roles of investment banks in merger deals firmly in their cross hairs. But are the courts going too far?The latest case is a lawsuit against Bank of America Merrill Lynch over Signet’s $1.4 billion buyout of the Zale Corporation. Last week, a judge in Delaware ruled that the suit could go forward.The core of the dispute is over something that happens all the time: an investment banker pitching a client for business.In this case, Bank of America Merrill Lynch made an offer to Signet to represent the company in an acquisition of Zale. Signet had first approached Zale to acquire the company the day before.A few weeks later, Bank of America was engaged by Zale to advise its board on its options. According to the complaint, the bank never informed Zale of its pitch to Signet until after the acquisition was announced.You may ask, what is the problem with asking someone for business before you are employed by either party?The answer is that not everyone was happy with the acquisition.The deal was opposed by Zale’s second-largest shareholder, TIG Advisers, which held 9.5 percent of the company. TIG claimed that the deal was underpriced in light of what it viewed as the bank’s conflict, as well as Zale management projections that came to light only after the deal was announced. TIG also argued that Zale’s largest shareholder, Golden Gate Capital, was itching to sell and had pushed Zale into a deal.In TIG’s view, Zale and Bank of America Merrill Lynch ran a less-than-robust sale process. Zale’s board decided to negotiate exclusively with Signet, claiming that other bidders were either uninterested or could not compete.Still, Zale’s shareholders did approve the transaction and the premium was a hefty 41 percent. The dual-pitch was disclosed to the Zale board, albeit after the deal was announced.In an attempt to address the situation, Zale’s board also held three meetings to consider the issue and ratified the bank’s conduct by stating that it did not affect the negotiation of the deal price.To be frank, this would not have raised issues in the Delaware courts but for one single detail. When Bank of America pitched Signet on an acquisition, the bank stated that a potential purchase price would be in the range of $17 to $21 a share. A banker at Bank of America who advised Zale was also reportedly in the room when Signet was pitched.Signet’s first bid was $19 a share, which was then raised to $20.5 a share. Zale countered with $21 a share on the advice of the bank, and Signet accepted.TIG’s main complaint is that Bank of America massaged the deal to come in within the range, albeit the top, of what it had told Signet, but not a cent more. Zale could have asked for more, but plaintiffs contend that the bank did not let that happen because it was stuck with its presentation to Signet.There is a lot to digest here. Soliciting business is in the investment banker DNA. Just because bankers said something in one informal meeting, does that mean they nefariously planned wrongdoing during a three-month sale process?To put it another way, it takes a lot to assume that a board and a team of bankers would be swayed just because a number was thrown out at a meeting before the bankers even knew there might be a deal.But we live in an age of what I call “dumb liability” — if it looks smelly, the bank is likely to be liable, no matter the legal standard.That has become increasingly apparent in a wave of opinions by Delaware’s courts when it comes to accusations of banker conflicts. Delaware plays a big role in deals because more than 60 percent of public companies are incorporated there.Barclays Capital was singled out in the buyout of Del Monte Foods for allowing the private equity firms Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company and Vestar Capital to team up to acquire the company, which was a breach of an agreement the firms had with Del Monte. In the buyout of the El Paso Corporation, Goldman Sachs was accused of being on both sides of the deal because it advised El Paso, and its private equity arm held a 19.1 percent stake in Kinder Morgan, the buyer. The Del Monte case was settled for $89.4 million and the El Paso case for $110 million after a judge found fault.The Royal Bank of Canada has chosen to fight similar conflict accusations over the buyout of the Rural/Metro Corporation by the private equity firm Warburg Pincus. At trial, the bank was found liable for $76 million for, among other things, trying to obtain financing business from Warburg Pincus while the private equity firm was buying Rural Metro. This was a bad move because Rural/Metro was being advised by the investment bank Moelis and Royal Bank of Canada on the sale. Moelis settled the case before the trial for $5 million, but Royal Bank of Canada was ordered to pay $76 million for its faulty advice in the sale.These cases already had bankers on edge, as practices everyone thought were normal in the industry have been upended under the “dumb liability” rule. (Although some practices, like the conduct in the Rural/Metro deal, did appear to cross a line, at least as detailed by the judge in the case.)The Zale case may now put fear into the hearts of bankers. In the three previous cases, the banks had real conflicts, either on both sides of the transaction or in pursuing other business.But here, the conflict of interest is only about an undisclosed solicitation. Bank of America had represented Zale for more than a decade and been paid three times more in fees than Signet in the previous year. (Zale knew beforehand that the bank had done work for Signet.)It is really a bit of a stretch to get from there to an argument that Bank of America deliberately manipulated the system in a conflict that was ultimately disclosed for no apparent gain.In a statement, Bank of America said: “The investment banking presentation at issue created no conflict of interest and had no impact on Bank of America Merrill Lynch’s efforts on Zale’s behalf. We will continue to vigorously defend against any suggestion to the contrary.”And Bank of America may have gotten lucky. The day after this opinion was issued, the Delaware Supreme Court ruled that conflicts like these can be purged if shareholders approved the deal knowing of the conflict, which happened in this case. So Bank of America may still get off on a technicality.Still, the immediate effect is that the Zale case will send banks scrambling to try to paper over every conflict, real or imagined. The banks now face liability exposure on deals for conduct that was once considered acceptable.Banks are particularly vulnerable because the Delaware courts are reluctant to go after companies — the chances that directors will be found liable are less than that of being struck by lightning. (The case against Zale’s board was dismissed.)The slim silver lining in all this, such as it is, is that banks will gain new business as more companies will hire two banks to be doubly safe. But disclosure will become even more copious as banks will have to keep track of all pitches and disclose them.Is this extra cost worth it?This is where “dumb liability” again comes in. We are moving to a world where the test for banker liability in mergers is not any more sophisticated than asking, does this look dumb or is there a whiff of conflict?  It might make many people feel self-satisfied, but it’s not a particularly good way to run a $2 trillion mergers market.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.Advertisement