By LIZ MOYERDEC. 10, 2015
Bank of America executives can breathe a sigh of relief.The Federal Reserve said on Thursday that it had approved the bank’s resubmitted capital plan, allowing the bank to continue paying its 20-cent annual dividend and buy back $4 billion in shares.But the regulator noted that Bank of America had to continue to make “steady demonstrable progress” in its risk management and capital planning processes “commensurate with the size and complexity of its operations and systemic importance.”Banks have to submit their 2016 capital plans in the first quarter.Bank of America released a short statement on Thursday saying the Fed had not objected to its plan.But behind the scenes, the bank has been working for months to improve coordination between its business units and the people charged with overseeing its stress testing and capital planning processes after the Fed granted only conditional approval for its 2015 plan in the spring. The bank said this year that it was spending $100 million to fix its processes.AdvertisementAt an investor conference in New York on Wednesday, Bank of America’s chief executive, Brian T. Moynihan, said that executives wanted “to make sure we really nail this thing.”Advertisement“We took an army and went after it,” Mr. Moynihan said, “and we have now broadened that army out to drive it across the enterprise to make sure we get it right.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the bank’s original submission in March, the Fed found weaknesses in some of its loss and revenue projections and in its internal controls. On Thursday, the Fed said the bank had made progress in fixing the deficiencies.Shares of Bank of America rose 0.6 percent on Thursday.Since the 2008 financial crisis, the Fed has required the biggest banks in the United States to submit plans for dividend payouts and share buybacks, along with stress-testing situations, to make sure they can weather another economic downturn.Bank of America has stumbled more than others in trying to get its processes aligned with the regulator’s expectations.It passed its 2014 stress test, then discovered weeks later that it had erred and overstated its capital by $4 billion. Those mistakes forced it to suspend its plans to buy back shares last year.The Fed also rejected Bank of America’s capital plan in 2011, forcing it to resubmit that year.A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Bank of America Wins Fed Approval of Plan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.