By CHAD BRAYDEC. 10, 2015
LONDON — The Swiss mining company Glencore said on Thursday that it was considering selling a minority stake in its agriculture business or potentially seek an initial public offering of that business as it pursues additional asset sales to further reduce its debt.Glencore’s stock has been under pressure in recent months as analysts and investors have expressed concern about the company’s heavy debt and weakness in commodities pricing.On Thursday, Glencore said that it was targeting as much as $3 billion to $4 billion in assets sales to further reduce debt.The company had already undertaken $1.1 billion in asset sales since it announced in September that it planned to sell up to $2 billion in assets.AdvertisementGlencore, which also is pursuing cost cuts, said on Thursday that it would seek to further reduce its debt to $18 billion to $19 billion by the end of 2016. The company, which went public in 2011, had $29.6 billion in debt as of June 30.Advertisement“We’re going there and hopefully lower,” Ivan Glasenberg, the Glencore chief executive, said on a conference call with analysts. “We don’t want to be in that situation again. We are definitely going to deleverage this balance sheet.”Shares of Glencore rose as much as 14 percent in London on Thursday morning following the announcement, but pared back some of those gains in afternoon trading.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Based in Baar, Switzerland, Glencore buys and sells commodities, like coal and cooper, as part of its trading arm and mines those commodities as well.The company is seeking a minority investor in its agriculture operation, but could potentially pursue an I.P.O. of the business, Steven F. Kalmin, the Glencore chief financial officer, said on Thursday.The company has received interest in the business from a “broad spectrum” of interested parties and expects to have an announcement in the first half of 2016, Mr. Kalmin said.“What we look for on the bidding process, which is taking place at the middle of this month, we’re going to ask for indicative bids for minority stakes,” Mr. Glasenberg said. “We don’t have an intention to sell the total business.“If we get a big number, and if someone throws a number that creates more value that we believe is worthy to us, of course, we’re traders, we will take the best price available,” he added.As part of its efforts to reduce debt, Glencore also eliminated its dividend and sold $2.5 billion in shares in September.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.