By JACK EWINGDEC. 10, 2015
WOLFSBURG, Germany —  The chairman of Volkswagen said on Thursday that the decision by employees to cheat on emissions tests was made more than a decade ago, after they realized they could not meet United States clean air standards legally.Hans-Dieter Pötsch, the chairman of Volkswagen’s supervisory board, said the cheating took place in a climate of lax ethical standards.“There was a tolerance for breaking the rules,” Mr. Pötsch said here on Thursday during his first lengthy news conference since the company admitted in September that 11 million cars with diesel engines were rigged to fool emissions tests. The fallout from that decision has confronted Volkswagen with “the biggest test” in its history, Mr. Pötsch said.Mr. Pötsch and Matthias Müller, the chief executive of Volkswagen, presented the results so far of an internal inquiry that is still underway. Although the company is not ready to identify culprits, the preliminary findings confirmed widespread suspicion that the scandal occurred because the company’s ambitions in the United States collided with air quality rules that were, and still are, more stringent than Europe’s.AdvertisementAnd the company’s disclosures on Thursday, along with interviews with industry experts and some former executives, helped connect some pieces of a sequence of decisions and events that played out over the course of 10 years,Advertisement“It proves not to have been a one-time error, but rather a chain of errors that were allowed to happen,” Mr. Pötsch said on Thursday.The wrongdoing began in 2005, Volkswagen said, when the company decided to make diesel cars the focus of its United States marketing. Volkswagen saw diesel, which it promoted as delivering superior fuel economy and acceleration, as a way to set itself apart from competitors.In the years that preceded a marketing push that began with the 2009 model year, there was an intense internal debate about what kind of emissions technology to use, according to a former executive who was involved and asked not to be identified because he did not want to offend Volkswagen.Some Volkswagen managers argued in favor of using a technology called selective catalytic reduction, or S.C.R. That method uses a urea chemical solution, sold commercially as AdBlue, which neutralizes nitrogen oxide emissions without a penalty in fuel economy or performance.Those managers argued that only S.C.R. technology would allow Volkswagen to keep pace with ever stricter limits on emissions of nitrogen oxide, which have been linked to lung ailments.Some other carmakers, including BMW and Mercedes-Benz, use S.C.R., which experts say is effective. But it costs more, adds weight to the car and takes up more space than other methods. It is particularly difficult to squeeze such systems into compact cars like the Golf or Jetta, which are among Volkswagen’s best-selling models in the United States.In addition, the tank that holds the chemical must be refilled periodically. That creates an inconvenience and expense for customers, especially in the United States. Until this year, regulations in the United States prohibited drivers from refilling the tanks themselves. They had to go to a dealer or service station.Advertisement“It’s a small chemical factory,” Thomas Schlick, a partner at the German management consultancy Roland Berger, who specializes in the automotive industry, said of S.C.R. systems. “It’s an additional system with no value for the customer.”Some of the Volkswagen executives who advocated an S.C.R. system were sidelined or pushed out of the company. Instead, beginning with the 2009 model year, Volkswagen sold cars in the United States that had 2-liter diesel motors equipped with so-called lean NOX traps. (NOX is shorthand for nitrogen oxide.) The device sponges up nitrogen oxide particles and typically costs several hundred dollars less than an S.C.R. system.The NOX traps do not require a chemical that must be refilled. But they tend to be less reliable at controlling emissions, according to a study published in October by the International Council on Clean Transportation, an environmental group that played a pivotal role in uncovering Volkswagen’s cheating.In addition, the NOX traps cut fuel economy by as much as 4 percent. The penalty in fuel economy suggests another reason Volkswagen employees may have programmed cars to have the emissions controls fully engaged during emissions tests, but dialed back during normal driving. On the open road, some spot checks have found, the Volkswagen diesels could spew more than 40 times the allowable limit of nitrogen oxide.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 2007, Volkswagen executives declared their determination to overtake Toyota as the largest carmaker in the world and were eager for any competitive edge.Volkswagen eventually phased in S.C.R. systems in models sold in the United States. Larger vehicles like the Touareg S.U.V. and Audi Q7 had them from the beginning of Volkswagen’s diesel push in 2009. The Passat sedan got an S.C.R. system in 2012.But the Golf, Jetta, and Beetle did not get the chemical systems until 2015, according to certification documents filed with the Environmental Protection Agency.Vehicles with the chemical systems should have been able to pass emission tests without a penalty in fuel economy. Yet, Volkswagen continued to equip those cars with “defeat devices” designed to detect when the cars were being tested and to turn up emissions controls. Apparently, people inside the company were trying to avoid the need to refill the cars with the urea chemical solutions in between regular service checks. And so, the company programmed the cars to use less urea than needed to contain nitrogen oxide emissions, except when the car was undergoing testing.Volkswagen is in talks with regulators in the United States about how to make about 500,000 diesel cars it sold there comply with clean air rules. Mr. Müller said on Thursday that he was optimistic that a technical solution would be announced in the coming days.AdvertisementWhile Volkswagen has figured a way to resolve the emissions problem in Europe at relatively low cost, the United States’ stricter limits on nitrogen oxide emissions has made a solution harder to devise.One of the complications is that 320,000 of the cars in the United States are equipped with the first generation of the engine, known as the EA 189, that is at the heart of the scandal. Those early EA 189 motors have the less sophisticated NOX traps, and it would be difficult to fit them with the S.C.R. systems.The solution, Volkswagen executives suggested on Thursday, may be a more effective NOX trap, taking advantage of recent advances in technology.Volkswagen on Thursday continued to maintain the company’s account that the cheating was the work of a relatively small number of people. It said that nine people had been suspended as a result of the scandal, one more than had previously been disclosed. But the company said it could not disclose any names until the evidence was “watertight.”Mr. Müller and Mr. Pötsch conceded that the deception reflected organizational shortcomings.For example, the people who developed the software were the same ones who approved it for use in vehicles. At other companies, it is standard practice for one team to develop components and another to check them for quality. Volkswagen said it would correct those procedures.Mr. Müller also said he wanted to change the company’s culture so that there was better communication among employees and more willingness to discuss problems. His predecessor, Martin Winterkorn, who resigned after the scandal, was criticized for creating a climate of fear that made managers afraid to admit mistakes.“We don’t need yes men,” Mr. Müller said, “but managers and engineers who make good arguments.”A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Volkswagen Cites ‘Chain of Errors’ in Emissions Cheating .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.