AdvertisementSupported byBy Clifford KraussHOUSTON — — After a summer of lower gasoline prices, American consumers will again spend considerably less on energy this winter because of lower oil and natural gas prices and expected warmer weather, the Energy Department projected on Tuesday.The nearly half of American households that are heated with natural gas can expect a decline of 10 percent in their gas spending, the agency said. The department’s Energy Information Administration, in its Winter Fuels Outlook report, forecast a 6 percent decline in residential natural gas consumption this winter because of higher temperatures, while prices will be 4 percent lower than they were last winter.An even bigger savings will go to homes that rely on heating oil, mostly in the Northeast, with households saving 25 percent. Retail prices are expected to be 15 percent lower, while consumption is expected to be 11 percent lower. The average household could pay roughly $460 less than last winter.Propane users, mostly in rural areas and in the Midwest, are expected to spend 21 percent less this winter than last. Total electricity expenditures are expected to be 3 percent lower than last winter.“If winter temperatures come in as expected by U.S. government weather forecasters, U.S. consumers will pay less to stay warm this winter no matter what heating fuel they use,” Adam Sieminski, administrator of the Energy Information Administration, said in a statement.Driving will also continue to be cheaper, Mr. Sieminski said. “December’s expected national average gasoline price of $2.03 a gallon would be the lowest average retail price for the month in seven years,” he said.Lower energy prices should be particularly helpful to working-class families who spend a high proportion of their incomes on fuels. Much of their additional spending power should help restaurants and retailers. Many industries, including airlines and manufacturers of petrochemicals, chemicals and plastics, should also benefit from the lower energy costs.While global oil prices have made a modest rebound in recent days, the major factor in the slide in energy costs is the collapse of crude prices since summer 2014 to about $50 a barrel from more than $100 a barrel. Meanwhile the continuing increase in domestic natural gas production has also meant lower prices, and inventories are expected to be at record levels at the start of the heating season.Rates for households using natural gas would be even lower — reflecting the projected average 13 percent decline in natural gas prices since last winter — except for the fact that utility rates for natural gas are often set by state utility commissions a year or more before the season. Also residential rates include utility operating and transport costs, which frequently rise from year to year.The picture for natural gas consumers in the Northeast may not be totally favorable, especially if the winter is colder than expected, because natural gas pipeline capacity is still limited in New England and New York. The situation has improved somewhat with capacity added in the last year or two from the Marcellus Shale field in Pennsylvania to the New York market.Advertisement