By LANDON THOMAS Jr.DEC. 11, 2015
Two months ago, Thomas Lapointe, lead portfolio manager of the Third Avenue Management junk bond fund, delivered a bullish presentation at a conference at the Waldorf Astoria hotel.Yes, fund assets were down, he assured worried investors, but there was value out there. The right approach was to stay the course, he said, according to an investor in attendance.But in a conference call on Friday, a day after Third Avenue said it would bar investors from getting their money back, the usually upbeat Mr. Lapointe struck a starkly different tone.“The dislocation in the market has been tremendous,” he said, according to a person who listened to the call. “And the magnitude and scope of managing this fund over the past year has been a humbling experience.”AdvertisementThe rare step taken by Third Avenue executives to keep investors from selling their shares rattled markets that were already bracing for the impact of the Federal Reserve’s probable interest rate increase next week.AdvertisementWith investors withdrawing from the riskier pockets of the bond market, the lockout by Third Avenue ignites fears that mutual funds that have loaded up on hard-to-sell securities like junk bonds, leveraged loans and emerging market debt may face a similar predicament.Mutual funds typically allow investors to withdraw funds on a daily basis. The step by Third Avenue to put the Focused Credit Fund into a liquidating trust and sell its assets over the course of a year or so was a rude surprise to its investors.Financial advisers who were in close contact with Third Avenue said that in recent weeks they received little indication that the fund was on the verge of such a drastic step.The fund’s value had shrunk to about $790 million from about $2.5 billion, but other high-yield bond funds had lost more assets. Behind the scenes, though, the Focused Credit Fund’s large position in so-called Level 3 assets — securities that trade so infrequently that prices for them can only be estimated — was causing serious problems.As Mr. Lapointe and his team moved to unload bonds that they could actually sell, the Level 3 assets increased from around 15 percent of assets in Third Avenue portfolios to around 25 percent — a level regulators generally deem unacceptable. Executives even took the extreme step of tapping an emergency credit line from a bank in order to bolster their cash position, said a person who had been briefed on the move by a Third Avenue executive.Making the job of Third Avenue executives more difficult was that other debt investors were smelling blood in the water.“In the last few days, we were unable to sell our investments at reasonable prices because market participants were aware we were forced sellers,” said David Barse, Third Avenue’s chief, on the conference call, according to a person who listened in.AdvertisementThe market in junk bonds continued to sell off on Friday.Some see the turmoil as a warning signal of a broader slowdown in the economy as companies, many of which have borrowed heavily in recent years, struggle to pay down their loans.“There is a real risk that this could keep echoing in the months ahead,” said Jeffrey Gundlach, the manager of the DoubleLine Total Return Fund who has been warning others about the junk bond market for some time. “It is a really bad thing when a mutual fund does something like this, and it makes me worry that you are going to see similar problems with leveraged hedge funds.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As an indicator of how bad things have become in the high-yield market, Mr. Gundlach noted that the $10 billion high-yield exchange-traded fund managed by State Street, largely seen as a barometer for the junk bond market, was trading lower today than it did right after the Lehman Brothers crisis in 2008.“When the market is pricing assets that low, you should worry,” he said.Mutual fund analysts say that the Third Avenue fund is perhaps the riskiest of the many high-yield funds that investors have been piling into in recent years.Mr. Lapointe and his team of analysts acted more like private equity investors, taking large stakes in companies that were either already bankrupt or emerging from bankruptcy. Unlike most funds that hold bonds that can be bought and sold, albeit with some difficulty, private equity funds are not required to pay back investors on demand — it is a must for mutual funds.“This was not your typical high-yield fund,” said Sumit Desai, a junk bond expert at the fund-rating shop Morningstar. “They were in the murkiest areas of the market, and they owned stuff that your traditional junk bond manager would never touch.”In that regard, Mr. Desai noted, the Third Avenue implosion should not necessarily mean that all high-yield funds are now at risk. Still, he pointed out that rock-bottom interest rates pushed a number of funds into the riskiest niches of the junk bond market.Among the high-yield bond funds that have experienced more investor outflows than Third Avenue this year are two that have the largest exposure to risky bonds that carry the lowest credit ratings because of their high risk.One is the Ivy High Income Fund — a $6 billion fund that has lost $1.8 billion this year and has 48 percent of its assets in securities — which carries a CCC credit designation, the lowest credit rating a fund can receive. According to Morningstar, this fund’s most recent cash level was reported to be 1.5 percent — quite a low cushion given the composition of its portfolio.AdvertisementA spokesman for Ivy Investment Management did not respond to a request for comment.On a larger scale, American Funds’ $16.8 billion high-yield fund has 30 percent of its portfolio in these types of bonds and this year has seen $1.3 billion in investor redemptions.On the conference call with investors, the Third Avenue executives insisted that they had ultimately acted in favor of investors by putting up gates, or keeping investors from accessing funds, which hedge funds often do but is rarely, if ever, seen in a mutual fund. But the executives did little to disguise how shocked they were at the speed of their fund’s demise.Responding to an email query from a fund shareholder, Mr. Lapointe said that a “significant part of my net worth” was invested in the fund.But beyond saying that investors would be getting a series of distributions over the next year, specific details were scant about why the fund did not have more cash on hand or when investors could expect to be made whole.“This has been very painful for us,” Mr. Barse said, according to the investor who listened to the call. “Our sales representatives will be in touch.”A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Junk Bond Fund Freezes Out Investors, and the Chills Spread .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.