
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

DEC. 11, 2015
Andrew Liveris, left, of Dow Chemical, and Edward Breen of DuPont, said that the combined company, which would be known as DowDuPont, would result from an all-stock merger of equals.Dow Chemical and DuPont are testing the limits of ambitious deal-making.The merger of the two American chemical titans unveiled on Friday is really four deals in one, given a planned three-way breakup to follow. The estimated value creation being promoted sounds optimistic and the structure is hazardous. At least the rationale makes sense.For nearly a decade, Dow’s chief executive, Andrew N. Liveris, has been chasing the 213-year-old DuPont. Activist investors who jumped into both companies more recently proved to be the necessary catalyst. The departure of DuPont’s chief executive, Ellen J. Kullman, in October probably helped open the window of opportunity wider.The two companies will combine their operations before carving themselves up. It will take at least three years before it all gets done, assuming the initial merger secures all the necessary blessings from shareholders and authorities. Dow and DuPont are highlighting $3 billion of annual cost savings, which they say equate to some $30 billion of market value.The headline figure is too high. It uses a fairly generous multiple of 10 times enterprise-value-to-earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. Investors need to discount the time it will take to achieve the savings. That alone knocks the value down by 20 percent. Then there are the one-off costs of the deal, estimated at about $4 billion. Take those off, and the potential benefit in present-value terms is closer to $20 billion. Another $1 billion of generally elusive “growth synergies” also can be ignored for the time being.Any integration or later separation pains could reduce the sum even further. Dow and DuPont shareholders each are due to hold about half the newly christened DowDuPont, with Mr. Liveris as executive chairman and DuPont’s boss, Edward D. Breen, as chief executive. The board also will be evenly split with eight directors from each company. Such mergers of equals are prone to culture clashes and power struggles that can destroy value.Once costs are stripped out, however, there will be little reason to keep products as diverse as genetically modified seeds, plastic packaging and Kevlar body armor under one roof. New chemicals, agricultural and materials companies eventually will be easier for investors to value. They should also benefit from greater focus and the opportunity to pursue consolidation in their respective sectors. That’s a long way off, though. The broad hypothesis looks sound, but DowDuPont is still a potentially risky experiment.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »