AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie Picker and Michael J. de la MercedOver the last week, a hundred or so people crammed into a law firm’s offices high in the General Motors Building on Fifth Avenue, drafting plans to merge Dow Chemical and DuPont.Yet all the work of those bankers and lawyers in combining two industrial titans, with a shared history of more than three centuries, will ultimately go toward a much bigger goal: breaking up the newly united chemical company.As Dow and DuPont formally announced their merger, the two companies made clear that they intend to separate into three companies, a path expected to be littered with complex deals, thousands of job cuts and months of government scrutiny.It is a path that DuPont’s chief executive of two months, Edward D. Breen, has trod before, having previously broken up Tyco into three pieces. And it is the culmination of the dream of his counterpart at Dow, Andrew Liveris, who has long sought a huge deal to strengthen his own company.Mr. Liveris wasted no time in calling his fellow chief executive after Mr. Breen was named DuPont’s interim chief in early October.“When the board asked me to step in as C.E.O., Andrew called me that day,” Mr. Breen said in a phone interview. “I chuckled because I knew why he was calling.”The two met the following Sunday and spent the afternoon discussing logistics. Mr. Liveris initially proposed merging and splitting into two companies, and Mr. Breen said three. Three it would be.What the two devised is what they describe as a merger of equals, putting together DuPont, the 213-year-old inventor of Kevlar, with Dow, the 118-year-old maker of plastics and chemicals. Shareholders of each company are expected to own half of the newly combined business — to be called DowDuPont — while the combined corporation will maintain headquarters in both Wilmington, Del., and Midland, Mich.Mr. Liveris would become the executive chairman of the combined company, while Mr. Breen would become the chief executive.Yet the new company, which garnered roughly $83 billion in pro forma sales last year, may not exist in its huge form for long. After the merger closes, which is expected to be during the third quarter next year, the business will be split up in 2018.What will emerge are three business: one specializing in agricultural chemicals, with $19 billion in pro forma sales last year; one in plastics and other materials, with $51 billion in annual revenue; and a third in specialty products like those for electronics and nutrition, which would have about $13 billion in annual sales.Of those businesses, agriculture has received the most attention. Once combined, the two companies would command about 25 percent of the agriculture market, according to Argus Research. Regulators may require minor divestitures, but nothing that should jeopardize the deal, said people briefed on the deal discussions, who asked for anonymity because the talks were private.Farmers — the end customers of Dow and DuPont’s products, who are already worried about rising prices — could still feel an effect.“Just a handful of large chemical companies including Dow and DuPont already control most of the seed supply used to grow crops like corn and soybeans,” said Wenonah Hauter, the executive director of Food & Water Watch, a nonprofit organization, said in an emailed statement. “Any merger that consolidates this market into fewer hands will give farmers fewer choices and put them at even more economic disadvantage.”Job reductions are expected to result from the merger, as well. Dow employs 53,000 people, while DuPont had 63,000 employees at the end of 2014.The companies did not discuss layoffs in their announcement, but DuPont, in a separate statement, said it expected to record a charge before taxes of $780 million, consisting of roughly $650 million in employee separation costs. DuPont said 10 percent of its global work force would be affected.In all, the companies plan to strip away more than $3 billion in costs from the deal and say there are potential growth synergies of $1 billion.Under the terms of the merger, Dow shareholders would receive one share of the new combined company for each of their shares, while DuPont shareholders would receive 1.282 shares for each. Under the merger’s exchange ratio, DuPont shareholders would receive $68.43 a share, based on Friday’s closing stock price, or a total of roughly $60 billion. The companies said the new company would have a combined market capitalization of $130 billion.The work of dividing the combined company will not wait until after the transaction closes. In many ways, it has already begun. The companies have already formed groups to design the separation. Mr. Breen will lead the agriculture and specialty products committee, while Mr. Liveris will lead the material science committee.The two said that finding the right people for each of the three divisions will be a major focus.“Who leads the companies is what’s going to create the value,” Mr. Breen said. “Having done this many times in my life, we know that you have to get the management.”The push to increase shareholder value at both Dow and DuPont drove prominent activists that circled their stocks. Last year, Dow settled a bitter dispute with Daniel S. Loeb, who runs Third Point, by adding four independent directors. This May, DuPont fended off Nelson Peltz. About two weeks ago, the company notified Mr. Peltz’s firm, Trian Fund Management, about the merger talks after having signed a nondisclosure agreement.While DuPont argued that its stock had outperformed traditional measures like the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, Trian said that the company had not cut enough costs and had repeatedly missed financial performance targets.On Friday, a Trian representative said, “Trian fully supports this transformative transaction and believes that the combination of DuPont and Dow is a great outcome for all shareholders.”Other investors were not as enthusiastic. Shares of Dow fell 2.8 percent to $53.37, while DuPont shares slumped 5.5 percent to $70.44. Both stocks, however, had surged on Wednesday after reports that the companies were in advanced talks.Dow also said on Friday that it planned to restructure its ownership with Dow Corning by becoming a full owner, up from a 50-50 joint venture. The law firm Shearman & Sterling is advising Dow on the Dow Corning restructuring, while Kirkland & Ellis advised Corning.Among Dow’s advisers in the deal with DuPont are Michael S. Klein, a former Citigroup rainmaker who has since helped lead multibillion-dollar mergers on his own; Lazard; Morgan Stanley; and the law firm Weil, Gotshal & Manges.DuPont turned to Evercore Partners, Goldman Sachs and the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom. Advertisement