
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
DEC. 12, 2015
This interview with Jessica Herrin, founder and chief executive of  Stella & Dot Family Brands, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences for you?A. My parents were divorced when I was young, and that’s where a lot of my drive comes from. My mom was a very smart, capable woman who became a mother as a teenager, and she always felt her life’s path was shaped by the challenges of not having much financial independence. So I was very determined to never let that happen to me. I started working two jobs from the time I was 15. It was never about earning money; it was about earning independence and choice.I mostly grew up with my dad. He is the quintessential entrepreneur, and a lot of my entrepreneurial spirit comes from him. His mother was a widow when he was 3. As he grew up, he was always the man of the house and always needed to have a job to help put food on the table. But his family never thought that they didn’t have everything they needed. He has this attitude of great abundance, and he’s always happy, always grateful, and the most positive person.He was always a smart guy, but since he also worked a lot he was not very focused in high school, until one day his calculus teacher told him, “I’m not going to pass you just because you’re a senior.” He wasn’t going to graduate if he didn’t pass the class. So he went to the library, studied hard and went from math dunce to genius. He believes that if you want to learn something, go crack a book and do it.AdvertisementWhat did you do after college?I had a mountain of debt, and I was about to take a job as an investment banker. At the last minute, I ended up going to interview with a software company in Texas. When I was driving back to the airport after the interview, uncertain about what to do, the cabdriver looked in the rearview mirror and could see I was lost in thought.He said, “Darlin’, what’s on your mind?” I told him I was weighing two different jobs. And he said, “Here’s the thing, sweetheart. Which job has the greater upside? What’s the downside, and is it worth the risk?” And I said, “Those are great questions.” I took the job in Texas, and that has been my decision-making framework pretty much ever since. That cabdriver was my angel in a cowboy hat.You started WeddingChannel.com in your early 20s and later sold it to the Knot. What were some leadership and management lessons from those days?It was a good warm-up round for Stella & Dot, but I was a terrible leader back then. I was a 24-year-old kid under extreme pressure, and I had no experience. We went from two people to 140 in the space of a year. Then the dot-com bubble started to burst, and I knew that if I didn’t do well, all these people around me were going to get fired. At that age, I didn’t have the emotional intelligence to realize that a leader needs to be at their best under pressure, not their worst.I had that typical early-entrepreneur hero complex, where it was about how well I did versus how well I helped other people do the work. Thank goodness I got that out of my system early.AdvertisementThen a mentor told me that if I ever want to run a large company, I should go work at one. So I got a job as a middle manager at Dell, and I had to develop skills as a leader. I also got pregnant with my first child, and I was always sick and tired, so I had to become far more focused in how I was spending my time. I learned to focus on what really matters.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And then you started Stella & Dot. How big is the company?Our revenue is around $300 million, and we have over 400 people in the home office and about 50,000 independent business owners in six countries.And what were your thoughts on culture this time?I wanted to hire missionaries, not mercenaries. The challenge, especially when you’re growing fast, is to be incredibly fierce about your hiring filters. You have to commit to caring for the culture more than the quarter.So how do you hire?I start by asking them about how they grew up and what was influential in their life and what did their parents do and what they’re really passionate about. And then I ask them, “What do you want to be known for, what mark do you want to leave?” I just want to see that they’re someone who really has a deep well of passion and that they think that way. I also ask people what their superpower is.It’s really about, do you care about the mission, do you have a fierce work ethic, are you a good person who other people enjoy being around, and do you care about winning as a company? That’s what I really try to tease out.The other really important thing is adaptability, and whether you can let things roll off your back. You’ve got to find people who have the mental wiring to see opportunities more than they focus on obstacles. And if you offer them constructive criticism, they’re curious instead of frustrated, and they’re open-minded instead of defensive.What advice do you give to aspiring entrepreneurs?The biggest thing is to have authentic passion. Creating something is very difficult. It requires perseverance, it takes a lot longer than you want it to, and it’s a lot harder than you think. You need passion to levitate over the obstacles you will face.And what I tell everyone is, do not be afraid to wash windows. If you are a passionate, open-minded person, you will find that opportunity is all around you, and you have to be the one who sees it. So don’t look around and complain about the parts you don’t like.If you decide to be your best and bring passion to everything you do, you will find more greatness within yourself and far more opportunity.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on December 13, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Put the Culture Over the Quarter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »