AdvertisementSupported byStrategiesBy Jeff SommerThe price of gasoline just keeps dropping. A gallon of regular costs $2.01, on average, across the United States, and the motor club AAA says it is likely to plunge below $2 imminently. If you drive a car, as I do, gas that cheap is a thrill. It is an inducement to head out on the road.Yet if you worry about fuel emissions and climate change, as I also do, the downward spiral of gas prices is frightening. It is an incitement to burn fossil fuel when a great deal of evidence suggests that we should be taking strenuous measures to burn much less of it, as many nations of the world concluded at the conference on climate change in Paris this month.It is a conundrum for consumers with a conscience because cheap gas is, in many ways, a beautiful thing. The decline in gasoline prices, which has followed the global plunge in oil and other commodity prices, puts more money in people’s pockets during a stretch when many Americans need all the help they can get. The average household in the United States was on track to save about $700 on gasoline in 2015 compared with the previous year, the federal Energy Information Administration estimated in April. But gas prices have fallen more than anticipated, so the savings may turn out to have been even greater.There is a nastier side to low prices, though: A great deal of evidence suggests that they are bad for the environment. The economics is simple. Low gas prices encourage people to drive more, and to buy more gas-hungry vehicles. Put in a contrary way, high prices are a boon because they discourage driving and limit gasoline consumption.A White House report in June called “Explaining the U.S. Petroleum Consumption Surprise” said the transportation sector accounted for more than 80 percent of a “surprising” and beneficial decline in petroleum use in the United States over the last few years. While more rigorous fuel-economy standards have been an important factor, the biggest cause of the surprise has been a decline in driving: “Declining vehicle miles traveled (VMT) has had a greater effect on consumption than rising fuel economy to date,” the report said.In 2014, though, oil and gasoline prices began to fall sharply, and an all-too-familiar pattern has already begun to emerge.Recent data on new-vehicle purchases is revealing. Fuel economy for new cars, light trucks and sport utility vehicles rose fairly steadily from 20.1 miles per gallon in October 2007 to 25.8 m.p.g. in August 2014, said Michael Sivak, research professor at the University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute. Since then, based on Environmental Protection Agency ratings, fuel economy of the new-car fleet has reversed course, dropping to 25 m.p.g. in November, a decline of 0.8 m.p.g.“That is a huge decline,” Professor Sivak said. It reflects a marginal shift in current buying preferences, away from smaller, efficient cars and toward bigger light trucks and S.U.V.s.What’s more, he has found, while miles driven by the average motorist declined when prices were high and the economy was weak, that trend has also been reversed. In September, the most recent month available, the number of miles driven by the average motorist had climbed above the level of October 2007, when the University of Michigan began a monthly study of the data.While fuel efficiency and emissions for new vehicles are still substantially better than in 2007, both have begun to worsen.Because vehicles are typically used for many years, current purchases have only a gradual effect on the fuel efficiency of the overall vehicle fleet of new and old cars in the United States. But history shows that fuel efficiency responds to gas prices, among other factors. It is striking, for example, that actual on-road fuel efficiency of the average car declined to 13.4 m.p.g. in 1973 from 15.3 m.p.g. in 1936, according to a paper by Professor Sivak and a colleague at the University of Michigan, Brandon Schoettle.Most of the progress in fuel economy occurred after the oil embargo of 1973 and in the 1980s. Fuel economy rose to 21.2 m.p.g. by 1991, propelled partly by soaring prices and by Corporate Average Fuel Economy standards, which went into effect for the first time in 1978. After that swift progress, however, on-road fuel economy rose only modestly to 23.4 m.p.g. by 2013, the most recent figure available for the overall American car fleet. The data on fuel efficiency for newly purchased cars suggests that the gasoline price declines of recent months may slow down improvements in fuel economy for the overall fleet at the very moment when reducing dependence on fossil fuels may be becoming more urgent.To cut back on gasoline consumption, after all, the Obama administration has been counting on higher fuel economy standards, which are likely to be more palatable when fuel costs are high.One way of increasing the prices paid by consumers at the pump is to tax carbon emissions or, alternatively, to raise the tax on gasoline. These methods don’t reward companies that extract and refine fossil fuel. Many economists favor such taxes. But a carbon tax, which the Obama administration has advocated but Congress has opposed, has failed to gain traction in the United States. And this month, Congress decided to hold the federal gasoline tax at 18.4 cents, the level at which it has been stuck since 1993. Still, as I pointed out in a column a year ago, a gasoline tax could be useful not only as an environmental measure but in rebuilding the nation’s roads and bridges.In a new paper, Stan A. Kaplowitz and Aaron M. McCright, sociologists at Michigan State University, analyzed public views on raising the gasoline tax. That wouldn’t be a wildly popular move among voters, Professor Kaplowitz said in an interview, but it would be more acceptable under certain circumstances. Not surprisingly, imposing a smaller increase — say, 20 cents a gallon — would be more popular than a $1 increase, for example. And when people are told that the money is to be used for a concrete purpose — for repairing transportation infrastructure, for example — they respond more favorably than when the tax revenues are simply to go into the federal Treasury. A so-called revenue neutral tax, in which people are refunded gas tax money in paychecks or tax returns, would also be more favorably received.“We found that a gas tax is salable if you tell people the reasons for doing it,” he said. “Raising taxes isn’t popular, but this is not as hopeless as it might seem.”The problem remains, however, that almost no one likes paying higher taxes, and even drivers who care about the environment really like low gasoline prices. I know I do. On a sunny day, when the traffic is light and gas is cheaper than it’s been in years, I want to get out on the road. Perhaps I should fight the impulse. It might be easier if the true cost of driving were reflected in the price at the pump.Advertisement