By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDDEC. 13, 2015
The hedge fund manager Daniel S. Loeb stepped up criticism of Dow Chemical over the weekend, calling on the chemical maker to bar its chief executive, Andrew N. Liveris, from having any role in the company after its merger with DuPont, people briefed on the matter said Sunday.In a letter to Dow’s board, Mr. Loeb, chief executive of Third Point, questioned the hastiness of the transaction and suggested that Mr. Liveris may have accepted a lower price for the company to retain a role there.Dow and DuPont announced on Friday that Mr. Liveris would become the executive chairman of the merged chemical manufacturer, to be called DowDuPont.
            Once combined, DowDuPont plans to split into three independent companies, each with its own specialty.        ORIGINAL COMPANIESDOWDUPONTCOMBINED ENTITYDOWDUPONTCOMBINEDREVENUENEW COMPANIESAGRICULTUREMATERIALSCIENCESPECIALTYPRODUCTS$19 billion$51 billion$13 billionHerbicides, fungicides, insecticides, genetically modified and hybrid seeds, including DuPont’s Pioneer brand.Construction materials, vinyls, epoxies andpolyurethanes, plastics used in food packaging, specialized chemicals used in the automotive and pharmaceutical industries.Materials used in electronics manufacturing, safety products like Kevlar and Tyvek, food additives and sweeteners, enzymes and other biological products used in manufacturing.DEC. 11, 2015
Mr. Loeb has been a persistent thorn in Dow’s side for more than a year. Late last year, he publicly criticized the company and Mr. Liveris for failing to meet financial performance targets and questioned whether the company was being run efficiently.AdvertisementThe two sides settled, with Dow adding four new independent directors and Mr. Loeb agreeing to a so-called standstill, which prevented him from publicly criticizing the company. The standstill expired on Saturday.A spokeswoman for Mr. Loeb declined to comment. A representative for Dow, Rachelle Schikorra, issued a statement from Dow board members saying they were “unanimously and fully supportive of the announced merger of equals with DuPont and intended separation” into three companies.AdvertisementNews of Mr. Loeb’s letter was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal.A version of this article appears in print on December 14, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Hedge Fund Manager Steps Up Criticism of Dow and Its C.E.O.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.