By THE NEW YORK TIMESDEC. 13, 2015
On Tuesday, the Labor Department is expected to release its latest update on changes in consumer prices for November. With the continuing plunge in oil prices — average pump prices dropped 19 cents in just one month — and widespread discounting in sectors from apparel to cars last month, analysts expect the Consumer Price Index to remain flat. Even a drop in the headline number is unlikely to push the Federal Reserve off course and deter it from raising the benchmark interest rate when it meets on Wednesday. —Patricia CohenEuropean policy makers are scheduled to meet on Tuesday to complete long-awaited data protection rules aimed at giving people across the region a greater say over how companies use their personal data. The overhaul, which will come into force over the next two years, could lead to fines totaling millions of dollars for tech giants like Google and companies like the drug maker Pfizer if they fail to comply with Europe’s privacy rules, which are significantly more stringent than those in the United States. —Mark ScottWhile Halliburton’s $35 billion acquisition of Baker Hughes was announced a year ago, the companies face a looming deadline on Tuesday for approval by the Justice Department. Since the two oil service providers first agreed to the deal, oil prices have plunged, making it more difficult to sell assets to allay any regulator concerns about competitiveness. Last week, regulators sued to block Staples’s acquisition of Office Depot. —Leslie PickerThe drumroll is over. It’s time for the main event. The Federal Reserve’s policy-making committee is expected to announce on Wednesday that it will raise its benchmark interest rate for the first time since the Great Recession. The first increase won’t amount to much.AdvertisementThe Fed, which has held the rate near zero for seven years as the mainstay of its economic stimulus campaign, is likely to set a new range of 0.25 to 0.5 percent. The more important question is how quickly the Fed plans to continue raising rates. The Fed’s chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, will have a chance to frame those expectations when she holds a planned news conference after the announcement. —Binyamin AppelbaumAdvertisementValeant Pharmaceuticals International will hold a meeting for investors and analysts on Wednesday, at which the company is expected to discuss its financial outlook for next year as well as certain drug development programs. The stock of the once high-flying company has been inching up recently after losing more than two-thirds of its value on concerns about the sharp price increases on some Valeant drugs and the company’s relationship with a mail-order pharmacy that is now being shut down. Investors will be looking for updates on the pharmacy matter at the meeting, which is scheduled to run from 8 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. —Andrew PollackOn Wednesday afternoon, General Electric will present its outlook for next year. In 2015, G.E. accelerated its post-financial crisis shift away from finance and back to its industrial roots, selling and servicing machinery such as jet engines, power generators, medical imaging machines and oil field equipment.With the strategy in place, next year should be one of execution for G.E. Analysts will be closely watching the company’s forecasts for major industrial markets, especially as oil prices continue to drop, and the probable impact on G.E.’s business. Wall Street’s consensus estimate for G.E. in 2016 is $1.51 earnings per share on revenue of $129 billion. —Steve LohrPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thursday is the deadline for Puerto Rico’s electric power authority to reach a deal with its creditors to restructure its debt. The Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority has persuaded many bondholders to exchange their debt for new bonds with more favorable terms to the struggling utility. But the agency has struggled to win over the insurance companies that are backing about 30 percent of the bonds, putting a restructuring in jeopardy. —Michael CorkeryEuropean Union leaders plan to meet late this week for their last scheduled summit conference of the year. Discussions are expected to begin on Thursday in Brussels with a focus on migration, security and British demands to reform the bloc.On Friday, the leaders are scheduled to turn to economic and monetary issues, including the so-called European Deposit Insurance Scheme, which was proposed last month by the European Commission, the bloc’s executive agency.The system would aim to ensure that all depositors across the 19 countries using the euro could be equally confident that their savings were safe. But Germany, which has long resisted sharing fiscal risks with other eurozone countries, has signaled reservations about the idea. That means leaders are likely to agree, at most, to a gradual introduction of such a system. —James KanterAfter nine months of nearly nonstop publicity — fan conventions, magazine covers, 500 storm troopers on the Great Wall of China, retail hoopla and theme park tie-ins — is there anyone anywhere not yet aware that “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” arrives on Friday? For Disney, which bought Lucasfilm, the studio behind the “Star Wars” franchise, for $4 billion in 2012, the stakes are gargantuan. If opening-weekend ticket sales are perceived by investors to fall short, even by a little, the entertainment conglomerate’s stock will undoubtedly get roughed up on Dec. 21.Disney has been trying to dial back expectations, but Wall Street thinks “The Force Awakens” will deliver one of the biggest openings — if not the biggest — in Hollywood history, surpassing the $209 million that “Jurassic World” generated in June. —Brooks BarnesA version of this article appears in print on December 14, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.