By BEN SISARIODEC. 13, 2015
Apple has won an exclusive streaming deal with Taylor Swift to show a concert film from her world tour.On Sunday, Apple and Ms. Swift announced that subscribers of the company’s new streaming service, Apple Music, would have access to a film directed by Jonas Akerlund that was taped two weeks ago at Ms. Swift’s show at the ANZ Stadium in Sydney, Australia. The film, which will become available next Sunday, includes backstage scenes as well as those of the many musical guests she brought onstage throughout the tour.Ms. Swift’s tour for her latest album, “1989,” finished its worldwide run on Saturday. It had more than $240 million in gross ticket sales, according to Pollstar, a trade publication that tracks concert data.The deal deepens the ties between Apple and Ms. Swift, who in June wrote a blog post criticizing the company over its plan not to pay music royalties during free trials of Apple Music. Within hours of her post, Apple reversed course on the royalties, and later Apple Music became the only streaming outlet to offer “1989.”AdvertisementOn Monday, Beats 1, Apple’s Internet radio station, will also broadcast an interview with Ms. Swift conducted by Zane Lowe, the influential BBC D.J. who joined Apple this year to lead the station.Terms of the deal were not disclosed. But it follows other arrangements that Apple has struck with star musicians to publicize Apple Music and produce programming for its service. The rapper Drake and the producer Pharrell Williams have been involved with Apple Music since its introduction in June, and last month Apple introduced a television commercial featuring the country singer Kenny Chesney.AdvertisementEver the skilled promoter, Ms. Swift announced the deal on Sunday, her 26th birthday, on her Twitter account. “Thank you so much for all the birthday wishes,” she wrote. “I have a little surprise for you.”A version of this article appears in print on December 14, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Taylor Swift Makes Deal With Apple on Tour Film.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.