By BEN SISARIOOCT. 6, 2015
Warner/Chappell, the music publishing division of the Warner Music Group, announced on Tuesday that Jon Platt, an executive with deep roots in hip-hop and rhythm and blues, will become its new chief, in a shift of power among Warner’s top music executives.Mr. Platt, known as Big Jon — at 6 feet 8 inches, he is easy to spot at industry functions — will become chief executive of the publishing division on Nov. 1, succeeding Cameron Strang. Mr. Strang has held an unusual position as the chairman and chief executive of Warner/Chappell, as well as the head of Warner Bros. Records, one of the major record divisions of the Warner Music Group, the smallest of the three major music conglomerates.In addition, Mr. Platt will take over as chairman of Warner/Chappell in May, at which point he will report directly to Warner’s chief executive, Steve Cooper, the company announced. Mr. Strang will remain the head of the Warner Bros. label; he is also a member of the board of the Warner Music Group.“My vision for Warner/Chappell is one of peerless commitment to the songwriter and unmatched advocacy for the value of music,” Mr. Platt said in a statement. “I see us leading the industry in our service not only to our songwriters, but also to the partners and fans that help make their livelihoods possible.”AdvertisementMr. Platt is renowned in the business for his ability to identify talented songwriters in urban music, and he has close relationships with top artists like Jay Z and Beyoncé, both of whom Mr. Platt lured to Warner after he joined the company in late 2012.In a statement, Jay Z praised Mr. Platt as “not your typical music ‘executive’ — Jon Platt is a lover of music, he lives music.” He added: “His business acumen is a byproduct of loving what he does. A great collaborator, we have rewritten many of the business rules. A man of the people, sometimes the good guys finish first. We salute his ascension to the top of the ranks.”AdvertisementWarner/Chappell, one of the dominant players in music publishing, was recently hit with a setback when a federal judge ruled that the company’s copyright for the song “Happy Birthday to You” was invalid. The company, which has controlled “Happy Birthday” since 1988, is said to collect about $2 million a year from licensing the song, income that would most likely be lost if the judge’s ruling stands.A version of this article appears in print on October 7, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; New Chief Executive Named at Division of Warner Music.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.