AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy David ZaringDavid Zaring is assistant professor of legal studies at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.The Federal Reserve Board has not had to worry much in the past about invasive legislation from Congress. The current highway bill, however, represents the culmination of a change in the political risk the agency faces.The bill exemplifies a new trend of legislative hostility toward the agency, which has expressed itself in Republican-sponsored bills calling for audits of the central bank, efforts to limit the Fed’s discretion in setting monetary policy and even calls for its dissolution.Those bills had never gone far. But now, the tax-averse legislature has chosen to pay for new highway funding through two raids on the Fed’s budget. If this bill becomes law, it will represent a new and troubling interference by Congress in the affairs of the central bank.The first raid drains the central bank’s “rainy day fund,” money set aside from revenue earned from its trading operations – it trades government debt to set monetary policy — to deal with the possibility of market losses.The second raid reduces the dividend that the Fed has paid to its member banks. Since 1913, that dividend has been set at 6 percent. Under the highway bill, the new, lower dividend would track the rate of return on the 10-year Treasury note, currently around 2.2 percent, with the difference being used for highway funding.It is the dividend reduction that represents a particularly novel degree of interference with the Fed’s internal workings.Taking $19 billion from the rainy day fund’s $29 billion stockpile certainly affects the Fed’s internal budgeting. But Congress has done this before. The Fed turns most of its trading profits over to the Treasury Department anyway. Moreover, it has never lost money on its open market operations, meaning that the $10 billion that would be left over should suffice as an emergency reserve.Reducing the dividends of member banks, however, is different, even if it concerns a pretty anachronistic Fed practice. The dividend comes from shares that the banks are obligated to purchase when they become members of the Federal Reserve System.But it also harks back to the days when the Fed was set up as a semiprivate institution, owned by its member banks, but created by Congress.Nobody thinks that the Fed is a private bank anymore, or they shouldn’t – it hasn’t looked like one since the New Deal.The Fed has been explicitly charged with the public function of managing the monetary supply. It is run by political appointees based in Washington, nominated by the president and confirmed by the Senate. The era of a decentralized Federal Reserve System run by regional boards nominated by member banks is long gone.There is no reason to pay Fed member banks a 6 percent dividend solely because they have always received a 6 percent dividend. It is strange for a government agency to pay a dividend to the industry it regulates, and perhaps that persuaded some in Congress to cut the dividend. But cutting the dividend to pay for a highway bill puts America’s banks on the hook for a roads project that has nothing to do with them.Fed officials have warned that the dividend cut could lead to unintended consequences, and I can imagine some banks rechartering as state banks, rather than leaving their money at the Fed to earn 2.2 percent. I can also see the banks preparing a plausible court case citing the Constitution’s takings clause.After all, the member banks had investment-backed expectations about that dividend that had a century of pedigree. It is not clear why they have been singled out so that Congress could do something about transportation without raising the gas tax.Banks do not usually do well with takings claims — it is a heavily regulated industry after all, meaning that you are expected to put up with administrative surprises — but this time might be different.Even worse, it all amounts to a real threat to the Fed’s cherished independence. Congress has talked tough about reining in the Fed in the past. But using the central bank as a fund-raiser for unrelated fiscal priorities is the sort of thing that happens in banana republics. And plundering the dividend for pet projects is the kind of thing no chief executive would be able to get away with.I even worry about the politics of all these “take back the Fed” initiatives. Legislators have criticized the Fed for being too cozy with the big banks, but they have been very receptive to the political donations that come from those banks. I doubt a Fed that was used by Congress as a regular piggy bank would end up being used for far-reaching legislative ends.Those in Congress who have been campaigning against the Fed have certainly won a round with the highway bill. It will doubtless increase their agitation to mess even more with the workings of the central bank.Advertisement