AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy Mark J. RoeMark J. Roe is a professor at Harvard Law School. He wrote “The Voting Prohibition in Bond Workouts,” published in The Yale Law Journal.Congress is poised to retroactively validate hardball restructuring tactics in the bond market that courts have struck down in major reorganization cases like that of Caesars Entertainment.The underlying problem is that since the 1930s, the securities laws have barred basic free contracting among bondholders, via the Trust Indenture Act of 1939. Although the ban is exceedingly poor — one can think of few groups less in need of contractual guidance in the United States than institutional bondholders — the lurking amendment would worsen the plight of the bondholder.One of the most prominent New Dealers, William O. Douglas, thought that insiders too often demolished retail bondholders in out-of-court restructuring cases. He wanted to bar votes from binding bondholders, despite that other securities holders, like shareholders, typically approve major transactions by vote, as even bondholders do in bankruptcy. He was then the influential chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission. (Yes, this is same William Douglas who later became a Supreme Court justice.) Congress agreed.The effort backfired, however. First, the voting ban meant that a handful of holdout bondholders could stymie a sound restructuring of a weakened company. Some holdouts act strategically, some do not like the deal on offer. But when the bondholders seeking a compromise see that the holdouts will get a big payout, they often stop being willing to compromise. They fear that the holdouts will be fully paid, while they get less. The deal dies and the company goes bankrupt.Then, decades later, smart investment bankers deployed a powerful but contentious mechanism, the “exit exchange offer.” In it, the debtor company offers new bonds for old bonds, but insists that investors exchanging their old bonds first vote to delete the bonds’ protections. The securities laws allow bondholders to vote on their protections but not on their payment terms. When the exit consent structure works for the deal makers, it drops nonparticipating bondholders into a “death trap”: The dissenting bondholder either takes an undesirable deal or suffers as the bonds lose protections and value. Courts and commentators are split on whether Douglas’s ban on changing the payment terms or maturity date barred the tactic; in recent months, courts in major restructuring cases stopped splitting and confirmed that it did.Imagine bonds for which the issuer had promised never to transfer value to its owners until the bondholders were paid back. The issuer offers to exchange those bonds for new bonds of an affiliate, but the issuer requires that the exchangers vote first to waive that no-payout protection. The bondholders who exchange do not care about the no-payout protection, because it is the affiliate that will owe them money after the protection is gone, so they vote to waive the no-payout protection. Those who do nothing would be hurt because, after the protection is gone, the debtor could transfer money to its shareholders and be unable to pay the remaining bondholders back. A bondholder would exchange even if the deal is bad —- as long as doing nothing leads to a worse deal.Thus Douglas’s no-vote rule facilitated one serious distortion —- the holdout who can kill a good deal —- and then, in reaction, deal makers invented a countervailing distortion: the coercive exit consent exchange offer to twist or break the arms of dissenting bondholders.Recent court decisions confirmed that the law bars the exit consent distortion (and possibly more), because it requires that bondholders get to make their own call as to payment terms. The lurking rider would validate the latter exit consent distortion.It would be far better to simply repeal the voting ban. It’s anachronistic for the 21st-century bond market to stymie uncoerced votes in restructuring cases.The consequence would be no holdouts after a vote, and no need for coercive exit consents. Congress should be modest about adding an important bond market rider without input from the S.E.C. and the bond market over all. If it cannot wait and the rider validating hardball tactics must pass, then a simple rider to the rider needs to be put in to give the S.E.C. authority to fix problems that will arise: “For bonds issued after June 30, 2016, bondholders may vote on payment terms, under conditions approved by the S.E.C.”A well-functioning bond market needs a way to restructure bonds via noncoercive votes. If bondholders had that right, restructuring cases would not need the exit consent maneuver to force holdouts into submission.Today’s financial marketplace operates by deal-making, and institutional bondholders know what they are doing. Shareholders vote on mergers and restructuring; bondholders should be able to, as well.The act needs to be updated for the 21st century to allow for uncoerced bondholder votes on core terms. Passing an amendment behind closed doors that would validate tough tactics is not the way to go. If a fair vote and a recapitalization plan could keep a company out of bankruptcy, it would be a good result for the distressed business, and that kind of decision-by-vote should not continue to be outlawed.Advertisement