AdvertisementSupported byBy Raphael MinderMADRID — Portugal faces fresh concerns relating to one of its smaller banks after shares in Banif tumbled Monday amid concerns about its ability to pay back loans it received in a bailout of the country’s banking sector.Banif was one of the smaller banks to receive emergency lending as part of the international bailout of 78 billion euros, or $85.7 billion, that Portugal negotiated in 2011. Banif’s ability to repay its share of the bailout has been under particular scrutiny since July, when the European Commission, the competition authority of the European Union, announced that it was investigating whether the subsequent restructuring of Banif included what amounted to illegal state subsidies.Banif’s problems provide an early test for the Socialist government of Prime Minister António Costa, who took office last month after a general election that failed to produce a clear-cut winner. Mr. Costa persuaded the Communists and other left-wing parties to form a parliamentary alliance to oust the center-right coalition government that had overseen Portugal’s three-year bailout program.Mr. Costa’s administration was already facing another banking headache: how to sell Novo Banco, an institution incorporating the healthy assets of Banco Espírito Santo, which required a €4.9 billion state-led bailout in 2014.The auction of Novo Banco is meant to complete Portugal’s restructuring and rescue of Banco Espírito Santo, which collapsed after it was forced to disclose unsustainable losses linked to loans it had made to other companies in the Espírito Santo family business empire.As part of the bailout, the Portuguese authorities broke up Banco Espírito Santo and transferred its healthy assets to a new entity, Novo Banco. The plan was to then auction Novo Banco to private investors and to recover as much of the cost of the bailout as possible, but that sale has been delayed.Banif could now be subjected to a similar restructuring, with its toxic assets split off from the rest of the bank, according to some Portuguese news reports, The share price of Banif fell about 35 percent on Monday.Banif issued a statement on Monday in which it denied reports that the government was struggling to prevent the bank’s collapse. Instead, Banif said, the government plans to sell its 60 percent stake in the bank to a strategic investor.“The board reaffirms the ongoing open and competitive process of selling the state’s stake in Banif, in which several international investors are involved,” Banif said in the statement.Banif, whose full name is Banco Internacional do Funchal, reported a net loss of €295 million last year, following a loss of €470 million in 2013. The government injected €1.1 billion of fresh capital into Banif in 2013 to help the bank meet minimum capital requirements.The bank was founded in Funchal, the capital city of Madeira. It has a strong presence there, as well as in the Azores and among Portuguese migrant communities in countries including Canada and the United States.Miguel Albuquerque, the head of Madeira’s regional government, said on Monday that he had spoken to Mr. Costa and had received assurances that the bank’s deposits would be safeguarded. News reports about “an imminent collapse of the bank don’t correspond to reality,” Mr. Albuquerque said.Portugal returned to growth after competing its bailout program on schedule in 2014. Last week, Fitch Ratings issued a relatively positive report about the Portuguese banking sector, despite the delays in selling Novo Banco.“Portugal’s banks are stabilizing, supported by a mildly favorable, but fragile, operating environment,” Fitch said. “Downside sector risks are, in our view, limited but it will take time before the banks significantly improve their stand-alone financial strength and political uncertainties could dampen reforms to boost investment and growth.”Advertisement