AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonThe private equity giant Bain Capital is winding down its multibillion-dollar hedge fund that took bets on shifting macroeconomic trends, adding to the list of funds that have thrown in the towel this year.The Absolute Return Capital hedge fund, run by Jonathan J. Goodman and Jeff Woolbert, is closing after three years of losses. The fund, which invested in fixed income, stock, commodity and currency markets, notched double-digit returns in 2009 and 2011 but since then has had less luck. This year, it has lost investors more than 14 percent through August, according to one person briefed on the firm.In a letter sent out Tuesday morning, Mr. Goodman and Mr. Woolbert told investors that the environment for macro strategies “continues to be challenging.” The letter added, “That factor, combined with the lack of certainty over when a recovery will take hold, led us to conclude that the time was right to return capital to you.”Investors across the industry are nursing losses after a tough summer punctuated with bad news, including a stock market rout in China that ignited a global sell-off. Many of Wall Street’s top investors were caught by surprise. William A. Ackman’s Pershing Square Capital Management reversed all of its gains over August and is down 12.6 percent through Sept. 30. Others, like David Einhorn, saw their losses amplified over the summer. So far this year, Mr. Einhorn’s Greenlight Capital is down 17 percent.Other, lesser known hedge funds were buffeted by the turmoil, too. One fund called Spruce Alpha, which employed a risky leveraged exchange-traded fund strategy, lost nearly half of its investors’ money in August. It has since moved all of its positions into cash.But the year has been particularly unkind to hedge funds that deploy macro strategies including wagers on when one country’s central bank will raise interest rates and how far another country’s currency could rise or fall. In the first half of the year, the average macro hedge fund lost around 0.3 percent, according to the research firm HFR.“Macroeconomic volatility increased to conclude the first half of 2015 with dislocations across China, Greece and oil, as well as on anticipated U.S. Federal Reserve interest rate increases, all contributing to financial asset volatility and increased investor uncertainty entering the second half of the year,” said Kenneth J. Heinz, the president of HFR.Absolute Return Capital had received requests from investors to withdraw a sizable amount of money from the fund, the firm said in discussions with investors, according to a person briefed on the firm. Investors in the fund have included the Boston Children’s Hospital, where several Bain executives sit on the hospital’s trust committee, and the Waltham Retirement System.Bain Capital created Absolute Return Capital in May of 2004. A spokesman for Bain Capital did not immediately respond to a request for comment.Bloomberg News earlier reported the wind-down of the hedge fund.Matthew Goldstein contributed reporting.Advertisement