AdvertisementSupported byBy Landon Thomas Jr.When the prominent Wall Street investor Martin J. Whitman finally stepped down from running Third Avenue Management in 2012, the move was seen as an inevitable passing of the torch for the octogenarian fund manager.Less remarked upon was that Mr. Whitman, now 91, would stay on as the chairman of Third Avenue’s five benchmark mutual funds — not least the Focused Credit Fund, the fund that rattled markets last week by barring investors from getting their money back.On Monday, Third Avenue said that its chief executive, David M. Barse, a bankruptcy lawyer who had been instrumental in establishing the credit fund, would be leaving the firm, bringing an abrupt end to a 24-year career at the firm.The management shake-up came as the market for high yield, or junk bonds, continued to weaken. The shares of BlackRock’s $15 billion exchange-traded fund, which invests in the bonds of risky companies, were down nearly 1 percent on Monday, with trading volume at record levels.And in a sign that nervous investors are still pulling money from these types of funds, Lucidus Capital Partners, a $900 million junk bond fund based in London, said it would be returning cash to investors.Regulators are also taking aim. The securities regulator in Massachusetts, the secretary of the commonwealth, William F. Galvin, has opened an investigation into Third Avenue. A spokeswoman for the Securities and Exchange Commission said that staff members from the agency were at Third Avenue’s headquarters in Midtown Manhattan monitoring the situation.The market forces driving the turmoil at Third Avenue are hardly surprising — the junk bond market has for months been seen as vulnerable to a sharp sell-off. But how the firm handled the retreat by investors has raised questions across Wall Street.Slamming the door on investors is about as extreme a step as a mutual fund can take. Mr. Barse, whose career had been carefully nurtured by Mr. Whitman, also did not help his cause in an investor conference call last Friday, with halting remarks that investors saw as too little, too late.Regulators are now examining why the Focused Credit Fund found itself in a position where it could not sell enough of its high-risk corporate bonds to satisfy the demands of investors. And mutual fund experts say that one of the first questions that will be asked is why the nine trustees who oversee the fund did not do more to prevent this from happening.“The problem here is that you didn’t have a board that was aggressive enough to challenge management,” said Mercer E. Bullard, a mutual fund specialist at the University of Mississippi School of Law and a former lawyer at the S.E.C. “This fund was having hundreds of millions of dollars in redemptions last year — that definitely should have been a red flag for the board.”After all, that is why mutual fund boards exist: To stand up for the interests of investors and to ensure that the fund company, in this case Third Avenue, is managing assets in a prudent, responsible manner.Since 2009, mutual funds have become larger in size and their portfolios more complex in nature, with many of them investing heavily in risky, high-return assets like leveraged loans and junk bonds. In response, regulators and industry advocates have been pushing fund companies to make sure that the boards that oversee these funds are both independent and competent in terms of their ability to truly grasp what the portfolio manager is doing.“There is an increased burden on mutual fund directors these days,” said Jay G. Baris, a mutual fund lawyer at Morrison & Foerster. “Nearly two-thirds of fund boards have independent chairs, and many believe that is best practice these days.”In this regard, the trustees overseeing the Third Avenue funds come up short. Mr. Whitman founded Third Avenue’s predecessor company in 1974, and since 1990 he has been chairman of its funds — with Mr. Barse serving as his No. 2 on the board since 2001.A spokesman for Third Avenue said that no one at the company would comment on its governance practices.The S.E.C. mandates that mutual fund boards have a majority of independent directors, and by that measure Third Avenue met its requirement. None of the other trustees have direct ties to Third Avenue.But some of the directors have close ties to Mr. Whitman, while others are lacking in relevant expertise.For example, Martin Shubik, 89, who has been overseeing funds since 1990, is a mathematics professor at Yale who played poker with Mr. Whitman in graduate school at Princeton and was co-author of a book with him in 2005, “The Aggressive Conservative Investor.”According to Third Avenue, Charles C. Walden, 71, oversaw a $12 billion investment account at the Knights of Columbus in New Haven. He also helped Mr. Whitman with another one of his books: “Value Investing: A Balanced Approach,” published in 2000.And then there is Lucinda Franks, the wife of Robert M. Morgenthau, the former district attorney for Manhattan; she has been a trustee since 1998. Ms. Franks, an author and a former staff writer for The New York Times, brings to the board the expertise of a “journalist and author,” according to Third Avenue regulatory documents.One of the fund’s most qualified trustees would seem to be Patrick Reinkemeyer, a former top executive at Morningstar, the investment research company, who joined the board in January.“Many mutual fund boards are nominally independent, but you would not expect them to stand up to the management company,” said Mr. Bullard of the University of Mississippi.Of course, there are exceptions. Earlier this year, two directors of the Sequoia Fund stepped down over concerns with the fund’s outsize position in Valeant Pharmaceuticals, the fast-growing drug company, some of whose pricing practices have drawn scrutiny.In terms of legal liability, Mr. Bullard says that the board’s main failure may have been to allow so much of the portfolio to be made up of securities that were hard to price and sell.Mutual fund analysts say that what led to the credit fund’s downfall was the larger-than-usual exposure it had to so-called Level 3 assets, or securities that trade so infrequently that it is very hard, if not impossible, to arrive at an actual price for them.Regulators say that anytime these assets exceed 15 percent of a fund’s portfolio, extra steps need to be taken so that enough cash is available to meet investor redemptions.For the last two quarters, regulatory documents show, Third Avenue’s credit fund exceeded this limit as portfolio managers were forced to dispose of easier-to-trade securities until it was left with many bonds that it could neither price nor sell.videoAdvertisement