AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — Cheap oil. A weak euro. Money printing by the central bank.The eurozone is so awash in stimulus that a rate increase by the Federal Reserve, expected on Wednesday, is not likely to create many ripples on the Continent, economists say.The larger question for Europe is why the eurozone’s economy is not responding more to the help it is getting not only from its own central bank but also, inadvertently, from the Fed.The prospect of higher interest rates in the United States, along with efforts by the European Central Bank to push down rates in the eurozone, has already prompted investors to sell euros and buy dollars. For much of the year, in large part because of the Fed, the euro has hovered near lows last seen in 2003. That is a boon for European exports because it makes products priced in euros cheaper for foreign buyers.But because the Fed has signaled its intentions so clearly, not much is likely to change for the eurozone on Wednesday unless there is a surprise — for example, a statement by the United States’ central bank pointing to faster interest rate increases than investors are expecting.“The prospect of the Fed raising rates and the E.C.B. easing policy in December has been fully priced in by currency markets,” Holger Schmieding, chief economist at Berenberg Bank, said in an email.The euro was trading at $1.10 on Tuesday, down from $1.25 a year earlier.The Fed is expected to raise rates for the first time in nearly a decade because the American economy has achieved modest but steady growth and unemployment is within the range considered de facto full employment in the United States job market.That is in sharp contrast to the eurozone, where joblessness remains high and economic growth is still sluggish despite everything the European Central Bank has thrown at it. Growth in the 19 countries of the currency zone will be just 1.5 percent this year, at an annualized rate, according to European Central Bank forecasts. Unemployment in October was 10.7 percent.The eurozone does have some forces that should work in its favor. Besides having an attractively weak currency, the eurozone economy has gotten a slight lift from lower energy prices, which give consumers more money to spend on other things. And the European Central Bank has been buying government bonds and other assets, a form of money printing that has helped reduce borrowing costs for companies and individuals. Fears that higher interest rates in the United States could spread to Europe have not materialized.All those factors, taken together, are the economic equivalent of performance-enhancing drugs. Mario Draghi, president of the E.C.B., said during a speech in Bologna, Italy, on Monday that stimulus measures “are producing their desired effects.”But the effect has been muted by too many negative factors, economists say. And Fed action is not likely to change that. Mr. Draghi also warned on Monday that monetary policy alone “cannot bring lasting prosperity for our economies.”The eurozone is still recovering from the effects of the global financial crisis that began in 2007, followed by the Greek debt crisis. Many banks are still weighed down by problem loans, which discourage them from issuing new loans to finance business expansion and hiring.Mr. Schmieding of Berenberg estimated that the cheap euro, the main side effect of Fed policy, adds just 0.1 percent to eurozone growth. That only partly offsets the effect in Europe from turbulence in developing countries like China, which are important customers for eurozone exports like cars and luxury goods.“The exchange rate is always a secondary factor,” said Marie Diron of the ratings agency Moody’s. “What drives exports really is demand. Cheap doesn’t help if the demand isn’t there.”The Fed is partly the cause of the emerging market turbulence. Investors are less willing to gamble on developing countries like South Africa and Turkey when they can earn a reasonable return in the United States, with less risk.But many of the problems in emerging countries stem from decisions made by their own governments. Slower growth in China was caused in part from overinvestment in steel factories and other industries, along with a bumpy shift to an economy based more on consumer demand.As a result, businesses in Europe remain cautious — even in strong countries like Germany.At first glance, Germany would appear to have all the elements for a boom. Credit is cheap and plentiful. Unemployment, at 4.5 percent, is less than half the eurozone average and lower than in the United States. Germany’s many export companies benefit from the devalued euro.And yet a survey published on Tuesday of midsize companies in Germany found that managers were more pessimistic than six months ago. Stefan Bielmeier, chief economist at DZ Bank in Frankfurt, which conducted the survey with two other banks, said that company executives were worried not only about China but also about economic instability in Russia, war in Syria and the influx of migrants into Europe. Fed policy is barely on their minds.Mr. Bielmeier said he expected eurozone growth in 2016 to be 1.5 percent, worse than this year. “Where are the impulses?” he said. “We have already have had strong stimulus for a long time. Yet growth is still moderate.”Stefano Micossi, an economist who is director general of Assonime, an Italian business group, said that eurozone leaders had failed to address some of the problems that hold back growth in the eurozone.Italy and France have not done enough to make their economies more competitive, he added.In his view, E.C.B. stimulus measures, including monthly asset purchases of 60 billion euros, or $66 billion, and a benchmark interest rate of only 0.05 percent, have merely dulled the pain of Europe’s underlying problems.“We are fully under the influence of morphine,” Mr. Micossi said, warning that Europe’s problems had yet to be fully felt.“The tensions are still underwater,” he added. “They are likely to emerge at some stage.”Advertisement