AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackValeant Pharmaceuticals International has agreed to distribute many of its drugs through Walgreens stores in a new way and, in some cases, for lower prices, the companies announced on Tuesday.The agreement appeared to be part of Valeant’s strategy to replace its reliance on Philidor Rx Services. Philidor, a mail-order pharmacy, had played a big role in keeping insurers and corner drugstores from substituting less expensive alternatives for Valeant’s high-priced dermatology drugs.Valeant severed ties with Philidor in October after questions were raised about its practices and about why Valeant had hidden its relationship with that pharmacy, which it had an option to buy. Philidor, which is shutting down, accounted for about 7 percent of the company’s revenue.Valeant announced the new deal the day before a scheduled big meeting with investors to outline its business prospects.Investors, who were worried about how Valeant would fill the gap in sales created by the closing of Philidor, reacted positively to the news about the Walgreens deal. Valeant shares closed up more than 16 percent, to almost $110.“We believe this bolsters management’s credibility, as investors had expressed skepticism that Valeant would be able to replace Philidor, especially this quickly,” Shibani Malhotra, an analyst at Nomura Securities, wrote in a note.The shares of once-highflying Valeant have plummeted from a high above $260 a share in early August, because of concerns about Philidor and because of growing criticism of Valeant’s practice of buying the rights to old drugs and then immediately raising their prices significantly.  It and some other drug companies have come under the scrutiny of Congress and federal prosecutors for some of their pricing practices and have stoked public outrage about the high cost of certain drugs.As part of its announcement on Tuesday, Valeant said it would reduce the wholesale list prices of its brand-name prescription drugs for dermatology and ophthalmology by 10 percent over the next six to nine months. This includes drugs like Jublia for toenail fungus and Solodyn for acne. That price reduction appears to apply across the board, not just to drugs dispensed through Walgreens.“We have listened to what the marketplace is saying and we’ve taken positive steps to respond,” J. Michael Pearson, Valeant’s chief executive, said in a statement. “Our goal is to create a system that allows prescription medications to be dispensed and insurance claims adjudicated in an efficient manner while allowing physicians to focus their efforts on what matters most: patient care.”Patients could already get prescriptions for Valeant’s drugs filled at Walgreens. But Walgreens, as is common practice, would buy the drugs from wholesalers and have responsibility for the inventory it owned.Under the new arrangement, which is supposed to last for 20 years, Valeant will ship drugs directly to Walgreens, which will dispense them but never take ownership of them. Walgreens will be paid dispensing and distribution fees for this, according to a Valeant executive.With Valeant retaining ownership of the drugs, it will have better control over prices when drugs are dispensed at Walgreens. It said that it would sell 30 of its brand-name drugs that have generic competition at the prices of the generics. Included is the diabetes drug Glumetza. Valeant acquired the rights to that drug this year and quickly raised its price by about 800 percent.Valeant will also be able to offer discounted prices to patients who pay cash at Walgreens. At other drugstores, patients who pay cash have to pay what the drugstore charges. Valeant said it would also be in a better position to offer co-payment assistance to commercially insured patients.Valeant said it would offer the same distribution model to some independent pharmacies. But it apparently will not be available to other big pharmacy chains.The company estimated the discounts announced on Tuesday would save the health care system up to $600 million a year.Because Valeant’s drugs, particularly for dermatology, often have generic or other less expensive alternatives, insurers often will not pay for them and drugstore pharmacists will sometimes try to substitute a generic.So Valeant urged dermatologists to transmit their prescriptions to Philidor, rather than send their patients to the corner drugstore. Philidor would mail out the prescription, making sure not to substitute a generic. It would also handle negotiations with the insurance company, relieving doctors of the paperwork they might otherwise face by prescribing an expensive brand-name drug.Now Valeant is apparently counting on Walgreens and the independent pharmacies that join its new program to fulfill orders with Valeant products.But insurers and pharmacy benefit managers would still have a say in what drugs they will pay for, and it is not clear how much Walgreens will take on the burden of trying to win reimbursement. Valeant is hoping the lower prices will make that task easier.Adam J. Fein, who publishes the Drug Channels blog, said the deal gave Valeant a “credible pharmacy partner” and would also help Walgreens by drawing traffic to its stores.Dr. Fein, who is president of Pembroke Consulting, said the deal would also help Walgreens Boots Alliance win government support for its bid to buy a rival chain, Rite-Aid. “This is a way to demonstrate they can use their size and scale to drive prices lower,” he said.Advertisement