AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robert ColeIt has been three weeks since news broke that Anheuser-Busch InBev, the Budweiser beer company, was considering a $100 billion takeover of SABMiller. Until SABMiller’s second-quarter trading statement on Tuesday, there was nothing much about the potential deal for shareholders to chew on. But the ostensibly ordinary sales update has changed that.The timing of the trading update will have taken the putative bidder — and everyone else — by surprise. SAB was scheduled to issue the trading update next week, just as a one-month “put-up-or-shut-up” pretakeover grace period expires. It’s reasonable for SAB to untangle normal quarterly reporting from the merger and acquisition details, but the timing may be wrong for Anheuser’s negotiating team.Between the lines of the trading statement, SAB also sent an unambiguous message to the Budweiser bidders about growth. Alan Clark, chief executive of SABMiller, used the word growth six times in just three short sentences of trading statement preamble. Although it’s difficult to know his exact intentions, Mr. Clark may be telegraphing a deep-rooted SAB intention to take the hardest possible line in negotiations without becoming actively hostile.There is a risk SAB management could overplay its hand. True, second-quarter figures published by SAB on Tuesday show good underlying growth in Latin America and Africa. In the latter, SAB’s net producer revenue — sales before excise duties – rose 11 percent. Less impressive sales growth came in Asia Pacific and Europe, while in North America — where SAB has a joint venture with Molson Coors — revenue actually shrank. The overall rise in underlying revenue was 6 percent. Add the impact of adverse currency movements, meanwhile, and the groupwide top-line revenue number dropped a substantial 9 percent.SAB shareholders may see more logic in a tie-up with Anheuser and be dismayed to see a half-decent offer slip. Still, seven days ahead of Anheuser’s deadline to begin a formal offer, SAB seems to be handing Budweiser a hard-nosed request: Pay up for our carefully tended growth in Africa and elsewhere — or shut up and go away.Robert Cole is assistant editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.comAdvertisement