AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen Workman and Patrick LaForgeAbout a month ago, Martin Shkreli, the pharmaceutical entrepreneur who was arrested on Thursday, began live-streaming himself on YouTube, sometimes for 10 hours or more at a time, as he worked, played video games, strummed a guitar and, occasionally, while he slept.He would also chat with his audience, defending himself to critics upset about accusations of drug price gouging and seeming to taunt fans of Wu-Tang Clan asking him to play the sole copy of the group’s latest album, which he reportedly purchased at auction. (So far, he had yet to play the music on the stream.)The live streams are preserved on his YouTube account. There are boring moments (Mr. Shkreli sleeping) and some odder ones, such as Mr. Shkreli debating drug prices and politics with a group of students apparently from his alma mater, Hunter College High School in New York.That exchange, on Monday, began when a girl who identified herself as a senior at Hunter connected with him via Skype.In their conversation, which starts a little less than four hours into the recorded video, Mr. Shkreli told her that he was planning to dominate the rap industry, have Hunter renamed for himself and bail a rapper out of jail. He talked about his admiration for Bill Gates, who was once “one of the most hated people in the world.”And he told her how he did not like Republicans because a Mitt Romney fund-raiser “was the most depressing night I’ve ever had.”The conversation was at times bizarre and disjointed. Here are a few more excerpts.Student: “All my friends think you’re really cool and we want to be your best friends.”Mr. Shkreli: “Great. I think the media would have problems with me being friends with a bunch of high school kids.”Student: “That might be a little bit of an issue but, like, we can ignore that.”Mr. Shkreli: “Yeah, whatever. I’m trying to dominate the rap industry.”Student: “That’s cool. Um, how’s that going? I heard that you spent $2 million on a Wu-Tang Clan album.”Mr. Shkreli: “It’s only the beginning.”Soon after that, she asked him to attend a school dance with her.Mr. Shkreli: “My Internet friends don’t think this is a good idea. I am blushing though.”Later in the conversation, she asks more about his friends.Mr. Shkreli: ”My friends? I don’t have any friends. Some of them, like, one of my good friends is in Rikers right now. He’s in for attempted murder and drug trafficking.”Student: “Wow, that’s very exciting.”Mr. Shkreli: “You might’ve heard of him. His name is Bobby Shmurda.”Student: “I actually haven’t, but [trails off].”The conversation took a quick detour to reflect on the racial makeup of Hunter College High School, but quickly swung back to Bobby Shmurda, the stage name of the rapper Ackquille Pollard.Mr. Shkreli: “I’m trying to bust him out.”Student: “Are you planning a heist?”Mr. Shkreli: “No, I’m just going to bail him out. You’re the first person I’ve told this to.”Later in the week, he gave an interview about his plan to bail out the rapper.Their conversation turned back to their common interest: Hunter College High School.Mr. Shkreli: “I think I’m going to have Hunter change their name to the Shkreli school.”Student: “I feel like that would not happen, but you can try.”Mr. Shkreli: “Really? Tell me more. Teach me more.”Student: “You’re too much of a controversial figure for Hunter. Yeah, it’s great. We had a couple A.P. gov discussions where your name popped up.”Mr. Shkreli: “You know, when I was in Hunter the big controversy was Bill Gates.”Student: “Really?”Mr. Shkreli: “He was one of the most hated people in the world.”Student: “Why?”Mr. Shkreli: “You’re too young, but he was a capitalist. He was a monopolist. He broke every rule. He was the most ruthless businessman to ever exist. That’s why he’s the richest man in the world now, but now he’s giving his money away, so it’s funny how quickly opinions can change.”Student: “Yeah, obviously, that’s crazy. Is that what you’re planning to do? If you give away your money to enough good places everybody’s just going to love you?”Mr. Shkreli: “Only time can tell.”He moved to hang up the video chat with her.Mr. Shkreli: “I mean, I’m having a lot of fun talking about Hunter, but my, um, Internet fan base is wondering what’s going on.”She reminded him about her Facebook friend request and the group chat she had invited him to. He shared his screen, letting viewers watch as he accepted the friend request and opened the group chat.Then, the live stream continued — but with many more students chiming in through chats and comments. Mr. Shkreli appeared to get in a bit of a tiff with one of the students, though it was not clear how serious he was.Mr. Shkreli: “I’m going to be at the courtyard tomorrow and I’m going to beat the [expletive] out of you, that’s basically what’s going to happen. You can tell the principal, who, by the way, I have drinks with, so he’s not going to do [expletive].”Student: “Oh my God, are you totally tight with all the administration?”Mr. Shkreli: “Of course.”Student: “I have so much respect.”Mr. Shkreli: “If Arty keeps talking [expletive] I am going to go to Hunter tomorrow. You know, I’ve had guns pointed at me, you know. I’m coming for you, Arty.”Later, the topic of conversation changed.Student: “Do you ever get sad because people don’t like you?”Mr. Shkreli: “No, come on, I’ve been criticized since I was 9 years old.”Student: “Really? Why? Were you bullied at Hunter?”Mr. Shkreli: “No, I was the bully.”Student: “What’s the meanest thing anybody has ever said to you?”Mr. Shkreli: “I don’t know.”He interrupted her to take another caller, who said: “I was just wondering if you were really going to raise that drug price.”He told the caller that he was playing the guitar while he talked to her “because this is boring me terribly. Now, what drug are you asking about?”Second caller: “The one I just read about on the Internet.”Mr. Shkreli: “Which one? I’m developing 25 different drugs. Which one are you talking about?”She says she would have to look it up. He does not respond favorably.“Do you always call people without researching the situation, or is this the first time?”The caller said this was the first time.Mr. Shkreli: “If I had to explain the situation to everyone from scratch, I wouldn’t have that much time, would I? No, I would not. Now how do you feel about wasting my time? Don’t you dare call me again and say, ‘What about them damn drug prices?’”The phone call ended, but the live stream went on.Advertisement