AdvertisementSupported byBy Steve LohrGeneral Electric, the nation’s largest industrial company, expects next year to be one of economic uncertainty, geopolitical turmoil and slow growth.But despite the tentative business environment, Jeffrey R. Immelt, the chief executive, said Wednesday that G.E. should deliver double-digit gains in earnings per share in 2016.He said the company’s stronger industrial businesses, like jet engines and gas turbines, should be enough to offset the weakness in its big oil field equipment unit, which has had orders drop sharply as oil prices have plummeted. The company’s revenue will also be trimmed by a stronger dollar, he added, since most of G.E.’s sales are overseas.The Federal Reserve’s decision to raise interest rates on Wednesday, bolstering the dollar’s value, was built into G.E.’s planning. “We’re counting on a stronger dollar year” in 2016, Mr. Immelt said.At a briefing for analysts and investors in New York on Wednesday afternoon, G.E. gave its first financial forecast for 2016. The company said it expected operating profits of $1.45 to $1.55 a share. Wall Street’s consensus estimate is $1.51 a share on revenue of $129 billion.The top of the profit range, G.E. said, could be achieved if global economic growth improves and if the company’s integration of the electric grid and power-generation assets of Alstom of France goes smoothly. The $10.6 billion acquisition of the Alstom business is the largest industrial deal in G.E.’s history. The midpoint model assumes that the costs associated with absorbing Alstom will lower earnings by 5 cents a share in 2016.G.E. said it planned to be a large and opportunistic buyer of its own shares next year, a financial tactic championed by Nelson Peltz, the activist investor, who in October disclosed that his Trian Fund Management had purchased a $2.5 billion stake in G.E. The company said it planned to spend $18 billion next year on buying back its shares, which increases earnings per share.General Electric shares rose slightly in after-hours trading, after closing up 2 percent for the day, at $30.98 . The shares have risen 23 percent so far this year.Investors have applauded G.E.’s rapid shift this year as it returned to its industrial roots and sharply pared its once-huge finance arm, a campaign that began when the 2008 financial crisis hit.G.E. has been moving even faster than the aggressive timetable it announced in April for shedding most of GE Capital, its finance unit. At the time, Mr. Immelt called the plan a “historic pivot” that would involve selling more than $300 billion in financial assets.The goal, he said, was to reshape G.E. so that 90 percent of the company’s profits would come from the industrial business by 2018, compared with 58 percent last year.That schedule has been shortened by a year, to 2017. The company will have sold off $104 billion in assets by the end of this year. Last month, G.E. also completed the spinoff of its consumer finance business, Synchrony Financial, which sells private-label credit cards and finance plans for retail purchases.G.E.’s industrial business is undergoing a transformation of its own, relying increasingly on software. It has built up a large software unit in San Ramon, Calif., as the spearhead of the G.E. effort to become a “digital industrial” company. In September, Mr. Immelt predicted that the company would be “a top 10 software company” by 2020.Today, G.E.’s new jet engines, power turbines, locomotives and medical equipment are loaded with sensors. These digital sensors generate data that smart software parses to spot machines in need of preventive maintenance, before they fail, and to identify opportunities to save energy or improve patient care, for example.The company’s growing portfolio of industrial software offerings adds to G.E.’s large services business, which produces 70 percent or more of the company’s industrial earnings.G.E.’s digital business will produce revenue of $5 billion this year, Mr. Immelt said, with the goal of reaching $15 billion by 2020.Advertisement