By BROOKS BARNESOCT. 6, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  One of the most successful cable channels of the last decade, ABC Family, will get a new name and undergo a radical rebranding as it stops chasing millennials and pushes toward even younger viewers it calls “becomers.”Starting in January, ABC Family will become Freeform, a name that reflects the “fluid” way that teenagers and young adults — now and tomorrow — consume media, said Tom Ascheim, the channel’s president. (Another name under consideration was Ink.) Mr. Ascheim said he believed that ending the Disney-owned network’s overt association with family friendliness would increase its cool factor.“We looked up from our research and said, ‘Oh, golly. They’re turning 40,’ ” Mr. Ascheim explained by phone. He was speaking about millennial viewers, the group that ABC Family has aggressively courted in recent years. (Most demographers define millennials as people born between 1980 and 1995.) The problem: ABC Family primarily sells advertising aimed at viewers 18 to 34.Freeform, which was announced on Tuesday, does not yet have a logo, but early marketing materials veer sharply away from the restrained imagery that ABC Family has long used. A Facebook video created to introduce the new name and look, for instance, relies on a rapid patchwork of fonts and images — appearing much more like MTV than Disney. “There is a brand opening in the house of Disney, between the kids brands the bigger adult brands,” said Mr. Ascheim, who worked at Viacom earlier in his career.AdvertisementCable channels routinely seek to refresh their image, whether by introducing a new logo, as Lifetime did in recent years, or restyling their names; the Sci-Fi Channel became Syfy, for instance. And channels that are struggling are sometimes recast completely. Last year, the TV Guide Network was renamed Pop.AdvertisementBut it is extremely rare for a channel that is succeeding to undergo such a drastic overhaul. Television companies risk alienating the viewers they do have. ABC Family consistently ranks as one of the most-watched channels among young women.ABC Family generated about $451 million in advertising revenue last year, according to SNL Kagan. Cable providers pay Disney 28 cents a subscriber to carry the channel, which is distributed into 94 million homes.Mr. Ascheim defines “becomers” not as a generation but as a life stage — “from your first kiss to your first kid,” or people roughly 14 to 34. If executed properly, the shift away from millennials will guarantee ABC Family’s continued ability to attract a fickle teenage audience that many advertisers pay a premium to reach.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Advertising sales are under pressure across television as marketers continue to shift money online and viewers, particularly young ones, consume television shows in nontraditional ways. There is evidence that the coming generation of young adults, the first to grow up surrounded by social media, may not subscribe to cable offerings at all, or at least seek out “skinny” packages that offer just a few channels.“The main issue facing cable networks is who gets dropped in the move to a skinny bundle,” said Tom Adams, the founder of Tom Adams Research, a media consultancy. “As ESPN’s little brother, ABC Family is relatively bulletproof from that risk.”He continued, “It’s the other side of the ledger — advertising — where there is considerable risk. They need to do everything they can to continue delivering young viewers.”Disney bought what was called Fox Family in 2001 for $5.2 billion and planned to show reruns of programs from its broadcast network, ABC. But ratings slumped without original programming. As Disney executives sought to rework its reason for existing, they looked at changing its name but thought that, at least for a time, they were hamstrung by contracts requiring the word “family” to remain.The network was founded as the Family Channel by the evangelist Pat Robertson. When Mr. Ascheim arrived in 2013, he pushed anew for the name change. “When we looked this time, there were no contractual issues,” he said. (The network must run Mr. Robertson’s “700 Club” talk show in perpetuity, however.)All of ABC Family’s most popular series will continue on Freeform, including “Pretty Little Liars,” “The Fosters” and “Baby Daddy.” Coming shows that Mr. Ascheim is counting on to become new hits include “Shadowhunters,” a fantasy based on “The Mortal Instruments” novel series, and a comedy about the rapper Nicki Minaj’s teenage years in New York City.AdvertisementThe channel’s longtime programming stunt known as “25 Days of Christmas” will also continue, Mr. Ascheim said, although he added that programming decisions for it would be made through “a becomer lens.”A version of this article appears in print on October 7, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Disney Plans Overhaul of ABC Family Channel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.