AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesThe Federal Reserve announced on Wednesday that it would raise its benchmark interest rate, a vote of confidence in the American economy. Policy makers have waited a long time for this moment: Since December 2008 the Fed has held the benchmark rate near zero, the centerpiece of its campaign to revive economic growth and reduce unemployment from the recession.Fed officials predicted that they would raise interest rates by about one percentage point a year over the next three years — an indication that they would be taking a slow-and-steady approach to economic expansion._____For consumers, the short-term impact will be almost imperceptible. Banks may begin advertising slightly higher-yielding savings accounts and certificates of deposit, though the returns will still be meager (and savers may face penalties for withdrawing early from a C.D.).The cost of borrowing is expected to rise, but only slightly, with variable effects on what banks charge for credit cards, home equity lines of credit, adjustable-rate mortgages, auto loans and some student loans. Remember, Janet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, has said the Fed will move cautiously in raising its benchmark rate._____The Fed knows how to raise interest rates, right? Yes, but this time will be different. Its immense stimulus campaign pumped so much money into the system that the Fed could easily drain enough money to discourage lending, its traditional approach. Instead, the Fed plans to pay lenders not to make loans, and work directly with an expanded range of lenders — and it will adjust its plan if that doesn’t work._____Getting to yes was a long process for Fed policy makers, led by Ms. Yellen. One Fed official voted to raise rates  months ago, while others preferred to wait. And this past summer, just when a consensus was building toward a liftoff in September, economic turmoil in China rocked the markets._____Low interest rates are sometimes a trigger for inflation. The Fed wants inflation at a sweet spot: 2 percent a year. Too low, and the economy may stall; too high and it can overheat.Inflation remains low, but after seven years of very cheap money and an improving jobs market, officials worry that prices will rise too quickly if the Fed does not increase the cost of money, by steadily raising interest rates._____Financial markets were encouraged by the Fed’s announcement. Stocks rose, the dollar gained modestly and the yield on the 10-year Treasury note rose slightly.Still, investors are debating whether rising interest rates will cause turbulence in other markets. A pullback on Wall Street could restrict the flow of credit into the economy, potentially slowing hiring and wage growth. And a decline in stocks could hurt households, whose equity holdings have increased in value by over $5 trillion since 2009.Advertisement