By JOHN KOBLINDEC. 16, 2015
There is finally a definitive answer for the number of shows on television, in a year in which television executives have debated whether the industry has reached “Peak TV.”For 2015, there will have been 409 original scripted television series on broadcast, cable and online services, according to the research department of FX Networks. That number is close to double the number of scripted shows just six years ago (when there were 211, FX said) and represents a record, easily surpassing 2014, when there were 376 scripted shows.The growth is across the board. The number of scripted original series on basic cable has jumped 174 percent since 2009. Premium cable is up a further 76 percent, and the broadcast networks are up 20 percent. Online services, including Netflix and Hulu, which had only 15 original scripted shows three years ago, ballooned to 44 this year.FX’s chief executive, John Landgraf, touched off a debate in August when he told the media that there was “simply too much television.” Mr. Landgraf argued that the glut of programming was responsible, in part, for an industrywide trend in declining ratings, and that this volume of scripted originals would not be sustainable in the long term.AdvertisementSome executives were quick to back him up. For instance, HBO’s programming president, Michael Lombardo, said that his cable channel was making a concerted effort to attract programming beyond just scripted fare like “Game of Thrones.” Next year, HBO will run a daily newscast in partnership with Vice; Bill Simmons will host a talk show; and Jon Stewart will be making digital shorts.Other industry executives and writers have argued that the landscape has never been richer, and thus more inviting for the viewer. There are more quality shows, they say, as well as increased diversity in casting and opportunities for show runners who would have previously been turned away.AdvertisementJulie Piepenkotter, the executive vice president of research for FX Networks, said in a statement: “This was the third consecutive year that scripted series count has grown across each distribution platform — broadcast, basic and pay cable, streaming — led by significant gains in basic cable and digital services. This statistic is staggering and almost unimaginable from where they were a decade ago.”A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; 409 Original Scripted Shows on TV Represents Record.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.