By MICHAEL CIEPLYDEC. 16, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  Steven Spielberg said on Wednesday that he and his DreamWorks Studios would join Participant Media, Reliance Entertainment and Entertainment One to form an entertainment company called Amblin Partners to produce movies, television shows and digital content.At the same time, Universal Pictures said it would distribute films from the new company, beginning with “The Girl on the Train,” to be directed by Tate Taylor with Emily Blunt in a lead role, in October 2016.The new venture, which will be based on the Universal lot, appears poised to absorb and redirect the creative output of DreamWorks Studios, which has distributed its films under a deal with the Walt Disney Company since 2009. That distribution arrangement was set to expire next August.Amblin Partners also will become an exclusive vehicle for Mr. Spielberg’s Amblin Entertainment, including a television division that is already making 13 episodes of the series “American Gothic” to air on CBS next summer. Further, the new company will produce many, though not all, of the films, television shows and other projects developed by Participant Media, an issues-oriented media company owned by the entrepreneur Jeff Skoll.AdvertisementIn an interview, Mr. Spielberg said much of his output as a director and producer would be placed under the umbrella of Amblin Partners, which will continue to use the DreamWorks, Amblin Entertainment and Participant brands on its various projects.Advertisement“It’s given me more bases, to get to home plate,” said Mr. Spielberg, explaining that the arrangement would expand his opportunities. Mr. Skoll, who joined the interview, said Participant would continue to develop, produce and finance issues-based projects apart from the Amblin venture.Michael Wright, the chief executive of DreamWorks, will become the chief executive of Amblin Partners. David Linde, a former Universal executive recently hired as chief executive of Participant, will keep that role.In their statement, the companies said the new venture was supported by $500 million in debt from a syndicate of lenders structured by JPMorgan Chase, with Comerica Bank as the other lead lender. Mr. Skoll said Participant, Reliance and Entertainment One also would contribute a “significant” amount of equity to the new venture.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Reliance, based in India, had previously provided financing for DreamWorks. Entertainment One, a Toronto-based conglomerate, had been a distributor of films by DreamWorks.For Mr. Spielberg, 68, the new company adds to a string of ventures that has included Amblin Entertainment, an original DreamWorks SKG studio, a truncated DreamWorks that was briefly owned by Paramount Pictures, and the independent DreamWorks Studios — separate from the publicly traded DreamWorks Animation — that had distributed films through Disney. It also extends what he said was a relationship of more than 50 years with Universal, where he started as an unpaid intern and later based his Amblin production company, even when making films for others.Mr. Skoll’s Participant Media had frequently been a partner to the latest DreamWorks incarnation, with credits on some of its biggest hits, including Mr. Taylor’s “The Help,” released in 2011, and several more modest performers. Those have included Mr. Spielberg’s “Bridge of Spies,” which has about $70 million in domestic box-office receipts since Disney released it in October.For at least a year, Mr. Spielberg said, Participant and DreamWorks had been working to expand their partnership with a new venture.In September, Mr. Skoll — in an interview during the Toronto International Film Festival — said he believed the new company might eventually distribute its own films, though he expected to work with an outside distributor. One person briefed on the Universal deal, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of confidentiality strictures, said it was a five-year arrangement.Universal said it expected to distribute four to seven films annually for Amblin Partners.Mr. Wright, who joined Mr. Spielberg, Mr. Skoll and Amblin Partners’ chief operating officer, Jeff Small, in the interview Wednesday, said he expected those films to have broad range, matching the varied sensibilities that have attached to Participant, with its focus on social issues; Amblin, with its family entertainment; and DreamWorks, with its varied, studio-style fare.Advertisement“Brands are vitally important,” Mr. Wright said.A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Spielberg and DreamWorks Join Others to Form Film, Television and Digital Production Company .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.