AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy John FoleyAnheuser-Busch InBev has barely concluded its $106 billion deal to buy SABMiller and now is planning its next deal: a sale of Peroni and Grolsch, which it will acquire in the SAB deal. SAB’s dregs might attract a rival, but a private buyer may find those brands more to its taste.Though SABMiller is huge, its brands mostly aren’t. Peroni is big in Italy and almost nowhere else. Grolsch has some scale in the Netherlands, but no more than 1 percent market share by volume in any other market, according to Susquehanna Financial. Both are under pressure from craft beers. They may worry antitrust regulators, but the two brands don’t really worry SAB’s bottom line.The deal between Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller is the latest merger of mass-market beer brands.Rivals will no doubt sniff around, but Peroni and Grolsch aren’t straightforward. Carlsberg could dilute its troublesome exposure to Russia, but also its more helpful presence in Asia. Asahi of Japan could decrease its reliance on the shrinking Japanese market, but emerge with tiny footholds in more than 70 markets. That’s not to be ruled out, but nor is it particularly logical.A buyout house – or a family-backed investor – might fare better. Peroni and Grolsch produce around eight million hectoliters of beer a year, around 13 percent of SAB’s total European volumes. Assume, roughly, that their share of European earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, is proportionate, and that leaves a buyer with a little over $100 million a year. Valued on a 12 times multiple, in line with SAB’s disposal of its stake in MillerCoors in November, it suggests the two could bring $1.2 billion.Thereafter, it’s a question of generating cash and paying back debt. Were a buyer to fund Peroni and Grolsch half in debt, at an interest rate of 5 percent, and grow Ebitda by 3 percent a year for five years, an acquisition could generate an ample 15 percent internal rate of return, according to a Reuters Breakingviews calculation.A financial buyer might also be able to offer Anheuser-Busch InBev something extra. When it sold South Korea’s Oriental Brewery to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company in 2009, Anheuser-Busch InBev won an option to buy it back after a few years on preset terms, which it exercised. By replicating that kind of arrangement, Anheuser-Busch could turn a smart deal today into another one later.John Foley is Reuters Breakingviews editor for Europe, the Middle East and Africa. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement