AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerBATS Global Markets is making a second attempt at a public stock offering three years after a technology problem forced it to stay private.Since then, BATS has faced new competitive threats and the increasing regulatory scrutiny of the role of high-speed trading in the securities markets.In a regulatory filing on Wednesday, BATS said it would list on its own exchange under the ticker BATS, using the proceeds of the offering to pay off a 2014 loan and make acquisitions. The filing says the offering is for $100 million, though that number is likely to change.Founded in 2005 by a wheat and stock futures trader who set out to develop an alternative to Nasdaq and the New York Stock Exchange, BATS grew to prominence as part of a new generation of electronic trading sites that courted traders who used sophisticated computer algorithms.BATS, which is owned by 13 Wall Street banks and electronic trading firms, is now the second-largest exchange in the United States by market share and the largest exchange for exchange-traded funds. Through the first nine months of this year it had a 21 percent share of the United States equity market, according to the filing.BATS attempted a stock offering in 2012, only to withdraw its debut on the same day because of technology system errors. The incident was not just an embarrassing turn of events for BATS. It drew a fresh round of introspection on the complexity and vulnerability of the American stock markets, where high-speed trading has taken on an increasingly dominant role.There have been attempts to push back against the high-speed traders. Investors Exchange, or IEX, applied to the Securities and Exchange Commission to become a full-blown exchange in September. The firm, which is owned by hedge funds like Greenlight Capital and Pershing Square and mutual funds like Franklin Resources, casts itself as a place that protects retail investors from predatory high-speed traders.IEX’s system imposes a 350-microsecond delay, essentially a speed bump, on traders who place and cancel orders in large quantities, a common tactic of high-speed traders.The IEX filing drew debate about the way the markets operate, including significant resistance by BATS and others to the concept of a speed bump for some traders. In a comment letter on IEX’s application, BATS said it supported the new exchange but opposed restricting some traders, saying it only created advantages for others rather than creating a level playing field. Nasdaq and NYSE Group have also complained.IEX has plenty of supporters, however. Michael Lewis, the author of a book, “Flash Boys,” that told the story of IEX, filed his own comment on the application this month. “IEX represents a market solution to a messy problem,” he wrote. “It was created to protect investors against the predatory trading of high frequency traders.”BATS once championed itself as the underdog against the market establishment. But that was in 2005, when regulatory changes helped propel its growth. In January 2014 it acquired Direct Edge Holdings, a rival electronic exchange.BATS continues to be owned by Wall Street banks and high-speed trading operations, including Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Citadel, Citigroup, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs, Instinet, JPMorgan Chase, Knight Capital Group, Lime, Morgan Stanley, Tradebot Ventures and Wedbush.One of the risk factors noted in BATS’s filing on Wednesday is the interconnectedness of its operations with the competing strategies of its Wall Street owners.“We generate a significant percentage of our total revenues from, and are provided with significant liquidity in our markets by, customers who are affiliates of our principal investors, who are not contractually obligated to continue to use our services,” the filing said.Advertisement