AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — European anti-fraud investigators said on Wednesday that they were looking into whether Volkswagen misused hundreds of millions of dollars in low-interest loans — threatening a significant source of funding for the crisis-struck automaker.Volkswagen’s admission this year that it rigged 11 million diesel engines to fool emissions tests has raised questions about whether it misused loans made by the publicly financed European Investment Bank and intended primarily for projects meant to reduce the carmaker’s environmental impact, investigators said. The loans have totaled 9.5 billion euros, or $10.4 billion, since 2000.The investigation, which is in “a preliminary stage,” is looking into whether the loans “could be linked to the production of engines or devices implicated in the manipulation of the real level of gas emissions of vehicles,” according to a statement from the European Anti-Fraud Office. The loans were meant to be used to develop engines that were more fuel-efficient and produce less carbon dioxide, according to Silvana Enculescu, a spokeswoman for the European Union fraud office.The new inquiry follows one underway by the European Investment Bank itself, which is funded by European Union countries. In October, the bank said it was looking into whether any of the loans it provided to Volkswagen were used to develop illegal software to evade emissions tests. The bank said on Wednesday that it would not disburse more money to Volkswagen or approve new loans to the company until its own review is completed.Volkswagen has admitted programming millions of diesel vehicles to cheat on tests for emissions of nitrogen oxide, a pollutant linked to lung ailments.Volkswagen said on Wednesday that it had been in talks for months with the European Investment Bank about the loans but had not been informed of the investigation by the anti-fraud office. “We are perplexed that the agency went to the public before informing the affected party,” the company said. Of the €9.5 billion in loans that Volkswagen received, €1.9 billion is still outstanding, the bank said.The anti-fraud office, which has the power to investigate but not to prosecute, said it would refer any evidence of crimes to law enforcement authorities.In separate developments on Wednesday, prosecutors in Stuttgart, Germany, said they had begun investigating whether employees at Bosch, a major Volkswagen supplier, had played a role in programming VW vehicles to cheat on emissions tests. And another public lender, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development — which is partly financed by the United States government — put a hold on credit that had been earmarked for a new Volkswagen plant in Poland.The development bank had planned to contribute €300 million toward construction of a €1.1 billion factory near Wrzesnia, Poland, that would produce lightweight commercial vehicles. A development bank spokesman said talks about disbursement of the money were postponed without giving a reason.The bank provides loans for former Soviet bloc nations, as well as some countries in the Middle East. The United States is the largest shareholder among the 64 countries that own the development bank.Volkswagen said that despite suspension of the loan, it planned to complete work on the Polish factory, which began in 2014. The plant is scheduled to be finished by the middle of 2016 and will employ 3,000 people to build Volkswagen Crafter cargo vans.Volkswagen so far has set aside €9 billion to cover the cost of repairing the vehicles affected by its emissions-cheating scandal. The company also faces several investigations in the United States and Europe into its practices, as well as lawsuits from customers.In a cost-cutting move on Wednesday, Volkswagen said it would temporarily cease production of the Phaeton, a vehicle meant to challenge Mercedes-Benz and BMW in the luxury market. Built at factory in Dresden that has glass walls to enable the public to watch the cars being made, the Phaeton failed to enthrall consumers. It had sold poorly since its introduction in 2002 and was regarded as a financial drag on the company.The car, which could be ordered with a 12-cylinder engine, became a symbol of the engineering overreach of Ferdinand Piëch, the Volkswagen chairman and scion of the Porsche family who pushed for the Phaeton’s development. Mr. Piëch was ousted this year, before the emissions cheating came to light.Volkswagen said that production of the Phaeton would end early next year. The factory will reopen at an unspecified date to produce a new version that will be powered solely by batteries, Volkswagen said.The investigation into parts supplier Bosch will focus on whether employees of the parts supplier played a role in the emissions cheating by Volkswagen, according to prosecutors in Stuttgart, where the company is based. Claudia Krauth, a spokeswoman for the Stuttgart prosecutor, said authorities were alerted by news reports that had proved substantial enough to warrant a formal investigation.Prosecutors have not identified any suspects, she said. Under German law, only individuals can be charged with crimes, not companies.René Ziegler, a spokesman for Bosch, said the company was cooperating with authorities. Bosch was a major supplier to the family of diesel engines, known as EA 189, that is at the core of the emissions scandal. Bosch is a critical player in the German auto industry, developing and producing a wide range of sensors, pumps, fuel injectors, batteries and other components.Volkswagen, even as it faces legal problems, is also obliged by regulators in Europe and the United States to repair or alter the deceptive diesel cars to make them comply with air-quality standards. The company said it would begin recalling cars in Europe in late January to make the necessary changes.The company had said previously that cars with 2-liter or 1.2-liter diesel motors could be fixed with a software update. Cars with 1.6-liter motors will get a software update and a plastic part known as a “flow rectifier” that the company said would improve the intake of air to the motor and allow more precise regulation of the fuel injection, reducing emissions.The company is still negotiating with United States regulators on how to bring about 500,000 cars into line with air-quality rules. The repairs are likely to be far more costly for Volkswagen in the United States than in Europe because of stricter limits on emissions of nitrogen oxide.Advertisement