AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi Somaiya and Sydney EmberSheldon Adelson, the billionaire casino magnate and Republican donor, and his family have formally owned The Las Vegas Review-Journal for a week.In that time, they have been broadly criticized for a lack of transparency in keeping their ownership secret, prompting questions about the paper’s editorial independence. They said they refrained from announcing they were the paper’s owners to avoid taking attention away from the Republican presidential debate, held on Tuesday at Mr. Adelson’s Venetian Resort Hotel Casino in Las Vegas.It is not yet clear what the second week will bring.That is largely because everyone directly connected with the sale, with the running of the newspaper or with the family has stopped answering the phone or declined to respond to messages seeking comment. Even many of those inside Mr. Adelson’s Las Vegas Sands company were unaware of the details of the purchase. One person close to the deal, who spoke on condition of anonymity, asked whether the journalists at The Review-Journal needed to know who owned the paper at all.And so the $140 million question — why Mr. Adelson, 82, and his family would want the newspaper at such a lavish price — remains mostly unanswered. It is particularly pressing to many in Nevada because he is perhaps the most powerful and overtly political figure in the state.Mr. Adelson rose from modest beginnings to 15th on the Forbes 400 list, with a current estimated net worth of about $25 billion. He is chairman and chief executive of Sands, and he aggressively defends his interests by wielding the influence his essentially unlimited funds furnish. He gave more than $100 million to Republican presidential candidates in 2012. Newspapers he owns in Israel tend to staunchly promote the right-wing agenda that he agrees with.He has pursued libel suits against journalists whose reporting on his sprawling empires drew his ire. In one continuing case, Mr. Adelson sued a reporter from The Wall Street Journal over an article about another legal battle Mr. Adelson was engaged in with a former employee.John L. Smith, a columnist for The Review-Journal who filed for bankruptcy while defending himself against a lawsuit brought by Mr. Adelson over a book Mr. Smith had written, said when reached by phone on Thursday that he would have to seek permission before speaking to a reporter. In a 2013 column about the lawsuit, Mr. Smith wrote that his lawyer had realized that “the case wasn’t about defamation, but about making me an object lesson for my newspaper and other journalists who dared to criticize the billionaire.” (Adelson eventually dropped the case.)The newsroom has not heard from the Adelson family beyond a statement issued in response to The Review-Journal’s own comprehensive article on the deal, said Michael Hengel, the paper’s editor. It was a report that was accomplished through sheer tenacity, he said.“Let’s face it, they weren’t being very cooperative,” Mr. Hengel said of those in charge, noting that the chief executives of the company that runs the paper, Gatehouse, and the chief executive of the company that sold it to Mr. Adelson, New Media Investment Group, had not returned his reporters’ calls.Asked whether he was concerned about conflicts arising between his newsroom and Mr. Adelson’s myriad business and political interests, Mr. Hengel said, “Yes, absolutely.” He said, too, that he had argued with the newspaper’s publisher, Jason Taylor, over Mr. Taylor’s decision to remove references in an online article by The Review-Journal that raised questions about the ownership. But, he said, “What we’ve got to go on right now is their statement that they are going to allow us to pursue journalism the way we should and the way we’re expected to. I am going to take them at their word on that, until they prove otherwise.”Howard Stutz, a reporter at The Review-Journal who covers the gambling industry, declined to comment on whether he was concerned about potential conflicts of interest.“I’ve been covering the casino industry for 11 years, and I’m going to do my job just like I’ve done for the past 11 years,” Mr. Stutz said. “I’ve been fair and impartial my entire career.”The family’s statement, released to The Review-Journal, said that they had purchased the newspaper “as both a financial investment as well as an investment in the future of the Las Vegas community.” The details had been kept secret, the statement said, to avoid distracting from the Republican debate. The family said they believed in the community, and wanted “to help make Las Vegas an even greater place to live. We believe deeply that a strong and effective daily newspaper plays a critical role in keeping our state apprised of the important news and issues we face on a daily basis.”Some remain skeptical. “I think there’s a lot of consternation, not just inside The Review-Journal, but outside,” said Jon Ralston, a veteran Nevada political journalist. “What is he going to do with this newspaper, and will he do the same as he did in Israel?” he said, referring to Israel Hayom, a newspaper Mr. Adelson owns there, which supports Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.In Nevada, Mr. Adelson’s interests run the gamut. His casinos are sometimes pulled into skirmishes with the local Clark County Commission, which oversees the Las Vegas Strip.Mr. Adelson has been involved in the gubernatorial race, and is a supporter of the state’s new attorney general, Adam Laxalt, who recently supported a bill backed by Mr. Adelson that seeks to ban or curtail Internet gambling and online poker.In national politics, where Nevada is a key electoral state, he is known as one of the most generous and aggressive backers of Republican presidential candidates. That leaves very few coverage areas for Review-Journal journalists to pursue without running into potential conflicts with their new owner, Mr. Ralston said.On Wednesday, before Mr. Adelson was formally revealed as the man behind the deal for the newspaper, Representative Dina Titus, Democrat of Nevada, had called on the House floor for transparency from the paper’s new owner.On Thursday, she issued a statement. “I applaud the Adelson family for coming forward as the new owners of The Review-Journal,” she said. “It was never about who bought the paper, but rather knowing who bought it.”“I trust the editorial policy will be fair,” she added, “and hope one day I will get their endorsement.”Advertisement