AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerEver since Avon Products rebuffed a $10.7 billion unsolicited offer by Coty more than three years ago, the beauty company has been the subject of takeover speculation.On Thursday, Cerberus Capital Management agreed to take private Avon’s North American business and invest in the parent, now valued at less than $2 billion.Since that refused offer in 2012, Avon has experienced three consecutive years of declining revenue and gross profit, causing the stock to plummet and slicing $8 billion off its market value. At the heart of Avon’s problems has been its unprofitable North American business, which has weighed down the rest of the company.Avon’s portfolio outside of North America represented 86 percent of revenue during the nine months through September, Sheri McCoy, the chief executive of Avon Products, said in a statement on Thursday.“We believe that the separation of North America is the best way to ensure that both businesses have an unencumbered path to profitability and growth,” said Ms. McCoy. “This was a key principle as we considered alternatives.”As part of the transaction, announced Tuesday, Cerberus agreed to acquire an 80.1 percent stake in Avon North America, worth $170 million. Avon North America will assume $230 million of long-term liabilities from Avon Products, which is contributing $100 million in cash to offset that cost.Cerberus will also make a $435 million investment in the parent company through convertible perpetual preferred stock. The conversion price of $5 a share represents a 46 percent premium to the average price over the last month. The investment will also include a dividend that accrues, or is payable at Avon’s discretion, at a rate of 5 percent per year.Shares of Avon rose more than 1 percent in trading in midday Thursday. But at least one shareholder was not supportive of the outcome. Barington Capital Group, which owns a 3 percent stake, said Avon sold at “fire sale” prices.“We are astonished that Sheri McCoy remains as C.E.O.,” said James A. Mitarotonda, chairman and chief executive of Barington, in a statement. “We intend to explore all available options.”Once a hallmark in suburban homes, with Avon saleswomen going door to door to offer beauty products, the North American unit has struggled to maintain a loyal base. Cerberus said that it would seek better ways to create incentives for Avon’s work force and also planned to invest in marketing, talent and product updates.The biggest question is how Avon will alter its business model out of the private eye, perhaps by focusing more on e-commerce or targeting a different consumer.“How far do they pivot in the U.S. model?” said Andrew Shore, a managing director at Moelis & Company. “You can make the argument that there are multiple doors they can go through, but no one knows the outcome.”In selling the North America business, Avon said it would incur a loss of $325 million to $425 million from pension and postretirement benefit plans. As part of Avon’s restructuring, the company said it would suspend its quarterly common stock dividend, effective during the first three months of 2016.Avon is also cutting the size of its board, to 11 from 12,. Six directors will step down, and Cerberus will add three representatives, Michael F. Sanford, Steven F. Mayer and Chan W. Galbato, who will be appointed nonexecutive chairman. Avon and Cerberus would choose two more independent directors to fill the remaining seats.Avon said that Steve Bosson would lead the Avon North America transition; Pablo Muñoz, the current president of the unit, will leave in January. Cerberus will name a new chief executive of North America.The transaction is expected to close in the spring. Goldman Sachs and Centerview Partners advised Avon, and Cravath, Swaine & Moore provided legal counsel. Kirkland & Ellis gave legal advice to Cerberus.Advertisement