AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Melanie Whelan, C.E.O. of SoulCycle, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences for you?A. My father is an entrepreneur. We lived in Baltimore, but all of his companies were based out of D.C. He got up every morning at 5 to work out, then he would commute an hour and a half each way to these companies. He probably started between five and six companies that I can remember.He was a huge role model for me because of his work ethic and discipline. He was like the mailman — come rain, come shine, come anything, he was out that door at 5 in the morning. And there was a big creative aspect to his work — he would start something, and when it grew large enough, he would sell it and do the next thing.Did you have an idea of what you wanted to do for a career when you were in college?I thought I wanted to be an architect. I was fascinated by building structures and engineering. I loved physics and calculus. After two and a half years, though, my interest started shifting to business. I realized I wanted to be part of a team and I wanted to build a company.What was your first management role?After working at Starwood Hotels and helping launch Virgin America, I was introduced to Harvey Spevak, the C.E.O. of Equinox, and he gave me the opportunity to start a business development function at the company. I was responsible for managing three department heads. They were all far more experienced than I was. I came in with one view of how to manage people, and after a year or so I had a completely different perspective.I thought initially that I was going to learn their business and then I could add value by saying, “Here are our goals, and here’s where we’re going.” What I learned very quickly was that they just wanted a partner to collaborate with. They just wanted to brainstorm, to vent, to spitball ideas.I learned to just ask questions, and not to have an initial point of view. For them, it was really just about collaboration and coaching and me bringing fresh eyes to their business. They wanted accountability, they wanted to run their business, and they didn’t really want me in their day-to-day. Once I figured that out, we had really productive relationships.And how has your leadership style evolved?The biggest thing I continue to learn is about really actively listening to people. Great leaders are great listeners. So what I try to do is set a vision about where we’re going, and then empower people to make it happen. I spend a lot of time with our leaders just really understanding how they’re doing, what they need and how else I can provide value to them.Can you share specific tips for being a good listener?You have to ask a lot of questions and you have to really listen to the answers. Don’t be thinking about the next question, and don’t be thinking about what you’re having for lunch. Really listen, because in every answer there are at least three more questions you want to be asking.I tell people to be comfortable with silence because after someone answers your question, something else is going to come out. We have also trained our teams on what we call empty-bucket sessions, where people state the facts of the problem, their interpretations of them, and then you work toward a solution. Until you get to the bottom and everything is out there, you can’t start to build solutions.We can’t have lumpy carpets here. Otherwise, you can’t build a foundation for a great company.How do you hire? What questions do you ask?The first thing I always say is, “Tell me about your background.” It’s a great way to warm up any conversation, and it really helps me understand how you communicate. Are you linear, concise and direct? Or are you a storyteller? Are you entertaining? Do you go off on tangents?I also love to hear how people talk about transitions and career decisions. Were you running away from something or toward something, and how do you frame that?I then ask people to pick some project from their story and go deeper. I listen for “we” versus “I,” and I want to know what you specifically did to impact the outcome.We’re a very hands-on culture. One of our core values is “We get dirty.” Everyone gets into the business.The last thing I do is ask what questions they have for me. That shows me how well you’ve done your research on our mission, and how intellectually curious you are. And it’s important to me that it feels organic and not packaged.What career and life advice do you give to new college grads?The first thing I say is to get a job and work hard. You are going to learn a ton in whatever that job is, so don’t stress too much about what it is or where it is. Just take a job and put your head down, work hard, raise your hand for anything anybody asks you to do.And be present in the present. Don’t worry so much about where you’re going. Just focus on where you are and do the best work you can, learn as much as you can. The next thing will come.The second thing I say is that a lot of people think in terms of “should” — I should be a banker, I should go to law school, I should pursue what I studied in school.I think that’s a mistake. I think you should figure out what you’re passionate about and also look for great people to work with. You should take a risk. You’re 22 years old, so take a risk.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement