AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerAfter pushing Walmart to remove high-capacity weapons from its shelves, Trinity Church on Wall Street is turning its attention to the sporting goods retailer Cabela’s.It wants Cabela’s to stop selling weapons that can fire more than eight rounds without reloading. Trinity made the request in a shareholder proposal for the next annual meeting of Cabela’s shareholders.Activists are raising reputational risk as an issue to push retailers and gun manufacturers to change.Last week, New York City’s public advocate asked the Securities and Exchange Commission to investigate whether Smith & Wesson misrepresented or omitted information in its public disclosures about how often its products are involved in crimes.The Rev. Dr. William B. Lupfer, the rector of Trinity, citing the recent mass shootings in San Bernardino, Calif., and Charleston, S.C., said, “It is difficult for Cabela’s to protect itself from the risk of selling high-capacity weapons to a terrorist, a terrorist suspect on a no-fly list, or to people who pose a significant danger to public safety.”A Cabela’s spokesman did not return a phone call for comment.Trinity owns only about 4,600 shares of Cabela’s out of the 69 million total outstanding shares, but says it has been a long-term shareholder.Cabela’s, based in Sidney, Neb., specializes in fishing and hunting gear, and other outdoors and sports products. It is one of the biggest sellers of guns.The company announced this month that it had hired Guggenheim Securities to help it conduct a strategic review two months after Elliott Management took an 11 percent stake and pushed it to pursue strategic options. Financial results have been weighed down by weakness in apparel and footwear sales.The chairman, James W. Cabela, owns 16 percent of the outstanding shares. He and his brother Richard founded the company in 1961. James Cabela has been a supporter of the National Rifle Association, as was his brother, who died last year.Trinity’s earlier shareholder campaign at Walmart was the subject of a lawsuit after Walmart received S.E.C. approval to exclude Trinity’s proposal from its 2014 proxy, on the grounds that it was too broad and could affect Walmart’s ability to make business decisions.Trinity appealed the case to the United States Supreme Court, but dropped that fight this fall. In the meantime, Walmart agreed to remove the weapons from its shelves in August. Trinity says it continues to talk to Walmart about governance issues.Proposals like the current one at Cabela’s were helped when the S.E.C. said in October that shareholder proposals that focus on a significant policy issue are not excludable from proxies.Evan A. Davis, Trinity’s chancellor, said the church and Cabela’s had been in conversations since 2013.Last year, the retailer adopted safety training for its sales force and purchasers, but Cabela’s rebuffed Trinity’s additional efforts to persuade it to require buyers of high-capacity weapons to have two letters of reference.Advertisement