AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedFor many in the fashion industry, it appeared to be a smooth and logical merger.The two biggest names in the business of selling luxury fashion online, Yoox and Net-a-Porter, announced plans this spring to combine in a 936 million pound, or $1.4 billion, deal, creating an e-commerce powerhouse in an industry that has been slow to embrace the Internet.“I don’t think any merger in history has been so perfect on paper,” Federico Marchetti, the chief executive of Yoox, told The Financial Times in May.Behind the scenes, however, simmered a corporate battle between the majority owner of Net-a-Porter and one of its original backers.The management of Net-a-Porter and some of its minority shareholders fought against the deal, arguing that the company’s majority owner, the Swiss luxury conglomerate Richemont, was selling out at far too low a price, according to people with direct knowledge of the matter.One of Net-a-Porter’s first investors, Carmen Busquets, even cobbled together a group of financiers who she said were prepared to buy back control of the retailer for far more than what Yoox had offered.In numerous letters sent this year — copies of which were reviewed by The New York Times — Ms. Busquets and Natalie Massenet, the founder and then executive chairwoman of Net-a-Porter, complained bitterly that the company, a pioneer of high-end online fashion sales, was being sold at far too low a price.“In a period of two weeks I had secured more than enough equity to buy the entire NAP at a minimum valuation of £1.4bn with an indisputably better partner set up than the Yoox transaction,” Ms. Busquets wrote in a letter to Richemont’s board on June 12. “I am certain that your shareholders will want to understand why your management chose to donate over £400 million and possibly even £500 million of their money to the shareholders of Yoox.”The dispute will not derail the merger, which closed in October. But it highlights a peculiar battle between Ms. Busquets, who has sold her shares in Net-a-Porter, and Richemont, which is best known for its luxury watch brands like Montblanc and Piaget.At the heart of the dispute is the future of how high-end fashion — with sales of roughly $243 billion last year — is sold. While the luxury fashion industry had been slow to move online, believing that customers preferred richer in-person experiences, top labels have come around to courting customers in the digital realm.Analysts at Exane BNP Paribas and ContactLab noted in a report this spring that online sales had jumped to 6 percent of total retail revenue from 3 percent in 2010. And by 2020, the analysts estimate, sales driven by e-commerce and other digital means will make up more than half of all luxury sales, up from a quarter this year.Yet at the same time, specialists in online luxury, including both Net-a-Porter and Yoox, are facing more pressure from traditional retailers as well as individual fashion brands eager to keep their customers rather than sell to them through middlemen.“I think their advantage is eroding,” said Luca Solca, an analyst with Exane BNP Paribas. “My expectation is that more and more luxury goods brands will try to insource their digital resources.”Putting together the archrivals Net-a-Porter, a specialist in current-season clothes from the likes of Balenciaga and Saint Laurent, and Yoox, which sells off-season goods, was meant to create a new giant that could compete against those strengthening rivals.“Today, we open the doors to the world’s biggest luxury fashion store,” Ms. Massenet of Net-a-Porter said in late March when the merger was announced. “It is a store that never closes, a store without geographical borders, a store that connects with, inspires, serves and offers millions of style-conscious global consumers access to the finest designer labels in fashion.”Investors appear to agree about the potential of the combined company. Shares of Yoox jumped roughly 22 percent on the announcement of the deal, and rose about 44 percent by the time the merger closed. Since early October, shares in the Yoox Net-a-Porter Group have climbed a further 22 percent.Richemont appears to believe in the future of Yoox Net-a-Porter, holding roughly half of the combined e-retailers’ stock.Ms. Massenet, however, struck a different tone in a Feb. 26 letter to Johann Rupert, the chairman of Richemont. In the letter, Ms. Massenet, who started Net-a-Porter in her London apartment in 2000, complained that she had been notified of the sale talks with Yoox only two weeks earlier.Ms. Massenet disclosed that she had the backing of a consortium interested in buying control of Net-a-Porter at a valuation of about £1.4 billion, more than 50 percent more than what Yoox was offering. The group included the investment firms Certares, Tiger Global Management and New Enterprise Associates. All the potential investors cautioned that their preliminary valuations were subject to due diligence.Other businesses, including Condé Nast, had also expressed interest in participating, according to that letter.The proposed offer would have allowed Richemont to maintain up to a 40 percent stake in the business, cashing in its remaining stake for £620 million. The promise was that Net-a-Porter would be taken public in perhaps three years, potentially reaping an even higher valuation.“We have many concerns around strategic rationale and cultural fit of the businesses, but are particularly surprised at the price ascribed to NAPG in comparison to Yoox,” Ms. Massenet wrote.A representative for Richemont declined to comment on Ms. Busquets’s contentions.A representative for Yoox Net-a-Porter declined to comment. A spokesman for Ms. Massenet declined to comment.Representatives for Certares, Tiger Global, NEA and Condé Nast declined to comment or did not respond to several inquiries for comments.Analysts over the years have questioned whether Richemont should continue to own Net-a-Porter, asking whether the company — primarily known for its high-end watch brands — should instead focus on its core business. And Net-a-Porter has posted annual losses while under Richemont’s ownership, though its sales have continued to rise.Richemont has said that merging Net-a-Porter with Yoox made sense because it would fuse two of the biggest online fashion retailers to create a new merchant with significant scale.Ms. Busquets, a Venezuelan-born investor who was Net-a-Porter’s original backer and retained a 2.3 percent stake in the business after selling control to Richemont, proved even more combative in her correspondence. Yoox “is simply an inferior business to NAP,” she wrote in a March 28 letter to Richard Lepeu, Richemont’s co-chief executive.In that letter, Ms. Busquets not only pressed the idea of a management buyout, but floated alternatives, including pursuing a merger with other businesses she believed would have been a better fit, like Barneys.Or, she wrote at the time, she would have been satisfied if Net-a-Porter were valued at about £1.5 billion.By June 12, Ms. Busquets was arguing that Net-a-Porter deserved to be valued even higher, given the company’s financial performance. In a letter to Richemont’s board, she wrote that bankers at Morgan Stanley, whom she had hired to evaluate the business, had valued Net-a-Porter at more than £2 billion, given its improved financial performance.Ms. Busquets has retained two high-profile law practices, Boies Schiller in the United States and David Gold & Associates in Britain, to explore her legal options, according to people briefed on the matter.Bad blood has lingered between Ms. Busquets and Richemont, stretching back to when the Swiss luxury company bought a majority stake in Net-a-Porter from Ms. Busquets’s father and the other minority shareholders, which she has said was done under duress.Ms. Busquets said in a statement: “We are reviewing all legal possibilities. I want to make sure future entrepreneurs protect themselves and don’t make the same mistakes we have made.”Ms. Massenet resigned from Yoox Net-a-Porter in October, just as the merger closed and after she sold her shares.Mr. Solca of Exane BNP Paribas said that he believed the valuation offered by Yoox was fair, but he allowed that Ms. Busquets might hold a different view.“This is more art than science,” he said.Vanessa Friedman contributed reporting.Advertisement