AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromThe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Monday that five more people became sick after eating at two more Chipotle Mexican Grill restaurants, dealing a further blow to the price of the company’s shares.The C.D.C. said that five people who had eaten in two Chipotle restaurants in Kansas and Oklahoma grew ill after eating something contaminated with E. coli STEC O26. The agency has not yet determined which food is responsible for the outbreak.“One of the challenges here has been that we have been able to identify the restaurants where people ate, but because of the way Chipotle does its record-keeping, we have been unable to figure out what food is in common across all those restaurants,” said Dr. Ian Williams, chief of the outbreak response and prevention branch of the C.D.C.The same bacteria has sickened 53 people in eight other states, nearly all of whom said they had eaten at a Chipotle. But Dr. Williams said the DNA of the bacteria appeared different in the latest outbreak than in the previous one. He said both types of the same bacteria were rare — the C.D.C. has seen the E. coli involved in the earlier outbreak only three times previously.Chipotle says it is working to put in place programs to monitor the safety of each of the 68 ingredients it uses, using methods like high-resolution testing and additional food-safety training for its employees. “With all these programs in place, we are confident that we can achieve a level of food-safety risk that is near zero,” Chris Arnold, a spokesman for Chipotle, wrote in an email.Mr. Arnold said that Chipotle had expected to see additional cases of E. coli poisoning like those that came to light on Monday, and he noted that not all of the victims in the earlier outbreak had reported eating at a Chipotle.The company’s shares dropped $19.07, to $522.01, after the new outbreak came to light. The stock is down 30 percent from its high of $757.77 in August.The latest infection is the fifth linked to Chipotle since August, when more than 200 people were infected with norovirus after eating at one of its restaurants in Simi Valley, Calif., according to Food Safety News.The same month, more than 60 people got sick with salmonella poisoning after eating in one of 22 Chipotle restaurants in Minnesota. Then in October, the first cases of E. coli poisoning began to surface in the Pacific Northwest.All told, almost 500 people have been sickened after eating in a Chipotle in the last half of this year, according to Food Safety News.Earlier this month, Steve Ells, Chipotle’s founder and chief executive, went on the “Today” show to apologize to the people who became sick most recently. “I’m sorry for the people who got sick. They’re having a tough time and I feel terrible about that,” Mr. Ells said in an interview. Arun K. Jain, a professor of marketing research at the University at Buffalo, compared Chipotle’s woes to those of Volkswagen, which is grappling with a scandal over its manipulation of emissions devices in some 11 million of its diesel cars.“It’s death by a thousand cuts,” Mr. Jain said. “One day after another day, you keep getting this negative news, and it begins to really damage brand equity.”He said the latest outbreak could be particularly bruising to Chipotle because the company has been promoting its new food safety programs. “Consumers will conclude that these people have not done anything in spite of what they’ve been saying, and that becomes a credibility issue,” he said. “For a company like Chipotle, which talks a lot about the integrity of its food, that’s seriously damaging.”Bill Marler, a lawyer who represents more than 50 victims from the four previous Chipotle food poisoning outbreaks, said he was stunned that the company was having yet another problem with food safety. “To have this many people spread out across the United States getting sick all within a month and a half, all with the same strain and all after eating in a Chipotle, that’s perplexing,” Mr. Marler said.He, too, has been critical of Chipotle’s public response to the scandal, although he said the steps the company is taking to improve food safety now seem to be good ones. “Even after watching their C.E.O. on T.V., I’m not sure they get it,” Mr. Marler said. “You really do have to have a culture of food safety from the top down.”Advertisement