AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robert CyranTheranos, a privately held blood-analysis company that is valued by investors at $9 billion, faces new charges of finagling with its herpes test, a product essential to its success, according to The Wall Street Journal.Unless the company wins vindication from independent experts, the damage may be too serious to fix. That harms similar start-ups, whose survival depends on investor trust.The Food and Drug Administration is investigating claims by former employees that Theranos continued administering tests despite accusations of inaccuracy. One contention is that the company modified its equipment while its herpes study was already underway. That would be a fundamental violation of research practices. The company denies it did anything wrong, and says it provided complete and accurate information to regulators.This is not just any kerfuffle. A big part of Theranos’s valuation is based on its proprietary technology for detecting medical conditions cheaply and effectively, using minuscule blood samples. The company aims to introduce more than 100 tests with the F.D.A.’s blessing. The problem is that Theranos has not subjected its technology and methods to experts’ strict review.With the news of the investigation, the company’s precarious situation could reflect badly on all so-called unicorns, the name for private start-ups ostensibly valued at $1 billion or more.There are more than 140 unicorns, according to CB Insights. Publicly traded companies must disclose reams of information, including audited financial statements, but private firms do not face anywhere near as much scrutiny. In fact, that’s one reason many large enterprises choose to remain private.The lack of disclosure means that investors must in many ways take what start-ups tell them on faith. That will be harder to do in the wake of Theranos’s self-inflicted wounds, a development that could hobble all single-horned creatures.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement