AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Standard Chartered said on Monday that it would make additional changes to its board of directors, with another director following several others out the door by the end of January.The Asia-focused bank, which is based in London, announced in February that the longstanding directors Ruth Markland and Paul Skinner would leave at the end of this year, which the bank confirmed on Monday.The bank also said at the time that it would shrink its board to 14 directors and that another director, Oliver Stocken, was leaving.On Monday, the lender said that Lars H. Thunell, who has been a director since 2012, would also depart at the end of next month.The bank said that Mr. Thunell had a number of other commitments and would be focusing more on his role as chairman of African Risk Capacity Insurance.David Philbrick Conner, 67, will join the board on Jan. 1 and would succeed Mr. Thunell as chairman of the board’s risk committee, Standard Chartered said. Mr. Conner is the former chief executive of OCBC Bank and spent 26 years at Citibank in several senior roles in Asia.“David Conner brings significant banking and risk management experience and a deep understanding of Asian markets,” John W. Peace, the Standard Chartered chairman, said in a news release. “I am delighted to welcome him to Standard Chartered.”The board changes are the latest in a widespread reorganization of leadership of the lender under its new chief executive, William T. Winters. Mr. Peace is expected to leave the board next year.Standard Chartered announced plans in November to raise up to $5.1 billion in new capital and to cut 15,000 jobs as part of a major overhaul of its operations.The bank has struggled in a weaker environment for emerging markets and tough trading conditions in some of its business lines, including currency-hedging products.Mr. Winters, the former head of JPMorgan Chase’s investment bank, joined Standard Chartered in June, replacing Peter Sands, the longtime chief executive, as part of a broad management shake-up.Standard Chartered also said on Monday that Elizabeth Lloyd would join the bank as its group secretary on Jan. 1, succeeding Annemarie Durbin.Advertisement