AdvertisementSupported by9 PhotosView Slide Show ›Kemal Jufri for The New York TimesBy Neil GoughPANGKALAN KERINCI, Indonesia — In this company town where acacia and palm oil trees stretch for miles, the Indonesian conglomerate Royal Golden Eagle is bracing for impact.Already, prices of palm oil, one of its main products, have fallen. And the value of the Indonesian rupiah has plummeted, hurting the buying power of the 100,000 people in this dusty town, many of whom rely on the sprawling mill and plantation for jobs, as well as electricity and water. And foreign investors have been broadly rethinking the country’s prospects, creating economic uncertainty.With the United States Federal Reserve now raising interest rates for the first time in nearly a decade, the company, which is private, is preparing for a further shakeout by keeping its debt load low and shifting its product mix. It is cautiously moving forward with new investments, like a $300 million expansion aimed at cutting the group’s reliance on lower-value acacia pulp exports.“We wanted to be positioned nicely for this downturn,” said Anderson Tanoto, the son of the company’s founder and chairman, Sukanto Tanoto. “It was just a matter of time. We all knew rates couldn’t stay low.”For years, emerging economies rode high on a flood of easy money, as the Fed cut interest rates to record lows. In Indonesia, miners, shippers, plantation operators and other businesses loaded up on cheap debt to finance investments and expansion. Indonesia overtook Malaysia as the world’s biggest producer of palm oil and emerged as a major regional supplier of other important raw materials.Officials said the economy was strong enough to keep growing with a little less help from the central bank. They said rates would rise slowly, but borrowing costs already have started to climb.Their efforts were supported by soaring commodity prices, when Chinese demand for coal, palm oil and other natural resources seemed inexhaustible. The boom transformed economies from Southeast Asia to Latin America, fueling the growth of the middle class in many countries.But developing countries are now being squeezed by the interest rate increase and the slump in global commodity prices. The dollar has strengthened in anticipation of the Fed’s move, but the Indonesian rupiah has been falling, nearly to a level last seen during the Asian financial crisis in 1998.Consumer demand in this relatively youthful country of 250 million people is also starting to look shaky. Car sales are down nearly 20 percent this year from 2014, and smartphone sales recently contracted for the first time on record. An array of local companies — from coal mine operators in the jungles of Borneo to the ubiquitous mobile phone retailers in Jakarta’s flashy new shopping malls — are struggling to cover their debts.“A Fed hike is not going to knock out emerging markets like Indonesia,” said Frederic Neumann, the co-head of Asian economic research at HSBC in Hong Kong. “But things are bound to get a little tougher from here.”Parallels between the current downturn and the financial crisis in the late 1990s are difficult to escape. Then, turmoil erupted when currencies around the region began to plunge, setting off a chain reaction of defaults among companies that had borrowed heavily from foreign investors.At that time, some two-thirds of the Tanotos’ sprawling mill and plantation complex on the island of Sumatra was still under construction, with projects totaling roughly $2 billion. The project’s three sources of funding — local banks, foreign banks and export credit agencies — dried up almost overnight.“Everything wrong happened at the same time,” the elder Mr. Tanoto said.After that crisis, a bank controlled by Mr. Tanoto collapsed and, later, he lost control of Adaro Energy, a huge coal mining business on Borneo. His palm oil operation had to pay a record fine of about 2.5 trillion rupiah, or about $180 million at today’s exchange rates, for tax evasion. The company disputes the allegations of unpaid taxes and continues to challenge the matter in the courts.In the current environment, the operation is focused on keeping down costs by increasing efficiency. At an on-site laboratory, scientists cross different types of palm oil trees, trying to develop a variety that yields more oil and better resists disease. The trees are also bred to be shorter, so it is easier to harvest their fruit.The company is also trying to reduce its reliance on lower-value bulk commodities. The roughly 400,000 tons of freshly cut acacia trees stacked in towering piles surrounding the mill are waiting to be turned into pulp that the company dries into sheets for export. With the mill expansion, it will be able to make more of its own Paper One brand here, which it can sell for a higher price.Prices of pulp and paper have proved to be more resilient than those of palm oil. So far, none of the major paper companies are showing the stress that appeared in the late 1990s, when the conglomerate’s larger competitor, Asia Pulp & Paper, defaulted on nearly $14 billion in foreign debt.While Indonesia does not appear to be headed for a repeat of the earlier crisis, the problems today are similar, if on a smaller scale. As they did then, some companies have taken advantage of years of easy credit to take on more debt than they can handle.Hotman Paris Hutapea, a  Jakarta lawyer who defended Asia Pulp & Paper from its foreign creditors, says he is seeing a sharp pickup in new cases today.Exactly seven years ago, the Federal Reserve cut interest rates to almost zero in order to nurse the ailing economy back to health. Recently it changed direction. This is how it works.Mr. Hutapea’s most recent big case involved defending one of Indonesia’s largest shipping companies, PT Arpeni Pratama Ocean Line — with total debt of nearly $500 million — from legal actions by creditors. One of the company’s insurers filed an action this summer seeking to declare the shipper bankrupt over unpaid bills.“The problems started in mining, because they shipped a lot of coal to China,” he said. “I’m not an economist, but if a shipping company runs out of business, it means all its customers are also seeing a drop.”“Luckily, I won the case in the commercial court and the Supreme Court, mostly on the basis of some technicalities,” Mr. Hutapea added.The slump that started in commodities and industrial firms is spreading to other parts of the economy. For years, sales of mobile phones rose fast, a tangible sign of the newfound buying power of Indonesia’s rapidly growing middle class.Now consumers are pulling back. In November, PT Trikomsel Oke, one of the country’s biggest mobile phone retailers, which is owned in part by the SoftBank Group of Japan, defaulted when it missed a payment on about $150 million in bonds sold in Singapore. The company said it had about $460 million in debt due in the next two years that it would be unable to pay.“Consumer staples, goods and services companies that used to be very robust — that part of the economy is now taking a slowdown,” said Sandiaga S. Uno, a co-founder of the Indonesian private equity group Saratoga Capital.Trikomsel, the mobile phone retailer, has blamed the shrinking budgets of Indonesian consumers, who are favoring cheaper products. The weakened rupiah is also a factor, since most phones are imported. Smartphone sales volumes fell by 7 percent in the third quarter of the year compared with the same period in 2014, according to Counterpoint Technology Market Research.On a recent visit to one of Trikomsel’s retailing outlets at the upscale Taman Anggrek mall in Jakarta, the store was empty apart from a lone cashier, Ibham, 26, who like many Indonesians uses only one name. “The end of the year is usually a busy season,” he said, “but maybe less so this year because the currency is weaker.”The broader telecom sector, a major focus of foreign investors in recent years, has been scrambling to limit its pain.Indosat Ooredoo, Indonesia’s second-biggest mobile service provider, which is majority owned by the government of Qatar, continues to add new subscribers. But Alexander Rusli, the company’s chief executive, says the slumping currency has hurt its ability to expand and upgrade its coverage network because it has made imported equipment more expensive.As it hunkers down, Indosat is reducing its dollar-denominated debt in favor of debt in the local currency. It is also exploring pricing contracts with suppliers like Huawei of China in that country’s currency, to further diversify its currency exposure.While Royal Golden Eagle is similarly preparing for the new reality, Sukanto Tanoto remains optimistic. Rising rates and slower growth in China may complicate his business plans, but they do not spell disaster.“Doing the commodity business with China is like drinking coffee,” Mr. Tanoto said. “We enjoyed three spoons of sugar per cup for a long time. Suddenly, when that’s cut to one and a half spoons, we feel bitter — because it used to be so sweet.”Muhammad Rusmadi contributed reporting from Jakarta.Advertisement