By EMILY STEELDEC. 22, 2015
The Walt Disney Company is in talks with the Spanish-language broadcaster Univision to sell its stake in Fusion, the joint venture started by the two companies two years ago, a person with knowledge of the discussions said Tuesday.Fusion is an English-language digital news service and cable channel that is aimed at millennial audiences. Its chief executive is Isaac Lee, who also oversees digital and multicultural functions at Univision.Terms of Disney’s exit, including the timing, the price and whether other partners were involved, were not clear.Over the years Fusion has struggled to define its identity and deliver large audiences. The cable channel has faced challenges attracting viewers in an era when TV networks face sharp ratings declines, particularly among younger viewers. The website, which originally was aimed at young Latinos who spoke English but shifted to target young viewers of all ethnicities, has had a hard time standing out against digital media rivals like BuzzFeed and Vice.AdvertisementA spokesman for Disney declined to comment. A spokeswoman for Univision could not be reached for comment. News of the talks was first reported by The Financial Times.AdvertisementDuring Fusion’s first full year of operations in 2014, the group reported losses of $35 million. The company has 250 to 300 employees and offices in Miami, New York, Washington, D.C., Boulder, Colo., and Oakland, Calif.Fusion has projected that its television network would be profitable in 2016, and that its digital operations would be ahead of business plans.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There have been some culture clashes. Disney, for instance, put Fusion on notice that it would not appreciate coverage that might hurt it with consumers after Fusion published several stories based on documents that hackers stole from Sony, according to a news report.Two years after Fusion started its cable network the distribution reached nearly 40 million households, according to a note to staff sent by Mr. Lee in October."So while we are still building awareness, we are reaching our target audience and growing at a faster pace than many of our competitors," he said."The development comes as Univision’s public offering has been delayed after fears about the future of the television business set off a plunge in the share prices for major media companies.Igniting much of that industrywide concern was Disney, which in August reduced growth expectations for its cable network division, which contributes about half of its annual operating income and is anchored by the cable sports network ESPN. Factors slowing growth at ESPN include subscriber erosion combined with a weak ad market and the inflation of sports rights.A version of this article appears in print on December 23, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Disney Eyes Fusion Exit as Venture Struggles.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.