AdvertisementSupported byEconomic SceneBy Eduardo PorterOne of the great success stories of the 20th century was the decline in poverty among the elderly. That story, however, is starting to change.A typical American worker in the middle rung of the earnings ladder — whose career pay averaged out at about $46,000 a year in today’s money — could retire this year at age 65 with a Social Security benefit worth 39 percent of the career average.But unless something is done to replenish Social Security’s shrinking trust funds, by 2035 the first pension check for such a worker might amount to as little as 27.5 percent of her career wage, according to calculations  published last year by the chief actuary of the Social Security Administration.This is not merely an American trend. A preliminary analysis by economists at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the official research and policy arm of the world’s advanced industrial nations, suggests that the gross replacement rates of public pension systems in a number of European countries are likely to decline over the next half century or so.Though there are big differences among nations, according to Stefano Scarpetta, director of employment labor and social affairs at the O.E.C.D., “in a majority of countries, the replacement rate probably will be lower than the one people have experienced so far.”It is a consequence, of course, of a broad, inexorable trend: aging. That has raised the dependency rate across industrial societies. In 1950 there were 14 people aged 65 and over in O.E.C.D. countries for every 100 people of working age. Today there are 28. The trend is expected to continue for at least the next 50 years.On average, men and women are spending seven more years in retirement than they did in 1970.Much as this represents yet another great social achievement, it has also strained the finances of public pension systems, which largely rely on current taxes to pay for retirement benefits.Public spending on old-age pensions and survivors’ benefits in the O.E.C.D. rose from 6.2 to 7.9 percent of overall economic output, on average, between 1990 and 2011.As governments of most industrial nations try to restore long-term financial stability to their pension systems — raising the retirement age, linking benefits more closely to workers’ contributions and the like — there is a growing risk, as the O.E.C.D.’s secretary general, José Ángel Gurría, put it, “that future pensions will not be sufficient.”This is hardly a shock: Demographics, like ocean liners, move slowly and can be spotted from afar. On top of that, the lackluster growth and high unemployment experienced across much of the Western world in the last few years is going to make it much harder for young workers who expect to retire around midcentury from accumulating enough money to sustain a decent living standard in old age.That all raises a question that seems to be studiously avoided in polite policy conversations: Is old-age poverty going to pick up again?While the prescription may seem obvious — policies that delay retirement and encourage working until later ages — it is far from infallible. Indeed, it is hardly certain that elderly workers could stay longer in the work force even if they wanted to.The O.E.C.D. devised some estimates of what to expect from pension systems. The analysis underscores just how uncertain life may become for the old.A low-wage worker entering the job market today at age 20, earning half the average wage over her career, can expect a public pension equivalent to 53 percent of her wages upon retirement — if, and this is a big if, she stays in the labor market uninterruptedly until the normal retirement age.That is (a) not a lot of money — a quarter of the average wage— and (b) somewhat unrealistic, given the odds of parenthood, unemployment and so many other things that might temporarily knock anyone out of a job.According to the analysis, it gets even worse if a worker enters the labor market at age 25 rather than 20. For the record, people in the O.E.C.D. today start working, on average, at 23.Fortunately, public pensions are not retirees’ only source of support. Social Security, for example, is still understood as one leg in a three-legged stool supported by a private pension and retirement savings, too. Adding up these other bits would lift the retirement income of a typical low-wage American retiree to 88 percent of her average lifetime wage, or 90 percent after accounting for her lower tax rate on retirement. This is a big improvement on the 44 percent of her lifetime wage, 54 percent after taxes, that she would get from Social Security alone.But today fewer than half of workers in the United States are covered by a private pension, and that is getting worse, too. A study by the Government Accountability Office estimated that fewer than one in five retirees among the bottom 20 percent had a defined benefit pension that pays a guaranteed monthly income and fewer than one in 10 have any retirement savings.What are the options to combat elderly poverty in the future? The challenge is particularly dire in the United States, despite a large young immigrant population, which reduces the demographic pressure: 21.5 percent of Americans 65 and older make less than half the nation’s median income, almost double the O.E.C.D. average.A plausible strategy would be to increase the resources of public pension systems. In the United States, in fact, modest increases in payroll taxes, targeted on higher-income workers, could prevent the depletion of Social Security’s trust funds.That poses challenges for most European countries, where taxes are relatively high, and seems politically dead on arrival in Washington — even though the tax burden is much lower in the United States — as long as tax-averse Republicans control Congress.The other alternative — which most industrialized countries see as the key to overcome their demographic stress — amounts to more work. While this is not an unreasonable proposition, it may not amount to the fix everyone is hoping for.There are two problems with the approach. One is distributional: Poorer workers in tough jobs may be unable to add years to their working life. They tend to die younger. Forcing them to shoulder the burden of increased longevity seems unfair and impractical.The other, potentially more complex problem, is that the job market has not adapted very well to this challenge.Consider a survey by the Employee Benefit Research Institute cited in the G.A.O. study, which asked workers 55 and older when they planned to retire. Almost half said 66 or older. More than 1 in 10 said never.Their aspirations do not fit reality: While there has been an increase in work among older Americans, only 14 percent retired after 66. Workers, the G.A.O. pointed out, “may have fewer years to work and save for retirement than they are planning.”Email: eporter@nytimes.com; Twitter: @portereduardo Advertisement