AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberA list for pasta lovers. An article about sleep deprivation. A web page detailing the history of cocaine traffickers.Advertisers and publishers say these types of ads — known as native ads and packaged to look like journalism — are less intrusive and more appealing (not to mention more likely to be shared on social media) than other online ads. But consumer advocates say this native advertising can be intentionally misleading, and they have long called for some kind of federal regulation.On Tuesday, the Federal Trade Commission issued a guide on native advertising intended to prevent customers from being deceived. The long-awaited guidelines function as a warning shot to the online ad industry and lay out for the first time how advertisers and publishers should deploy and label native ads.The agency states, for instance, that advertisers “should not use terms such as ‘Promoted’ or ‘Promoted Stories,’ which in this context are at best ambiguous and potentially could mislead consumers that advertising content is endorsed by a publisher site.” The F.T.C. also provides guidance on where disclosures should appear. If a native ad appears as a user scrolls down a web page, for example, a disclosure should not appear below the ad.“People browsing the web, using social media, or watching videos have a right to know if they’re seeing editorial content or an ad,” Jessica L. Rich, director of the F.T.C.’s Bureau of Consumer Protection, said in a statement.The F.T.C.’s guidance caps a long period of growth in native advertising, which mimics the look and feel of the host site.But proponents of the ads contend that any rules could stymie the development of a tool that has become an increasingly important source of revenue for publishers. The practice has grown ever more popular in recent years as advertisers and publishers — including Forbes, Yahoo, BuzzFeed and The New York Times — have sought to reach savvy web users who increasingly block or simply ignore traditional online ads. And native ads have only grown more popular as consumers spend more time on their mobile phones, whose small screens have prompted marketers to look beyond intrusive banner ads and pop-ups. The Association of National Advertisers reported in January that nearly two-thirds of marketers surveyed said they planned to increase their spending on native advertising this year.“Native is so organic,” said Henry Tajer, the global chief executive of IPG Mediabrands. “It’s like ivy.”The tactic now called native advertising is not new — many radio ads, magazine inserts and infomercials, for example, have long used a similar strategy. But native ads have grown more sophisticated online, and the line between marketing and journalism has blurred.In their more basic forms, sponsored stories and blog posts, sometimes created by the publishers themselves, appear alongside news articles and other content. (Forbes’s BrandVoice, for instance, allows advertisers like Fidelity and IBM to produce their own editorial content, which then appears on the Forbes site in the same style as an article done by the magazine.)Other types of native ads include posts on Facebook and Twitter, paid-search results, and recommended links.But the way publishers designate native ads is inconsistent and often vague — a shaded box or a small label with some version of the phrase “sponsored by.” What all native ads have in common is that their appearance blends in with the rest of the page; on first glance, it is often unclear that native ads are ads at all.“Native advertising is product placement on digital steroids,” said Jeffrey Chester, executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy. “There’s no way that saying, ‘This is an ad,’ means anything.”The rise of automated ad buying and the ability to show tailored ads to specific groups of people means advertisers can now serve native ads to targeted consumers based on their online behavior. A user who recently searched for doctors in Los Angeles might see a sponsored article for trusted physicians in California.These kinds of targeted native ads have drawn particular concern from consumer-privacy advocates, who say no amount of labeling can make them less nefarious.Mr. Chester, who sent several memos and letters to the F.T.C. about native ads, expressed concern that the F.T.C.’s guidance did not address how advertisers are using data to serve consumers specific native ads based on their interests and online behavior.“What’s needed is a 21st-century set of safeguards that enable consumers to control the data used to deliver them ads, especially formats like native that are specially designed to be disguised as content,” Mr. Chester said in a statement.Some industry executives warned that the guidelines could be seen as toothless: The F.T.C. is an enforcement agency and its recommendations are not laws. Still, publishers and advertisers who do not comply with the guidelines risk being held out as examples of bad actors. There could also be financial sanctions.Marketers and publishers, however, worry that the guidelines could stifle further advancements in an area that they both have come to increasingly rely on.“As soon as you start to standardize things and put guidelines around things, you limit the level of creativity and innovation that is able to occur,” said Mark Howard, the chief revenue officer of Forbes Media. “If you put out stringent guidelines, are you going to put people back in the box?”Advertisement