AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy Michael W. PeregrineMichael W. Peregrine, a partner at the law firm McDermott Will & Emery, advises corporations, officers and directors on issues related to corporate governance, fiduciary duties and internal investigations. His views do not necessarily reflect the views of McDermott Will & Emery or its clients. The pursuit of legitimate corporate strategic goals is increasingly running into the concerns of corporate officers who see themselves at greater personal legal risk if there are ever allegations of corporate misconduct.This governance challenge is a byproduct of new enforcement policies from the Justice Department and Securities and Exchange Commission regarding the individual culpability of corporate officials.The S.E.C. has focused its oversight efforts on the accountability of so-called gatekeepers — officers and directors, as well as auditors, lawyers and compliance officers. The Justice Department, meanwhile, is seeking to combat corporate misconduct prosecution by going after individuals.These new policies shift the primary attention in corporate investigations to employees from the organization as a whole . They also create incentives for companies to give up individuals believed responsible for corporate wrongdoing, in order to receive leniency in any possible settlement with the government.Officers and executives are becoming increasingly sensitive to both the existence of the new policies and the tensions they may create in the relationship between management and the board. Indeed, a senior Justice Department official has acknowledged that although the new policies “may make some employees nervous, some may have reason to be nervous.”And they may be. Yet boards should be nervous as well — not necessarily for their own exposure, but for the fate of major strategies that management is charged with putting into effect.The law protects directors who are innovative and accept informed risks in their pursuit of corporate strategies. The concept of risk is not antithetical to effective governance, legal compliance and prudent corporate strategy. Indeed, a board’s excessive strategic conservatism may be harmful to the corporation’s long-term sustainability.Yet in the new enforcement environment, some executives may have a different perspective on risk, at least as it relates to their role in adopting certain corporate strategies.The primary board concern is that some gatekeepers may engage in self-protective conduct that hampers valid company initiatives.Such conduct may manifest itself in both obvious and subtle ways.Examples of obvious self-protective conduct could include the gatekeeper’s refusal to engage with the initiative, written or oral expressions of discomfort made to corporate leadership or even resignation.Examples of subtle self-protective conduct could include excessive cautiousness, substantial equivocation in observations or recommendations or simply delegating initiative responsibility to a lower level of management. Whether obvious or subtle, it is conduct intended to provide the gatekeeper with “plausible deniability” as to material involvement with, and support of, the initiative.To a certain extent, that’s just human nature. And the government may applaud such conduct as an appropriate check and balance to problematic corporate conduct.But it becomes a governance issue when such self-protective conduct impedes legally appropriate strategies. Attentive boards should seek to address the understandable concerns of its gatekeepers.Fundamental to any board response is an awareness that such tension exists, why it exists and the problems it can create for the corporation’s strategic vision. More specific governance steps would include efforts to assure gatekeepers that the corporation is protective of their personal interests as well.One step would be to provide assurance that corporate strategic plans are consistent with the board-approved risk profile and that all major decisions have been carefully vetted by experienced legal counsel. A second step would be to enhance confidence in the board’s commitment to effective, rigorous corporate compliance and risk management programs. In addition, gatekeepers should also receive clear legal guidance on the proper use of the corporation’s strategic plan. Make it known that company lawyers are available to counsel gatekeepers at all times.A fourth step would be to carefully review the adequacy of existing indemnity and insurance coverage available to gatekeepers. The goal would be to confirm that “state of the art” coverage is in place with the best possible terms.These and other steps should help reduce the anxiety of gatekeepers and other management team members concerning their personal liability exposure. In so doing, these steps may remove unnecessary barriers to the use of corporate strategies.They’re also consistent with a top-down organizational “culture of compliance” that the board is responsible for maintaining. And, ultimately, that’s what the new government enforcement policies seek to achieve.Advertisement