AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberShortly after 5 p.m. on Tuesday, Michael Hengel, the editor of The Las Vegas Review-Journal, instructed staff members to gather in the newsroom and bring their cellphones. As reporters tweeted and recorded the meeting, Mr. Hengel shocked his employees by telling them he was resigning.On Wednesday, as Mr. Hengel cleaned out his desk, reporters and editors tried to push ahead and publish a newspaper under circumstances they said were bizarre and unsettling — with anxiety about job security, a void in newsroom leadership and concern about editorial interference from the owners. Less than two weeks ago, The Review-Journal, the biggest newspaper in Nevada, had been sold for $140 million to a buyer whose identity was kept secret for days behind layers of corporate management. Reporters said that articles related to the sale were reviewed and edited without their input in what they felt were attempts to paint the new owners in a more favorable light.When the paper reported last week that Sheldon Adelson, the billionaire casino magnate and Republican donor, was behind the mysterious purchase, the revelation brought little relief, and many questioned whether Mr. Adelson, or the group he has chosen to oversee operations, would meddle with the paper’s journalistic independence. “People do feel like their livelihoods are at risk,” said James DeHaven, a reporter who has worked on articles about the sale of The Review-Journal. “They feel like it’s going to be an adversarial relationship, and they worry that they’re going to be the ones who suffer.”In a telephone interview on Wednesday, Mr. Hengel said concerns about Mr. Adelson’s business and political interests, and the potential conflicts they created for the paper, were a factor in his decision to accept what the owners described in a statement as a voluntary buyout offer.“I’m not sure what their plans were and how I fit into them,” he said. “So when I got presented an offer based on what I knew the situation was, I had to determine whether it was acceptable or not. And for me and my family, it was.”During the meeting with his staff on Tuesday, Mr. Hengel said he thought his resignation probably came as a relief to the new owners.In the meantime, the paper’s journalists have been left without a clear leader at a time when they perhaps need it most. New Media Investment Group — which sold The Review-Journal to Mr. Adelson and his family, but still manages the paper — is in the process of selecting an interim editor, according to a person involved in the transition. New Media expects to name a permanent editor in two to three months after a nationwide search, the person added.James Wright, a deputy editor at the paper, who has been editing articles about the sale and the new ownership, said it was unclear who was pulling the strings in the newsroom. “It’s a mess — it’s a convoluted mess,” he said. “We don’t really know in some cases who’s in charge of what.”He said articles about the paper and the new owners were being reviewed, and sometimes altered, but added, “we’re not sure who is doing the vetting.” Trying to allay potential concerns among readers, the Adelson family has put out two statements saying it was committed to investing in the newspaper. In a statement that ran on the front page on Wednesday, the family pledged to “publish a newspaper that is fair, unbiased and accurate.”“We regard ourselves as stewards of this essential community institution,” the statement said, “and we promise that The Review-Journal will serve the people of Las Vegas for many years to come.”Whether Mr. Adelson will ultimately try to shape the paper’s coverage remains to be seen. But in the weeks since he has owned the paper, reporters said, several articles about the paper have been heavily reviewed and edited to remove quotes that could be viewed as unfavorable to the new owners.An article about Mr. Hengel’s resignation was trimmed before it was published from about 20 paragraphs to three and stripped of nearly all of Mr. Hengel’s comments, according to people familiar with the article. The article ran on Wednesday inside the paper. Similarly, an initial article on the paper’s website about the sale was edited after it was published to remove references to the buyer’s unknown identity.Mr. Hengel said he was approached about taking a buyout offer on Dec. 11 — the day after the paper was sold — after he had argued with Jason Taylor, The Review-Journal’s publisher, about the changes to the initial article on the sale. The buyout offer came on Tuesday around 4 p.m., shortly before he addressed the newsroom. The statement from the new owners that said Mr. Hengel had “accepted a voluntary buyout offer” appears to have been written before he, in fact, accepted it.Mr. Taylor, who was on vacation, did not respond to messages seeking comment on Wednesday.In an email, Michael E. Reed, the chief executive of New Media Investment Group, wrote: “We have no further comment on anything related to the sale, Hengel’s resignation, etc. The owners’ statement last night addresses concerns of readers and staff.” Adding to the anxiety at the paper, some reporters said, was the prospect that more employees would leave.So far, 15 employees, including Mr. Hengel, have accepted voluntary buyout offers, according to the person with knowledge of the transition. (Several reporters said they were aware of only one other person who had accepted a buyout.) The buyout offers were made companywide before the sale was announced. But journalists at the paper are soldiering on. Jennifer Robison, a reporter who has been writing about the sale, said that the year over all had been one of transition, and the ownership change was just the latest test. But without Mr. Hengel guiding the way, she said, there was more uncertainty than ever.“He’s been there, he’s been steady, he’s been calming,” she said, “and losing him yesterday so unexpectedly has created a lot of turmoil in an already tumultuous time.”“It’s really hard to have a stable perspective right now because we’re still in the middle of it, and it’s been so up and down.”Barry Meier contributed reporting.Advertisement