AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerCanadian Pacific’s third proposal to acquire Norfolk Southern received the same response from its fellow railroad operator as the first two: No, thank you.Norfolk Southern took a week to consider the newest offer from Canadian Pacific, backed by the billionaire investor William A. Ackman. On Dec. 16, the Canadian railroad added a so-called contingent value right, or C.V.R., that accords Norfolk Southern shareholders up to $3.4 billion extra, based on the combined companies’ stock price. The C.V.R. would be in addition to the approximately $27 billion cash-and-stock offer that Canadian Pacific made early this month.Norfolk Southern has rejected all three of Canadian Pacific’s proposals, arguing that the offers were “inadequate” and carried too much regulatory risk.“It would be inconsistent with the duties of the board to pursue a risky and uncertain offer that substantially undervalues the company,” Norfolk Southern’s chief executive, Jim Squires, and Steven Leer, the company’s lead director, said in a letter to Norfolk Southern executives on Wednesday.“CP remains confident that a CP-NS combination would secure regulatory approval as a seamless coast-to-coast single-haul service benefits shippers, the industry and the public, and would generate tremendous shareholder value,” Canadian Pacific said Wednesday in a statement.Railroad mergers are subject to the approval of the Surface Transportation Board, a regulator in the Department of Transportation. The board created rules in 2001 — after a wave of railroad deals were blamed for missing cargo and crashes — requiring that participants in any potential merger demonstrate that it would improve competition and serve the public interest. The standard is even more vague than the typical antitrust regulations and has never been tested.For Norfolk Southern, that regulatory uncertainty was not worth the potential disruption to business that could occur over the few years it could take to get approval. Canadian Pacific suggested putting its own shares in a voting trust, led by an independent trustee, aimed at speeding up the integration of the two companies.But Norfolk Southern doubted that the voting trust would suffice. The railroad requested that Canadian Pacific seek a declaratory order from the transportation board to demonstrate whether the voting trust structure is legal under the regulator’s rules. Canadian Pacific has not yet pursued the order, Mr. Squires said in Wednesday’s letter.E. Hunter Harrison, the chief executive of Canadian Pacific, contends that greater consolidation would be in the public interest because it could make the system more efficient. The company called out Norfolk Southern, Union Pacific and CSX in a statement Monday for halting service through Chicago during Christmas, which Canadian Pacific said was disruptive to shippers.“Optionality, agility, efficiency and service are at the heart of our proposal and we urge all stakeholders to examine the benefits of a CP-NS combination,” Keith Creel, Canadian Pacific’s president and chief operating officer, said in Monday’s statement.Some shipping organizations have opposed the combination. The Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers and the Association of Global Automakers, which together represent the major car manufacturers in the United States, submitted a letter to Mr. Creel arguing that the deal posed “significant service and competitive concerns,” according to a copy obtained by The New York Times. Other associations in the agriculture and manufacturing industries have voiced similar concerns.Canadian Pacific is offering Norfolk Southern shareholders $32.86 in cash per share, plus 0.451 share in the new company, plus 0.451 of the contingent value right.Investors were not too surprised by Norfolk Southern’s decision to reject Canadian Pacific’s offer. Norfolk Southern shares closed up 0.9 percent and Canadian Pacific closed up 1.8 percent, in line with the broader market.Advertisement