By LESLIE PICKERDEC. 23, 2015
Two federal agencies have ordered a major marketer of student debit cards to pay millions of dollars in restitution to users of its services for failing to disclose details about fees.Higher One, whose OneAccount division provided cards and checking accounts to students for books, school supplies and other living expenses, improperly collected millions of dollars because of its failure to fully inform consumers about certain fees and other features, the two federal regulators said in separate statements Wednesday.The Federal Reserve is seeking $24 million worth of repayment to about 570,000 students, while the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ordered Higher One and its partner bank, WEX Bank, to return $31 million to 900,000 consumers, the statements said. Most of the abuses took place in 2012, 2013 and early 2014, the regulators said.Higher One also neglected to inform students about locations of A.T.M.s where they could collect cash without paying additional fees and it displayed school logos, which suggested endorsement of the product by their colleges, the Federal Reserve’s statement said.Advertisement“Deceptive marketing practices with respect to student loans will not be tolerated,” said a Federal Reserve governor, Lael Brainard, in the statement. “This action ensures that students who were misled into paying fees to access their financial aid funds will receive restitution for those fees.”AdvertisementHigher One has come under fire for similar practices in the past. In 2012, the company settled with the F.D.I.C., agreeing to repay $11 million to 60,000 students for charging excessive fees to students who overdrew their accounts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Higher One said on Dec. 15 that it reached an agreement to sell all the assets and some of the liabilities of its disbursements unit, which includes OneAccount, to one of its bank partners, Customers Bank and its parent company, Customers Bancorp, for $37 million in cash.“With the announcement of the sale of Higher One’s disbursements and OneAccount businesses to Customers Bank, we’re bringing this longstanding matter to a close and look to begin a new chapter for Higher One,” Marc Sheinbaum, who joined Higher One as chief executive in 2014, said in a statement on Wednesday.The F.D.I.C. ordered Higher One to pay a penalty of $2.23 million and WEX Bank to pay $1.75 million, according to a statement Wednesday. The Federal Reserve sought $2.23 million in penalties from Higher One.The F.D.I.C. said it was working with Higher One and WEX Bank to provide better disclosure.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.