By RANDALL SMITHDEC. 24, 2015
Most companies listed on American stock exchanges are conventional, familiar businesses like Apple or Exxon Mobil, but the stock market also contains many obscure, even mysterious, specialized sectors that operate with much less public awareness.In recent months, one of those groups of specialty firms has been drawing attention as controversy has increased over some of its tactics and results.Known as business development companies, or B.D.C.s, the firms were created by Congress in 1980 to encourage investment in small businesses whose growth may generate jobs. They sell stock to the public and then use some of the proceeds to make loans to emerging businesses for a variety of needs.The category has grown tenfold over the last decade, to $64 billion in assets. That is partly because business development companies offer higher yields in exchange for the high-risk nature of their assets, and partly because they cater to a market that big banks have retreated from since the financial crisis.AdvertisementIn the last four months, several business development companies have become targets of activist or dissident investors who are dissatisfied over management and performance issues and are waging proxy contests or seeking sales.AdvertisementIn September, one company, TICC Capital faced multiple challenges to its plan to sell its asset manager to another concern. In October, an investor demanded that another, KCAP Financial, be sold. In November, the activist investor Elliott Management challenged a spinoff plan by a third, American Capital. And a shareholder of a fourth company, FifthStreet Finance, started a proxy challenge seeking three board seats.One of the most criticized business development companies, however, is Prospect Capital.With $6.6 billion in assets, Prospect is a large player in the category. But in the last year and a half, its stock price and net-asset value per share have been steadily sinking. Even before the recent junk-bond market upheaval, Prospect and three of the other business development companies being challenged have traded at discounts to net-asset-value of more than 30 percent this year, well below the average of less than 20 percent for such firms.Some analysts have accused Prospect of charging what they say are conspicuously high fees, even as investor returns have faltered. And others have taken issue with the compensation paid its chief executive, John F. Barry III — more than $100 million annually in recent years, according to estimates by former employees and an outside analyst.By comparison, Malon Wilkus, chief executive of the largest internally managed business development company, American Capital, earned $16.9 million in 2014.Prospect’s president, M. Grier Eliasek, and the firm’s head of investor relations, Michael Cimini, who talked enthusiastically about Prospect’s stock and its 12 to 13 percent dividend in interviews they initiated in January, did not respond to emails and phone messages seeking comment on questions about Prospect’s performance.Not all such companies have disappointed investors. Main Street Capital, for one, trades at a 40 percent premium, based on the steady growth of a more sustainable dividend in the 6 percent range, lower fees and returns which topped the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index in three of the five years that ended in 2014.The reversal of fortune at Prospect is striking, given its promising start.The firm went public as Prospect Energy in 2004 after a $121 million offering at $15 a share. It specialized in investments in energy firms and rode a surge in energy prices that peaked in 2008. It also made a shrewd $201 million acquisition in 2009 of Patriot Capital Funding, a specialty finance company, at a 54 percent discount to book value.AdvertisementThe stock price rose to $18.79 in late 2006, and in total returns, it beat the S.&P. 500 in three of its first four calendar years as a public company, according to the research firm Morningstar.But since then, the stock price has fallen by 61 percent. Prospect has twice cut its dividend, which is now $1 a share, from its peak of $1.62 in 2009. And despite reducing its exposure to energy investments, its returns have trailed the S.& P. 500 in all but one year since 2008.Some investors who specialize in business development companies avoid Prospect stock partly because, they said, the firm inflates the fees it pays its management firm, Prospect Capital Management, a separate company owned largely by Mr. Barry.“They have earned incentive fees even though they have lost shareholder value on a per-share basis,” said David Miyazaki, who focuses on specialty finance companies at Confluence Investment Management in St. Louis.Prospect operates like a mutual fund, investing in high-yield, high-risk assets like stocks, loans and bonds of companies through private equity buyouts, finance companies, debt pools like collateralized loan obligations, real estate investment trusts, aircraft leasing and even online loans. Its latest report lists 131 different holdings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Prospect’s fees, like those of many business development companies, are similar to those of private equity funds. Its external manager charges a 2 percent annual management fee on all assets plus an incentive fee of 20 percent of certain income gains — and administrative expenses — at the high end of the sector. For its fiscal year that ended in June, the Barry-owned manager received fees and expenses totaling $240 million, or about 3.5 percent of its total assets, according to the company’s annual report.Some analysts say Prospect has often paid out dividends above its earnings, and sold stock below its book value, both of which can hurt investors. Both moves have helped Prospect raise its assets tenfold since 2008, also increasing fees.“Dividends in excess of earnings aren’t really dividends, they are returns of investors’ capital, and they lead directly to falling net asset value per share,” David B. Golub, chief executive of Golub Capital BDC, a low-fee competitor, said about business development companies in general.Since 2007, Prospect’s net asset value per share, or book value, has fallen 33 percent to $10.17, partly because of the high dividends.AdvertisementSome analysts have also objected to various tactics they say allow Prospect to inflate income, increasing incentive fees due its manager. For example, Prospect charges above-market interest rates to some companies it controls and receives some of the interest in noncash debt securities that count toward current incentive fees — leaving shareholders at risk of nonpayment.Four Prospect companies pay interest of 20 percent or more on debt they owe Prospect — typically 10 percent in cash and 10 percent in noncash pay-in-kind debt, according to its reports.In an August call with a Prospect staff banker who questioned imposing such high rates on the companies, Mr. Barry described the interest payments as “a brand new road freshly paved to have net investment income come in to Prospect,” according to a record of the call. By contrast, he said, with an equity interest in the same company, “you get to walk across a minefield” before earning profits.The son of a partner at the law firm of Lord Day & Lord, Mr. Barry, who is in his mid-60s, had what he sometimes alludes to as a “silver spoon” upbringing, graduating from Phillips Exeter Academy, Princeton and Harvard Law School. He joined Prospect Capital Management in 1990 after stints at a law firm and two investment banks.Mr. Barry works mainly from his home in Riverside, Conn., often coming into Prospect headquarters near Bryant Park in Manhattan on Fridays. He generally conducts business remotely, via email and lengthy phone calls with groups of employees.Starting last summer, Prospect and other business development companies experienced a series of adverse events.In early 2014, Prospect suspended its stock and bond sales for a few months pending a review of its accounting by the Securities and Exchange Commission, which required Prospect to clarify the accounting for its owned subsidiaries.Business development company stocks were also hit last year when several big index providers dropped them, based on regulatory guidance requiring index mutual funds to reflect their hefty fees in the index funds’ own fees. This year, they fell further as concerns grew about energy exposure and rising future defaults.AdvertisementSome investors say the wide discounts to book value represent a good buying opportunity, especially with activist investors popping up. The whole business development sector is “on sale,” said Gregg T. Abella, an adviser at Investment Partners Asset Management in Metuchen, N.J. Prospect, he added, “looks cheap to me” based on its earnings, income and low energy exposure.In December 2014, Prospect said it would cut its dividend a second time. With its shares down 34 percent in the last 17 months, Prospect has curtailed new stock sales. As a result, growth of its assets slowed to 5 percent in its latest fiscal year from an annual rate of 58 percent over the previous five years.One reason for Prospect’s big discount to net-asset value, now 28 percent, is that some investors are skeptical of the value Prospect reports for some assets.Robert Dodd, a Raymond James analyst, said he had not had a buy rating on the stock since 2008. Given all the questions and unknowns, he said, “there is no price at which I would be a buyer of Prospect.”A version of this article appears in print on December 25, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Skepticism for Obscure Corner of Wall St.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.