AdvertisementSupported byBy Stacy CowleySanta’s reindeer had a relatively easy time of it, compared with their earthbound counterparts. While Dasher, Dancer and company put in some frantic hours of work Thursday night, the holiday season started in early November for Yukon, Blizzard, Tundra and their 17 herdmates at California Reindeer Rentals.For Diana Frieling, the company’s owner, the weeks before Christmas are a two-month sprint, packed with more than 50 holiday festivals, photo shoots, parades and other events. Nationwide, a few dozen businesses, mostly mom-and-pop operations, offer reindeer for hire, cramming nearly all of their annual income into the holiday season.Reindeer are cash cows at this time of year. Prices vary widely around the country, but a two-hour event booking with a pair of reindeer typically starts at around $1,000. Ms. Frieling’s deer have made appearances this season at holiday parties for Zynga and YouTube and are on view daily at the California Academy of Sciences in San Francisco.Like many reindeer ranchers, Ms. Frieling, 68, got into the business as a way to subsidize other projects. Her main vocation is Windswept Ranch, a farm in Tehachapi, Calif., where she shelters some 40 rescued animals, including donkeys, deer, zebras, goats, bison, pigs and a yak.“We started off with dogs and kittens, and it just kind of progressed,” she said of her eclectic menagerie. About 20 years ago, seeking a way to earn enough money to keep the ranch operating, she hit on the idea of raising and renting out reindeer. The revenue they bring in during the holidays covers most of the farm’s annual costs.Reindeer loom large in the cultural imagination, but people are often slightly shocked to encounter a live one, owners say.“I have a lot of adults pull me aside and whisper, ‘What are they really?’ ” said Mark Sopko, 46, the owner of Reindeer Magic and Miracles in Branchburg, N.J.They are really reindeer. Native to chilly places like the Arctic and parts of northern Europe, reindeer, close relatives of caribou, were imported to Alaska in the 1890s, and are now raised in domesticated herds in dozens of states. An industry trade group, the Reindeer Owners and Breeders Association, has about 140 members, nearly all of them small and independent.“It’s not a business; it’s a love thing,” said Mike Jablonski, the group’s president, who has 50 reindeer on his farm in Hamburg, N.Y. “No one is going to become a millionaire off reindeer. They’re very hard to raise.”Heartbreak is an inevitable part of the business. After a lifelong fascination with reindeer, Mr. Sopko, a veterinary dental technician, bought his first pair in 2012. Mr. Sopko calls the night they arrived — right before Christmas, naturally — the most magical day of his life. Rocket earned his name by tearing around his home field, while Fetch loved to carry around sticks to chase and chew.Mr. Sopko booked holiday events to offset the cost of keeping them, but this fall, both reindeer succumbed to a tick-borne disease. Devastated by their deaths, Mr. Sopko considered giving up on his tiny reindeer farm, but the allure of the creatures won out. He is starting over with two new reindeer, including a 6-month-old calf who likes to kick soccer balls.“He’s like a puppy with antlers,” Mr. Sopko said.Getting into the reindeer business generally requires a five- to six-figure financial outlay. The handful of breeders that sell animals typically charge $1,000 to $6,000 each, and owners say that food and veterinarian bills run about $3,000 annually per deer. Fencing, a barn or shelter, and fans to keep the reindeer cool in the summer, plus the electricity to run them, cost thousands more.Obtaining licenses and permits adds to the price. Most states regulate the possession and importation of reindeer, and some places ban them entirely. In South Carolina, even temporary exhibitions of reindeer are prohibited because of concerns about chronic wasting disease. Brett Witt, a spokesman for the state’s Department of Natural Resources, said Santa’s reindeer get a pass, “We welcome Father Christmas to the Palmetto State.”Many of those who run reindeer-based businesses say they were inspired to do so by their love of the holiday season. Vince Zarate, 64, an owner of Z Arch Barn Farm  in Easton, Pa., had his curiosity about owning reindeer piqued by the 2003 television movie “Stealing Christmas,” which features a Christmas shop with a live reindeer.“I saw those deer and wondered how you go about doing that,” he said. “I started doing research, and the harder it got, the more determined I got.” In 2012, after retiring from a career as a carpentry teacher, Mr. Zarate opened a Christmas tree farm and bought five reindeer to populate it. He now has a herd of 10, with three calves due in the spring.Reindeer raised around people tend to be docile and social, owners say, though the males can become aggressive during the fall mating season. They are the only deer species in which males and females grow antlers — a handy advantage for owners seeking the classic holiday look — but males often shed their horns in December.Ms. Frieling gets a feminist kick out of that tidbit. “Women do all the work, and we now have scientific evidence that it’s the girls pulling Santa’s sleigh,” she said.Because the reindeer business is heavily seasonal, most owners book two or three events a day to maximize earnings and accommodate as many clients as possible. Thanksgiving to Christmas is crunchtime, though winter festivals and other events keep some businesses busy through March.Aside from a few “Christmas in July” events, the spring and summer months tend to be slow. For a discount reindeer, try renting one in April. Although the industry got an unexpected stimulus from Disney. Thanks to the huge hit “Frozen,” which prominently features a playful reindeer named Sven, demand for rental reindeer at “Frozen”-themed parties has created a year-round moneymaker.One irony of the reindeer business, Mr. Zarate said, is that he is now so busy with bookings that he is working straight through his favorite time of the year. Ms. Frieling said she is often on the road for at least 14 hours a day, covering thousands of miles at events throughout California.“My family doesn’t celebrate Christmas until the middle of January, when our reindeer come home, but it’s great,” she said. “We get to celebrate with hundreds of thousands of people all over California. When a child is on the edge of not believing in Santa, the realization that reindeer are real translates into one more year of innocence and belief. I can’t think of anything a parent would want more for Christmas.”And Ms. Frieling has a tip for children who plan to leave snacks for Santa and his crew next year: graham crackers. Her reindeer go nuts for them.Advertisement