
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
DEC. 22, 2015
 This interview with César Melgoza, founder and chief executive of the business intelligence firm Geoscape, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant. Q. Tell me about your early influences.A. I was born in a city called Uruapan in the state of Michoacán, Mexico. I only lived there for less than a year, though, because my family decided to move to California, and we settled in a Central California agricultural community.My father, from the age of 17, had been part of the bracero program — the guest worker program during and after World War II — where young Mexican men helped harvest the crops and build the railroads. But my mother basically insisted that we all move north. Legally.So we actually grew up on a farm labor camp in the middle of California. It was a pretty big agribusiness ranch, growing all kinds of fruits and vegetables. There was an area for families and an area for single men, and there were eight of us in our family, living in this small place. We didn’t even have our own bathroom. We lived there until I was almost 9 years old, and then we moved to a small town nearby.AdvertisementObviously we were trying to get somewhere in the world. There were certain barriers that still existed, and a certain amount of discrimination. Some of that provided a little motivation to study more and do something to progress in life. So education was always a very strongly held value in my family.My parents didn’t have the benefit of a college education, but they always had a sense of self-respect and carried themselves well, and they wanted their children to be well spoken and prepared. They instilled in us a strong work ethic.Tell me about your college years.I got married young. I had my first child at 19, and 13 months later my second son was born. I was still in college. It was not easy. I had to work full time. I would go to school in the morning and then usually worked from about 3:30 in the afternoon until about 12:30 at night.I worked at a company that made the heads that read the information on hard disk drives. I was part of the quality control team, and then I became a supervisor when I was about 21.What are some key leadership lessons you’ve learned over the years?One thing I’ve learned along the way is that I know myself well enough to understand that I probably don’t communicate enough on a day-to-day basis. We all have our checklists of things we have to get done, and it’s easy to focus on that instead of talking to your employees about what the company’s up to, how things are going and giving them feedback.AdvertisementBecause I know that can happen, I’ve learned to overcommunicate during our regular staff meetings about strategy and why things are happening, so that everybody knows what’s going on.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The other thing I’ve learned is to listen more, both personally and professionally. I’m basically a guy who totally buys into the idea that old dogs can learn new tricks. I learn a lot from all of my children, who are 7, 10, 34 and 35. I really believe you can learn very valuable things from just about anybody. We all have blind spots. The question is, how many can you eliminate?I’ve also learned that a lot of times, innovation happens just by talking among ourselves at work. I’ve discovered, especially when it comes to technology development, that there’s a magic that happens when you start to think about a problem with a group of people and collaborate toward finding a solution.It’s amazing what you can come up with if you give yourself the time to think about it for a few minutes, just sit in the room, let the pregnant pauses happen, write on the wall, come up with stuff. It’s about giving people the opportunity to rise to the occasion.Pregnant pauses are really good. There’s something that happens there. When you give a problem some thinking time, it’s amazing what you can come up with. You just need to make people feel comfortable about having a conversation and thinking through a difficult problem.How do you hire? What questions do you ask? What qualities do you look for?I ask people what magazines and books they have read recently, and what they do in their spare time, to get a sense of what motivates them. It’s always a very personal conversation, but it tells me a lot. The question it answers for me is, are you investing in yourself?Everybody has choices about what they do with their spare time. Professionally, most of us have some time to invest in getting better at what we do. I’m trying to find out if this person cares enough about their own development to invest the time to make themselves better at something.Because after you graduate from college, that’s kind of the start, right? You still need to continue to learn about everything, and things are changing so rapidly. You have to keep up. And if you continue to hold yourself up to a high standard, then you will probably do things that make you better at that.What advice do you give to new college grads?The sooner you can establish a focus on what you want to do professionally, the better. The trick is to do something that you love because you’re going to do a much better job at it, and it won’t seem like work. If you can get to a place where you’re doing something that you love and you’re getting paid for it, that’s the destination.And everybody needs to have a sense of self-discipline. It’s not enough just to be intelligent. It’s much more important to know how to be willing to work hard. Hard work makes up for intelligence in a lot of ways. Not in all ways, but in a lot of ways. So you need to be willing to work hard and learn and hopefully do something that you like, because nobody wants to be in a job they don’t like.The Corner Office interview on Dec. 27, with César Melgoza, founder of a business intelligence firm, misstated the name of the firm. It is Geoscape, not Geospace.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on December 27, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Seeing Potential in Every Pause.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »