By BARRY MEIER and SYDNEY EMBERDEC. 27, 2015
Until a few weeks ago, Sheldon Adelson, the billionaire casino mogul and Republican party benefactor, was better known for suing newspapers than owning them.Mr. Adelson, the chairman of the Las Vegas Sands Corporation, has sued The Daily Mail, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal and a columnist for The Las Vegas Review-Journal for defamation.Now, Mr. Adelson controls The Review-Journal. His family secretly bought it this month through a shell company headed by an executive, Michael E. Schroeder, who declined to identify its owners when the deal was announced.It took just days for the Review-Journal reporters to unravel the mystery of the paper’s ownership, but the revelation has spawned a new round of mysteries and raised concerns about Mr. Adelson’s motivations in buying Nevada’s largest paper.AdvertisementAlso, while Mr. Adelson’s family was in talks to buy The Review-Journal, three of its reporters were asked to start monitoring three Nevada judges — one of whom is overseeing a lawsuit against Mr. Adelson. Subsequently, a small Connecticut paper owned by Mr. Schroeder, The New Britain Herald, published a critical article about the judge that appeared to use fabricated quotations and had the byline of a person who does not appear to exist.AdvertisementBillionaires buying newspapers is nothing new. In recent years, Jeffrey P. Bezos, the founder of Amazon, acquired The Washington Post and John Henry, a former commodities trader, purchased The Boston Globe. Media watchdogs routinely question whether new owners will use papers to advance their personal agendas, but both of those transactions have been beneficial for the publications.However, across Las Vegas — and inside the Review-Journal newsroom — there are heightened concerns about the paper’s direction.“The purchase of the Review-Journal signals a tectonic shift in the political landscape of Las Vegas and Nevada and has the potential to reverberate all the way to the White House,” the Review-Journal columnist John L. Smith wrote last week. Mr. Smith filed for bankruptcy in 2007 while defending himself in a libel lawsuit brought against him by Mr. Adelson, who eventually dropped the case.Mr. Adelson has already become a newspaper force in Israel, the country where his wife was born. In 2007, he started a free daily there, Israel Hayom, and has used it as a powerful weapon in support of the country’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu. Mr. Adelson added to his Israeli newspaper holdings last year when he bought a small religious publication, Makor Rishon. The Adelson Family Foundation has provided hundreds of thousands of dollars in financial support to JNS.org, a Jewish news service based in the United States, according to public records.Mr. Adelson’s family paid $140 million for The Review-Journal, a steep price given that The Review-Journal and a group of other publications was sold only nine months earlier for $102.5 million. Still, it is a relatively small sum for someone whose fortune is estimated at $23 billion.In a statement published last week on The Review-Journal’s front page, the Adelson family assured readers that they would run the paper fairly, invest in it and hire a reader’s advocate to scrutinize its operations. “We regard ourselves as stewards of this essential community institution,” the statement read.The statement did little to tamp down concerns. Last week, The Review-Journal’s editor resigned, expressing worry over Mr. Adelson’s ownership. Reporters say that corporate managers are closely editing articles about the deal and crucial details are being taken out. A veteran reporter at The Bristol Press, another Connecticut paper owned by Mr. Schroeder, announced his resignation on Thursday in a Facebook post, accusing Mr. Schroeder of “journalistic misconduct of epic proportions.”AdvertisementSome observers say that Mr. Adelson might use the Nevada paper to promote his political allies and protect his extensive gambling interests in Las Vegas, which include the Venetian and Palazzo hotels, and the adjoining Sands Expo convention center. His company also operates hotels and casinos in Bethlehem, Pa., Macau and Singapore.“I don’t think anyone thinks he is doing this to benefit the Las Vegas community or Clark County,” said Alan Deutschman, a professor of business journalism at the University of Nevada, Reno. “Everyone thinks this is in his self-interest.”Mr. Adelson declined requests to be interviewed for this article. Mr. Schroeder declined to comment when asked several questions.In a statement, a spokesman for Las Vegas Sands, Ronald Reese, defended Mr. Adelson’s lawsuits against journalists. “When careless reporting or malicious attacks impugn his reputation,” Mr. Reese said, “he has an obligation to the company’s shareholders and its 50,000 employees to set the record straight.” (The Daily Mail paid damages to Mr. Adelson and issued an apology; his lawsuit against The Wall Street Journal reporter is continuing.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Adelson’s interest in The Review-Journal, which has a circulation of 167,000, stretches back to February, when a company named New Media Investment Group bought the newspaper and several smaller publications for $102.5 million in cash. Soon after, Mr. Adelson’s family expressed an interest in The Review-Journal to New Media, a publicly traded affiliate of Fortress Investment Group, the large investment firm based in New York.By September, secret talks between the two sides were apparently advancing. Late that month, a Delaware limited liability company called News and Media Capital Group was formed that served as the shell company through which Mr. Adelson’s family acquired The Review-Journal. Nothing on that filing indicated its connection to Mr. Adelson. Instead, the only person on it was Mr. Schroeder, listed as the manager of the company.Events then took a strange turn. In early November, three reporters at The Review-Journal said they were instructed by the paper’s corporate managers to spend days observing three local judges and their courtroom behavior. One judge selected for monitoring was Elizabeth Gonzalez, who is handling a wrongful termination lawsuit filed in 2010 against Mr. Adelson and his casino company by Steven Jacobs, a former chief executive of its operations in Macau.About that same time, an executive of New Media Investment Group contacted the editor of The Sarasota Herald-Tribune, another newspaper it owns, and suggested that he send reporters to Las Vegas to investigate possible corruption among judges there. The editor of the Sarasota paper, Bill Church, said he refused to do so. Despite the reporters’ having filed 15,000 words on their courthouse reporting, The Review-Journal did not publish an article either.But then at the end of November, as the Adelson family purchase of The Review-Journal neared completion, Mr. Schroeder’s New Britain Herald ran an article about business courts that was sharply critical of Judge Gonzalez. The same article appeared in his other paper, The Bristol Press.AdvertisementThe article appeared under the byline “Edward Clarkin.” But two people quoted in the article said they never spoke to a person by that name and that quotations attributed to them were fabricated.Melanie Brown, a spokeswoman for Steve Arwood, the head of the Michigan Economic Development Corporation, said that Mr. Arwood’s quotation was either made up or cobbled together from public comments he had made. “He never did an interview with this publication,” or on the subject of business courts, she said.There is no Edward Clarkin living in Connecticut, according to public records. Mr. Clarkin has written five other articles — four restaurant reviews and a book review— all of them appearing in Connecticut papers controlled by Mr. Schroeder. The Review-Journal reported last week that Mr. Schroeder’s middle name was Edward, and his mother’s maiden name was Clarkin.Asked whether he was writing under the nom de plume Edward Clarkin, Mr. Schroeder declined to comment.Mr. Schroeder appears to have a connection to the Adelson family through Russel Pergament, the publisher of JNS.org, which syndicates articles from Mr. Adelson’s paper Israel Hayom in the United States. Mr. Schroeder and Mr. Pergament worked together at BostonNOW, a defunct free daily newspaper.Mr. Pergament could not immediately be reached for comment.To deal with the fallout from its Review-Journal purchase, the Adelsons have hired Mark Fabiani, a crisis communications specialist who worked in the Clinton White House and for the cyclist Lance Armstrong. Mr. Fabiani did not respond to inquiries about whether the issue of Nevada judges came up during sales talks.Michael E. Reed, chief executive of New Media Investment Group, the company that sold the paper, said in an email it “did nothing wrong or inappropriate with regard to this specific topic.” He said his company’s interest in judges was part of an investigative news project, and added that New Media, which will continue to manage The Review-Journal, had “never had a business or personal relationship” with Mr. Schroeder.On Christmas Day, Steve Collins, the Bristol Press reporter who quit amid accusations of journalistic misconduct by his paper’s publisher, Mr. Schroeder, received a $5,000 award from a nonprofit run by Jeremy Stone, son of the investigative journalist I.F. Stone. In an email, Mr. Stone, the president of the activist organization Catalytic Diplomacy, praised Mr. Collins for resigning.“Mr. Collins,” Mr. Stone wrote, “personifies what journalistic independence means and often requires.”An article on Monday about the purchase of The Las Vegas Review-Journal from the New Media Investment Group by the family of Sheldon Adelson, the Las Vegas casino owner, misstated the given name of the editor of The Sarasota Herald-Tribune, another newspaper owned by New Media. He is Bill Church, not Jim.Susan Beachy contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on December 28, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Questions on Direction of a Paper in Las Vegas.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.