AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel AbramsAs Gerry Cody, a senior design manager at Mattel, cheerfully loaded a live cricket into the driver’s seat of a new toy car, the cricket probably did not have time to wonder how it had gotten to this point.Mr. Cody explained how the company had consulted an entomologist for the first time in its history to develop a battery-operated racecar with a compartment for a cricket, whose movements “drive” the car — sometimes into walls and chairs.Mattel may be more closely associated with Barbies than bugs, but the racecar fits into Mattel’s efforts to prove that it can be as nimble and tech-focused as its competitors. After years of sagging sales, executives trot out the Bug Racer as one of the quirkier signs that the 70-year-old company is no longer your grandmother’s toymaker.“That’s a really good example of something that you feel like you’re taking a little bit of a risk,” said Susie Lecker, the executive vice president and chief brand officer of Toy Box, a new division of Mattel that developed the Bug Racer as part of its mandate to fast-track promising, experimental products. “That’s where I’m most comfortable, where it’s not the sure thing.”Toy Box’s 400-some employees represent just a fraction of Mattel’s 31,000-person work force, but the manufacturer is relying on the unit for some of the most technologically ambitious projects, including two of its more prominent items this holiday season: the interactive talking Hello Barbie doll and View-Master, a decades-old 3-D brand that Mattel reimagined as virtual reality goggles.“It may be a bit smaller, but it’s the engine that we’re counting on,” Christopher A. Sinclair, Mattel’s chief executive, said in an interview at the company’s headquarters in El Segundo, Calif.Mr. Sinclair took over after the abrupt resignation of his predecessor, Bryan G. Stockton, in January. He quickly started mending fences, importantly, with Disney, which had dropped Mattel as a partner for its Disney Princess dolls, one of its most lucrative licensing deals. And he built bridges to outside toy inventors in search of fresh ideas because, Mr. Sinclair said, the company had become too “insular.”“Disney was obviously, you know, a huge blow a year ago, but in many respects, we did it to ourselves,” Mr. Sinclair said, blaming Mattel for, in part, offering toys that competed with Disney Princess products. “But it wasn’t just Disney,” he said. “We had to go back to Universal and Warner and all the other folks we do business with and reboot, if you will, the Mattel way of doing things.”Disney, Warner Bros. and Universal Pictures issued statements praising their relationship with Mattel.Toys tied to movies and television shows are a huge part of Toy Box’s mandate, as Mattel looks to rev up its licensing business. That includes coming toys for well-known characters like the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles and new shows like Netflix’s “Dinotrux.”Although the hole left by Disney Princess may be enormous, Mattel has the rights to a number of other lucrative entertainment properties: Disney’s next “Toy Story” film, several of DC Comics’ female superheroes and the coming “Batman v. Superman: Dawn of Justice” movie. Mr. Sinclair is also confident in Mattel’s chances of winning the rights to Disney’s third installment of “Cars.”Investors have nevertheless expressed concerns about the company’s core business.That business includes Barbie and Fisher-Price, staples that have struggled in recent years to find a mainstream following. Last year, sales of Barbie to retailers declined 16 percent and Fisher-Price fell 13 percent. This year, though, there were some positive signs, including an increase in consumer sales in stores.The task of revamping Barbie has largely fallen to Richard Dickson, who returned to Mattel last year after spending several years as a top clothing company executive and now serves as Mattel’s president and chief operating officer.More apt to wear a vintage watch than a Timex, Mr. Dickson — a native New Yorker whose parents worked in retailing and fashion — has long straddled the worlds of consumer products and style. His office has a row of Barbies wearing what look like colorful fur coats, as if they are gearing up for a catwalk in the arctic. A framed black T-shirt that reads “The Same is Lame” leans against a wall.Demonstrating Barbie’s relevance in 2015 has meant balancing goals that seem at odds with one another: remain true to the doll’s roots, while avoiding the impression that she stands for a particular brand of beach-blond body dysmorphia. Barbie, as Mr. Dickson puts it, is “really about imaginative play, and not about body image.”Barbie’s makeover has meant new products — a Fashionistas line with a broad assortment of skin tones, eye color and facial structures and a Zendaya doll in the image of the African-American Disney Channel star Zendaya Coleman — but also a more streamlined marketing operation that plays up Barbie’s progressive side. A commercial for Moschino Barbie, for example, featured a boy playing with a Barbie probably for the first time in the company’s history. Another ad features little girls who “Imagine the Possibilities” after playing with Barbie— veterinarian, teacher, businesswoman — and has garnered nearly 20 million views online.The ads are a 180-degree turn from some of the less-empowering messages of Barbie’s past, like the talking Barbie who complained how “Math class is tough” that may be forever etched into the collective consciousness.But Mr. Dickson understands that making Barbie relevant does not just mean making her talk, she must also be part of the conversation.“Pop culturally, we’re getting Barbie back on the right track,” Mr. Dickson said.Ad spending has declined in dollar value this year, but it has increased sharply as a percentage of overall sales, according to Sean McGowan, an analyst with Oppenheimer and Company. “I think the message from this is that they went through a period where they thought they could get away with cutting the advertising,” Mr. McGowan said.Then there’s the $75 Hello Barbie, the WiFi-connected doll Mattel is promoting as one of the brand’s most innovative products in years. Hello Barbie’s speech recognition technology allows her to discuss potential career ambitions (Scuba instructor? Journalist?), ask for advice or have other interactive conversations using her more than 8,000 phrases. It hit store shelves in time for the Christmas season, but Mattel is still relying on a number of more traditional Barbie dolls and play sets, like the Barbie Dreamhouse and the Rock ’n Royals line.“Hello Barbie is their prototype car,” said Jim Silver, the editor of TTPM, a toy review website. Hello Barbie, Mr. Silver said, is more about proving what Mattel is capable of. “It’s to show that they’re doing cool things with the brand.”Produced in collaboration with the San Francisco-based company ToyTalk, Hello Barbie is also an example of how Mattel wants to revive its relationships with outside inventors. Toy Box’s options — exclusive agreements to develop products for a specified period — have about doubled since the division started in 2014.“Within a month, we had an option on the Bug Racer, which is very fast,” said Robert Schwartzman, the president of Pace Development Group, who created the idea with his business partner, Peter Williams.The pair did not even think of bringing their idea to Mattel when they met with the company last year. But after members of Toy Box described how they were looking to speed up the production of edgier products, Mr. Schwartzman pulled out a video on his iPad, and explained how sensors could steer the car based on an insect’s movements.“We were thinking, ‘Mattel doesn’t make cool toys,’” Mr. Schwartzman said. “‘They make beautiful toys and fun toys, but they don’t make edgy toys.’”The Bug Racer was on shelves within the year.Still, there were concerns that consumers would find the bug racer “creepy,” Ms. Lecker recalled. “This is connecting dots that you wouldn’t really think are connected: a bug driving a car,” she said.There were practical issues too: Even though crickets have a life span of only a few weeks and are often sold as iguana food, they had to be able to survive inside the Bug Racer. “We’ve done a ton of bug, insect research,” Mr. Cody said, pointing out the separate chamber for food. “We haven’t lost a cricket behind the wheel yet.”Advertisement