By THE NEW YORK TIMESDEC. 27, 2015
Three new reports will land Tuesday morning, indicating how the United States economy performed in the final months of 2015. At 8:30 a.m., the Census Bureau will report the latest data on the trade balance in November, with economists expecting a slight widening in the trade deficit.Although exports are rising, led by demand for aircraft from overseas buyers, imports are forecast to rise more, a trend likely to continue because of the strong dollar. At 9 a.m., the Standard & Poor’s/Case-Shiller survey of home prices will most likely show that average prices in October were up 5.5 percent from a year ago, in line with the overall trend for 2015. Although existing-home sales unexpectedly dropped in November, according to another report released last week, most economists think that was a temporary dip that was related to new government regulations.Finally, at 10 a.m., the Conference Board is expected to release its reading on consumer confidence in December. Economists are looking for the index to rise to 93.8, up from 90.4 in November, lifted by stronger hiring and falling gasoline prices. —Nelson D. SchwartzThe Labor Department is scheduled on Thursday to release data on new claims for unemployment insurance for the week ending Dec. 26. The job market has been fairly strong this year, with the unemployment rate at 5 percent, and experts expect the number to be line with the four-week moving average of 272,500, a healthy level in terms of the long-term trend for new claims. —Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisementFinancial markets on Thursday will end a volatile year of trading in the United States that was dominated by concerns about the Chinese economy and the future policy decisions of the Federal Reserve.AdvertisementThe benchmark Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index is on track to close the year at about the same place that it began, despite many significant moves at the end of the summer. This has been the worst year for American stocks since 2011, when the major indexes ended the year largely unchanged. Bond investors also struggled this year, as they prepared for the Fed’s decision, which came this month, to raise interest rates for the first time since 2006.European stocks were set to end a disappointing 2015 not far from where they started the year, after a spring rally fizzled on anxieties about the direction of the Federal Reserve’s interest-rate policy and concerns about global growth.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In London, the FTSE 100 index was poised to start the last trading week of 2015 nearly 5 percent lower for the year. Dollar-based investors in Europe would have lost money as the falling British pound and euro weighed on the value of their returns. And in Asia, China’s main Shanghai share index had a year to forget: A record rally ended in June with a sharp retreat. Despite a failed government attempt to prop up prices, stocks are down around 30 percent from their peak, even though they are still up about 12 percent this year. —Nathaniel Popper, David Jolly and Neil GoughFinancially challenged Puerto Rico faces another deadline, on Jan. 1, for payments on some of its $72 billion of debt. This time the payments amount to about $902 million, according to the Center for a New Economy, a nonpartisan research institute in San Juan. About a third of that is for general obligation bonds, which are constitutionally guaranteed in Puerto Rico, a United States commonwealth.It would be unlawful for Puerto Rico to skip such a payment outside of bankruptcy proceedings. Puerto Rico is barred from Chapter 9 bankruptcy protection, which would otherwise give it some flexibility to restructure its debts. So far, the island has managed to stay current on most of its obligations. But officials say they are running out of cash, and it is not clear that Puerto Rico will have enough money to pay what it owes on Jan. 1. The House of Representatives is expected to hold a hearing on Jan. 5 about the island’s financial problems. —Jane BornemeierThe slowdown in China’s huge manufacturing sector is expected to have continued throughout December. On Friday, the result of an official purchasing managers’ index, one of the earliest monthly glimpses at the state of the economy, is expected by economists to show a reading of 49.8.A reading above 50 indicates rising output, while one below 50 signals a contraction. For China, a reading below 50 would represent the fifth month in a row of falling manufacturing output — the longest such streak since the survey began in 2010. The results of a private-sector survey carried out by Markit, a financial data compiler, are due to be released on Jan. 4 and are expected to show that China’s manufacturing sector lost steam for a 10th month in a row. —Neil Gough A version of this article appears in print on December 28, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Week Ahead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.