By NELSON D. SCHWARTZDEC. 28, 2015
MINNEAPOLIS —  A nondescript conference room on the 38th floor of Minneapolis’s tallest skyscraper bears little resemblance to the brick clubhouse a few blocks away where members of the local elite have gathered for more than a century.But swap out the Oriental rugs and dark wood for a granite table and Aeron-style chairs, and it serves much the same function as the Minneapolis Club once did.Every Friday morning, 14 men and women who oversee some of the biggest companies, philanthropies and other institutions in Minneapolis, St. Paul and the surrounding area gather here over breakfast to quietly shape the region’s economic agenda.They form the so-called Working Team of the Itasca Project, a private civic initiative by 60 or so local leaders to further growth and development in the Twin Cities. Even more challenging, they also take on thorny issues that executives elsewhere tend to avoid, like economic disparities and racial discrimination.AdvertisementThink of it as The Establishment 2.0: more diverse than the nearly all-white and male establishment of old, to be sure, but every bit as powerful, and just as invisible when need be.Advertisement“Itasca operates behind the scenes,” said Tim Welsh, a senior partner at the consulting firm McKinsey & Company, which hosts the weekly breakfasts at its offices in the IDS Center here. “We all know each other but we are clearly not recognized as the people of Itasca.”Itasca’s impact is very real, however. And its consensus-oriented approach offers an alternative path at a time when politics nationally — and in many state capitols — seems hopelessly divided along partisan lines.While Itasca would just as soon stay out of the limelight, the levers of power in the Twin Cities are within easy reach. The guest list for the weekly breakfasts downtown includes the mayors of Minneapolis and St. Paul, as well as local legislators, school superintendents and university officials.So when a proposal to raise the gasoline tax in 2008 to help rebuild roads and transit systems was vetoed by the Republican governor at the time, Tim Pawlenty, phone calls from Itasca’s business leaders helped persuade enough Republican legislators to cross the aisle and override the veto.More recently, pressure from Itasca helped secure increased funding for the state’s college and university system. Itasca also spearheaded the creation of a new regional agency to attract companies looking to move or expand, as well as an effort to encourage procurement chiefs at local giants like Target and Xcel Energy to buy more goods and services locally.Itasca’s work is among the reasons that the Twin Cities region has emerged as an economic powerhouse. At 2.9 percent, the metropolitan area’s unemployment rate is well below the national level of 5 percent.At the same time, Minnesota has excelled in creating the kinds of higher-paid, knowledge- and skills-based jobs that provide entree into the middle class today. With that in mind, Itasca has drawn interest from leaders in American cities and abroad who would like to emulate its success.AdvertisementThat will not be easy. Part of what makes Itasca work is also what has helped Minnesota prosper: a long history of progressive and engaged business leaders, a largely homogeneous population with a low poverty rate and a consensus-driven Midwestern culture where egos are checked at the door, or at least not displayed too openly.“Sometimes it doesn’t serve anybody to take credit,” said Jennifer Ford Reedy, president of the Bush Foundation, a major philanthropy here, and a former McKinsey consultant who advised the Itasca group. “The people who need to know what Itasca is doing are the participants. That’s it.”In fact, Itasca has no building, budget or full-time staff, other than two McKinsey consultants who coordinate research and logistics for Itasca members.Business establishments, of course, are hardly unique to Minnesota. Most big cities — and many smaller towns — have chambers of commerce, not to mention economic development offices and the like.What makes Itasca unique, participants say, is a commitment to hard data and McKinsey-style analysis, as well as a willingness to depart from the script that drives many private sector lobbies.“We’re not just asking for lower taxes and less regulation,” said David Mortenson, the current chairman of the Itasca Project. “If we’re taking on education or income disparity as a group of business leaders, we want to be able to break some eggs.”That’s different from what happens in most other cities, said Mr. Mortenson, who earlier this year took over M. A. Mortenson, a nationwide construction firm founded by his grandfather.In Seattle, where Mr. Mortenson lived for nine years before moving back to Minneapolis in 2012, “most of the big tech companies viewed the city as a convenient location to house some of its workers,” he said. “They didn’t engage unless it affected their business.”Advertisement“Tech leaders are very philanthropic,” he added, “but they disconnect it from their business.”That has never been a problem here: The Pillsbury family and other members of the Minneapolis Chamber of Commerce helped pay for the construction of the railroad to move grain and flour in the 1800s. And the current governor of Minnesota, Mark Dayton, is a scion of the family that founded the Dayton Dry Goods Company, which grew into a retail giant and more recently morphed into Target Corporation.But by the beginning of the 21st century, that paternalistic, locally minded model of capitalism was fading, said James R. Campbell, a local banker who served in top positions at Norwest Banks and Wells Fargo before retiring in 2002.In 2001, Target rebranded the iconic Dayton’s store downtown as Marshall Field’s, the Chicago chain it had acquired in 1990. (Marshall Field’s was later sold to Macy’s.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Also in 2001, 3M, a pillar of the old business establishment based in St. Paul, brought in an outsider as chief executive for the first time in its 100-year history: W. James McNerney Jr. of General Electric.“We were concerned that this flyover land was not organized,” said Mr. Campbell, who oversaw the creation of Itasca in 2003 with other local business chiefs along with the leaders of major philanthropies. They took the name from Itasca State Park in northern Minnesota, where business leaders had met annually in the 1950s and 1960s to discuss issues facing the state.Existing groups like the Chamber of Commerce and the Minnesota Business Partnership were focused “on lower taxes and less regulation,” he said.“We were not addressing other issues like income disparities,” said Mr. Campbell, who served as chairman of Itasca from 2003 to 2008, and helped initiate the Working Team breakfasts on Friday mornings in conjunction with the McKnight Foundation and Mr. Welsh of McKinsey. “The chamber didn’t want to touch that.”Nor was the business community focused on areas that were crucial to long-term economic development, like transportation and infrastructure. “What were we going to do about job growth?” Mr. Campbell said he wondered at the time. “What about marketing ourselves?”AdvertisementThe question of self-promotion helped inspire the creation of Greater MSP, an economic development agency that has put the region on the radar of corporate site selectors while overcoming Minnesotans’ traditional reluctance to brag about themselves.A bigger test of Itasca’s reach — and of the willingness of the local establishment to go outside their comfort zone — came in 2008, when Governor Pawlenty vetoed a proposed increase in gas and sales taxes to fund $6.6 billion in transportation improvements.A rush-hour bridge collapse over the Mississippi River in downtown Minneapolis the year before had killed 13 people and galvanized worries about aging infrastructure nationwide. But there was fierce opposition to what would be the first gas tax increase in 20 years.At the same time, Governor Pawlenty was eyeing a White House run and had made a no-new-taxes pledge. None of the governor’s previous vetoes had been overridden, but Itasca’s members helped move the debate beyond the usual left-right dynamic.Mr. Campbell donned a hard hat and a fluorescent vest and stood with union leaders on the capitol steps to rally support. He and other business executives privately made the case to Republican legislators that traffic jams and long commutes were not good for employees or employers.In the end, six Republican legislators defied the governor, and the veto was overridden by a two-vote margin.“I can’t overstate the importance of the Itasca Project leadership on the transportation issue,” said Chris Coleman, the mayor of St. Paul. “There’s no question it changed the trajectory of the debate.”While the case for better infrastructure is straightforward, other Itasca initiatives will take much longer to show concrete results. One major focus of the group is income inequality, as well as the high dropout and unemployment rates among minorities.AdvertisementThe gap between the refined atmosphere at the McKinsey aerie and the problems in local neighborhoods can be awkward even for people with the best of intentions. In fact, while Itasca leaders talk up the importance of diversity, minorities are conspicuously absent from the Working Team. (They are much better represented within the larger Itasca membership.)Social issues may be less amenable to business-sector solutions than crumbling roads and bridges, but that has not stopped Itasca from pushing for McKinsey-style benchmarks to measure the performance of local public schools.The group is also spearheading a new effort to better equip the state’s two- and four-year college systems to produce graduates with the skills that today’s employers need.“The research they’ve done on education and hiring has really influenced my agenda,” said Betsy Hodges, the mayor of Minneapolis. “It puts wind in our sails to know that the business community thinks these issues are important.”As might be expected from boosters whose job it is to promote economic growth and talk up the Twin Cities’ appeal, many Itasca participants express confidence that their project could be replicated elsewhere. Mr. Campbell, though, is less sure.“My answer is maybe,” he said. “There’s a unique willingness to trust each other here. It’s kind of in our blood.”A version of this article appears in print on December 29, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: They’re in the Room Where It Happens.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.