AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Kevin AllisonJames Moffett is riding into the sunset. Mr. Moffett, Freeport-McMoRan’s longtime leader, is resigning as executive chairman of the $9 billion copper, gold and petroleum company facing pressure from the activist investor Carl C. Icahn. It’s a needed step to restore confidence after faux pas including an ill-timed, cozy-looking 2012 oil deal. Mr. Moffett’s replacement, though, faces serious challenges.The departing chairman casts a long shadow. Mr. Moffett helped found McMoRan Oil & Gas in 1969 before merging it with Freeport Minerals in 1981 and eventually turning it into one of the world’s leading copper and gold producers. The sudden end to his long reign, coupled with another swing lower in commodity prices, may explain the more than 8 percent drop in Freeport’s share price on Monday.That, though, looks like an overreaction. Freeport’s shares have plunged around 80 percent since the company struck a pair of questionable oil deals in late 2012. The acquisitions of Plains Exploration & Production and McMoRan Exploration for a combined $20 billion including debt were not only poorly timed, given the subsequent collapse in crude prices. They also raised serious governance questions: Mr. Moffett ran and partly owned McMoRan, while Plains’s boss, James Flores, sat on McMoRan’s board at the time. In January, Freeport agreed to pay $138 million to settle a lawsuit brought by investors asserting conflicts of interest.It took the arrival of Mr. Icahn to usher in more serious change. He has already had success in the sector: In 2012 he started agitating for management change at Chesapeake Energy, another troubled resources company. Its larger-than-life founder Aubrey McClendon was gone within a year.The activist investor revealed his Freeport stake in August this year. By October, the company announced it was dismantling its three-member office of the chairman — comprising Mr. Moffett, Mr. Flores and the chief executive, Richard Adkerson — and considering strategic alternatives for its oil and gas business.Monday’s shake-up is another welcome sign of a newly assertive board. The new nonexecutive chairman, Gerald J. Ford, previously the lead independent director, has his work cut out to get the company in shape for lower commodity prices. And he’s not completely free of Mr. Moffett, who will be chairman emeritus and stay on as a consultant to the board for a time, potentially complicating efforts at a truly clean break. Over all, though, the changes are positive for Freeport shareholders.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement