AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robert CyranValeant Pharmaceuticals’ latest fix reinforces its challenges.The drug company has appointed three executives to take the reins while its chief executive, J. Michael Pearson, is on medical leave, and three board members to oversee and guide them. The double triumvirate shows how reliant on one man Valeant has become.Mr. Pearson, who has been hospitalized with a serious case of pneumonia, is the architect of the company’s serial acquisitions strategy. This business model and Mr. Pearson’s leadership have come under intense scrutiny. Critics have attacked the company’s accounting, its stifling $30 billion debt load and its price increases on acquired drugs. As a result, Valeant’s market capitalization has plummeted by 60 percent since August. This loss of faith by investors has forced the company to switch to integrating businesses, instead of buying new ones, and paying off debt.The company’s prompt action in addressing Mr. Pearson’s illness by disclosing and appointing interim leadership is commendable. And there’s a good chance Mr. Pearson could be back shortly. But the structure is convoluted.The general counsel, Robert Chai-Onn; the chairman; Ari Kellen; and the chief financial officer, Robert Rosiello, will share management responsibilities in a newly created office of the chief executive. The board has also created a committee to “oversee and support” the office of the C.E.O. This, too, comprises three members: Robert Ingram, the lead independent director; Mason Morfit, president of the big stakeholder ValueAct Capital; and Howard Schiller, the former chief financial officer.The company says this reflects Valeant’s nontraditional organizational philosophy. It relies on what it says is a deep bench of qualified executives working in areas of expertise rather than a traditional hierarchy with roles such as a chief operating officer. Mr. Chai-Onn has been at Valeant for a decade; Mr. Rosiello advised the company for eight years before joining the firm as finance boss. Moreover, the additional board oversight could augur better corporate governance if it leads to the company’s eventual separation of the roles of chairman and chief executive.Investors are more worried that this structure reflects the fact Mr. Pearson can’t be replaced easily, and increases the risk of executive and board infighting. These fears sent the stock down 10 percent Monday morning. More turmoil is the last thing Valeant needs.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement