By LIZ MOYERDEC. 28, 2015
Initial public offerings by companies based in the United States sputtered out in December.So far this month, there have not been any such stock market debuts, according to Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ, the first month this has happened since September 2011. There have been just three I.P.O.s in the United States market at all in December, not including closed-end funds. The biggest was the $462 million offering by Atlassian Corporation, an Australian-based software company.December’s slump in activity caps a disappointing year in general for I.P.O.s after two consecutive banner years, Renaissance Capital says. There were 169 offerings this year that raised $30 billion, a six-year low. Things had been looking more positive until August, when volatile markets brought new offerings to a virtual halt.In terms of I.P.O.s by United States companies, new issues dropped by nearly 40 percent in the second half of the year, according to S&P Capital IQ. There were 81 offerings through June this year, raising $15.3 billion. After that, there have been 49, raising $10 billion. First Data Corporation’s $2.56 billion debut in October accounted for a quarter of the proceeds raised in the second half of the year.Tech company I.P.O. activity in 2015 was the lowest since 2009, with only 23 offerings raising $4.2 billion, according to Renaissance Capital.AdvertisementThe volatile markets of late summer and falling energy prices helped cast a pall on activity and put pressure on the shares of seven of the 10 largest I.P.O.s of the year. Tallgrass Energy, which had a $1.2 billion offering in May, is trading 49 percent below its offering price. Columbia Pipeline Partners, whose $1 billion offering was in February, is down 23.9 percent. TerraForm Global, which had a $675 million offering in July, is down 63 percent, according to S&P Capital IQ.AdvertisementFirst Data, which had the biggest transaction of the year, is trading 3.37 percent above its offering price.Fitbit Inc. and TransUnion are bright spots among the top 10 United States listings, with Fitbit trading up 44.5 percent and TransUnion up 24 percent, according to S&P Capital IQ.Heading into 2016, some 48 I.P.O.s were filed in the last 90 days, looking to raise $11 billion. They include a planned $1.6 billion offering by the grocery store operator Albertsons, a $1 billion offering by the Spanish-language media company Univision and a $1 billion offering by Neiman Marcus Group, the luxury department store company, though weak quarterly results at Neiman Marcus could delay an offering, according to Renaissance Capital.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.