
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

DEC. 28, 2015
White-collar defendants seem to be emerging as the new media stars, generating publicity sometimes rivaling that of social phenomena like the Kardashians.For example, Martin Shkreli, the small-time hedge fund manager and pharmaceutical company executive, was featured in front-page headlines for his arrest on fraud charges only weeks after a wave of negative publicity for increasing sharply the price of old patent drugs. In a new twist, rather than remain silent in the face of criminal charges, Mr. Shkreli has taken to social media to proclaim his innocence, a tactic The New York Times noted was something defense lawyers believe can be highly risky.As athletes and movie stars have found, social media outlets like Twitter and Facebook let one connect directly with the public while bypassing the close questions asked by the traditional media. Rather than hide behind a phalanx of high-priced lawyers with nary a word emerging, we may see more defendants act like Mr. Shkreli by offering themselves to the public to counter the bully pulpit used by prosecutors like Loretta Lynch, the United States attorney general, and Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, to announce their latest cases with great fanfare.Beyond the publicity, the past year brought its usual array of developments in white-collar crime that continue to make this one of the more fascinating areas of the law. Here are a few to watch play out in the coming year:Daily Fantasy Sports There may be no more uninteresting segue in a conversation than, “He’s on my fantasy team.” But the two leading providers of fantasy sports contests, DraftKings and FanDuel, have made themselves ubiquitous with heavy advertising and tie-ins with the leading professional sports leagues.AdvertisementNow come the legal challenges because daily fantasy sports is offered as something akin to a lottery with the prospect of quick riches based on a few picks, which any winner will proclaim is an exercise of skill even though there is a healthy dose of luck. The attorneys general in New York, Illinois, and Nevada have issued opinions finding that these contests are a form of gambling, and therefore subject to prohibitions under state law.AdvertisementThere have not been any criminal prosecutions related to daily fantasy sports yet, although Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York attorney general, filed a lawsuit seeking an injunction to prevent DraftKings and FanDuel from allowing residents to participate. A New York State Court judge agreed, but an appeals court issued a stay that allowed the companies to continue to operate until at least next Monday while it reviews the case — conveniently coming after the end of the N.F.L. regular season.In one of the Republican presidential debates, when the issue was raised about government regulation of daily fantasy sports, Governor Chris Christie of New Jersey criticized the question, saying “enough on fantasy football. Let people play, who cares?” Like it or not, it is something that a lot of people who play these games do care about. Leaving the issue to the states to decide whether the contests constitute illegal gambling would mean a hodgepodge of regulations that could effectively drive the companies out of business.Given the popularity of daily fantasy sports, we may well see something emerge from Congress on the subject if DraftKings and FanDuel get shut out of major markets like New York and Chicago. Their efforts to remain legal will be aided if the professional leagues throw their weight behind an effort to preserve something that is both appealing to fans and potentially quite lucrative for teams.The Feinberg Solution When a company faces a potentially disastrous situation in which a number of consumers and businesses have been harmed, whether economically or physically, there has emerged a new means to deal with the fallout. The ingredients include issuing multiple apologies, especially when called before Congress, and then hiring Kenneth R. Feinberg, who is provided with a virtual blank check to settle claims — voilà, the Feinberg Solution.Volkswagen is the latest company to follow this path in response to its use of software intended to evade pollution emission standards in the United States that have exposed it to billions of dollars of penalties. Mr. Feinberg’s appointment is an important signal that Volkswagen is serious about dealing with the issue, a sharp turn from its initial response in which a few engineers were blamed for what its former chief executive called “irregularities.”Mr. Feinberg has established a sterling reputation through his work to help victims of the Sept. 11 attacks and the Boston Marathon bombing. He has since come to the rescue for BP in response to the gulf oil spill by distributing a $20 billion fund, and General Motors gave him carte blanche to settle injury claims related to defective ignition switches, even allowing payments in cases that had already settled or would have been blocked by the company’s 2009 bankruptcy. The Feinberg Solution provides significant public relations cover because a company can defer all inquiries to the program he develops.AdvertisementThe approach taken by the Takata Corporation over claims that its airbags were defective provided an interesting counterpoint to how Volkswagen responded. Takata has not tried to settle claims about its product, even as the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration identified an eighth death caused by a rupture of an airbag inflater. Will we see whether the company might offer up the Feinberg Solution, or a reasonable facsimile, in 2016.Spoofing Spoofing almost sounds like a party game in which one person tries to get others to guess wrong by pretending to do one thing while engaging in the opposite. But when it comes to the securities and commodities markets, putting out orders to mislead other traders into thinking that there is more activity than really exists so you can make trades on the other side can be a crime.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Justice Department obtained a conviction in the first trial of a defendant, Michael Coscia, for violating the anti-spoofing law adopted as part of the Dodd-Frank Act that prohibits “bidding or offering with the intent to cancel the bid or offer before execution.” The jury returned its guilty verdict after deliberating for only one hour, concluding that he engaged in spoofing through an algorithm that entered in a high volume of orders that were canceled within 400 milliseconds, the equivalent of a blink of the eye.As the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission pursue more spoofing cases, the message to high frequency trading firms is to tread carefully in how they use orders that will go unfilled to mask their true intentions. The law does not say how many orders have to be canceled to show spoofing, and trading strategies that generate a high volume of canceled orders will be closely scrutinized.S.E.C. Administrative Hearings The Dodd-Frank Act gave the S.E.C. the choice of pursuing most cases in a federal court or before one of its in-house judges in an administrative proceeding. In a prime example of “be careful what you wish for,” the agency’s decision to route more cases through administrative proceedings, including complex fraud and insider trading charges, provoked a powerful backlash that may change significantly how it pursues cases in the future.Filing charges in a federal court provides a defendant with much more extensive rights to discover evidence through depositions and subpoenas, along with the opportunity to have a jury decide the case. An administrative proceeding is much more streamlined, with the current rules requiring the hearing to begin within four months and restricting the evidence for the most part to what the S.E.C.’s staff gathered in its investigation.This purported “uneven playing field” resulted in a number of defendants going into court in 2015 to challenge the procedures. The one claim that has gained traction before federal judges in Atlanta and New York is that the in-house judges were not properly appointed under the Constitution, and therefore the entire proceeding was improper. Those cases are on appeal, along with others in which the agency was victorious in putting off challenges to how administrative proceedings operate until the appeal of an initial decision goes through the S.E.C.’s internal review process.As different federal appeals courts consider these challenges in the next few months, there is a looming possibility of conflicting decisions, which would in all likelihood require the Supreme Court to resolve the split. If that were to happen, it would probably not be until 2017 that there would be a resolution regarding the propriety of administrative proceedings.In the meantime, Congress has started paying attention to the use of in-house judges amid claims of unfairness, and the S.E.C. has proposed rules to respond to criticisms that administrative proceedings fall short of providing a fair forum. There are sure to be substantial changes in how the S.E.C. pursues cases emerging in the coming months.AdvertisementInsider Trading There is no more hardy perennial in the garden of white-collar crime than insider trading. I started writing the White Collar Watch just a few weeks after the arrest of Raj Rajaratnam and others in October 2009 for trading on material nonpublic information, and insider trading remains in the news even as defendants serve long sentences for violations.The decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan in December 2014 in United States v. Newman upset the long run of successful prosecutions by Mr. Bharara’s office, resulting in the dismissal of charges against a number of defendants. The opinion has made it more difficult for prosecutors and the S.E.C. to pursue cases against those who receive inside information, called tippees.A brief filed with the Supreme Court seeking further review of the Newman case by Donald B. Verrilli Jr., the solicitor general, asserted that opinion would “hurt market participants, disadvantage scrupulous market analysts and impair the government’s ability to protect the fairness and integrity of the securities markets.” Despite such claims of impending doom, the court rejected the Justice Department’s request to review the lower court’s decision, meaning that the status of insider trading law will be in flux as judges try to figure out how far the Newman decision’s reasoning should be applied.There is no way of measuring how much of an effect the Newman case will have because prosecutors and the S.E.C. do not make public announcements about the charges they decide not to file. Suffice to say that the case has caused its share of consternation, and the next year will start to provide an answer about whether the decision prompts a major reordering of cases involving tippees or becomes little more than a speed bump on the road to pursuing charges for misuse of inside information.Wishing everyone a happy and prosperous New Year!We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »