
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

DEC. 29, 2015
Carl C. Icahn’s Pep Boys fight can go another round.The auto parts chain is spurning the Japanese tire maker Bridgestone in favor of a sweetened $1 billion offer from Mr. Icahn, the raider-turned-activist, after several rounds of back and forth. But shareholders seem to be betting that Bridgestone has the financial wherewithal to punch its way to a higher price.The frenzy started when the Tokyo-based Bridgestone struck an all-cash deal in October to acquire Pep Boys for $15 a share – part of a wider trend of Japanese companies looking for deals to expand outside their moribund home market. In December, Icahn Enterprises unveiled a $15.50-a-share counterbid that was later matched by the tire maker. Bridgestone was forced to raise its offer yet again, to $17 a share, after Icahn Enterprises improved its initial proposal.Mr. Icahn’s latest salvo of $18.50 a share values Pep Boys at $1 billion, some 52 percent more than it was worth before the initial Bridgestone pact and double where the company was trading before speculation arose in May that it might be up for sale. Pep Boys stock promptly jumped on Tuesday above the new price to $18.80, suggesting investors anticipate another raise.That’s plausible. Bridgestone had around $500 million of net cash on its balance sheet as of September. Adding an extra $100 million or so to its current offer would still leave the company with a negligible ratio of debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, assuming it were to borrow to pay for the entire deal.Mr. Icahn has suggested that he is willing to pay even more if necessary. Both bidders may anticipate substantial cost savings -- Bridgestone from merging Pep Boys’ service centers with its existing network of tire shops in the United States, and Mr. Icahn from combining it with Auto Plus, a rival car parts dealer he already owns.In the current accommodative merger market, this battle between a deep-pocketed strategic bidder and a master financial mechanic may not be over yet.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »