
DEC. 30, 2015

Over the course of four days in 2005 and 2006, Bill Cosby answered questions posed to him by a lawyer for a woman, Andrea Constand, who said Mr. Cosby had drugged and molested her. The following is an excerpt.
Related Article

Q. Now, I asked you that time can you tell me without regard to any statements what you recall of the night in which you gave the pills to Andrea.A. Yes, you did.Q. Can you tell me?A. Yes.Q. Please do.A. Andrea came to the house. I called her. She came in through the kitchen door. She sat down. I sat
down. We talked. We talked about Temple University. We talked about her position. And then I went upstairs and I got three pills. I brought them down. They are the equivalent of one and a half. The reason why I gave them and offered them to Andrea, which she took after examining them, was because she was talking about stress, her neck, maybe  even her shoulders. I'm not sure. Her neck. I talked to her about relaxation. 

I talked to her about her head and how she had to try and think. We sat for 15 or 20 minutes talking. I then said, let's go into the living room. We went into the living room, which is the first living room, which is the opposite of the last two encounters. I motioned for her to sit. She said she had to go to the bathroom. She went to the bathroom, which is about a 54 step walk maybe. 

She came back. I asked her to have a sit down on the sofa. We were still talking. But then we began to neck and we began to touch and we began to feel and kiss and kiss back. I then opened my top and I lifted up what was sort of like a fishing net. I don't know what the sweater was. Then I lifted her bra up so our skin could touch. We rubbed. We kissed. I stopped. 

I moved back to the sofa, coming back in a position. She's on top of me. I place my knee between her legs. She's up. We kiss. I hold her. She hugs. I move her to the position of down. She goes with me down. I am behind her. I have this arm, her neck.Q. Indicating your left arm?A. Left arm. Her neck is there and her head. There's a pillow, which is a pillow that goes with the decoration of the sofa, it's not a bedroom pillow. I am behind her. We are what would be called in a spooning position. My face is right on the back of her head, around her ear. 

I go inside of her pants. She touches me. It's awkward. It's uncomfortable for her. She pulls her hand -- I don't know if she got tired or what. She then took her hand and put it on top of my hand to push it in further. I move my fingers. I do not talk. She doesn't talk. But she makes a sound which I feel was an orgasm and she was wet. She was wet when I went in. 

She relaxed her hand after pressing it during her sound. I relax. I pull my hand out after a wait of a while. I don't say anything. I then make a move to get out. She moves back. She now has her arm like so. Her left arm out. I sit between her torso and her thighs. I sit there and I ask her to please take a nap. Please take a nap. 

I refer to moving eyeballs under the lids. This is an old conversation that we have had about the fact that she has said she has trouble sleeping. That her eyeballs move under the lids, that they move under the lids. She has trouble sleeping. I asked her to now try to go to sleep. Go to sleep.  

I go upstairs. I set my alarm clock for a time, I don't know what. But it's going to be dark so she can leave. I wake up an hour before the alarm clock goes off. I hit it. I come down the steps quietly I believe and I look and she is awake. I said in a sort of chastising way, I thought you were going to go to sleep. Really believing that I would have to wake her up. She says no. She sits up and we then go to the kitchen. 

I offer her a blueberry muffin on a plate. She takes it. I offer her tea, she agrees. I go into the cappuccino room, I make tea for her, Red Zinger, she says she likes it. She's had it before. Bring it back, pour tea. She sits and we talk. Not a lot of talk, but we talked. 

She is not asking me a darn thing in a negative. She's giving no viewpoint of anything negative having happened to her. And I sat there and I watched her eat the muffin. I don't think she ate all of it. She then wrapped it up, didn't finish all of the tea. By the way, she sat fully in the chair. She got up. I got up with her. Opened the door. She went out through the second door to the car, got in the car and drove away. Q. Now, you said I went up and got three pills. Can you describe these three pills for me?A. They are the equivalent of one and a half decongestant Benadryl.Q. What are the three pills?A. Benadryl.Q. Why do you say they're the equivalent of one and a half?A. Because they were broken.Q. What color were they?A. Blue.Q. Are you saying that you broke the Benadryl?A. Yes.Q. When did you do that?A. Upstairs.Q. Why?A. Because sometimes I would rather take them small because I don't know if the full pill will look like something different to her from the one that is in half.Q. What do you mean by that?A. I mean, if I break it, it looks like three of the same.Q. What shape are they?A. Oblong.Q. Did you tell her they were Benadryl?A. No.Q. Why not?A. Just didn't think about it.Q. Now, what effect did they have on her?A. Well, obviously not the effect I wanted.Q. What effect did you want?A. I wanted her to be comfortable enough to relax and go to sleep after we had had our necking session.Q. What effect did they have on her?A. She didn't go to sleep.Q. She didn't go to sleep while you were downstairs?A. When I came downstairs, she was awake.Q. How long were you upstairs?A. I don't know. Maybe two hours or something.Q. Do you know if she slept during those two hours?A. I don't.Q. What made you decide to give her one and a half pills?A. Because Andrea is about the same size I am, not in weight, former athlete. I take two.



      Advertisement