AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieJamie Dimon has generated his fair share of controversy as the boss of JPMorgan Chase. But he marks 10 years running the New York bank on Thursday having fashioned an institution with some of the leading results in the business — and in a strong position to outperform competitors for another decade.Avoiding the worst of the financial crisis was Mr. Dimon’s key achievement. By ditching the bank’s structured investment vehicle in 2004 and reducing its presence in subprime mortgages and collateralized debt obligations, Mr. Dimon sidestepped the messes that required bailouts for Citigroup and Bank of America.Consequently, JPMorgan was able to invest in new branches and technology, including the introduction of new payments systems. It also has taken stakes in emerging platforms like OnDeck in lending, and Square in payments.The crisis elevated Mr. Dimon as an unofficial spokesman to complain about its aftermath. He called the 2008 bank bailout the “TARP baby” and hounded Ben Bernanke, chairman of the Federal Reserve at that time, and his Canadian counterpart Mark Carney, now governor of the Bank of England, about the effects of new regulations. Virtually nobody else had the authority to do so.That changed in 2012 when a $6 billion trading loss called into question the bank’s risk-management skills. Within two years, JPMorgan submitted to a $13 billion settlement with state and federal agencies in the United States over bad precrisis mortgages — many sold by Bear Stearns and Washington Mutual, which Mr. Dimon snagged in 2008.Shareholders stuck by him, twice voting against stripping him of the chairman title. It helped that JPMorgan’s underlying business remained solid, unlike at Citigroup and Bank of America: Years after the crisis, neither is covering its cost of capital.JPMorgan, legal costs aside, has routinely bested that since the crisis. Of its larger rivals, only Wells Fargo does better. Wells Fargo, based in San Francisco, is now the largest bank by market value and has also given shareholders a slightly better total return over Mr. Dimon’s tenure at JPMorgan — 130 percent to JPMorgan’s 117 percent.JPMorgan and Mr. Dimon, who also battled cancer a year ago, still face challenges. An 11 percent return on equity is hardly stellar. Slow economic growth often comes with low margins. And regulation shows no signs of loosening. Yet as bank bosses go, 10 years on, Mr. Dimon is hard to beat.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement