By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDOCT. 7, 2015
It’s unusual to have the fate of a $104 billion takeover campaign rest in the hands of one family. But in the case of SABMiller, its future lies in part with a wealthy Colombian clan that is one of its biggest shareholders.That would be the Santo Domingo family, whose immense wealth has been tied to the canny way it came to dominate that country’s beer market. And a shrewdly constructed deal to sell their company to SABMiller a decade ago has now given it an outsize role in determining whether Anheuser-Busch InBev’s acquisition of the brewer will succeed.As of now, the family controls a roughly 14 percent stake, putting it behind only the tobacco giant Altria, which owns 27 percent. Yet the two have diverged in their responses to Anheuser’s latest takeover offer of roughly £42.15 a share.While Altria has declared that it is happy with Anheuser’s bid, the Santo Domingos, who hold two seats on the SABMiller board, have sided with the company in fending off the bigger brewer’s advances.AdvertisementPeople briefed on the negotiations, who were not authorized to speak publicly, conceded that the Colombian family holds no small amount of influence in that situation. In fact, Anheuser’s offer — in which 41 percent of SABMiller’s shareholders could take special unlisted shares instead of cash, corresponding precisely with the combined stakes of Altria and the Santo Domingos — was crafted with an eye toward wooing those two.AdvertisementBoth shareholders gained their stakes years ago through stock swaps, potentially putting them on the hook for huge tax bills if they sold their shares for cash.Ending up as a possible fulcrum in a merger dance between the world’s two biggest beer giants is only the latest twist for the Santo Domingos, who over decades have amassed billions of dollars and an outsize presence in Colombia through savvy wheeling and dealing.The family traces its rise to its patriarch, Julio Mario Santo Domingo, the son of a successful banker who parlayed his family’s connections into his own successes. (He died in 2011.) There was Caracol, the Colombian television network he controlled. Then there was El Espectador, Colombia’s oldest newspaper, which he owned for four years.And there was Avianca, an airline that he sold to the Brazilian entrepreneur Germán Efromovich in 2004.But the crown jewel has always been Grupo Empresarial Bavaria, which became the second-biggest brewer in South America with brands like Poker, Costena and Aguila dominating markets in Colombia, Peru and Ecuador. (A top rival was AmBev of Brazil, which went on to become a key part of what is now Anheuser.)“There are few countries in the world in which an individual came to have so many tentacles,” Semana, a Colombian magazine, once wrote of the elder Mr. Santo Domingo.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bavaria’s imposing presence in the fast-growing South American market drew a battle between SABMiller and Heineken, culminating with SABMiller’s $5.5 billion takeover of the Santo Domingos’ company in 2005. Unusually, the deal involved the European brewer paying cash to Bavaria’s minority shareholders — giving the family a $3.5 billion stake that has since quadrupled in value.“We married for beauty, not for money,” Mr. Santo Domingo said in 2005.Along the way, Mr. Santo Domingo and his clan gained prominence for more than their business successes. The patriarch cultivated a playboy image, drawing comparisons to old Hollywood stars as he swanned through social circles. His two marriages were each to South American socialites.AdvertisementHe befriended the likes of the author Gabriel García Márquez. And he served as Colombia’s first ambassador to China, under then-president Julio Turbay.And while Mr. Santo Domingo’s rise was inexorably tied to his home country, the billionaire himself spent much of his later years in New York City. He and his second wife, Beatrice, lived in 740 Park Avenue, one of Manhattan’s elite addresses, counting fellow billionaires David Koch and Stephen A. Schwarzman as neighbors.That social prominence has carried over to the younger generation as well. One of Mr. Santo Domingo’s daughters-in-law, Lauren, is a prominent fixture of the fashion set in New York City, with her wedding featured in Vogue.But the future of the clan’s wealth likely lies with the two members who sit on the SABMiller board: the elder Mr. Santo Domingo’s son Alejandro and Carlos Pérez Davila, Alejandro’s cousin.The family is drawing upon the counsel of advisers, including law firms in the United States and Britain, as it weighs its option. But a person close to the SABMiller board insisted that for now, the clan is aligned with the company.In an awkward moment, Anheuser first said on Wednesday that it expected to gain the support of the Santo Domingos, only to later concede that it had not. But in a conference call, the brewer’s chief executive, Carlos Brito, acknowledged their importance.“There is no transaction without them,” Mr. Brito said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.