AdvertisementSupported byBy Nelson D. SchwartzBetting the local newspaper business still has a profitable future, Gannett said on Wednesday that it would acquire the Journal Media Group, publisher of The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel and 14 other dailies, for $280 million. Gannett will pay $12 a share for the Milwaukee-based company, whose other holdings include newspapers in Memphis, Knoxville, Tenn., and Naples, Fla., well above the $7 to $8 level its stock had been at in recent weeks. “Gannett is doubling down on newspapers,” said Ken Doctor, a media analyst. “They paid what they needed to pay and they are smart about the assets they want and clustering geographically.” The media business has been convulsed by deals in recent years, with many companies shedding newspapers and magazines, and focusing on faster-growing assets.Gannett was split into two companies in June, with Gannett retaining the newspapers and Tegna, a new company, owning faster-growing TV stations. Time Warner spun off its publishing assets including Time and Fortune into Time Inc. in 2014, and the Tribune Company, owner of The Chicago Tribune and The Los Angeles Times, is also splitting into separate entities.Journal Media, which was carved out of E.W. Scripps and Journal Communications in April, represents significant expansion for Gannett, raising its revenue by nearly half a billion dollars.The two companies said the deal would be accretive to Gannett’s earnings immediately, with plans for $35 million in cost savings over the next few years.“It’s about cutting expenses,” said Alan D. Mutter, a veteran editor and media executive who teaches media economics at the University of California, Berkeley. “I am sure the companies have identified lots of ways to cut costs,” he added, including cutting “corporate staff, reducing head count, sharing content, pooling digital development and consolidating national sales teams.” The roots of the flagship Milwaukee paper go back more than 175 years, with the Journal and Sentinel combining in 1995. With a daily circulation of just over 200,000, The Journal Sentinel is well respected in the newspaper world, having won several Pulitzer Prizes in the last decade.Advertisement