By JACK EWINGDEC. 31, 2014
FRANKFURT — A top official of the European Central Bank said in an interview published on Wednesday that measures taken so far to stimulate the eurozone economy might not be adequate and that the central bank might need to do more.The comments by Peter Praet, a member of the central bank’s executive board, strengthened expectations that the central bank is moving closer to broad-based government bond purchases as a way of pumping money into the economy.Added impetus, Mr. Praet said, could come from the additional drag on consumer prices as a result of the recent drop in crude oil prices. While he said that “the risk of broadly based deflation in the euro area is not high,” he noted that oil’s slump “could mean negative inflation during a substantial part of 2015.”In an interview with Börsen Zeitung, a German financial newspaper, Mr. Praet said the steps taken so far might not be enough to raise inflation from a level considered dangerously low because it undercuts corporate profits and makes it more difficult for borrowers to repay their debts.Advertisement“There is the risk that we won’t have achieved the degree of monetary accommodation that we had intended,” Mr. Praet said, according to a translation of the interview on the E.C.B. web site.AdvertisementNoting that eurozone inflation could be even lower next year than the 0.7 percent forecast by E.C.B. economists, he added, “This is why we have to be very vigilant and ask ourselves: Have we done enough?”The statement by Mr. Praet, along with recent signals from other high-ranking E.C.B. officials, suggest that action is increasingly likely at the next monetary policy meeting, on Jan. 22.But the central bank could delay an asset purchase program to bring dissenting members of the policy-making governing council on board, or simply to allow more time to make preparations for what would be a huge and complex intervention in bond markets. Political turmoil in Greece could delay asset purchases, because the E.C.B. might be reluctant to acquire debt that a new Greek government might not repay.Mr. Praet said there was a danger that businesses and consumers were becoming resigned to low growth and low inflation, and as a result were not investing and spending. If so, that would be one of the symptoms of deflation — a broad-based decline in prices that causes people to delay purchases, company profits to sink and unemployment to rise.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.European Central Bank policy makers are increasingly worried about “the very high risk that after seven years of crisis and very poor economic performance in the euro area, businesses and households are reducing their long-term growth expectations and adapting to weak growth and low inflation,” Mr. Praet said.“The big risk is that this growth pessimism perpetuates the current situation of weak growth and low inflation,” Mr. Praet said.Many economists as well as central bankers in other countries have expressed concern that the E.C.B. has already waited too long to address very low inflation. Prices rose at an annual rate of 0.3 percent in the eurozone during November, and some analysts expect inflation to have fallen further during December or even to have turned negative. An official estimate of December inflation will be released on Jan. 7.An asset purchase program in the eurozone would be more complicated than the quantitative easing used by the Federal Reserve to stimulate the American economy. The Fed bought large quantities of United States Treasury bonds, but the eurozone has no comparable asset. The E.C.B. would have to buy bonds of individual eurozone countries, which will number 19 when Lithuania joins on Thursday.AdvertisementMr. Praet said the E.C.B. might buy government bonds in the secondary market in proportion to the size of each country’s outstanding debt. That approach could be controversial, because it would tend to reward the most indebted countries, like Greece and Italy.Mr. Praet acknowledged that the E.C.B. risked rewarding bad behavior, a practice known as moral hazard.“Moral hazard is an issue for monetary policy, I don’t deny that,” he said. “At the same time, it cannot be an excuse not to act if you come to the conclusion that this is needed, given your mandate.”A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: E.C.B. Executive Says More Eurozone Stimulus May Be Needed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.