
Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, may be pushing hard for a weaker euro to spur growth in Europe, but his central bank peers seem to be several steps ahead of him.In an interview with a German newspaper on Friday, Mr. Draghi, known for using his public comments to achieve policy goals, said the threat of deflation might force his bank to take more aggressive stimulus measures, which could include buying eurozone bonds in bulk.His comments prompted the euro to fall to $1.20, a four-and-a-half year low against the dollar. More important, it also highlighted a powerful new trend in world currency markets: Global central banks — along with investors also wary of the low returns that their euros have been delivering — have increasingly been switching into dollars and out of euros.On Friday, the dollar also hit a multiyear high against the Japanese yen, and it was also gaining on the fragile currencies in Brazil, Turkey and Russia.The expectation is that a rapidly recovering United States economy will push the Federal Reserve to increase interest rates this year, making dollar-based assets more attractive than those denominated in euros, Japanese yen and emerging market currencies.By contrast, Europe’s economy remains stagnant, and November’s inflation rate of 0.3 percent was a blunt reminder of how far Europe’s central bank is from meeting its inflation target of 2 percent.To jump-start growth and avoid deflation, many analysts say the most powerful policy arrow in Mr. Draghi’s quiver is to talk the euro sharply downward, which would bolster exports, increase the price of imports and ultimately, it is hoped, stimulate an increase in inflation.“The euro is going to go down because it really needs to,” said Jens Nordvig, the global head of currency strategy at Nomura in New York. “The divergence between European and U.S. growth is very, very wide now.”Mr. Nordvig pointed to recent data from the International Monetary Fund showing that in the third quarter of 2014, global central banks were big euro sellers and dollar buyers. As a result, the proportion of global reserves held in dollars moved to 62 percent from 60 percent, and the euro’s share fell to 22 percent from 24 percent.In an $11 trillion market, moves of this magnitude are highly unusual, and they could signal a long-term preference on the part of central bankers for high-yielding dollars in favor of less lucrative euros.“This was shocking to me,” Mr. Nordvig added. “And it really opens the way for a weaker euro.”The weakness in the euro on Friday came after Mr. Draghi, in an interview in Handelsblatt of Germany, said, “The risks of not fulfilling our mandate of price stability are in any case higher than they were six months ago.”Investors interpreted Mr. Draghi’s comments to mean that the central bank was moving closer to broad-based purchases of government bonds, possibly as soon as its next monetary policy meeting, on Jan. 22.“There are growing indications that the E.C.B. will decide as early as January to buy government bonds on a large scale,” Ralph Solveen, an economist at Commerzbank, wrote in a note to clients on Friday.Yields on government bonds in the eurozone also declined on Friday as their prices rose. The yield on the two-year German government note fell to a new low of minus 0.11 percent. The yield has been below zero since September; investors are effectively willing to pay the German government to keep their money safe. The yield on the 10-year German note fell to 0.49 percent, from 0.54 percent on Wednesday. The yield on the 10-year United States Treasury note fell to 2.11 percent from 2.17 percent on Wednesday.The decline in the euro may have further to go. Many currency specialists expect the euro to weaken quickly to 1.18 or 1.17 against the dollar. But they caution that the time lag between a weaker currency and higher growth and inflation can be considerable.Japan is a prime example in this regard. Since the middle of 2012, the yen has lost a third of its value against the dollar, yet the growth in Japanese exports has been disappointing and the economy remains stuck in a deflationary slump.A strong dollar is a welcome reflection of a United States economy that is growing and adding jobs at a faster clip than many of its peers. But if the currency climbs too much too quickly, corporate profits can suffer. When the dollar is worth more against other currencies, it pushes up the price of American goods and services in overseas markets. This can lead to lower exports and weaker earnings for many American companies.Douglas A. Kass of Seabreeze Partners, a hedge fund, said the rising dollar was most likely a reason behind the decline in a measure of United States manufacturing activity that was released on Friday.“We are starting to see the impact of a higher U.S. dollar on domestic manufacturing,” Mr. Kass said in an email. “This is one of the unintended consequences of a strengthening currency.”And while United States economic growth is largely driven by domestic factors, economists worry about the nation’s ability to expand over the long term when its major trading partners — Europe, Japan and China — are experiencing growth slowdowns of various sorts.Still, currency specialists note that the dollar’s strong run started fairly recently and was preceded by more than a decade of persistent weakness. Measured against a basket of global currencies, the dollar remains 20 percent below its high in 2002.Moreover, some analysts say the currency effect on American corporations may well be muted — outweighed, over time, by the positive effect of a recovering European economy drawing in more exports from the United States.Bank of America Merrill Lynch calculates that a 10 percent increase in the dollar against the euro would shave a little under 2 percent off the earnings of major exporters within the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index in 2015.“It is not just a cut-and-dried currency effect,” said Savita Subramanian, an equity strategist with Merrill Lynch. “There is also the global growth picture.”Mr. Draghi has, for the better part of a year now, tried to make the case that to stave off deflation and low growth, wholesale purchases of eurozone bonds must be considered.Unlike central bankers in Japan, the United States and Britain, Mr. Draghi represents not just one country but the conflicting agendas of the 19 countries that use the euro. That includes the depression-hobbled Greece and the cash-rich Germany, which remains perpetually wary of the central bank loading up on risky eurozone bonds.And while many analysts now expect him to formalize this decision this month, it could well be that Mr. Draghi’s big bet for a European recovery is less the actual buying of the bonds in question, which will remain a politically draining exercise.Instead, it could be a euro in free fall — driven by central banks moving into dollars and the foreign currency traders that follow in their wake — that does the job for him.A version of this article appears in print on 01/03/2015, on page B1 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Euro Falls Lower as Central Bank Hints at Increase in Stimulus Plan.