
Common Sense By                     
 JAMES B. STEWART
 
JAN. 1, 2015
HANGING OVER HIS FUTURE For Zachary Warren, the 30-year-old magna cum laude graduate of Georgetown Law School caught up in the 2012 collapse of the big law firm Dewey & LeBoeuf, probably the best thing that can be said about 2014 is that it’s over.In March, Mr. Warren was indicted by a grand jury in Manhattan on multiple felony counts based on allegations that he helped mastermind an extensive fraud at the once-prestigious law firm, where he was a low-level “client relations manager.”Just about everyone who knew him was shocked. Mr. Warren was just 24, fresh out of Stanford, when he applied for a job as a paralegal at Dewey. He left the firm to attend law school, well before the 2010 bond offering at the heart of the fraud charges. And the three others charged — the law firm’s former chairman, executive director and chief financial officer — were top-ranking administrators.Why prosecutors decided to throw the book at Mr. Warren remains a mystery. Although it’s obvious he infuriated them at his interrogation, where he perhaps unwisely testified without a lawyer to defend him, little evidence related directly to him has emerged in pretrial motions. About the worst that has been said is that he was in a room with others on one occasion when elements of the plan were discussed.AdvertisementBut simply being indicted in a prominent fraud case has damaged his once-promising legal career. Williams & Connolly, the prestigious law firm based in Washington known for its white-collar criminal defense work, withdrew a job offer. Mr. Warren had expected to work there after finishing his clerkship on the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit this summer. (A partner at Williams & Connolly said the firm did not comment on personnel matters.)AdvertisementThe judge in Mr. Warren’s case did grant a motion to sever his trial, which means he won’t suffer any guilt by association with his far higher-ranking co-defendants. But it also means he won’t be tried until after they are, which prolongs the time a cloud will hang over his future.In the meantime, he’s working as a consultant to a small Pittsburgh firm. If there’s any silver lining to his predicament, it’s that he’s getting an immersion in criminal law and procedure that no law school could teach. “He’s resilient and optimistic,” said William J. Murphy, one of his lawyers and a partner at Zuckerman Spaeder. “He believes in the criminal justice system, and he’s convinced the evidence will show he didn’t do anything wrong.”PULLED BACK IN For Paul J. Taubman, the one-man investment bank, the most important deal of the year may turn out to be the one he negotiated for himself.When I spoke to Mr. Taubman in April, he was operating out of an extra office at the law firm of Weil Gotshal & Manges while single-handedly accounting for a staggering $175 billion in deals.Once a leading contender to run Morgan Stanley, where he had spent his entire career before leaving in 2012, Mr. Taubman, 53, was poised to start a boutique firm, PJT Partners. He was negotiating for office space on the block of West 57th Street that’s become investment banking row, and he’d brought on board several partners.He thought he’d finally found “clarity” about his future, he recently told me. And then, just days after committing to a lease on the new office space, Hamilton E. James, president and chief operating officer of Blackstone, called Mr. Taubman with an unexpected proposition: Blackstone had decided to spin off its client advisory businesses, including M.&A. advising, restructuring and Park Hill, its fund placement business. It wanted Mr. Taubman to run the new company. “There went the clarity,” Mr. Taubman said.After several months of due diligence and frequent meetings with Mr. James, the Blackstone co-founder Stephen A. Schwarzman, and other top officials, they reached a handshake deal by Labor Day. Mr. Taubman will vault from his one-man office to a new publicly traded company with about 400 employees and offices around the world. He’ll be chairman and chief executive.AdvertisementIf the initial public offering takes place as scheduled early this year, “this may set a new speed record from conception to I.P.O.,” Mr. Taubman said.‘AND THEN THERE WERE TWO’ In June, John Browne, a former chief executive of the British oil giant BP, became the first chief executive (either current or former) of a listed company to acknowledge in public being gay. In his memoir, “The Glass Closet,” he told the sometimes painful story of his experiences as a closeted gay chief executive, which culminated in his being outed by a British tabloid. “My greatest regret in life is that I wasn’t honest while I was chief executive,” Mr. Browne, 66, who is Lord Browne of Madingley, told me when we met last summer.He also said he wrote the book in part to encourage others to be open. In that sense, “it’s been a remarkable year,” he said. “A great year.”On Aug. 14, Trevor Burgess, chief executive of Florida-based C1 Financial, rang the opening bell of the New York Stock Exchange to celebrate his company’s first day of trading. In the company’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr. Burgess disclosed he has a husband, Gary Hess, who owned shares in the company. He also contacted Out Leadership, an advocacy group for gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgendered executives, which issued a release drawing attention to Mr. Burgess’s status as a publicly gay chief executive.In response, he received an email from Jason Grenfell-Gardner, chief executive of a pharmaceutical concern, IGI Laboratories, who is also gay and the chief executive of a publicly traded company. “And then there were two,” Mr. Grenfell-Gardner wrote.Today there are more.In late October, Tim Cook, chief executive of Apple Inc., disclosed that he is gay in an essay published in Bloomberg Businessweek. He said his motives were similar to Mr. Browne’s: “If hearing that the C.E.O. of Apple is gay can help someone struggling to come to terms with who he or she is, or bring comfort to anyone who feels alone, or inspire people to insist on their equality, then it’s worth the trade-off with my own privacy,” Mr. Cook said.“For Tim Cook to come out is an incredibly important step,” Mr. Browne said when I reached him recently in London. “But constant vigilance is needed. Look at Russia and Uganda. There are too many forces in the world pushing in the opposite direction.”Still, Mr. Browne said he’d been “overwhelmed” by positive reaction to his book. At a book signing in Henley-on-Thames, a couple asked him to autograph a copy for their son. “We hope this will encourage him to come out,” they told him.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.HAVE TENT, WILL TRAVEL When I spoke to Derek De Armond just before Thanksgiving, he was in a multiroom tent with a screened porch outside a Best Buy in Fort Myers, Fla., whiling away the time with his flat-screen television, tiki bar and fully decorated Christmas tree.AdvertisementAfter camping for two weeks waiting for Best Buy’s 5 p.m. Thanksgiving opening, Mr. De Armond, 55, a press operator for The News-Press in Fort Myers, landed the door buster he was aiming for — a Panasonic 50-inch LED TV for $199. He has donated it to a local children’s hospital for a fund-raising auction.But Mr. De Armond didn’t waste time getting into another line. The Monday after Thanksgiving, he set up camp outside JetBlue Park for season tickets to Red Sox spring training games. He had to wait only five days for those.When Mr. De Armond and his son recently attended a Miami Dolphins game, some people recognized him from media coverage of his pre-Thanksgiving vigil and asked to have their picture taken with him. Mr. De Armond said his son was embarrassed. “When you do this next year, could you wear a mask?”Mr. De Armond said he received calls from other national retailers hoping he would camp outside one of their stores next year. “My friends are asking me what I’ll do next year to top this,” he said. (One possibility: pitching his tent in Times Square for New Year’s Eve.)I figured Mr. De Armond might have run out of lines to colonize in 2014, but he said a few days before Christmas that he was taking his family to Walt Disney World on Christmas Day, without his tent. “We’ll be waiting in lines just like everybody else,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on January 2, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Year of Columns, a Memorable Trove of Characters.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »