AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressFRESNO, Calif. — The new year is expected to bring rising egg prices across the United States as California starts requiring farmers to house hens in roomier cages.The new standard, backed by animal rights advocates, has been criticized by chicken farmers in Iowa, Ohio and other states who sell eggs in California and will have to abide by the same requirements. California is the nation’s largest consumer of eggs and imports about one-third of its supply. To comply, farmers will have to put fewer hens into each cage or invest in revamped henhouses, most likely passing the costs on to consumers. California voters in 2008 approved a law to get egg-laying hens out of cramped cages and put them, by Jan. 1, 2015, into larger enclosures that give them room to stretch, turn around and flap their wings. State legislators passed a companion piece in 2010 requiring out-of-state compliance.In anticipation, egg prices have risen already, said Dave Heylen of the California Grocers Association. The holiday season, cold weather across the country and increased exports to Mexico and Canada also contributed to a year-end price increase, he said, but he expects supplies to remain adequate to meet demand.Daniel Sumner, an agricultural economist at the University of California, Davis, said prices initially could rise sharply this year but he expected them to eventually settle 10 to 40 percent higher in California and return to their normal prices elsewhere in the country.If farmers reduce the numbers of chickens they have so they can comply with California’s cage law, Mr. Sumner said, the number of eggs available could decline. “When there’s that much uncertainty, I’m thinking there may be some disruption in the market,” he said.Jim Dean, chief executive of Centrum Valley Farms in Iowa and Ohio, said he had one building that could hold 1.5 million hens that is about half full to meet California’s standards, and another building may have to be completely overhauled. One reason is that producers like him in cold climates will have to install heaters to replace the warmth generated by the more closely packed chickens.“You’re talking about millions upon millions of dollars,” he said. “It’s not anything that’s cheap or that can be modified easily, not in the Midwest.”Wayne Pacelle, president and chief executive of the Humane Society of the United States, said he thought the costs to consumers would be minimal and worth it for the welfare of chickens.“This is the last bastion of cage confinement in industrial ag,” said Mr. Pacelle, whose organization helped push for the changes.Starbucks said in December that it would eliminate the sale of eggs from caged hens, Mr. Pacelle said, following the lead of Burger King and Whole Foods Market.Low-income people who rely on eggs as a cheap source of protein may be hurt the most by California’s cage law, according to a report this week by the Egg Industry Center at Iowa State University. Estimating a 15 percent price increase, the report said the cost of a dozen eggs could rise 27 cents.California has prevailed in lawsuits, including six from major egg-producing states that said the state was dictating market prices in other states in violation of the Commerce Clause of the Constitution. Appeals are pending.Ken Klippen of the National Association of Egg Farmers said California’s egg law, in addition to driving up the cost at the grocery store and putting pressure on egg supplies, would result in more injuries to chickens. The roomier pens mean chickens are more likely to run, raising the risk of a broken leg or wing.“You’re not going to help the chicken,” he said. “You’re not helping consumers.”Advertisement