AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — Factory activity in the United States grew at the slowest pace in six months in December, weakened by declines in orders and production. Yet growth was still healthy, a sign that manufacturing may help drive the economy’s expansion in 2015 as it did last year.The Institute for Supply Management, a trade group of purchasing managers, said on Friday that its manufacturing index fell to 55.5 in December from 58.7 in November, which was just below a three-year high reached in October.December’s reading is the lowest since June. But it is also close to the average for all of 2014 and remains a solid figure. “These were readings that in any ordinary time would be considered excellent,” Guy Berger, an economist at RBS Securities, wrote in a note to clients.The Institute for Supply Management’s measure of employment rose to a four-month high, evidence that factories added jobs last month. That is a good sign for the December jobs report, which will be released next week.United States manufacturers are still growing despite struggling economies overseas. A measure of overseas demand for American goods fell last month, the I.S.M. survey found, but remained in expansion territory. “The strength of domestic demand will ensure that industry and the wider economy still perform particularly well in 2015,” Paul Dales, an economist at Capital Economics, said.In a separate report, the Commerce Department said that construction spending slipped 0.3 percent in November, after having climbed a revised 1.2 percent in October and 0.6 percent in September. Much of the decline came from a 1.7 percent retreat in government expenditures. Total construction spending has improved a mere 2.4 percent from a year ago to $974.9 billion.Construction activity has lagged broader economic growth for much of 2014, hampered by limited gains in homebuilding. Modest buying activity has dissuaded builders from breaking ground on more homes. Residential construction spending declined 0.5 percent over the last 12 months, to $352.7 billion. “As the labor market continues to show improvement and wages increase, especially for young adults, we expect the pace of single-family building to pick up this year,” said Anika Khan, a senior economist at Wells Fargo.Architectural firms have reported increased demand for the last seven months, a sign that construction spending could accelerate in 2015. Advertisement