By JACK EWINGJAN. 2, 2015
FRANKFURT — A strong indication on Friday that the European Central Bank is on the verge of aggressive action to stimulate the economy, just as the Federal Reserve is dialing back its stimulus, helped push the euro to its lowest level against the dollar since 2010.Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, said in an interview published in the German newspaper Handelsblatt that the risk that the central bank would not be able to meet its main task of keeping inflation from being too low or too high was greater than it had been six months ago. At 0.3 percent in November, inflation in the eurozone was far below the central bank’s official target of close to 2 percent.Investors interpreted Mr. Draghi’s comments to mean that the central bank is moving closer to broad-based purchases of government bonds, the same kind of “quantitative easing” that the Fed used to push down market interest rates in the United States — and is phasing out as growth picks up.The diverging paths of the two central banks prompted investors to put money into dollars, on the expectation that interest rates in the United States will rise and offer a better return than in Europe, where interest rates are falling.AdvertisementThe euro fell to 1.20 against the dollar on Friday, its lowest since June 2010, while the yield, or market interest rate, on German two-year government bonds fell to a new low of minus 0.11 percent. The yield has been below zero since September; investors were willing to effectively pay the German government to keep their money safe.AdvertisementThe larger picture is not merely that the dollar is gaining against the euro. Signs that the Fed is getting closer to raising its benchmark interest rate from zero have helped the United States currency to soar against its counterparts in Japan, Britain and in major emerging markets. Against a broad basket of currencies, the dollar has risen more than 13 percent since September to its highest level in almost six years.Mr. Draghi’s comments were part of an ever-louder drumroll from top European Central Bank officials signaling that quantitative easing could come as soon as the next monetary policy meeting, on Jan. 22.“There are growing indications that the E.C.B. will decide as early as January to buy government bonds on a large scale,” Ralph Solveen, an economist at Commerzbank, wrote in a note to clients on Friday.In his comments to Handelsblatt, Mr. Draghi sounded more concerned than he has in the past that low inflation is becoming entrenched in the eurozone, with potentially grave consequences for the growth.Mr. Draghi said there was a risk that low inflation could cause people to delay making purchases. If so, that would be a classic symptom of deflation, a broad-based decline in prices that eventually undercuts company profits and leads firms to cut workers.The risk of deflation “cannot be ruled out completely, but it is limited,” Mr. Draghi told Handelsblatt. But he added, “If inflation remains low for a long time, people might expect prices to fall even further and postpone their spending.”“We are not there yet,” Mr. Draghi said. “But we need to tackle this risk.”The euro on Friday reached its lowest level against the dollar since June 7, 2010, when it hit $1.1923. The currency of the 19-nation eurozone has fallen nearly 14 percent since it climbed to $1.3910 on May 7.AdvertisementThe last time the euro was so low, Greece’s debt problems were causing havoc in the eurozone and there was fear the common currency would not survive. Greece is again in turmoil, with coming elections likely to usher in a left-wing government, but is no longer the main cause of the euro’s decline.The concern now is that the eurozone is already stuck in the same kind of stagnation that has afflicted Japan for two decades.“History shows that falling prices can be as damaging to the prosperity and stability of our countries as high inflation,” Mr. Draghi told Handelsblatt.The weaker euro is a mixed blessing for the struggling eurozone economy. European exporters will gain a competitive advantage against foreign rivals because their products will become cheaper for customers who pay in dollars or other currencies that tend to track with the dollar.A weaker euro could also push up inflation — a desirable outcome at the moment — because foreign goods would become more expensive in euro terms.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With the collapse of the crude oil market adding to the downward pressure, economists expect an official report next Wednesday to show that consumer prices fell at an annual rate of about 0.1 percent in December, down from the rate of 0.3 percent in November.However, a weaker euro also has negative effects in the eurozone. Because oil is usually priced in dollars, a weak euro cancels out some of the economic benefit from the recent drop in oil prices.Cheaper energy is good for companies because it reduces production costs for factories. Consumers benefit because they pay less for fuel and can spend the money on other things.Mr. Draghi reiterated that the E.C.B. does not try to achieve a certain exchange rate for the euro. The recent decline in the euro, he said, is “a natural outcome of diverging monetary policy path in the U.S. and the euro area. Markets expect a less accommodative monetary policy in the United States. This contributes to a stronger dollar.”AdvertisementMr. Draghi and other top E.C.B. officials appear to be preparing financial markets for stronger action to combat low inflation.“Low inflation is already a serious obstacle to economic recovery and rebalancing within the eurozone,” Jean Pisani-Ferry, an economist who serves as a policy adviser to the French government, wrote in a blog post this week. “Outright deflation would be an even more dangerous threat.”And if the central bank were to hold its fire now, Mr. Pisani-Ferry warned, the consequences for the financial system would be disruptive, as investors have already factored in quantitative easing. Disappointing those expectations would bring “an abrupt and damaging unwinding of positions: Long-term interest rates would rise, stock markets would sink, and the exchange rate would appreciate,” he wrote.Peter Praet, a member of the central bank’s executive board, said in an interview published on Wednesday in Börsen-Zeitung, a German financial newspaper, that oil’s slump “could mean negative inflation during a substantial part of 2015.”“There is the risk that we won’t have achieved the degree of monetary accommodation that we had intended,” Mr. Praet said. “This is why we have to be very vigilant and ask ourselves: Have we done enough?”Among the 25 members of the central bank’s Governing Council, which sets monetary policy, a majority appears to be in favor of beginning quantitative easing immediately. But the council might wait until March, when it holds its second monetary policy meeting of the year, to persuade reluctant members from Germany and some other countries.In addition, the central bank may need more time to prepare for what would be a large, complex and unprecedented intervention in bond markets.By speaking to German newspapers, Mr. Draghi and Mr. Praet may have been trying to weaken resistance in the German public to central bank bond buying. Many Germans fear that they will be stuck with the bill if some eurozone countries like Greece or Italy are unable to pay their debts.“Public opinion in Germany is very important for us,” Mr. Draghi said.David Jolly contributed reporting from Paris.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.