
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
JAN. 3, 2015
Shareholders own the companies they invest in, but they have long been largely shut out of any role in naming the people who are supposed to represent them: corporate directors.Executives at most companies, of course, generally oppose the idea of shareholders nominating their own directors. But now the Securities and Exchange Commission, generally seen as the defender of shareholder interests, is siding with companies keen to keep investors out of the nomination process.The skirmish unfolding at Whole Foods Market highlights an issue that is likely to play a prominent role in the 2015 proxy season. After the S.E.C. ruled in favor of the company last month, allowing it to exclude from its proxy a shareholder proposal on director nominations, 10 other companies followed suit, asking the commission to rule the same way for them.Currently, investors can withhold their support only for directors they consider objectionable; they can rarely nominate replacement candidates.AdvertisementThese restrictions have helped to keep corporate boards clubby and pro-management, investors say, resulting in outsize executive pay and a lack of accountability.AdvertisementIn recent years, some institutional investors have been pushing companies to allow long-term shareholders to propose directors. Since 2012, when the S.E.C. changed its rules on these matters, shareholders have been able to put forward proxy proposals on director nominations.These proposals commonly carry relatively low ownership thresholds, stating that a shareholder or a small group of shareholders can nominate directors if they have held at least 3 percent of the company’s shares for three years or more — a so-called three-and-three proposal. Some shareholders in companies want an even lower bar; one such investor, Norges Bank, has proposed allowing nominations from investors holding 1 percent of a company’s shares.In 2011, the S.E.C. approved a rule automatically giving shareholders the right to nominate directors if they held a 3 percent stake for three years. But a federal court overturned that rule in 2011 after a lawsuit filed against the S.E.C. by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.Institutional investors like Scott M. Stringer, comptroller of New York City, have taken up the three-and-three cause; some companies have agreed to let 3 percent holders nominate up to one-quarter of their directors. They are CenturyLink, Chesapeake Energy, Hewlett-Packard, McKesson, Verizon and Western Union.But many companies still resist opening the boardroom to investors. When their shareholders try to introduce proposals, these companies ask the S.E.C. for permission to exclude them from their proxies, making sure that stockholders can’t vote on them.Whole Foods, the upscale grocery chain, is leading the charge. In September, James McRitchie, a longtime shareholder and publisher of a corporate governance website, put forward a typical three-and-three proposal to be voted on at the company’s annual meeting early this year.The company’s lawyers wrote to the S.E.C., asking to exclude Mr. McRitchie’s proposal from its proxy. Under S.E.C. rules, companies can exclude a shareholder proposal from their proxy filings if it “directly conflicts with one of the company’s own proposals to be submitted to shareholders at the same meeting.”AdvertisementWhole Foods made this argument, saying that it planned to put its own shareholder nomination proposal on the proxy and that Mr. McRitchie’s would conflict with it. Whole Foods said that including both proposals would “create the potential for inconsistent and ambiguous results.” A spokeswoman for Whole Foods declined to comment further.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Mr. McRitchie’s proposal posed a direct challenge to Whole Foods’ version. The ownership hurdle for an investor under Whole Foods’ planned proposal was a whopping 9 percent. Not only was that three times Mr. McRitchie’s threshold, but no outside investor holds such a stake in the company. The biggest outside shareholder owns just over 5 percent.Nevertheless, on Dec. 1, S.E.C. officials agreed with Whole Foods on the conflict issue and said it would face no enforcement action if it excluded the 3 percent proposal from its proxy.Other companies seem to have been closely watching the S.E.C.’s ruling. Since the Dec. 1 decision, 10 other companies have asked the S.E.C. for permission to exclude nomination proposals from 3 percent shareholders. They include Arch Coal, Cabot Oil & Gas and Marathon Oil, and they make the same argument about conflicting proposals. The S.E.C. has not yet ruled on those companies’ requests.On Dec. 23, Mr. McRitchie appealed to all the S.E.C. members to reverse the decision on the Whole Foods proxy. He argued that the S.E.C.’s decision “effectively limits shareholders to consideration of proposals sponsored by the board of directors and eliminates any opportunity for shareholders to present alternative criteria.”A spokesman for the S.E.C. declined to comment on the Whole Foods proposals, noting that the commission had not yet answered Mr. McRitchie’s appeal.Last Tuesday, a few days after I had asked Whole Foods why it had chosen an onerous 9 percent threshold, the company filed its proxy asking shareholders to approve a new bylaw for director nominations. This proposal lowered the bar, to 5 percent from 9 percent: One investor holding at least 5 percent of its stock for at least five years may nominate one director or 10 percent of the board, Whole Foods said.But even this threshold is too high, many investors say. The largest pension funds typically hold less than 1 percent of any company’s shares. At Whole Foods, only two outside shareholders own stakes of 5 percent; eight stockholders own stakes of at least 3 percent.Moreover, when writing its ill-fated nominations rule, the S.E.C. determined that requiring a 5 percent stake was unrealistic. After analysis, the S.E.C. said, the data “suggest that a uniform 5 percent ownership requirement would be substantially more difficult to satisfy than the 3 percent requirement we are adopting.”AdvertisementMr. Stringer, the New York City comptroller, said: “The S.E.C.’s intent in enacting a ceiling of 3 percent ownership over three years ago was to give share owners the meaningful ability to hold boards accountable and drive long-term investment value. Boards that propose higher thresholds are fabricating the illusion of accountability and access in order to manipulate the no-action process and disenfranchise share owners.”Indeed, Ann Yerger, executive director at the Council of Institutional Investors, pointed out just how inconsistent the S.E.C.’s ruling in the Whole Foods case was with its own stated goals. The commission’s approach to conflicting proposals works when you see two that are relatively similar, she said.“But what we’re seeing at Whole Foods are two diametrically opposed approaches to the same issue,” she added. “In this case, the S.E.C. has made it even more confusing for investors.”A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Whole Foods’ High Hurdle for Investors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »