AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam BordenOne day in November, Ferran Adrià, the Spanish chef who turned foods into foams and pioneered a new era in gastronomic innovation while running one of the world’s most popular restaurants, bounced through a loft space in Barcelona. He peered at pencil-sketched mind maps tacked to plastic foam bulletin boards and examined books jammed on narrow shelves — until he reached the end of a display table featuring a variety of Asian soup spoons. Then he stopped.“I have a question,” he said in Catalan to the small group of visitors and staff members trailing him. “What is wine?”There was silence. Four seconds, five seconds, 10 seconds. Finally, cautiously, someone offered, “A drink?” Mr. Adrià's eyes widened. “Maybe it is a drink if I put it in a cup. But what if I make it into a sauce and cook with it?” His voice was sharp. More silence. Mr. Adrià spun away and began walking again. “Now,” he said over his shoulder as the crowd shuffled in his wake, “what if I turn the wine into ice cream? What is it then?”Mr. Adrià, 52, has always been inquisitive. Even during the peak years at El Bulli, when Restaurant Magazine named it the world’s best restaurant five times from 2002 to 2009 and he rocketed beyond the standard-fare celebrity chefs into the rarefied air of the gastronomic geniuses, he would pose random questions about the origin of vegetables or fruit. (According to members of his kitchen staff, he also was known for higher-volume queries like, “Why the hell is this foam not the right height?”)His questions were genuine. Creativity made El Bulli and, later, killed it. Mr. Adrià calculated that he concocted 1,846 dishes during his time there, many of which pushed the boundaries on epicurean labels (the artichoke as rose petals, the olive formed from frozen olive juice). He says the primary reason he closed the restaurant in 2011 was not, as hotly speculated in the Spanish press, a family squabble or overwhelming money troubles. It was that even while El Bulli operated only six months a year and served just one meal a day, Mr. Adrià — whose entire brand was built on deconstructing everything that people thought they knew about food — was scared of repeating himself.“Can you imagine this pressure?” he said. He shook his head. “You cannot.”Now there is pressure of a different kind. Mr. Adrià's acclaim came with benefits that were tangible — he used to charge 80,000 euros, or about $97,000, for an hourlong lecture on creativity — as well as some that were more abstract. Most notable of these has been a grace period, which has stretched some three years, in which the world has patiently waited to see what he will do next.Mr. Adrià has proclaimed that the wait is nearly over. But even so, it is not altogether clear what the next act will be. His latest venture is an umbrella project known as the El Bulli Foundation. The foundation’s aim, it seems, is to take on the entire notion of creativity, but for now it has so many potential elements that Mr. Adrià might deliver an effective elevator pitch only if he were stuck between floors.He acknowledges as much, often saying to visitors, “Et roda el cap, oi?” (or, roughly, “Your head is spinning, right?”). But he does not apologize.Like any number of celebrities before him, Mr. Adrià has taken advantage of his reputation and fame to vault into a new endeavor. There is little food at his headquarters now. There are no bags of flour or sugar or grain lying around, only questions and more questions, diagrams and notecards, and, on at least one computer screen on a recent afternoon, a lengthy treatise about Brosimum alicastrum, which, as you surely know, is a tree with an edible nut found primarily in Central and South America. If all of this seems a bit academic, consider that Mr. Adrià likes to say, “Now, we will eat knowledge.”So what is his goal? The foundation’s current mission seems to flutter between worldly and chaotic. Consider the activity on a morning in November: One group of employees worked in a corner of the loft on prototypes of a website known as BulliPedia that, when finished, will be a type of Wikipedia for haute cuisine. On the opposite side of the room, a young woman edited pages intended for a multivolume book collection tracing the history of food. At a desk facing the window, three men spent hours researching white asparagus. (It was not immediately clear what this was for.)Mr. Adrià stalked among them, his eyes darting about and his hand constantly pushing up his glasses into his hair. The work has not gone perfectly; there have been starts and restarts, adjustments of the larger vision and, most painfully, an ugly and still-simmering political fight over the construction of his foundation’s new home.The pressure has changed. Instead of competing against his own originality, Mr. Adrià is now shouldering the expectations of a company that has invested in him, a nation that (mostly) adores him and a global culinary community that reveres him.Topping his own opening act is not an inconsiderable concept. But Mr. Adrià, still chattering about wine as a “manufactured product,” looked assured as he paused near the middle of the room. “We are trying to create an entire language for creativity,” he said. He shrugged. “I know this sounds a little pretentious.”A Nonbusiness BusinessShortly before lunchtime, between examining a treatise on green vegetables and evaluating the evolution of a chart deconstructing ravioli, Mr. Adrià reached his hands over his head and scowled.“Everyone thinks I am this crazy, creative genius and that I don’t care about business,” he said. “It’s a lie.”Caring about business, he went on, and running a business in the traditional way are different things. For example, from a strictly financial perspective, choosing to close El Bulli for lunch — which he decided to do in 2001, just as the restaurant’s popularity was soaring — cost him and his partner an estimated €1 million a year. But Mr. Adrià had bigger ambitions than a good lunch rush. Three years earlier, he had decided to allocate 20 percent of the restaurant’s money to research, a decision that helped make El Bulli a palace of innovation while allowing Mr. Adrià to rake in significant income in other ways.It should be said that El Bulli itself was not a moneymaker. But the El Bulli name, along with Mr. Adrià's, was golden: He estimated that El Bulli’s catering division brought in up to €400,000 a year, and in 2010, he said, V.I.P. fund-raising dinners earned about €3.5 million, most of which was put toward ensuring the new foundation’s long-range viability.The El Bulli Foundation operates as a nonprofit, Mr. Adrià said, and is intended to appeal to “chefs, as well as anyone who is interested in the creative process.” It is not a charity, he said, but it is also not a traditional commercial business. “It is a think tank for creativity,” he said.He readily concedes that what allows him to operate such an ethereal enterprise is the value of his personal brand. In 2010, not long after announcing that he would close El Bulli, he met with César Alierta, the chief executive of Telefónica, the telecommunications giant based in Madrid. Mr. Alierta was interested in Mr. Adrià's future plans, and Mr. Adrià, as he often does, preached about creativity.A match was made. Mr. Adrià became an ambassador for Telefónica, linking his name to the company — he makes appearances for it — in exchange for what amounts to corporate sponsorship of his foundation. Neither he nor officials at Telefónica would reveal the company’s total investment in his foundation, but the relationship has been good for Telefónica. Surveys done by the company in the first half of 2014 showed that the portion of respondents who viewed Telefónica as having a “vision of the future” jumped to 70 percent from 59 percent once they were made aware of the connection to Mr. Adrià, according to José María Sanz-Magallón, the company’s global director for institutional relations and sponsorship. The share of respondents who gave Telefónica favorable ratings in the “innovative” category increased 13 percentage points.Mr. Adrià is hardly the only celebrity to use the power of a name to move in a different direction. Debbie Millman, president and chief marketing officer at Sterling Brands, a consulting firm in New York, says examples abound, whether it’s an actor becoming a politician (Arnold Schwarzenegger), a world-renowned architect moving into Broadway show set design (David Rockwell) or a musician branching into spirits, clothing or sports management (P. Diddy and Jay Z).“We accept the blurring of roles now more than we ever did before,” Ms. Millman said. But there is a catch. “The key with Adrià and any brand changing direction — you get one chance, maybe two, to use your brand and do something new. If it’s not successful, that’s generally it.”To Mr. Adrià, success is a malleable concept — “We will know if we are doing well because we will feel it,” he explained — and there doesn’t seem to be much pressure from Telefónica to produce anything in particular. Unlike some artists, he is not shy about his corporate connections, and given the activities in the foundation’s loft, he does not seem afflicted by commercial concerns. He zigged and zagged from smaller-scale descriptions of documents (“this is a flow chart of a cucumber’s existence”) to grander, if occasionally vague and counterintuitive, proclamations about originality (“you don’t have to be passionate to be creative; you can just be professional about innovation”). Neither he nor his staffers appeared to be rushed.He also seems uninterested in running his foundation as a typical start-up, and his rigid devotion to his own mantras can occasionally give the entire operation a cultish feel. Additionally, it isn’t obvious exactly how his ideas will make the leap from notion to project. Mr. Adrià has nominally divided the foundation into two main strands: knowledge, which is the group focused on creating BulliPedia; and creativity, which is focused on, in his words, “deconstructing the entire process of creativity.” He calls this group El Bulli DNA.If the names of the various projects aren’t enough to keep straight, Mr. Adrià adds a few more: El Bulli Lab is the Barcelona-based office where people associated with El Bulli DNA do their work. That should not be confused with 6W Food, which may not get going for a few more years but is expected to be a sort of cross between a science museum, an art museum and a house of culinary innovation. Also in the works is a search engine known as SeaUrching (named in part for the delicacy) as well as a language to describe gastronomy known as Huevo, Spanish for egg. Huevo, it was noted by one of Mr. Adrià's colleagues, could ultimately be a digital language coded for use by refrigerators or other kitchen appliances.At the conclusion of one of several long soliloquies, Mr. Adrià was asked what he expected the foundation’s budget to be for 2015. He took a breath. “One million euros,” he said. In response to a quizzical expression of doubt — moments earlier, he said he intended to have a staff approaching 75 — he explained, “We will hire a lot of interns.”Then, before anyone else could speak, he started to explain a side project he was doing as a consultant with Cirque du Soleil in which, he said, “We are helping create a restaurant that is not a restaurant.”On Dalí's TurfAbout two hours north of Barcelona, there is a protected area, Parc Natural del Cap de Creus, that juts into a bay. The park is famous for inspiring the work of Salvador Dalí and, later, as the unlikely location of El Bulli. For years, expectant diners made their way along a narrow road toward the bay and through the narrow doorway with the familiar bulldog logo etched into the wall, settling into seats for what was, essentially, an art show presented on a shimmering dinner-plate canvas.At present, the tiny house is covered in demolition dust. The room that used to be reserved for the careful cutting and preparing of meat — staff members nicknamed it “the morgue” — has been transformed into a makeshift office holding reams of paper detailing the reconstruction of what Mr. Adrià envisioned as the heartbeat of the El Bulli Foundation.The plans are ambitious: exhibition areas, an expansive brainstorming room with a glass wall facing the sea and, yes, a kitchen for fund-raising events. The proposed name of this museum is El Bulli 1846 — named for the number of dishes the restaurant produced — and the design is airy and grand. Mr. Adrià wanted the baby footprint of El Bulli the restaurant to become something much bigger.There is only one problem: It is mostly not happening. When Mr. Adrià's vision was revealed, ecologists almost immediately objected to the potential impact of the expansion within the park and gathered nearly 96,000 signatures on a petition to stifle it.Barbara Schmitt, spokeswoman for an environmental group in the nearby town of Roses, said the group’s worries included the effect on wildlife and the traffic expected from thousands of new tourists. Ms. Schmitt said she and some colleagues met with Mr. Adrià and his team back in May but came away with no meaningful conclusions.“It was very respectful and a nice meeting, but at one point, Mr. Adrià said that if he needed to, he would limit the number of people who could visit each day to 25,” Ms. Schmitt said. “I can’t imagine that will actually happen.”Such a suggestion is not atypical. The downside of Mr. Adrià's creativity — or, put another way, his thinker’s curse — is that he cannot stop himself from constantly conjuring, even if his ideas are not always feasible. Jose Mari López, a longtime employee who lives in Roses and is overseeing the work at the site, said the plans for the new building had changed more than a half-dozen times, depending on Mr. Adrià's moods. Mr. López described Mr. Adrià, lovingly, as “a person of the moment.”Nathan Myhrvold, the Mad Hatter of modernist cooking, invited the movement’s leading chef, Ferran Adrià, over for a 50-course, lab-prepared meal. It was a lot to digest, sure, but what does a feast like this mean for the future of eating?Mr. Adrià does not like to speak publicly about the construction issues, grimacing and waving his hand when the subject is raised. Mr. López, though, said that the entire ordeal was “very disappointing” for Mr. Adrià and that it was not clear what would happen with the project.“We live here in Roses. We want to be in Roses,” Mr. López said. “What is not possible is being in Roses and having people throw stones at us all the time.”By law, Mr. Adrià is allowed to increase the size of his property a maximum of 20 percent, a modest expansion that, for the moment, is underway. Some people say they think Mr. Adrià will ultimately get the overhaul he initially desired. Roses is a lively tourist destination, and its mayor, Montserrat Mindan, said she wanted to assist Mr. Adrià in achieving his dream because there was a considerable upside for the town. Ms. Mindan played down the concerns of the environmental groups, focusing instead on how El Bulli and Mr. Adrià helped crystallize the town’s reputation within Catalonia.“Ferran Adrià will help us be on top,” she said.Santi Vila, the minister for territory and sustainability in the region and a member of the Catalan Parliament, which is expected to vote on whether to grant Mr. Adrià an exemption from the law limiting expansion in natural parks, said he respected Mr. Adrià's stated wish to avoid a public fight on the issue. But Mr. Vila said he did not believe that Mr. Adrià should be apprehensive.“This is very important — Ferran Adrià and F.C. Barcelona are the two biggest brands in Catalonia,” Mr. Vila said, referring to the popular soccer team. When asked if any other Catalonian entrepreneur would receive the same treatment if he wanted to build in a natural park, Mr. Vila smiled.“There are not many Catalonians who have been on the cover of so many magazines,” he said.The Power of QuestionsJust after 6 p.m., as the light coming through the loft’s windows was fading, Mr. Adrià sat still for just a few moments at a table alongside one wall. These moments are rare.“I don’t like to unplug,” he explained. “There is always too much to do.”He often mentioned how he enjoys working 18 hours a day, and he revealed that he rarely eats. “The logical thing would be for me to be in the Maldives, living the good life,” he said. “But I leave here every night thinking I know nothing about cooking. That is powerful.”Despite his lack of interest in operating a restaurant again — “that is over,” he said flatly — Mr. Adrià's passion for cooking has not waned. He still watches cooking shows on television, enjoying “MasterChef” and “Top Chef” the most, and is involved with the restaurants run by his brother, Albert.At home, Mr. Adrià cooks simple dishes, such as fish with vegetables, but, for just a moment, he allowed himself to recall the wonder he felt when he deconstructed a dish for the first time. It was 1994, and he turned rice with a fried egg on top into “kind of a tomato, with ice cream,” he said. Leaning back in a chair as he looked across the whole of the loft space, he smiled at the memory of a time when the process he made famous was so fresh and new.While employees slipped on jackets and headed out into the evening, Mr. Adrià pushed his glasses back up onto his forehead and resumed wandering among the tables and bulletin boards and papers and screens. As he walked, he riffed on a few of the various questions he had spewed earlier in the day: What is an iPhone? What is technology? What is lettuce?“It took me eight months to understand this,” he said, referring to the lettuce. He was not kidding.Sometimes it feels as though it might take a similar amount of time to fully digest what Mr. Adrià is seeking now. A deconstruction of his goals suggests that his previously insatiable thirst for innovation has been replaced by an insatiable thirst for knowledge. That is why there are so many charts, maps and graphs. That is why three men spent hours researching white asparagus. Scattershot as they may be, Mr. Adrià's motives are earnest.So, too, are his methods, even if it is not always altogether clear to everyone else what he is doing. As one staff member said, understanding the true purpose of the El Bulli Foundation is less important than understanding the process by which it is built. For those who believe that Mr. Adrià truly is a genius, the staff member said, that is enough.The sunlight was gone, and the office was quiet. Mr. Adrià stopped at one desk. He peered at a notebook. He lingered, finally, over a grid of index cards that traced the history of cuisine from the Neolithic era to the present day. Thousands of years, thousands of changes in cooking style, preparation, ingredients and techniques. Thousands of innovations. Mr. Adria frowned.“If I don’t understand all of this,” he said, “I don’t understand anything.”Pere Bosch contributed reporting.Advertisement