AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack Ewing and Binyamin AppelbaumMario Draghi indulged the photographers and their rapid-fire shutters for a few moments, making his first appearance for the news media in the European Central Bank’s ostentatious new high-rise headquarters in Frankfurt.Then he shooed the cameras away. He had an important message to deliver.Mr. Draghi, the central bank’s president, told reporters on that early December afternoon that it was ready to deploy new weapons against the eurozone’s dangerously low inflation rate. Though this 19-nation bloc is one of the world’s richest economies, it has never really recovered from the 2008 global financial crisis. And low inflation is one of the impediments to growth.Emphasizing every word, Mr. Draghi said that the bank’s governing council had just agreed to prepare “for further measures, which could, if needed, be implemented in a timely manner.”In the past, such assurances had bought time for Mr. Draghi. His famous vow in 2012 to “do whatever it takes” to save the euro currency union had seemed to work without the bank having to actually take much action.But on this day, after months of Mr. Draghi’s saying the equivalent of “stay tuned,” his statement of resolve failed to work the old magic.European stock markets sagged even as he spoke. The reaction by investors, whose money and faith will be crucial to any true economic recovery, raised an ominous question: Is the man who is arguably the most powerful official in Europe really powerful enough to pull the eurozone out of its doldrums?“A central bank claiming that it will do ‘whatever it takes’ while not delivering with actions eventually loses its credibility,” said Athanasios Orphanides, a former European Central Bank board member who is now an economics professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. “It is difficult to escape the conclusion that the E.C.B. has not been operating in a manner that promotes fulfillment of its mandate.”Mr. Draghi’s quandary is that the actions that might save the eurozone also threaten to divide it.As he begins the fourth year of an eight-year term, the central bank has still not pursued the path that many economists say offers the greatest hope to millions of Europeans to escape from a “lost decade” of stagnation: buying government bonds and other financial assets in huge numbers. Such an approach, known as quantitative easing, was used successfully by the Federal Reserve in the United States. The idea is to pump money into the financial system, encouraging more lending and spending and kick-starting the economy.Mr. Draghi continues to send signals that a bond-buying program is in the works. In an interview published on Friday, he warned of the danger that low inflation could cause people to delay purchases, in the expectation that prices will fall further. If so, that could be the beginning of a pernicious decline of expectations that would undermine consumer spending and business investment.“History shows that falling prices can be as damaging to the prosperity and stability of our countries as high inflation,” Mr. Draghi said in an interview with Handelsblatt, a German business newspaper. “The purchase of government bonds is one of the tools in our toolbox.” Yet even as Mr. Draghi tiptoes toward a bond-buying program, which could be unveiled as early as the central bank’s policy meeting on Jan. 22, he faces challenges from inside and outside the walls of his new 45-story headquarters, which had a price tag of 1.2 billion euros, or $1.5 billion.The 25 members of the central bank’s governing council, who are supposed to be above parochial politics, often seem to represent the interests of their home constituencies. Members from Germany and other wealthier northern European nations have resisted the plan, fearing that their taxpayers would have to bail out the central bank if any eurozone countries defaulted on the bonds the bank bought. That fear has been reinforced by the rise of a left-wing populist party, Syriza, in Greece that is challenging the government’s commitment to to meet its debt obligations.But whatever differences he must bridge, many economists say Mr. Draghi is running out of time to deliver the decisive action needed to prevent low inflation from becoming a chronic condition. While low prices benefit consumers in the short term, extended low inflation, which could worsen into the widespread decline in prices known as deflation, imposes a heavy burden on borrowers and makes it hard for companies to be profitable, encouraging them to cut wages or lay off workers.“I do think they’re at a critical moment,” said Thomas F. Cooley, an economics professor at the Stern School of Business at New York University. “There has got to be some attempt on the part of the E.C.B. to stimulate the economy. They are the only ones capable of doing the heavy lifting.”By some measures, Mr. Draghi, a 67-year-old native of Rome who earned a doctorate in economics from M.I.T., is at the peak of his powers. Wielding the moral authority he acquired after calming the markets and pulling the eurozone from the brink with his “whatever it takes” promise, he has overseen an expansion of the European Central Bank’s jurisdiction.Not only does the central bank manage a currency used by 338 million people, in November it also began regulating eurozone banks, which together constitute the world’s largest banking system.Given his purview, Mr. Draghi arguably has as much or more power in Europe than national political leaders like Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President François Hollande of France. And because he is appointed by European political leaders, he does not need to win re-election. (Mr. Draghi, who rarely gives interviews, declined to comment for this article.) Yet in its core task — to keep inflation below, but close to, 2 percent — the central bank has fallen short. The last time the eurozone’s annual rate of inflation was 2 percent was in January 2013. As of November 2014, the rate was only 0.3 percent, already low enough to have a pernicious effect on growth.Under Mr. Draghi and his riven council, the central bank has also presided over a steep decline in the size of its balance sheet, the key measure of how much money it has been able to pump into the economy. That number has shrunk to about €2 trillion from almost €3 trillion early in 2012, as commercial banks repaid loans from the central bank.The Federal Reserve, by contrast, which had a balance sheet about the same size as the European Central Bank’s in early 2012, has since increased its holdings to $4 trillion from $3 trillion.“I find the European policies to be baffling in terms of how bad they are,” Frederic Mishkin, a former Fed governor who is now a professor of banking and financial institutions at Columbia University, said at a monetary policy conference in November. “If it’s all about inflation, then inflation is way too low.”If Mr. Draghi feels wounded by such criticism, he does not show it. In public appearances, he exudes confidence. And he is not shy about dismissing his critics.It’s hard to imagine Janet L. Yellen, the chairwoman of the Fed, speaking to a member of Congress in the same tone that Mr. Draghi used to upbraid a Spanish member of the European Parliament who accused the central bank of strong-arming Ireland into accepting a bailout in 2010.Raising his voice and sweeping his arm dismissively during an appearance in Parliament late last year, Mr. Draghi said the central bank had a duty to protect the money it had lent Irish banks after the financial markets cut them off. “Don’t you think we should worry about that?” Mr. Draghi asked, with an irritation unusual for an otherwise supremely composed central banker. Any fissures within the central bank’s governing council, say those who have observed the dynamic, might be partly a result of Mr. Draghi’s approach to management and diplomacy — and impatience with lesser intellects.There has been criticism — mostly from people who did not want to be identified for fear of offending him — that Mr. Draghi is aloof, especially when compared with his voluble predecessor, Jean-Claude Trichet. Mr. Draghi is known to confide in a small number of trusted colleagues, such as Benoît Coeuré, one of the six members of the executive board, who has a background in economics and public finance that is similar to Mr. Draghi’s.Others can feel left out of the loop.Mr. Draghi’s pledge to do “whatever it takes,” for example, was an impromptu addition to a scheduled speech at a banking conference in London, according to a published transcript of an interview with Timothy F. Geithner, the former Treasury secretary of the United States.With that comment, as he later made clearer, Mr. Draghi was alluding to the central bank’s being ready to intervene in the bond markets, if necessary, to reduce the borrowing costs of Italy and some other eurozone countries, which had spiked to dangerous heights.It was evidently a promise made without consulting the governing council. Only later did the council formalize the promise with a program — as yet unused — to buy the bonds of troubled countries.Jens Weidmann, the president of Germany’s central bank, the Bundesbank, and a member of the European Central Bank’s governing council, has argued against more aggressive monetary stimulus and been a thorn in Mr. Draghi’s side. On Dec. 17, for example, Mr. Weidmann told reporters in Frankfurt that he would regard quantitative easing “with skepticism,” citing “the rather modest and uncertain impact of a broad Q.E. package, together with the risks and side effects it could bring and the unclear need for it at present.”He also said he considered the fear of deflation overblown. “An inflation rate below zero for a period of a few months does not yet constitute deflation in my opinion,” said Mr. Weidmann, who declined several requests for an interview.But after reports last fall of a growing schism on the governing council, Mr. Weidmann and Mr. Draghi have made a show of getting along. People close to them emphasized recently that they speak often, even if they don’t always see eye to eye.“It’s fairly normal to disagree about things,” Mr. Draghi said at a news conference in November, noting that central bankers in the United States, Britain and Japan also have their differences. “It happens everywhere.”All central banks face internal dissension, but Europe’s is unique in that its members are separate countries. The eurozone is a currency union with a centralized monetary policy, but the member countries remain largely in control of their own budgets and regulatory policies.The leaders of France and Italy, the second- and third-largest eurozone economies after Germany, seem unable to overcome resistance from trade unions and other interest groups over changes that promise to help improve long-term growth. Even Germany, the region’s economic anchor, has lost momentum and barely escaped falling into recession in the third quarter of 2014, the most recent to be reported.“I’m very, very concerned,” said Lucrezia Reichlin, former head of research at the European Central Bank under Mr. Draghi’s predecessor, Mr. Trichet. “Now the big risks are France and Italy.”Without a more aggressive monetary policy, Ms. Reichlin and a growing chorus of economists say, Europe has little chance of economic revival anytime soon.“I certainly believe that both in Europe and in Japan, the willingness to tackle a declining inflation rate has been too gradual, and it’s much less effective if it’s gradual,” said Eric S. Rosengren, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.But in Germany, conservative opposition to large-scale asset purchases similar to those conducted by the Fed and the Bank of England borders on the hysterical.“There is no country in the eurozone where monetary policy is debated in such a lively way and by so many citizens as in Germany,” said Jörg Asmussen, a former member of the European Central Bank executive board and now a high-ranking official in the German labor ministry. “Even if you watch TV over breakfast, they are giving news about monetary policy.”German opposition to bond-buying reflects broader discontent with the way the common currency has, in the eyes of many Europeans, failed to deliver the prosperity it promised. In its most extreme form, this discontent manifests itself as a protest toward the whole idea of a united Europe, nourishing right-wing parties like the National Front, in France, and the Alternative for Germany.If Mr. Draghi is fortunate, the eurozone economy will start to recover without a big central-bank intervention, and inflation will rise toward the 2 percent target. The plunge in world oil prices will provide some stimulus, but because fuel is usually priced in dollars, it is being partly offset by a weaker euro.But the costs of delay are mounting. And now, even if the central bank finally does begin full-bore quantitative easing, there is no certainty that it will be enough to rescue the eurozone’s creaky, highly regulated economy.“Q.E. in the euro area is much less effective,” Mr. Asmussen said. That, he said, is because bond-buying is most effective in economies like that of the United States, where the business world gets most of its financing through capital markets. European companies tend to get their money from banks.“I think it could be a good thing,” he said, “but I would warn against expecting the effects to be as large.”Jack Ewing reported from Frankfurt and Binyamin Appelbaum from Washington. Melissa Eddy contributed reporting from Berlin.Advertisement