Moderna Therapeutics, a four-year-old company with a promising but unproven technology for developing drugs, said on Monday that it had raised $450 million in its latest round of financing, a figure that could be the largest ever in a single round for a private biotechnology company. The company, based in Cambridge, Mass., said that the new financing brought to more than $950 million the total it had raised from investors and corporate partners. That is somewhat of a remarkable figure for a company that does not yet have an experimental drug in clinical trials. Moderna is developing drugs based on synthetic versions of messenger RNA, the molecule used by cells to carry the recipe for making a protein from the DNA in the genes to the cell’s protein-making machinery. If the company can deliver synthetic messenger RNA, it can get the body to produce virtually any protein it needs, helping to treat all manner of diseases. Stephane Bancel, Moderna’s chief executive, said the company needed the money because it had grand ambitions to develop dozens of drugs. “We do not want to do what most biotechs do, which is one drug at a time,’’ he said. “We want to go in parallel.’’ He said Moderna and its corporate collaborators, AstraZeneca and Alexion Pharmaceuticals, had 45 drugs in development. The first few should enter human testing in 12 to 24 months, he said. The financing seems to be about double that of other private rounds in the industry and bigger than most initial public stock offerings. Jazz Pharmaceuticals, which is now public, raised $250 million in a private round in 2004. Intarcia Therapeutics raised $200 million in a private round last year. Juno Therapeutics in December had the largest initial public offering in the biotechnology industry in recent memory, raising about $300 million. Mr. Bancel said Moderna would have been satisfied raising $200 million, but got more offers than it expected and even ended up turning away some investors. New investors in the latest financing were Viking Global Investors, Invus, RA Capital Management and Wellington Management. AstraZeneca and Alexion Pharmaceuticals, which are collaborating with Moderna, also invested. The largest shareowner in the company is Flagship Ventures, the venture capital firm that started Moderna. 