The senior partners of Wall Street’s private equity firms typically draw their salaries from management fees paid by clients, including the nation’s biggest pension funds, whose capital they invest.But in the biggest deal struck last year by the Texas private equity giant TPG, investment clients are effectively paying twice for a partner’s time — once through management fees and again through a separate fee based on the partner’s work on the particular investment.The partner, Kevin R. Burns, TPG’s head of global operations, is generating the additional payments through his role as acting president and chief operating officer of Chobani, the yogurt maker in upstate New York that took a $750 million loan from TPG last April, when it was struggling financially, according to people briefed on the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity.Mr. Burns, who continues to draw a full salary from TPG, has spent most of his time at Chobani since quietly taking on the management role in early September, the people said. The additional payments for his Chobani work — which TPG officially classifies as reimbursements — flow to TPG itself, which is owned by Mr. Burns and the other partners. The amount of Mr. Burns’s work at Chobani that is being reimbursed could not be determined.Such a payment plan appears to fall within TPG’s stated business practices. Members of the firm’s operations group may serve in management roles at the firm’s portfolio companies, at the expense of clients, according to a regulatory filing by TPG in March. Nevertheless, the existence of the arrangement, which has not previously been reported, highlights a thorny issue in private equity that is being scrutinized by the Securities and Exchange Commission.“It’s a classic problem that there are all these ancillary fees that are not being offset when the investors think they are,” said Gregg D. Polsky, a law professor at the University of North Carolina who studies private equity firms. “It ends up being a disclosure issue and potentially problematic.”A spokesman for TPG, Owen Blicksilver, said in a statement: “It is common for our operations team to take on interim management roles like Mr. Burns and other TPG professionals have at Chobani.”“This is exactly what our investors expect of our operations team, and the terms under which we are reimbursed for the cost of these services are explicitly agreed with and disclosed to our investors,” he added.A spokesman for the S.E.C., John Nester, declined to comment.The S.E.C., which has sharpened its focus on private equity since the financial crisis, is concerned that the industry’s clients, which are already paying management fees and a cut of investment profits, have in numerous cases paid extra for work at companies acquired by a firm on their behalf. This can create problems because the clients often do not realize they are paying and because the payments are often in addition to management fees, according to a speech last May by Andrew J. Bowden, director of the S.E.C.’s office of compliance inspections and examinations.The payments for Mr. Burns’s work at Chobani are in addition to management fees paid by TPG’s clients, according to the people briefed on the matter.Mr. Blicksilver, in the statement, said Mr. Burns announced his Chobani role at an annual conference for TPG clients in October. But the text of a slide presentation on Chobani delivered by Mr. Burns at the conference, obtained by The New York Times, does not include a mention of his management role.TPG, which is based in Fort Worth and was founded in 1992 by David Bonderman and James Coulter, is hoping that the Chobani deal can help lead it out of a trying period. Its performance has suffered from a string of disappointing deals in recent years, including the $45 billion buyout with other investors of the Texas utility TXU, now called Energy Future Holdings, which filed for bankruptcy last spring. Having been burned by such mega-buyouts, TPG has recently stuck to smaller deals, including investments in the home rental site Airbnb and the ride-booking service Uber.Yet many investors remain skeptical as TPG seeks to raise $10 billion for its latest buyout fund. The firm has offered investors discounts on fees if they invest larger amounts of capital and commit on the early side, according to a fund-raising document obtained by The Times.In talks with Chobani last year, TPG seized an opportunity to invest in a company that it viewed as a leader in the booming market for Greek yogurt but that was in urgent need of cash, according to the slide presentation given by Mr. Burns. TPG negotiated hard for the deal, beating out several rivals. The talks even spilled over into an Easter Mass attended by Mr. Burns, who received a call to his cellphone from Hamdi Ulukaya, Chobani’s founder, and answered it during the service, the presentation says.Mr. Burns, who is based in TPG’s San Francisco office and oversees the operational work for numerous companies in the firm’s portfolio, soon made Chobani his focus. Among the problems he sought to fix were the large amounts of waste in Chobani’s plants and a declining market share, according to the presentation. Mr. Burns is being considered as a candidate to succeed Mr. Ulukaya as Chobani’s chief executive, people briefed on the matter said.TPG has a system in place to collect extra for Mr. Burns’s work. The firm employs accountants in its Fort Worth office whose job includes ensuring TPG is compensated by clients for time and expenses spent working on portfolio companies, according to internal emails obtained by The Times and people briefed on the matter. The group is called the TPG Recovery Team, a name that is not widely known inside the firm. In Mr. Burns’s case, the team has been “recovering” payments that otherwise would flow to clients.The payments stem from so-called monitoring fees that TPG collects from Chobani and other portfolio companies in exchange for broadly defined services. Such fees have generally come under scrutiny by private equity clients and the S.E.C., and TPG and other private equity firms now share them with clients. But the TPG Recovery Team, when it collects payments for operational work, draws from clients’ portion of monitoring fees, the people briefed on the matter said.The dollar amount that TPG has collected under this arrangement could not be determined. But TPG’s monitoring fees in general can run into millions of dollars annually for individual companies. In 2013, for example, it collected more than $7 million in monitoring fees from Energy Future Holdings, according to an internal document detailing insider payments that was obtained by The Times.Mr. Burns has continued to work on other portfolio companies while serving in Chobani’s management. At the conference for clients in October, which was held at the Phoenician resort in Scottsdale, Ariz., he also gave a presentation on American Tire Distributors, which TPG acquired in 2010.Most of the conference expenses were paid by clients, the people briefed on the matter said. Chobani paid for what it called “creation stations,” carts offering yogurt and an array of toppings.But TPG picked up the bill for a performance by the Who, the people said. The band’s set included the 1971 rock anthem “Won’t Get Fooled Again.”A version of this article appears in print on 01/06/2015, on page B1 of the NewYork edition with the headline: TPG Investors Pay Twice for Work on Chobani Deal.