The 19th-century German leader Otto von Bismarck once remarked that “laws are like sausages, it is better not to see them being made.”  Figuring what a law  means can be no less problematic. This adage is particularly applicable to the latest court cases involving lawsuits claiming retaliation  in violation of the whistle-blower provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act. The vagaries of the law have left much room for interpretation in what protections Congress intended to provide whistle-blowers.One of the central questions of the provision has been whether a whistle-blower has to first report information about questionable practices to the Securities and Exchange Commission in order to be protected from firing, demotion or harassment. The federal courts have been split on this question. That there is ambiguity in the law should not come as a surprise. The Dodd-Frank Act covered 2,300 pages and was the product of numerous last-minute changes to its wording. But the anti-retaliation provision in the Dodd-Frank Act provides a strong and important protection for whistle-blowers.  To encourage disclosure of corporate wrongdoing, the S.E.C. has taken an expansive view that would protect from retaliation any employee who reports information either internally or to a government agency.The legal problem is that Congress appeared to require reporting to the S.E.C. as a prerequisite to applying the anti-retaliation provision.  The law defines a whistle-blower as someone who provides “information relating to a violation of the securities laws to the commission.”  The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit found in Asadi v. G.E. Energy that the law “clearly expresses Congress’s intention to require individuals to report information to the S.E.C. to qualify as a whistle-blower under Dodd-Frank.”How does the S.E.C. get around what looks like a pretty clear mandate that requires reporting to the agency first?  It uses some rather convoluted logic to argue, in essence, that the language of the Dodd-Frank Act is not really as clear as it first appears.Under the anti-retaliation provision,  whistle-blowers are protected for reporting information to the S.E.C. or in making other disclosures that are “required or protected under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.”  That means a whistle-blower can be required to file a report about misconduct to a company’s audit committee and senior management without having to also provide the information to the government. Thus, there are instances where the person does not need to go outside the company to qualify as a whistle-blower. This provision was added to the Dodd-Frank Act at the last minute, so it is not entirely clear what Congress intended.In an effort to bolster its position, the S.E.C. adopted a rule in 2011 that takes the position that reporting outside the company is not necessary for an employee to be protected from retaliation.  That step is important for its argument because under a Supreme Court case, Chevron v. Natural Resources Defense Council, courts should defer to an agency’s reasonable interpretation of an ambiguous statute.  If the S.E.C. is right in that the statute is unclear, then its view should prevail.The S.E.C. recently filed a “friend of the court” brief in the federal appeals court in Philadelphia arguing that the reference to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act furnishes an “implied exception” to the whistle-blower definition that avoids the limited view of who qualifies as a whistle-blower.Asserting that a statute is ambiguous does not make it so.  Nevertheless, some federal district courts have accepted the argument that reporting misconduct to the S.E.C. is not an absolute requirement for the anti-retaliation protection, rejecting analysis in Asadi v. G.E. Energy that requires a report to the S.E.C. Whether an employee qualifies for protection under the Dodd-Frank Act is an important question that needs to be addressed by the courts – not solely because it can safeguard a person’s position in a company.  The law gives much greater rights to whistle-blowers who suffered from retaliation than is available under other laws that encourage reports of misconduct.The Dodd-Frank law gives an employee a right to sue in federal court for reinstatement to a job, unlike the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which requires an employee to file a complaint with the Labor Department before proceeding further.  The remedies provided in by the Dodd-Frank Act are more lucrative. It allows litigants to collect double back pay for lost income caused by the retaliation in addition to recovery of lawyers’ fees (that’s something that is music to the ears of lawyers).  The statute of limitations for filing a case is six years after the retaliation occurred, much more than the 180 days provided to file a complaint under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.Needless to say, companies are much more fearful of running afoul of the Dodd-Frank Act’s anti-retaliation provisions because of the potential costs.  If the S.E.C.’s expansive interpretation of who qualifies for the protections is adopted, then future whistle-blowers will always try to come within that statute rather than using the more limited rights afforded by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.As I have discussed before, whistle-blowing has been embraced by Congress as a means to combat fraud in government programs, even as  a Deal Professor column by Steven Davidoff Solomon argues that a rich payout “rewards bad people.”  The Supreme Court took an expansive view of the scope of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act’s whistle-blower protections last year in Lawson v. FMR LLC. In that case, the court found that Saranes-Oxley provides protections for employees of private companies that do work for publicly traded corporations, not just those working at public companies themselves. The trend is clearly in favor of encouraging whistle-blowers to come forward. And the courts seem divided on whether to  broadly
interpret the protections adopted by Congress for actions that can be perceived as retaliatory.  Even if the S.E.C. is unable to persuade the courts to adopt its reading of the Dodd-Frank Act, Congress can quickly settle the issue by amending the law to clarify how far the protection should extend.  Companies are sure to resist efforts to broaden the anti-retaliation provision. But they  could find themselves on the wrong side of the issue by appearing to shield wrongdoing if they fight efforts to encourage whistle-blowing.By PETER J. HENNINGPrograms, and payouts, to encourage whistle-blowers to come forward with wrongdoing are likely to increase with the new Congress, Peter J. Henning writes.