PARIS — Shares of Club Méditerranée fell on Monday, after an Italian businessman who had been battling for control of the vacation resort operator conceded to his rival, the Chinese conglomerate Fosun International.The Global Resorts consortium, led by the Italian investor Andrea C. Bonomi, said late Friday that “after careful consideration” it would not top Fosun’s offer of 24.60 euros, or $29.40, a share, which Fosun made on Dec. 19. The stock dropped on Monday afternoon in Paris to just above the winning bid, falling 2.1 percent, to €24.54 a share.Mr. Bonomi and his partners in the bidding, which include his Investindustrial private equity group, the Wall Street titan K.K.R., and Sol Kerzner, a South African hotelier, were facing a Wednesday deadline set by the French market regulator to either raise their own offer or walk away.In the end, Mr. Bonomi’s decision was hardly a surprise, as analysts had said that he would have trouble justifying a higher offer in view of Club Med’s prospects.
PhotoAndrea Bonomi had partnered with private equity groups and a South African hotelier in his bidding.Credit Charles Platiau/Reuters“Global Resorts, as an institutional investor, feels that the current situation and the levels of valuation do not warrant further consideration of Club Med as an investment opportunity,” Mr. Bonomi said in a statement.The winning offer, made by Fosun’s Gaillon Invest II consortium, values the company at €939 million, or about $1.1 billion, including Club Med’s convertible securities. In addition to Fosun, the Gaillon group includes Ardian, a French private equity investor; Fidelidade, a Portuguese insurance company controlled by Fosun; Beijing Utour International Travel Service, a Shanghai-listed travel company; and Club Med’s management. Nelson Tanure, a Brazilian investor, has also been invited to join the project.Fosun’s chairman, Guo Guangchang, joined in May 2013 with Henri Giscard d’Estaing, Club Med’s chairman and chief executive, in a bid to take the company private at €17 a share. After months of legal wrangling and a small improvement in the offering price, that deal looked set to go ahead at €17.50, until Mr. Bonomi upended the tables in June.Mr. Bonomi had tried to sway investors with an argument for more balanced investment in Club Med’s international and European growth, including middle-market consumers, rather than the more Asia-focused luxury strategy espoused by Fosun and Club Med’s management.Fehmi Ben Naamane, an analyst at Oddo Securities, said Mr. Bonomi had been seeking to change almost overnight the resort company’s 10-year-old strategy of moving upscale and the management model built around that. It was completely predictable that Mr. Bonomi walked away, Mr. Ben Naamane said, considering the logic of his investment would be lost at a higher price.With the battle over, Club Med’s future “still looks difficult,” Mr. Ben Naamane said, “but if Fosun rapidly puts its strategy into place, and if they can expand significantly in China, of course that would bring major growth.”If nothing else, Global Resorts has helped holdout investors to make a handsome return. Mr. Bonomi and his allies themselves bought more than 3.5 million Club Med shares on June 30, when they closed at €19.51 share; that could give them a paper gain of roughly €18 million on those shares alone.Over the ensuing months, the consortium members ultimately acquired several million more shares as they built their nearly 20 percent stake in Club Med. They intend to tender their Club Med shares to the winning bidders or sell them on the market, they said.Through a spokesman, Mr. Bonomi declined to comment.​Fosun, in a statement, expressed its “satisfaction” at its victory. The board of Club Med is expected to meet as early as this week to endorse the winning offer, after which only the approval of the market regulator would be necessary for the deal to move toward completion. Club Med declined to comment. Laure Fourquet contributed reporting.