By any measure, last year was a good one for the business of raising money, in either the public or the private markets, DealBook’s Michael J. de la Merced writes. Some 1,205 issuers raised nearly $249 billion globally, according to data from Thomson Reuters, making 2014 one of the busiest since 2010 for companies seeking to list on the stock markets. Such enthusiasm has prompted comparisons to the dot-com boom and bust of 1999-2000.At the same time, start-ups like Uber and Airbnb raised enormous sums of money by turning to private investors, garnering valuations that rivaled those of publicly traded counterparts. Over all, 192 of the top technology start-ups tracked by the research firm CB Insights in 2014 raised $12.9 billion in new funds. By comparison, a similar set of the companies that the firm tracked in 2013 raised about $5 billion.What will this year bring? “Unlike the past year, there is no mega-I.P.O. already lined up for the public stage,” Mr. de la Merced writes. Many are hoping that Uber will pursue a public stock listing. The file-sharing company Box is scheduled to go public, and just last week, Shake Shack announced it, too, would go public. And let’s not forget Pinterest, the health-tracking company Fitbit and Vice Media, which have all drawn speculation about their plans.EURO FALLS LOWER  |  Down the euro goes. On Friday, Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, said in an interview with a German newspaper that the threat of deflation might force his bank to take more aggressive stimulus measures, which could include buying eurozone bonds in bulk, Landon Thomas Jr. and Jack Ewing report in DealBook. His comments prompted the euro to fall to $1.20, a four-and-a-half year low against the dollar.The dollar also hit a multiyear high against the Japanese yen, and it was also gaining on the fragile currencies in Brazil, Turkey and Russia.What does it all mean? The moves highlighted a trend in world currency markets: Global central banks ‒ along with investors also wary of the low returns that their euros have been delivering ‒ have increasingly been switching into dollars and out of euros, Mr. Thomas and Mr. Ewing write. “The expectation is that a rapidly recovering United States economy will push the Federal Reserve to increase interest rates this year, making dollar-based assets more attractive than those denominated in euros, Japanese yen and emerging market currencies,” they write.The weakness in the euro on Friday came after Mr. Draghi, in an interview in Handelsblatt of Germany, said, “The risks of not fulfilling our mandate of price stability are in any case higher than they were six months ago.” Investors interpreted Mr. Draghi’s comments to mean that the central bank was moving closer to broad-based purchases of government bonds, possibly as soon as its next monetary policy meeting, on Jan. 22. MARIO DRAGHI’S STRESS TEST  |  Mr. Draghi’s comments followed those he made in December, when he told reporters that the central bank was ready to deploy new weapons against the eurozone’s dangerously low inflation rate, Jack Ewing and Binyamin Appelbaum write in The New York Times. At the time, Mr. Draghi said that the bank’s governing council had just agreed to prepare “for further measures, which could, if needed, be implemented in a timely manner.”But unlike his past assurances, which had bought time for Mr. Draghi, this one failed to work. “Mr. Draghi’s quandary is that the actions that might save the eurozone also threaten to divide it,” Mr. Ewing and Mr. Appelbaum write. And even as Mr. Draghi hints at a bond-buying program, he faces challenges, from inside and outside the walls of his new high-rise headquarters in Frankfurt.ON THE AGENDA  |  Automakers report December sales figures. The American Economic Association concludes its annual meeting in Boston. The trial of Ross W. Ulbricht, who is accused of operating the now-defunct online marketplace Silk Road, begins.BITCOIN FOUNDATION DISMISSES TOP EMPLOYEE  |  The Bitcoin Foundation has parted ways with Jim Harper, its global policy counsel, Sydney Ember writes in DealBook. Mr. Harper’s last day was Wednesday, though he received notice of the foundation’s decision shortly after Thanksgiving. The dismissal comes as the Bitcoin Foundation is shifting its focus, from policy advocacy to Bitcoin technology and infrastructure development.But Mr. Harper said he was not quite ready to cut all ties to the Bitcoin Foundation, despite a difference of opinion on the foundation’s direction. In an interview, Mr. Harper, who previously served as director of information policy studies at the Cato Institute, said he was still running for a position on the foundation’s board. The board election will take place in mid-February.  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailClub Med Set to Back Chinese Bid  |  The resort operator Club Méditerranée is expected to back an offer from a consortium led by the Chinese billionaire Guo Guangchang this week after the Italian investor Andrea C. Bonomi declined to raise his offer on Friday, Reuters reports.  REUTERSNasdaq Buys U.S. Index Provider for $225 Million  |  The Nasdaq stock exchange has acquired Dorsey Wright, a United States index provider and analytics group, for $225 million as part of a strategy to diversify its business, The Financial Times reports.  FINANCIAL TIMES Oil Price Slump May Spur European Oil and Natural Gas Deal-Making  |  In the short term, the drop in the oil prices will make it harder to get deals done. But if low prices persist, financial stress may make small players vulnerable, Fiona Maharg-Bravo of Reuters Breakingviews writes. DealBook »Rangers Football Club Receives Takeover Offer  |  Robert Sarver, an American businessman who owns the Phoenix Suns, has made an offer for Scotland’s Rangers International Football Club, pitting him against Mike Ashley, who owns Newcastle United Football Club and extended a 3 million pound loan to the Rangers late last year, The Financial Times reports.  FINANCIAL TIMES Chinese Game Developer Receives Buyout Offer From Chairman  |  Perfect World, a Chinese game developer, has received a proposal from its chairman, Michael Yufeng Chi, to acquire the shares he does not already own, in a move that values the company at about $1 billion, The Wall Street Journal writes.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Vanguard Sets Record for Fund Inflow  |  Investors poured $216 billion, a record inflow for any mutual fund firm, into the Vanguard Group in 2014, according to preliminary figures from the mutual fund group, The Wall Street Journal writes.  WALL STREET JOURNAL A Sobering Perspective on a Looming Retirement Crisis  |  “Falling Short” details the whats and whys of an impending retirement crisis and provides a number of reasonable sounding alternative paths to avoiding financial Armageddon, writes Jonathan A. Knee in a Book Entry review. DealBook »Private Equity Turns Attention to Permanent Capital  |  Instead of traditional funds that allow investors regular opportunities to redeem their money, or buyout funds that wind up after 10 years, many hedge fund and private equity managers are seeking to raise money for vehicles that bring cash in that can be invested in perpetuity, known as “permanent capital,” The Financial Times reports.  FINANCIAL TIMES Founder of Russia Fund Vanishes  |  Kim Karapetyan, the founder of Blackfield Capital, one of Moscow’s top hedge funds, is said to be missing along with all of the firm’s assets, in an international mystery that has captivated Moscow investors, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing former employees of the firm.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Hedge Fund Founder Killed in New York Apartment  |  Thomas Gilbert Sr., the founder and chief investment officer of Wainscott Capital Partners, is said to have been fatally shot in the head by his son inside the family’s apartment on Sunday, the New York Post writes, according to police.  NEW YORK POST U.S. Fund Gives Gift to London Business School  |  The hedge fund AQR Capital has given the London Business School 10 million pounds to set up an investment institute and host what it hopes will become the “Davos of finance,” The Financial Times reports.  FINANCIAL TIMES Germany’s Tele Columbus Revives I.P.O. Plans  |  Tele Columbus, Germany’s third-biggest cable television operator, is reviving plans to raise at least $362 million in an initial public offering originally set for last year, Bloomberg News writes.  BLOOMBERG NEWS International CES Kicks Off in Las Vegas  |  Household devices that link together through the Internet are likely to energize this year’s International Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, The New York Times writes. The event opens to the news media on Monday and to the public on Tuesday.  NEW YORK TIMES Xiaomi Triples Smartphone Shipments in 2014  |  Xiaomi, the fast-rising Chinese smartphone maker, which recently closed a $1.1 billion financing round, valuing the company at about $45 billion, said it sold 61.1 million units last year, up from 18.7 million in 2013, The Wall Street Journal writes.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Zuckerberg Starts a Book Club  |  Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook, is trying to read a book every other week as his goal for 2015 and has invited his 30 million Facebook followers to join him, ReCode writes.  RECODE Whole Foods’ High Hurdle for Investors  |  Whole Foods Market got the Securities and Exchange Commission’s permission to exclude from its proxy a shareholder proposal on director nominations, and 10 other companies now want to do the same, Gretchen Morgenson writes in the Fair Game column.  NEW YORK TIMES China Drops Export Limits on Rare Earths  |  China has ended its export quotas for rare earths, minerals used in mobile phones and other high-tech products, after losing a World Trade Organization case brought by Washington and other trading partners.  ASSOCIATED PRESS Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 