AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.11 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.02 percent.The following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Board of Education, $270 million of debt securities. Competitive.Florida Department of Management Services, $103.2 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.TUESDAYMiami, $319.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYMassachusetts School Building Authority, $80 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Ohio, $148.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYShelby County, Tenn., $172.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKBroward County, Fla., School Board, $273 million of certificates of participation. Citigroup Global Markets. Comal County, Tex., $78 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Kalamazoo, Mich., $90.9 million of limited tax general obligation bonds. Bank of America. Keller, Tex., $158.9 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. William Blair. New York Dormitory Authority, $1 billion of personal income tax revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.New York University Hospital Center, $120 million of debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities. Oregon Department of Administrative Services, $412 million of lottery revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.St. Johns County, Fla., $56 million of certificates of participation. Citigroup Global Markets. Texas A&M University, $178 million of taxable debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Texas A&M University, $198 million of taxable debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets. Wyoming Community Development Authority, $76 million of housing revenue bonds. Bank of America.Advertisement