LONDON — This just in: British regulators made missteps in the handling of the 2008 financial crisis.More than 500 pages of minutes of Bank of England meetings were released on Wednesday, and they showed that regulators drastically misjudged the magnitude of the crisis and were short of tools needed to address it.In September 2007, the chairman of the Financial Services Authority, Callum McCarthy, characterized problems in the market as “ones of liquidity, not of institutional insolvency,” the minutes say. He emphasized “that the U.K. banking system was sound and that there was scope for bringing back onto institutions’ balance sheets items that needed to be dealt with.”Mervyn King, governor of the Bank of England at the time, said that the crisis of confidence had shaken the “unusual serenity of recent years” but if managed properly — avoiding moral hazard and draconian measures — it “should not threaten our long-run economic stability.”Days later, Britain witnessed its first bank run since 1866 on the mortgage lender Northern Rock, which was nationalized later. The next year, the government spent 45 billion pounds to buy more than 80 percent of Royal Bank of Scotland and £20.5 billion bailing out Lloyds TSB Bank. Anger in Britain over these bailouts is still palpable.During the crisis, those institutions were assigned code names as officials managed their emergency liquidity facilities and bailouts. Royal Bank of Scotland was “Phoenix” and Lloyds was “Lark.” Alliance & Leicester, another lender, was called “Tiger,” and Bradford & Bingley was called “Badger.”Andrew Tyrie, the chairman of the Treasury Select Committee, who has called for the release of the Bank of England minutes since 2011, said in a statement that “the minutes show that during the crisis the Bank of England did not have a board worthy of the name.” Mr. Tyrie criticized the members of the board, called the court, for not asking tougher questions of the governor. He said the board “should have been able to provide effective challenge to the executive, and to make clear that, where appropriate, it would conduct retrospective reviews of bank policy and performance.” He said there was “little evidence that the court attempted either.”The minutes also show an alarming lack of information inside the Bank of England, which had little authority to obtain the kind of market data it seemed to need to make the decisions it was making.At one point in 2008, minutes showed concern that the public did not have a proper understanding of how deposit insurance worked. Apparently neither did the Bank of England. The insurance “was not well understood by the public, nor had it been well understood in the F.S.A. and bank until recently,” the minutes read.The minutes show a march over time toward greater regulation of banks, which materialized in a number of reforms.The so-called tripartite system for sharing responsibility for financial regulation among the F.S.A., the Treasury and the Bank of England eventually became widely discredited. Eventually Mr. King would say the arrangements were “not sufficiently workable” or relevant to “managing a crisis.” The system was rebuilt, with new regulatory powers assigned to the Bank of England, a greater emphasis on financial stability and a new agency, the Financial Conduct Authority, given responsibility for a huge swath of the market.The bank appears to have had its prescient moments. Minutes from the meeting of Oct. 15, 2008, soon after Lehman Brothers failed, show that the bank had been pushing the government to recapitalize the lenders. It was not until conditions were dire enough that it did so.“Earlier in the crisis, there had been reluctance outside the bank to accept that the provision of central bank liquidity was not a solution to underlying problems,” the minutes say. “The bank’s view was that the provision of liquidity was necessary, but it was only a ‘sticking plaster’ that provided time for banks to make the adjustments that were needed.”After the announcement of its plan — which included recapitalization of the banks, partial and temporary guarantees to jump-start financing and provision of central bank liquidity to ensure stability of the banking system — it declared a  victory of sorts. “There was now a real sense that a corner had been turned and the bank could be proud of its work and contribution,” the minutes say.The banks’ greatest validation of that point came at meetings of the International Monetary Fund on the weekend before the Oct. 15 session, when other countries said they would follow Britain’s lead. “Most significantly,” the minutes say, “the U.S. team had also reached a view that they should also adopt such a plan.”The minutes reflect a hope that the events would stem the criticism of the bank for being out of touch, understaffed and lacking in banking expertise. “It was hoped that when the role of the bank was considered in the future, it would be recognized that the bank had a vast amount of expertise in markets and banking relevant to its policy role,” according to minutes of the Oct. 15 meeting.  In 2009, the Bank of England board was revamped. It is now smaller and run by a nonexecutive chairman.On Dec. 11, the Bank announced further reforms, including a decision to publish its minutes with its monetary policy committee decisions and to publish the financial crisis minutes ahead of the normally scheduled date of 2027-2029.