There can be no clearer admission that Coach has exhausted the growth opportunities of its core brand than the $574 million purchase of the luxury shoemaker Stuart Weitzman. Yet for shareholders, who have lopped off half of the company’s value since 2012, Coach’s acceptance of its limitations offers a sign of hope. Coach is betting that, like the luxury conglomerates LVMH and Kering, it can use its knowledge to expand other, smaller brands.For 74 years Coach focused exclusively on its own label, a strategy that worked until a few years ago. Despite an ambitious brand makeover, the company has failed to reverse sliding same-store sales and struggled to maintain its cachet with fickle fashionistas.As Coach has steadily lost market share to designers like Michael Kors and Kate Spade, its market value has fallen by half, to $10 billion today. And a rapid expansion into factory outlets has also tarnished the brand’s cool factor.Last year the company hired a new creative director and staged its first New York Fashion Week show in February. The revamp has thus far failed to bear fruit. In October, the company posted its sixth straight quarter of North American same-store sales declines.Enter Stuart Weitzman. The company, a red carpet regular and maker of People magazine’s “trendsetter” boot of the year, offers Coach a chance to jazz up its reputation. With 118 retail locations, Stuart Weitzman has roughly the same footprint Coach had a decade ago before nearly doubling its global presence and growing net sales to $4.8 billion in the 2014 fiscal year from $1.3 billion in 2004.Stuart Weitzman posted revenue of $300 million for the year ended Sept. 30 and has grown sales at a 10 percent compounded annual rate in the last five years. The ambition for Coach is to apply to Stuart Weitzman its experience in quadrupling its core brand over the past decade. That’s the way LVMH and Kering have managed to maintain their sparkle. It’s a new strategy for Coach, but the old one wasn’t working.By HIROKO TABUCHI and MICHAEL J. DE LA MERCEDThe transaction is a rare acquisition by Coach, which has embarked on a turnaround that includes ending discounts and transforming itself into an upscale lifestyle brand.Stephanie Rogan is research assistant for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.DealBook readers: The Breakingviews predictions book for 2015, “Animal Spirits and Crisis Ghosts,” is a collection of pithy commentary that reflects two conflicting sentiments coexisting in finance and economics. Stocks and other assets keep recording solid, but not yet outlandish, price gains, which have encouraged mergers, initial public offerings and shareholder activism. At the same time, policies inspired by the global financial crisis in 2008 are restraining certain industries, in particular banking where regulators want bigger, and therefore more expensive, capital cushions. Click here to read the book. (Or download the PDF.)