As the market perpetually shifts, so do the rhetorical stylings its players use to talk their way out of problems. The past year saw above-average creativity when it came to saying one thing and meaning another. Here, Reuters Breakingviews offers 10 euphemisms we’d most like to see disappear.Asset-light strategy Holding assets of tangible value used to be seen as a good thing. But as asset bubbles deflate, the opposite has become true. While some hoteliers went “asset-light” years ago, in 2014 everyone from the car-hailing app Uber to the drink company Jamba Juice promoted their intangibility. Yet someone still has to own all those assets, whether cars, hotels or shops. So in reality, profit or loss is just spread among more people. It’s outsourcing by another name.Competitive pay What’s not to like about being competitive? When it’s a roundabout way of saying “excessive.” Helge Lund’s unacceptable pay as chief executive of the British energy group BG was explained as “competitive in the international oil and gas industry.” Stuart Gulliver’s potential $18 million in pay and benefits at HSBC were part of a “competitive position on pay.” Even Coca-Cola used the word to defend an egregious stock compensation plan opposed by some shareholders and belatedly criticized by Warren Buffett. More often it becomes a competition in which shareholders lose out.Adjusted earnings This fluid word “earnings” came in for a special beating in 2014. Valeant, the drug maker that bid unsuccessfully for the Botox-maker Allergan, asked shareholders to focus not on its regular earnings but on “cash earnings per share,” mainly because they were much higher. Tech companies ask investors to look at “non-GAAP earnings,” which add back things accounting regulators have already decided should be removed. As a result, loss-making companies turn profitable; the mediocre become tremendously successful.Ecosystem In old-school parlance, collections of companies with loose industrial logic were called “conglomerates.” Contemporary Internet groups like Facebook, Google, Rakuten and SoftBank prefer the more biological-sounding word ecosystems. For some, it means dabbling in many things, because no one is sure what will work. For others, like Alibaba, that include customers and service providers like couriers in their ecosystems, it’s a way of sharing in the labors of unrelated companies without having to bail them out when things go wrong. Or at least, that’s the hope.Gifting Luxury-goods makers have discovered to their horror that in China, gift giving is often a front for bribery of officials, and a purge on corruption has deprived them of a large chunk of revenue. The result is what cognac distillers call “destocking.” It’s hard to believe the most sophisticated consumer brands in the world didn’t know that their customers were using their products to break the law. The falling share prices of companies like Rémy Cointreau and Prada suggest investors hadn’t seen through the linguistic wrapping.“Hello There” That innocuous greeting was how Stephen Elop, executive vice president at Microsoft, began an email in July that, 11 paragraphs later, would tell 12,500 employees they were being fired. In fairness, only a sociopathic boss would relish firing people. But by using harmless language to dress up policies that workers won’t like, Mr. Elop is in the same boat as politicians around the world, from Germany to China. In economics they just call it “structural reforms.”Internal devaluation A polite, academic term for a government policy that forces workers to toil for longer and receive lower pay and benefits. Though first coined in the 1990s when several Nordic states were considering adopting the euro, the actual crisis of the single currency forced countries, principally Spain, to put the theory into practice. While the strategy may work, honesty would dictate a redefinition to “more work, less pay.”Inversions This fancy name for buying foreign companies to avoid taxes in the United States on offshore earnings may see little usage in 2015. Buyers like Burger King, Pfizer, Eaton and Chiquita attempted to strike deals in 2014 that would sidestep the taxman. But President Obama decided that “inversion” was simply a misspelling of “evasion” and made such deals harder to get done.Settlement Cases thought settled proved to be anything but in 2014. The British lender Standard Chartered paid a third round of penalties over dealings with Iran, only to find that American authorities fear there was still more to be unearthed. Barclays, UBS and four other banks were found to have manipulated foreign currency markets, despite having already settled other charges of interest-rate tinkering. Bank bosses blame the industry’s “culture” — the biggest misnomer of all.Volatility The concept is pretty simple. But its meaning has become, well, volatile. When market movements were sluggish, low volatility described an anxious state of uncertainty as markets waited for commodity prices to inevitably drop and interest rates to rise. Now, plunging prices of assets like the ruble and oil have been explained as a natural return to volatility. In fact, low or high volatility mean the same thing: Nobody knows what’s going on.John Foley is China editor and Rob Cox is editor of Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.DealBook readers: The Breakingviews predictions book for 2015, “Animal Spirits and Crisis Ghosts,” is a collection of pithy commentary that reflects two conflicting sentiments co-existing in finance and economics. Stocks and other assets keep recording solid, but not yet outlandish, price gains, which have encouraged mergers, initial public offerings and shareholder activism. At the same time, policies inspired by the global financial crisis in 2008 are restraining certain industries, in particular banking where regulators want bigger, and therefore more expensive, capital cushions. Click here to read the book. (Or download the PDF.)