After account records for clients of Morgan Stanley were put up for sale last month on the information-sharing site Pastebin, the bank traced the breach to a financial adviser working out of its New York offices, a 30-year-old named Galen Marsh, Nathaniel Popper writes in DealBook, citing a person involved in the investigation. Mr. Marsh, who had been with Morgan Stanley since 2008, was quickly fired and is currently the subject of a criminal investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, a person briefed on the investigation said. The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority is also examining the matter.Morgan Stanley said on Monday that it had determined that Mr. Marsh took data on about 10 percent of its 3.5 million wealth management customers, including transactional information from customer statements. The bank said Mr. Marsh did not take any sensitive passwords or Social Security numbers, and that it had not found any evidence the breach had resulted in any losses to customers. A lawyer for Mr. Marsh acknowledged on Monday that his client did take the information in question but said he did not post it online, share it or try to sell it.A brief timeline of events: The first advertisement of Morgan Stanley data was on Dec. 15. Twelve days later, a different item provided a sample of the information that was available, giving details from 1,200 accounts that Morgan Stanley said were tied to 900 clients. The item directed interested buyers to gourl.io, a website that advertises itself as a “crypto-currency payment gateway.” The Morgan Stanley documents were offered for 78,000 Speedcoins, a Bitcoin knockoff that is not yet big enough to have a readily available exchange rate.BIG GAIN FOR COHEN’S NEW FIRM  |  Steven A. Cohen’s prowess lives on. Mr. Cohen’s family office, Point72 Asset Management, generated a gross profit of $2.5 billion to $3 billion in 2014, DealBook’s Matthew Goldstein reports, citing several people briefed on the firm’s performance. That would have made it one of the industry’s most profitable hedge funds of the year ‒ if it were a hedge fund.But of course, it is not. Point72 is the successor to SAC Capital Advisors, which Mr. Cohen rebranded after the firm pleaded guilty to securities fraud charges arising from the federal government’s crackdown on insider trading in the hedge fund industry. He also agreed to stop managing money for outside investors.“It is difficult to compare Point72’s performance to that of a hedge fund because the figures for Mr. Cohen’s firm do not take into account operating costs, like the salaries and bonuses paid to Point72’s more than 800 employees,” Mr. Goldstein writes. “But in a year when the average hedge fund was up just 3.26 percent as of Nov. 30, according to Hedge Fund Research, Point72’s performance is an eye-opener given all the regulatory and law enforcement focus on Mr. Cohen and his firm.”How did other hedge funds do? The average stock-focused hedge fund was up just 2.27 percent as of Nov. 30, according to Hedge Fund Research. David Einhorn’s Greenlight Capital ended the year up almost 9 percent, said a person briefed on the firm’s returns. And William A. Ackman’s Pershing Square Capital Management is expected to post one of the most impressive gains of any large hedge fund in 2014.STOCKS SHUDDER ON OIL FEARS  |  Oil prices dropped below $50 a barrel on Monday, once again sending fear through the global markets, Clifford Krauss and Peter Eavis write in The New York Times. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index fell 37.62 points, or 1.83 percent, to 2,020.58. The Vix, a measure of market volatility, rose about 12 percent. As investors sought safety in government bonds, the yield on the 1-year Treasury note fell to 2.03 percent.The value of the euro, too, continued to drop, falling to its lowest level in years on Monday, prompting sharp declines in European stocks and fanning fears of a regional slowdown.Things were looking a bit better on Tuesday morning. European stocks pared losses and were little changed after a two-day sell-off. But Japan’s Nikkei 225 fell 3 percent, its biggest drop in almost 10 months.ON THE AGENDA  |  The Markit purchasing managers’ index for services is released at 9:45 a.m. The Institute for Supply Management nonmanufacturing index comes out at 10 a.m. Data on factory orders is out at 10 a.m. The Consumer Electronics Association kicks off its annual International Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas. Congress returns to work.UNUSUAL BOARDROOM BATTLE  |  An academic paper written last month by Daniel M. Gallagher, a member of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and Joseph A. Grundfest, a professor at Stanford Law School and himself a former S.E.C. commissioner, is at the heart of a dispute about corporate governance, Andrew Ross Sorkin writes in the DealBook Column. The paper took aim at Lucian A. Bebchuk, a Harvard Law School professor who has long researched corporate governance issues and has been an outspoken advocate for increased democracy in corporate America’s boardrooms.Through Harvard’s Shareholder Rights Project, a group he created, Mr. Bebchuk, on behalf of public pension funds, has helped wage proxy contests at 129 companies to change policies ‒ known as staggered, or classified, boards ‒ that prevent shareholders from electing, or overthrowing, an entire board at once. Mr. Bebchuk appears to be winning the argument. But Mr. Gallagher and Mr. Grundfest suggest that companies are dropping these structures based, in part, on faulty research by Harvard’s Shareholder Rights Project. Worse, they suggest that Mr. Bebchuk’s project committed fraud by not fully disclosing the extent of contradictory research, which they say is a “material omission” by S.E.C. standards.“There are many opposing views on the paper. But here’s one way to think about it: It was a bad precedent for Mr. Gallagher to involve himself in a paper that raises the possibility of fraud in the field he regulates without the due process of a legal complaint,” Mr. Sorkin writes. “Almost lost as collateral damage is the central question of whether staggered boards benefit or hurt shareholders. It should continue to be pursued as the smoke clears.”  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailVerizon Said to Weigh AOL Acquisition  |  Verizon Communications is said to have approached AOL about a potential acquisition or joint venture to expand its mobile video offerings, Bloomberg News reports, citing unidentified people with knowledge of the matter. Verizon has not made a formal proposal to AOL, and no agreement is imminent, the people said.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Club Med Shares Fall as Battle for Resort Operator Ends  |  Andrea C. Bonomi, an Italian businessman who had been battling for control of the vacation resort operator, conceded to his rival, the Chinese conglomerate Fosun International. DealBook »Facebook Buys Voice Recognition Start-Up  |  Facebook has acquired Wit.ai, a voice recognition start-up that allows users to communicate vocally with their machines, ReCode writes.  RECODE Bang & Olufsen Would Consider Bid Approaches  |  Ole Andersen, the chairman of the Danish television and sound system maker Bang & Olufsen, said his company would weigh any bid approach from a bigger rival, as it seeks a response to problems that caused a profit warning last month, Reuters writes.  REUTERS NPS Pharmaceuticals Said to Seek Buyer  |  The drug maker NPS Pharmaceuticals, based in Bedminster, N.J., is said to be seeking a buyer, though the process is in the early stages, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the situation. The company could be valued at over $4.5 billion in a sale.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Ally Financial Sells Stake in Chinese Joint Venture to G.M.  |  Ally Financial said on Monday that it had completed the sale of its stake in a joint venture with a Chinese auto lender to General Motors for $1 billion, Reuters writes.  REUTERS Goldman Says JPMorgan Should Break Itself Up  |  Goldman Sachs analysts wrote in a research note on Monday that JPMorgan Chase could unlock value by splitting its four main businesses or dividing into consumer and institutional companies, Bloomberg News writes.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Deputy Chief Executive Departs Royal Bank of Scotland  |  Chris Sullivan, who became deputy chief executive last year after leading its corporate bank and was expected to leave the bank later this year, left on Dec. 31. DealBook »Lloyds Bank Is Said to Seek Exemption From Rules  |  The Lloyds Banking Group is said to have applied for an exemption to one of the rules requiring Britain’s largest lenders to separate consumer operations from riskier investment banking units, Bloomberg News reports, citing an unidentified person with knowledge of the matter.  BLOOMBERG NEWS TPG Investors Pay Twice for Work on Chobani Deal  |  Clients of the private equity firm are paying twice for a partner’s work for the yogurt maker Chobani, which borrowed $750 million from TPG last year. DealBook »Wasserstein & Co. Goes on Deal Spree  |  In less than a week, the small private equity firm has announced four deals. In the latest, Wasserstein & Company is acquiring Tantor Media, an audiobooks company, for about $25 million. DealBook »Coach Said to Be Nearing Deal for Stuart Weitzman  |  Coach is said to be closing in on a deal to buy Stuart Weitzman, the luxury shoemaker, The Financial Times writes, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter. A deal for Stuart Weitzman, which is owned by the private equity firm Sycamore Partners, could be announced as soon as Tuesday.  FINANCIAL TIMES Debt Dispute Between Argentina and Hedge Funds at Impasse  |  Argentina made an informal offer to settle a debt dispute with a group of New York hedge funds, but the country is still asking the bondholders to accept less than they are seeking. DealBook »Rare Labor Unrest at a Buffett Company  |  Dissent is brewing in the pilot ranks of NetJets, the company owned by Warren E. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway. “Labor unrest is unusual for a Berkshire company, and this particular fight is turning nasty,” The Wall Street Journal reports.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Son Is Charged With Murder in Death of Manhattan Hedge Fund Manager  |  Thomas Gilbert Jr., 30, was arrested after his 70-year-old father, Thomas Gilbert, the founder of Wainscott Capital Partners Fund, was found dead with a gunshot wound to his head on Sunday at his Beekman Place apartment, the police said. The son was also charged with criminal possession of a weapon.  NEW YORK TIMES Tudor Investment Said to Shut Its Oldest Fund  |  Paul Tudor Jones, the founder and chief investment officer of the $13 billion hedge fund firm Tudor Investment, is said to have closed the Tudor Futures Fund, his firm’s oldest fund, Reuters reports, citing an unidentified person familiar with the matter.  REUTERS Golf Business Acushnet Said to Pick I.P.O. Adviser  |  The Acushnet Company, the owner of golf brands like Titleist and Footjoy, is said to have selected Solebury Capital, based in the United States, to advise on a potential initial public offering, which could value the company at about $1.8 billion, Reuters writes, citing an unidentified person with direct knowledge of the matter.  REUTERS Nestlé Health Sciences to Invest $65 Million in a Boston Biotech Start-Up  |  Nestlé Health Science will announce that it has invested $65 million in Seres, a Boston-based start-up focused on restoring the “microbiome,” the host of microorganisms that provide vital functions for humans. DealBook »Biotech Company Moderna Raises $450 Million  |  Moderna Therapeutics said the financing brought the funds it had raised from investors and corporate partners to more than $950 million, a remarkable figure for a company that does not have an experimental drug in clinical trials. DealBook »Apps Everywhere, but No Unifying Link  |  As people spend more time using apps, their Internet has taken a step backward, becoming more isolated ‒ more like the web before search engines, The New York Times writes.  NEW YORK TIMES Stiglitz Said to Be Barred From S.E.C. Panel on High-Frequency Trading  |  Joseph Stiglitz, the Nobel laureate economist who called for a tax on high-frequency trading, is said to have been blocked from a government panel that will advise regulators on issues facing United States equity markets, Bloomberg News reports.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Who Is a Whistle-Blower? The Courts Weigh In  |  The vagaries of the Dodd-Frank Act have left it to the courts to sort out whether a whistle-blower is protected from retaliation, Peter J. Henning writes in the White Collar Watch column. DealBook »White House Is Said to Be Set to Nominate Community Banker to Fed  |  President Obama is expected to nominate a community banker to the Federal Reserve’s board of governors as soon as this week, The Wall Street Journal writes, citing unidentified people familiar with the plans.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 