Wasserstein & Company, the small private equity firm that specializes in media, consumer and industrial companies, is having a busy start to the year. In less than a week, the firm, founded by the late Bruce Wasserstein, has announced four deals. In the latest, it is acquiring Tantor Media, an audiobooks company, for about $25 million. Tantor Media will become part of Recorded Books, one of Wasserstein’s portfolio companies, which distributes unabridged audiobooks to the likes of Audible.com and libraries.In the year that Wasserstein has owned Recorded Books, revenue has doubled through a mix of acquisitions and organic growth, said Anup Bagaria, Wasserstein’s co-managing partner. “We’ve taken a sleepy business and really accelerated growth,” Mr. Bagaria said. Tantor Media, based in Old Saybrook, Conn., has a catalog of more than 5,000 audiobooks.  “As the publishing industry continues to embrace a shift towards digital and the growth in audio content, Recorded Books’ catalog of audiobooks and digital capabilities will be even better positioned to capitalize on that demand,” said Rich Freese, chief executive of Recorded Books. The acquisition of Tantor Media follows three other deals announced by Wasserstein in recent days. On Monday, the firm acquired Summit Professional Networks, which publishes Investment Advisor and other insurance and legal magazines. Summit will become a part of American Lawyer Media, which Wasserstein reacquired last year.  Also on Monday, Wasserstein led the acquisition of Paris Presents, which makes cosmetic and bath products. And last week, Wasserstein sold High Pressure Equipment for about $160 million, an industrial company it acquired in 2012. All the deals were from Wasserstein III, the firm’s latest fund, which has $403 million under management. Wasserstein also still has a stake in Penton, another industrial company, that is worth several hundred million dollars. That investment was made from a previous fund. Wasserstein has spent about half of the money in the latest fund, leaving it with about $200 million. Mr. Bagaria said he expected the rest of the year to be similarly busy on the deal-making front. “We’re optimistic,” he said. “I hope we can do two or three more deals this year.” 