
Frequent Flier By                     
AUSTIN HOPE

JAN. 5, 2015
IT seems that I’ve been in an airplane most of my life. When I was younger I raced professionally in motocross. I did the national circuit and we traveled all over the country. My family started planting grapes in 1978. I remember getting into a little trouble at school once and my dad said if I didn’t shape up he was going to make me work the vineyards. I thought working on the land was the coolest thing ever, which probably wasn’t the reaction he wanted. But there is a great joy to be found when you’re working a vineyard and seeing grapes develop and grow. I don’t know how I did it, but somehow I managed to get my college degree in fruit science from California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo. Now I’m president and winemaker for our business, Hope Family Wines, including Treana, and I’m still traveling all the time.I have always been fascinated by jets and always fly commercial. I’m lucky that I get to fly business class. I loathe coach, and believe me I’ve flown coach many times, especially when I was younger. Back then, everything was fun, but now so much of the joy has been taken out of flying that a decent seat in business class helps a little bit.I’m a really good flier, and once we are in the air nothing bothers me at all. As soon as we take off I can close my eyes and fall asleep. I don’t take a sleep aid because the one time I did I turned into an idiot and kept asking the attendant for an ice cream sundae like I was 4 years old. I kept repeating myself and was generally annoying, or at least that’s what my wife tells me. I don’t remember much from that flight and am not sure I even got my ice cream, but no more sleep aids for me.I’m in a business where casual dress is fine, but when I go to events I have to look the part. I was flying out of central California to Bismarck, N.D., to do a charity dinner. I got on the plane in my typical workday clothes of shorts and a T-shirt. I had formal clothing in the luggage, which, of course, didn’t make it to North Dakota. One of our sales people picked me up from the airport and offered to lend me his jacket. He was a couple sizes bigger than me, but at least I had a jacket, albeit a roomy one, but I figured I would roll up the sleeves or something.AdvertisementThe only clothing store that I could find open by the time we arrived was a secondhand store. I wound up buying a pair of pants and a shirt to go with my too-big jacket. The pants and shirt didn’t fit well, either. I looked pretty stupid, like I didn’t know how to dress myself. Fortunately, people liked the wine and were too polite to comment on my attire.I may not be one to talk to seatmates, but my daughter Ainsley sure is. On a flight to Hawaii, James Hetfield from Metallica was sitting across from me and my family. Ainsley is 11 now, was 10 then, and grew up listening to good music, including Metallica. I told her who he was, and her eyes got really big. I handed her my business card and told her to go say hi.AdvertisementTo my surprise, she did, and they talked for about half an hour. She and Mr. Hetfield shook hands and yelled aloha to each other as they parted ways. I think she has a great future in marketing, or maybe heavy metal.As told to Joan Raymond. Email: joan.raymond@nytimes.comQ. How often do you fly for business?A. At least three times a month or so, mostly domestic, with a little international.Q. What’s your least favorite airport?A. San Francisco. It’s just a nightmare and I try to avoid it at all costs.Q. Of all the places you’ve been, what’s the best?A. Chiang Mai, Thailand. I’ve never seen a country so rich in history and sheer beauty. My family and I had a ball there.Q. What’s your secret airport vice?A. I usually just burrow in a lounge, and since I’m in the adult beverage industry I have to try the Champagne. No matter where I am.A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Fit for the Job, Even in an Ill-Fitting Suit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »