By EMILY STEELJAN. 5, 2015
Dish Network, the satellite provider, is trying to lure younger viewers back to paying for television with the start of a web-based offering that includes ESPN and a number of other popular networks for $20 a month, about a fifth the cost of the average household bill for cable and satellite service.Announced at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas on Monday, the new service is called Sling TV, and provides live and on-demand television delivered via an Internet connection to television sets, computers and mobile devices.Dish executives said that the service was cheaper and more convenient than traditional cable service. And they boasted that it delivered more choices for viewers looking to pay for a slimmed-down group of television networks and programs they want to watch, as well as more options as to when, where and how they want to watch them.“It is the launch of a whole new industry here,” Joseph Clayton, Dish’s chief executive, said in an interview. “We are innovators. We are disrupters. We don’t always make people happy because we challenge the status quo.”AdvertisementSling TV is part of a growing wave of offerings expected from tech, telecom and media companies in the coming year, posing a threat to the established television business, which takes in $170 billion a year. Meanwhile, the streaming outlets of Amazon, Hulu and Netflix continue to pour resources into developing more robust offerings. Sony, CBS and HBO and others are starting Internet-only subscription offerings.AdvertisementThe companies are trying stay relevant in the face of growing numbers of so-called cord-cutters, who have canceled their cable or satellite packages in favor of cheaper streaming alternatives, and “cord nevers,” who have never paid for a traditional cable service. The number of American households that pay for broadband service but not television increased 16 percent, to 10.6 million, in 2014, from 9.2 million in 2012, according to SNL Kagan.Viewers are also spending more time watching streaming video. Roku, which sells popular streaming devices, said more than three billion hours of content were streamed using its devices in 2014, nearly double the amount in 2013.“A lot of people are starting to use it essentially as their full-time TV platform,” said Jim Funk, Roku’s senior vice president for product management and strategy.Dish executives said the new service would not cannibalize the company’s current business because its current offerings do not appeal to Sling TV’s target audience of 18- to 35-year-olds.“We are not hitting the 18- to 35-year-old market today; we just aren’t,” Mr. Clayton said, adding that he knows from experience with five children between the ages of 18 and 28.While the Sling TV service does not allow subscribers to choose specific networks, it offers a less expensive version of the typical cable bundle with 12 of some of the most popular cable networks available at the start. Those networks include ESPN, the Disney Channel, Food Network, HGTV, TNT, TBS and CNN. The Maker Studios network of YouTube stars will also be included. Not included are broadcast networks ABC, CBS, NBC and Fox.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Clayton said including sports in the package was essential for an offering aimed at younger adults. Some analysts have said that one of the major reasons people hold on to their cable packages is to continue to watch sports.For $10 a month, Sling TV subscribers will be able to buy add-on packages for specific genres of programming, like children’s shows and news. Dish executives said Sling TV would complement streaming services like Netflix and Hulu.AdvertisementThe service also requires no long-term contract, no equipment, no credit check and no scheduled installation.Media analysts expect the start of such new services to bring broader change in the TV industry. Established cable and satellite groups are likely to continue introducing more flexible offerings to woo subscribers.Television network groups, meanwhile, could consolidate to protect the business of selling highly profitable bundles of channels.“It’s possible smaller networks combine in some form in an effort to protect bargaining leverage for the pay TV bundle, or larger conglomerates could conceivably look to smaller networks as similar support,” Tim Nollen, an analyst at Macquarie, said in a recent report.A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Dish Network Unveils Web TV Service to Rival Cable (and It Has ESPN).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.