AdvertisementSupported byInside EuropeBy Noah Barkin | ReutersBERLIN — In August 2012, during a visit to Canada, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany swept aside any doubts about her support for Mario Draghi and his controversial promise, weeks before, to do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro.The pledge by Mr. Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, had set off a storm of criticism in Germany. Yet Ms. Merkel told reporters gathered in the Canadian Parliament building in Ottawa that Mr. Draghi’s remarks were “completely in line” with her own approach to the crisis.Her comments helped convince the financial markets that Mr. Draghi had the political support to back up his bold words with action, calming fears of a catastrophic breakup of the euro currency union.Two and a half years on, the crisis in Europe’s single currency bloc has shifted from acute to chronic. And once again it has fallen to Mr. Draghi to come to the rescue.As Europe stumbles into 2015 dogged by weak growth, stubbornly high unemployment and the prospect of Japanese-style deflation, Mr. Draghi is on the verge of executing mass purchases of government bonds, a tactic known as quantitative easing, in hopes of jolting Europe’s economy back to life. But this time around, it is unclear whether he can count on the same clear message of support from Berlin.Without this backing, the effectiveness of any stimulus program could be undermined. More fundamentally, a rift between Germany and the E.C.B. could herald a dangerous new phase for Europe in which the region’s two most important shapers of policy are pushing against each other, rather than pulling together.In a rare four-page interview with the German newspaper Handelsblatt on Friday, Mr. Draghi appeared to be going out of his way to reach out to the skeptics and avert such a clash.Germany’s position on a bond-buying program is “arguably the single most important issue for the E.C.B. right now,” said Marcel Fratzscher, head of the DIW economic institute in Berlin and a former senior official at the E.C.B. He added that for any bond-buying program to work, the support of Ms. Merkel and Wolfgang Schäuble, the German finance minister, “will be absolutely vital.”What has changed since 2012?For one thing, fears of a euro breakup have subsided. That has made it easier for German officials to push back against policies they disagree with.The fear in Berlin is that bond-buying will reduce the pressure on struggling members of the eurozone in southern Europe to reform. Some worry that by pumping new money into the system — the goal of bond-buying — the E.C.B. would be sowing the seeds of a future crisis.Further clouding the debate in Berlin is the rise of the Alternative for Germany, or AfD, a new euroskeptic political party that did not exist back in 2012. After sweeping into three regional parliaments in eastern Germany in the second half of last year, the AfD will be trying to win its first seats in a western assembly when the city-state of Hamburg votes in mid-February.A bond-buying program, which the markets expect to be announced as soon as the E.C.B.’s next policy meeting on Jan. 22, could play right into the AfD’s hands.Uncertainty surrounding a Jan. 25 election in Greece, which could vault the left-wing Syriza party into power, has further complicated matters. Syriza has promised to cut Greece’s debt load, prompting fears that the country will default on part of its debt, which could result in the E.C.B.’s racking up severe losses on the mountain of Greek bonds that it holds. Should the E.C.B. announce a bond-buying program and, in turn, commit to buying more Greek sovereign bonds before the political outcome in Athens is clear, it would be impossible for the German government to remain silent, several officials said. “The Greek situation makes it much more difficult to announce” a bond-buying program, said Christian Odendahl, chief economist at the Center for European Reform in London.The other big cloud hanging over the stimulus program is the risk of a legal challenge by Germany’s Constitutional Court. In February 2013, the court expressed concerns that Mr. Draghi’s promise to buy bonds if needed to defend the euro, part of his “whatever it takes” speech, exceeded the E.C.B’s mandate and violated a ban on funding governments.The German high court referred the case to the European Court of Justice in Strasbourg, whose adviser is expected to give a preliminary assessment on Jan. 14 before a final ruling in mid-2015. The decision could have big implications for how the E.C.B. structures a bond-buying program. “The consensus view in the market is that the E.C.J. won’t find anything wrong with the bond-buying scheme, but there is a risk,” said Elga Bartsch, chief European economist at Morgan Stanley. “Berlin is clearly worried about the implications of the E.C.J. ruling for the German Constitutional Court,” she said. “And the E.C.B. is also taking it very seriously.”Regardless of what the European court adviser says, the E.C.B. may feel the need to tread carefully, pending a final ruling. That increases the chances of a bond-buying program in which the credit risks tied to purchased bonds remain with national central banks, an idea that was floated last month by Jens Weidmann, the Bundesbank president. If the E.C.B. goes down this path, Ms. Merkel could feel more comfortable endorsing the stimulus program, regardless of the criticism that is sure to flow from the AfD and some of her conservative allies in Parliament. But will a bond-buying program designed to address German concerns satisfy the financial markets, which for months have been pricing in bold action from Mr. Draghi? Mr. Odendahl at the Center for European Reform fears it will not. “If you limit this along national lines, it would clearly be a disappointment, because it would show quite starkly that the E.C.B. is running up against its limits,” he said. “Draghi knows that the announcement itself will be the most important thing. I hope he is bold.”Advertisement