Despite signs that the United States economy is accelerating, a huge bond market with a strong track record for predicting economic problems may be sounding a warning, DealBook’s Peter Eavis reports. As they do in times of stress, investors are seeking the safety of government bonds. In turn, the prices of government bonds are rallying, pushing their yields to lows. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note, for instance, fell to 1.94 percent on Tuesday. In Europe, yields are even lower.“The bond market is raising the specter that a period of economic growth that may have already felt lackluster to many Americans could be on the verge of losing steam,” Mr. Eavis writes. But just how worried should one be? The United States economy grew at 5 percent in the third quarter of last year. What’s more, the stock market is still trading on valuations that suggest investors see few hurdles to continued growth in corporate profits. And the bond market does not always get its economic predictions right.Bond investors are once again hanging on European policy makers doing more. “But even a big bond-buying program in Europe ‒ and continued stimulus in Japan ‒ might not be enough to make bond markets optimistic about global economic growth,” Mr. Eavis writes. “Some bond investors say the stimulus from the central banks has a decreasing effect because, each time the stimulus occurs, it increases indebtedness and stokes speculation in financial markets that fails to translate into growth in the real economy.”MCDONALD’S VS. SHAKE SHACK  |  Wall Street wants McDonald’s to be more like Shake Shack, which recently filed for an initial public offering that could value it at a billion dollars. “But perhaps instead, Wall Street should let McDonald’s be McDonald’s and be careful about whether Shake Shack is a burger bubble,” Steven Davidoff Solomon writes in the Deal Professor column.If chatter about Shake Shack’s billion-dollar valuation is true, the chain would be valued at more than 300 times forward earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda. McDonald’s, on the other hand, is valued at 10.3 times forward Ebitda, lower than all of its peers, including Wendy’s, Red Robin, the combined Burger King and Tim Hortons, and Yum Brands. “With Shake Shack and other quick casual chains like Chipotle getting all the love, it is no surprise that McDonald’s is feeling the pressure to be more like the young burger phenom,” Mr. Davidoff Solomon writes.To keep up with the likes of Shake Shack and Five Guys, McDonald’s has recently embarked on a turnaround plan that involves a simpler menu with fewer choices and high-quality ingredients. “But this all raises the question of whether McDonald’s should even go down this road,” Mr. Davidoff Solomon writes. “Instead of trying to transform McDonald’s, perhaps Wall Street should take a harder look at its premium burger fetish.”COACH ADDS CELEBRITY CACHET  |  Coach, the luxury fashion house based in New York, said on Tuesday that it would buy Stuart Weitzman, the maker of midrange luxury shoes, for up to $574 million in cash, Hiroko Tabuchi and Michael J. de la Merced write in DealBook. Coach also said it would retain Mr. Weitzman, the company’s 72-year-old executive chairman and creative director, to lead the team whose styles have been in high demand on red carpets and in stores.The acquisition is a rare move by Coach, which has preferred to expand its global business organically, from $953 million in sales a decade ago to almost $5 billion last year. But difficulties, including a slump in its handbag business, prompted Coach to embark on a turnaround in 2013 that involves ending discounts and transforming itself into an upscale lifestyle brand. “Stuart Weitzman’s hip lineup of shoes and sandals could give that campaign a much-needed boost,” Ms. Tabuchi and Mr. de la Merced write.Stuart Weitzman, which still manufacturers its shoes in-house, reported $300 million in revenue in the 12 months ended Sept. 30. The company, which has been controlled by Sycamore Partners since the private equity firm acquired the Jones Group last year, said it had increased sales by about 10 percent during the last five years. Under the terms of the deal, Coach will pay an initial $530 million to Sycamore. If the shoemaker hits certain financial milestones in the first three years after the transaction closes, Coach will pay up to $44 million more.ON THE AGENDA  |  The ADP employment report comes out at 8:15 a.m. Gallup’s job creation index is released at 8:30 a.m. Data on international trade is out at 8:30 a.m. The Federal Reserve’s policy-making committee releases minutes of its recent meeting at 2 p.m. Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive of Goldman Sachs, is on CNBC at 8 a.m. The International Consumer Electronics Show continues in Las Vegas.BITCOIN EXCHANGE SUSPENDS SERVICES  |  Bitstamp, one of the biggest Bitcoin exchanges, suspended services on Tuesday, Sydney Ember writes in DealBook. The move prompted unease in a virtual currency industry already scarred by the collapse last year of Mt. Gox, once its most prominent exchange. In a message on its website, Bitstamp, based in London, said that some of its virtual wallets were compromised on Sunday and that it had lost roughly 19,000 Bitcoins, worth about $5 million.In its message, Bitstamp sought to reassure customers. “This breach represents a small fraction of Bitstamp’s total Bitcoin reserves,” the exchange wrote. Bitstamp’s lost Bitcoins are only a tiny percentage of the nearly 14 million Bitcoins in circulation, but the breach provided a stark reminder that the Bitcoin industry is still grappling with its image as a plaything of hackers and ne’er-do-wells intent on exploiting the digital currency and the places where it is traded and stored. Bitcoin was trading around $285 on Wednesday morning.  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailVerizon Not Pursuing AOL, Chief Says  |  Lowell McAdam, the chief executive of Verizon Communications, said at a conference on Tuesday that his company was not planning any major acquisitions after a report that Verizon had approached AOL for a potential takeover, Reuters reports.  REUTERS The Year in Market Doublespeak  |  The last 12 months saw above-average creativity in saying one thing and meaning another. John Foley and Rob Cox of Reuters Breakingviews offer 10 euphemisms they would most like to disappear. DealBook »Audio Equipment Maker Monster Sues Beats  |  The audio equipment maker Monster has filed a lawsuit contending that it was unfairly cut out of its partnership with Beats Electronics before the company was sold to Apple last year, Reuters writes.  REUTERS Pimco Cuts Access to Some Quarterly Investment Reports  |  Pimco has removed the quarterly investment reports of two large mutual funds from its website. Both funds were managed by William H. Gross before he was forced to leave the firm last year. DealBook »Wall Street Regulator Plans to Scrutinize Electronic Bond Trading  |  The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority said it would scrutinize whether firms that offer electronic bond trading are able to ensure they are achieving the best price for their customers. DealBook »Global Crude Falls Below $50  |  Oil fell below $50 a barrel in London for the first time since May 2009, driven by speculation that United States inventories will increase, adding to a global supply glut, Bloomberg News writes.  BLOOMBERG NEWS A ‘Quarterback’ Named Michael Bloomberg  |  The Times Insider feature takes a look at the first time Michael R. Bloomberg’s name appeared in the pages of The New York Times. A profile that ran in the business section of The Times on Nov. 9, 1975, showed how crucial communication was to the man who would become rich selling market data to Wall Street.  TIMES INSIDER Greenhill Hires Energy Lawyer as Vice Chairman  |  Joseph C. Dilg, a longtime deal maker for the energy sector, was the managing partner of the law firm Vinson & Elkins from 2002 until 2011. DealBook »Goldman Names Co-Head of Internet Investment Banking  |  Goldman Sachs has named Kim Posnett, who previously served as head of the e-commerce group, as co-head of its Internet investment banking team, Bloomberg News writes.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Silver Lake Makes Big Bet in Red Ventures, a Digital Marketing Company  |  Silver Lake, the private equity firm that helped Michael Dell take his computer company private, plans to announce on Wednesday that it has invested $250 million in Red Ventures, which helps clients like DirecTV and MetLife acquire customers. DealBook »3G Capital Sets Sights on New Brands After Fund-Raising  |  Investors are said to have pledged about $5 billion to a new takeover fund being formed by the Brazilian investment firm 3G Capital, one of the world’s biggest acquirers, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.  WALL STREET JOURNALPrivate Equity Deals in Europe Ignite Leveraged Loan Surge  |  Private equity firms in Europe will fund mergers and acquisitions this year with a record amount of leveraged loans that have few safeguards for lenders, according to the region’s biggest arrangers, Bloomberg News writes.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Ackman’s Fund Tops Performance List  |  William A. Ackman’s Pershing Square International posted a return of 32.8 percent for the first 10 months of 2014, making it the top fund in Bloomberg Markets’ annual ranking of the best-performing large hedge funds. By year’s end, Pershing Square International had gained an additional 10 percentage points.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Brevan Howard Stake Said to Be Up for Sale  |  Swiss Re is said to be looking to sell its minority stake in Brevan Howard Asset Management, one of Europe’s biggest hedge fund firms, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the talks. The 15 percent stake is worth $350 million to $500 million, people involved in the process said.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Former Point72 Manager Said to Raise $700 Million  |  Gabriel Plotkin, who was one of Steven A. Cohen’s top money managers, is said to have raised about $700 million for his new hedge fund, Melvin Capital, Bloomberg News reports, citing unidentified people with knowledge of the matter.  BLOOMBERG NEWS James River Seen as Takeover Target After I.P.O.  |  The insurer James River could be a takeover target after being taken public by the hedge fund firm D.E. Shaw, according to an analyst at BMO Capital Markets. BLOOMBERG NEWSGlassdoor, a Job Listing and Rating Start-Up, Raises $70 Million  |  The job listing and rating start-up Glassdoor said on Tuesday that it had raised $70 million in a new round of financing led by Google Capital, the late-stage investment arm of Google, and an existing investor, Tiger Global Management.  GLASSDOOR BLOG  Eurozone Consumer Prices Fall for First Time Since 2009, Adding to Deflation Fears  |  Even before the recent collapse in oil prices, inflation had been falling amid slack spending by consumers and businesses that makes it difficult for companies to raise prices, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMES Bank of England Minutes Underscore Turbulence of Financial Crisis  |  More than 500 pages of minutes of Bank of England meetings showed regulators drastically misjudged the magnitude of the 2008 crisis and were short of tools needed to address it. DealBook »House Republicans Change Rules on Calculating Economic Impact of Bills  |  The long-sought change to “dynamic scoring” is widely seen as a way for Republican leaders to set new ground rules for an overhaul of the entire tax code, The New York Times writes.  NEW YORK TIMES Obama’s Choice for Fed Is a Nod to Smaller Banks  |  Pressed by the community banking industry, the White House chose Allan R. Landon, a former chief of Bank of Hawaii, to join the Fed’s Board of Governors, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMESBritain Fines Former Banco Espírito Santo Unit  |  It is the first time the Financial Conduct Authority of Britain has issued a fine against financial sponsors that act as advisers on initial public offerings and other stock listings. DealBook »Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 