Nestled in a suburban town just south of Charlotte, N.C., the digital marketing company Red Ventures has spent most of its nearly 15-year existence in relative obscurity. But two major private equity firms are betting that it will grow into a giant.Silver Lake, the firm that helped Michael Dell take his computer company private, plans to announce on Wednesday that it has invested $250 million in Red Ventures for a minority stake, joining an existing investor, General Atlantic.The deal values Red Ventures at more than $1 billion, according to people briefed on the matter.The investment is a wager that the company and its suite of marketing tools represent a unique, and highly lucrative, approach to acquiring customers for companies like DirecTV, Verizon and MetLife. To the investment firms, Red Ventures’ heavy emphasis on data analysis and technological solutions sets it apart from standard marketing companies. Red Ventures says that not only can it figure out potential new customers’ preferences and demographics, it can also shape marketing pitches and telephone scripts for individuals — making it more likely to land a sale.And a co-founder, Ric Elias, argues that the company’s performance-based compensation, where Red Ventures often lays down much the initial marketing expenditures itself and then gets paid a “bounty” for securing a new customer, provides an irresistible allure to its clients.The end result, according to the company’s supporters, is a sophisticated approach to marketing that garners clients significantly more customers than they could acquire on their own, while taking fewer financial risks in doing so.“It’s the greatest company you’ve never heard of,” Greg Mondre, the Silver Lake managing partner who led the investment and who is joining the company’s board, said in an interview.And Anton Levy, a managing director at General Atlantic, said in a statement, “The company is changing the marketing and sales landscape for its client businesses.”The interest in Red Ventures from major private equity firms only came after the company made a number of wrenching decisions, including a significant shift in its business early last decade to a performance-based compensation model. (And Mr. Elias had his own personal brush with disaster, having been on board the US Airways flight that made an emergency landing on the Hudson River in 2009.) Since then, however, the company has grown significantly. Though Mr. Elias declined to provide specifics, Red Ventures allows that its annual sales are growing at about 20 percent year over year. He added that Red Ventures’ home services division is expected to grow about 40 percent this year, a growth rate that he argued demonstrated the power of the company’s business model.Bootstrapped for much of its existence, Red Ventures first came to the attention of General Atlantic, which took a minority stake in 2010. But as Red Ventures continued to grow, Mr. Elias said, it began seeking out an additional financial backer with expertise in both technology and international expansion.Meanwhile, Mr. Levy of General Atlantic had for several years been urging Mr. Mondre of Silver Lake to take a look at the company.Red Ventures plans to invest in new analysis and digital marketing technology, according to Mr. Elias, as well as opening up its first international offices later this year: Brazil in the first quarter, and then Western Europe by the end of the year.“We think it compounds our relationships and our opportunities,” he said of the new financing. Still, it is unclear whether Red Ventures will ultimately pursue selling itself or going public. But Mr. Elias contended that there was still plenty of time to figure that out. “I tell our employees that I feel that we’re at the bottom of the second inning,” he said.