AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelThe Super Bowl attracts more than 100 million viewers every year. Anheuser-Busch is trying to connect with the texting and Snapchat- and Instagram-using millennials among them.The company, which usually buys more commercial time than any other advertiser during the Super Bowl, wants to appeal to a younger generation of 20-something beer drinkers, a large portion of whom it said had never tasted a Budweiser. “They are the future of the beer category,” said Jorn Socquet, vice president for United States marketing at Anheuser-Busch, the exclusive beer advertiser in the Super Bowl. “If we do not get Budweiser and Bud Light in the hands of those consumers, the beer category could become in serious trouble.”On Wednesday, the company plans to announce that it is preparing three 60-second commercials, with corresponding digital campaigns, to promote its Budweiser and Bud Light brands during the game this year. The Super Bowl ranks as the biggest event on television each year, and advertising during the game is by far the most expensive. At 112.2 million viewers, last year’s game between the Seattle Seahawks and the Denver Broncos was the most-watched event in television history, according to Nielsen.Super Bowl XLIX, to be broadcast by NBC on Feb. 1, is no exception. Commercial time is selling for a record $4.5 million per 30-second spot — or $150,000 a second. That is up 12.5 percent from the $4 million for last year’s game on Fox and up 88 percent from $2.4 million a decade ago, according to Kantar Media, a research firm owned by the advertising conglomerate WPP.(Marketers buying two or more spots will receive a slight discount and pay $4.4 million this year.)“It is still the only game in town. They can pretty much name their price,” said Allen Adamson, chairman of the North American region of Landor Associates, a branding consulting firm. “There is no other single event that marketers can get as many eyeballs or as much potential buzz.”Marketing executives said the steep price was worth it, given that the Super Bowl is one of the few events that attract a mass audience eager to watch commercials. Advertisers, including Pepsi, Snickers and Dove Men and Care, also plan to tap a range of social media to promote their spots.Mr. Socquet of Anheuser-Busch said the game was one of the rare places that a marketer was guaranteed to capture the attention of a young adult. “The average span of attention for the millennial is eight seconds, but on the Super Bowl, they actually give you their undivided attention,” Mr. Socquet said.Anheuser-Busch, a division of Anheuser-Busch InBev, is planning a series of traditional, digital and live promotions tied to the ads before, during and after the Super Bowl. The spots themselves will be released in the week leading up to the game.One ad, called “Coin,” will follow a real-life Bud Light drinker who is approached at a bar in Los Angeles and asked if he is “up for whatever,” said Alexander Lambrecht, vice president of the company. He provided few details about the rest of the spot but said that an adventure would ensue that would involve a coin flip and a retro game that would “resonate extremely well with the millennial audience.”Bud Light is in the middle of shooting the campaign this week. The marketer is also shooting video of the experience, which it will post across social media, as well as hosting a “Bud Light House of Whatever” party in Phoenix.Omnicom’s BBDO is the advertising agency producing the spot.The campaign follows in the footsteps of a Super Bowl spot last year that recounted an “epic night” fueled by the beer. Other beer makers have experimented with similar themes. Heineken’s “Legends” campaign, for instance, placed unsuspecting people in unusual situations to see how they would react.With the Budweiser spots, “the goal is to showcase the quality and the authenticity of Budweiser beer,” said Brian Perkins, vice president of Budweiser. One called “Lost Dog” will feature the brand’s iconic Clydesdales, which help a lost puppy, and will “tell the true meaning of friendship”The second campaign, which is yet to be named, will showcase the craftsmanship of the beer, with a healthy dose of pride, attitude and swagger, Mr. Perkins said.Anomaly is the ad agency for both Budweiser spots.Anheuser-Busch will face steep competition from dozens of other advertisers. The number of commercials that networks pack into the broadcast has steadily increased in the last several years, making it that much harder for an individual brand to stand out. Since 2010, games have consistently clocked more than 47 minutes of commercial time, according to Kantar Media.Consumers are likely to remember a handful of the commercials in any year, ad executives said.“Whatever trends you see that are repeated from the past are a mistake and will bring back diminished returns,” said David Lubars, chief creative officer at BBDO. “It is high stakes, high stress, but the returns when you do it right are so vast and almost always worth it.”In November, NBC said that it had sold nearly 90 percent of the commercial time during the game. The pace of sales was slower than in previous years, reflecting soft demand across the broader TV ad market as well as the fact that marketers are less willing to make longer-term spending commitments to ads.Advertisement