By LANDON THOMAS Jr.OCT. 7, 2015
The Securities and Exchange Commission said on Wednesday that three funds managed by the Blackstone Group, the private equity giant, would pay about $39 million to settle a case over how the firm imposes its fees.The settlement, while minuscule when compared with the $4 billion in profits that Blackstone took in last year, highlights a growing scrutiny by regulators on the rich fees that asset management companies collect from those who invest in their funds.Few firms have been as successful in this regard than Blackstone, which relies on a mix of management and performance fees to drive its extraordinary profits. Private equity firms in general have been criticized not just for the size of the fees, but their opaque nature, which makes it difficult even for sophisticated investors to fully grasp how much they are paying to hire a firm like Blackstone.AdvertisementIn its statement, the S.E.C. said that Blackstone did not inform clients in three funds — Blackstone Management Partners, Blackstone Management Partners III, and Blackstone Management Partners IV — of the financial benefits Blackstone received in monitoring companies in these portfolios.AdvertisementAbout $29 million of the settlement would be returned to investors in these funds, the S.E.C. said. The firm will also pay a $10 million civil penalty.“Full transparency of fees and conflicts of interest is critical in the private equity industry and we will continue taking action against advisers that do not adequately disclose their fees and expenses, as Blackstone did here,” said Andrew J. Ceresney, director of the S.E.C.’s division of enforcement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The S.E.C. said that Blackstone had admitted breaching its fiduciary duty to its funds and that it had “failed to adopt and implement reasonably designed policies and procedures.”In response, Blackstone said that the fee matter came from a lack of certain disclosures in marketing documents 10 years ago. The firm said that it had changed these policies before the S.E.C. began its investigation.Each fee, Blackstone said, was disclosed to investors when they received it.The S.E.C. also said that Blackstone received discounts from legal firms that it worked with, but did not pass these savings on to investors.In general, as long as the returns have been robust, private equity clients have tended to look at these complex fees as a necessary cost of doing business.But, with markets becoming more volatile, the rich returns of past years may become more difficult to achieve. Given that, bankers have predicted that investors will keep a much closer eye on the fees that they are being charged.A version of this article appears in print on October 8, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Scrutiny on Fees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.