AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — American services companies expanded at a solid but much slower pace in December compared with the previous month, a sign that growth may have cooled at the end of last year.The Institute for Supply Management said on Tuesday that its services index fell to 56.2 last month, down from 59.3 in November. Yet the drop was from a high level: November’s reading was near the eight-year high of 59.6 that was reached in August. Any reading over 50 indicates expansion.Also on Tuesday, the Commerce Department said orders to factories in the United States fell for a fourth straight month in November, with demand in a crucial category that signals business investment plans down for a third month.Factory orders dropped 0.7 percent in November after a similar 0.7 percent fall in October. The November weakness came from decreases in demand for primary metals, industrial machinery and military aircraft.A closely watched category that serves as a proxy for business investment spending dropped 0.5 percent in November, representing the longest stretch of weakness in this category since 2012.Economists, however, remained optimistic that the drop in orders was a temporary soft patch and that a stronger economy with increased consumer spending would produce a rebound in demand in 2015.Total factory orders fell to a seasonally adjusted $492.7 billion in November. Orders for the first 11 months of 2014 were 3.4 percent higher than the same period in 2013.The recent weakness in factory orders contrasts with an otherwise strong year for manufacturing, driven in part by strong auto sales.The services index decline echoes a similar drop in the I.S.M. manufacturing index, released on Friday. Both indexes fell from strong readings in November, but are still showing steady levels of expansion. Hiring picked up last year and gas prices have fallen, leaving more Americans with money to spend. That benefits retailers, hotels, restaurants and other service providers.Paul Dales, senior United States economist at Capital Economics, said the two I.S.M. surveys were consistent with an economy growing at a 3 percent annual rate. That is solid, though below the breakneck 4.8 percent pace in the April-September period.“Don’t interpret this survey as a sign that the outlook has weakened,” Mr. Dales said in a note to clients. “On the contrary, the further fall in oil prices has actually made things even better.”The I.S.M. is a trade group of purchasing managers. Its survey of services businesses covers enterprises that employ 90 percent of the American work force, including retail, construction, health care and financial services companies.December’s reading in the services index was close to last year’s average of 56.3. The overall economy expanded rapidly in 2014 after harsh winter weather caused a contraction in the first quarter.On Friday, the institute said that its manufacturing index slipped in December to 55.5 from 58.7 in November. Orders and production fell. Still, a measure of hiring rose, a good sign for the December jobs report, to be released by the government on Friday.Advertisement