By RACHEL ABRAMSJAN. 5, 2015
Martin Anderson, a conservative economist who helped shape American economic policy in the 1980s as a top adviser to President Ronald Reagan, died on Saturday at his home in Portola Valley, Calif. He was 78.The Hoover Institution at Stanford, a public policy think tank where Mr. Anderson was a senior fellow, confirmed his death.Mr. Anderson also served under Presidents Richard M. Nixon, Gerald R. Ford and George H. W. Bush, but his strongest ties were with Reagan. As a member of the president’s inner circle, Mr. Anderson is credited with helping to shape Reagan’s economic policies, which called for broad tax cuts, decreased social spending, increased military spending and significant deregulation of industries and markets.Mr. Anderson wrote, co-wrote or edited more than a dozen books, including several about Reagan. Next month, Hoover’s publishing imprint will release his final book, “Ronald Reagan: Decisions of Greatness,” which he wrote with his wife, Annelise Anderson, a frequent collaborator and a research fellow at Hoover, who also served under President Reagan.AdvertisementIn a statement, Nancy Reagan said that the Andersons had written some of the “best books” about her husband’s presidency.Advertisement“He was a dear friend, and an integral part of my husband’s campaigns and White House senior staff,” Mrs. Reagan said.Mr. Anderson served on the board of the Reagan Presidential Foundation and Library from 1985 to 1990. He visited it frequently and, until his death, held a security clearance to give him access to some of the foundation’s files, according to a spokeswoman, Joanne Drake.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Born in Lowell, Mass., on Aug. 5, 1936, Mr. Anderson graduated from Dartmouth College before earning a master’s degree in engineering and business administration. He received a Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and went on to teach at Columbia University’s business school. He joined the Hoover Institution as a fellow in 1971.Mr. Anderson often interrupted his political, writing and teaching careers to serve on political campaigns. He advised multiple presidents on issues like domestic policy, missile defense and ending the military draft, the Hoover Institution said.He helped advise Nixon on his bid for the White House in 1968 and was later a special consultant to him. He went on to help Reagan win the presidency in 1980 and continued as a top policy adviser in the White House for two more years.An expert on welfare and relations between state and federal governments, Mr. Anderson published his first book, “The Federal Bulldozer: A Critical Analysis of Urban Renewal, 1949-1962,” in 1964. Years later he became a crucial architect of Reagan’s New Federalism — the handing over control of government programs to the states.Mr. Anderson resigned from the Reagan administration in 1982, citing personal reasons, but remained a staunch defender of the president’s policies. He and his wife edited “Reagan, in His Own Hand” (2001), a collection of Reagan’s essays, one of which they found in his desk.In addition to his wife, Mr. Anderson is survived by a half brother, James McHugh Jr.A version of this article appears in print on January 7, 2015, on Page A20 of the New York edition with the headline: Martin Anderson, 78, an Adviser to Reagan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.