DuPont is about to face one of the biggest challenges in its two centuries as an industrial powerhouse: a fight with one of Wall Street’s most prominent activist investors over its board.The investment firm run by the billionaire Nelson Peltz announced on Thursday that it had nominated four director candidates, escalating its campaign to break up the $67.5 billion chemical maker.A proxy fight by Mr. Peltz’s firm, Trian Fund Management, would be the first major challenge by an activist investor in 2015, at a time when corporate America has been under increasing pressure from hedge fund managers and others seeking to shake up companies.Such investors have gained outsize power and influence over the years, drawing support from other shareholders and forcing through change at their targets. Last year, the hedge fund Starboard Value ousted the entire board of Olive Garden’s parent, Darden Restaurants. And the billionaire Daniel S. Loeb won three seats at Sotheby’s after a fight with the auction house.Emboldened by their success, activists have also taken on ever-bigger targets. DuPont is one of the biggest companies ever to face a proxy battle.Over his decades-long career, Mr. Peltz has built up a reputation as one of the most successful activist investors; his firm has prompted change or won board seats at companies like Wendy’s, State Street and Family Dollar.But he has waged a proxy fight just once before, in 2006 at H. J. Heinz, where he eventually won two seats on the ketchup maker’s board. Mr. Peltz has also threatened a fight over the board of PepsiCo, after urging the food and beverage company to break itself into two.Now he is mounting a public challenge to one of the country’s biggest chemical makers, the company formally known as E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, founded in 1802 as a gunpowder manufacturer.Mr. Peltz’s firm first emerged as a prominent investor in autumn 2013, and since then has argued privately and publicly for change. His firm is one of DuPont’s biggest shareholders, owning an approximately 2.68 percent stake worth about $1.8 billion.“Trian has been patient, giving management more than a year and a half to prove it could achieve its publicly stated financial goals,” the investment firm said in its statement. “Trian believes all stockholders will benefit from the election of Trian’s nominees, who will stimulate robust dialogue and enhanced engagement in the board room.”(Another prominent chemical maker, Dow Chemical, settled a brewing proxy fight with Mr. Loeb in November by adding four new independent directors to its board.)DuPont’s problem, according to Trian, is a combination of underperformance and a complex business structure that has saddled it with excess costs and bureaucracy. The company has missed a number of sales and earnings targets and has posted sales and margins that have underperformed competitors.Even some of the steps that DuPont has already taken to slim itself down and appease shareholders drew Mr. Peltz’s ire. A coatings business that was sold in 2012 for $4 billion subsequently increased its earnings around 140 percent under its new owner.And the impending spinoff of DuPont’s performance chemicals unit, whose offerings include pigments and refrigerants, includes a number of elements that the investment firm declared unfriendly to shareholders.“It’s corporate governance from the ’70s and ’80s. This is 2015,” Mr. Peltz said in an interview. “It’s one of the worst examples of corporate governance that I’ve seen in years.In its statement on Thursday, Trian noted that it had called for Dupont to break itself up into two companies: one containing faster-growing operations like agricultural chemicals and another holding slower-rising but cash-generating operations like safety materials. But Trian stressed that its board challenge was meant to be a referendum on the chemical maker’s performance.“We concluded that we needed to have representation in the boardroom,” Edward P. Garden, Trian’s chief investment officer, said in an interview. “We could not let management step in the same pothole again.”Besides himself, Mr. Peltz nominated John H. Myers, the former chief executive of General Electric’s asset management arm; Arthur B. Winkleblack, a former chief financial officer of Heinz, and Robert J. Zatta, the acting chief executive of Rockwood Holdings.Mr. Peltz will find himself very busy if he wins a directorship. He already sits on the boards of Wendy’s, the snack maker Mondelez International and the Madison Square Garden Company.DuPont’s management, led by its chief executive, Ellen Kullman, has defended the company’s performance and initiatives to improve shareholder value. The chemical maker has raised its operating margins by 65 percent from 2008 to 2013. And it has returned about $12 billion to investors from 2009 through autumn 2014 using share buybacks and stock dividends.Over the last 12 months, DuPont shares have risen nearly 19 percent, closing on Thursday at $74.53.The company has continued to shed businesses in an effort to slim down. Last month, it announced plans to sell assets that manufacture Neoprene, the synthetic rubber used in wet suits that DuPont invented nearly 85 years ago.Ms. Kullman has said previously that she agrees with Mr. Peltz that DuPont needs to bolster its margins and productivity.“Our track record demonstrates that we have a winning strategy in place and are never finished with operational improvement and portfolio refinement,” she told analysts in a conference call in October.A version of this article appears in print on 01/09/2015, on page B1 of the NewYork edition with the headline: DuPont Finds Itself a Target of an Activist.