The activist hedge fund Starboard Value fretted on Thursday that Yahoo might employ a type of complicated transaction to dispose its minority stakes in the Chinese Internet giant Alibaba Group and in the publicly traded Yahoo Japan.It isn’t the first time that the somewhat arcane deal structure, known as a “cash-rich split-off,” has come up in relation to Yahoo.First, a primer on how such a deal would work. It’s essentially a way for Yahoo to sell off its stakes in the Asian Internet companies without generating a big tax bill. For instance, Alibaba would create a new subsidiary that held both cash and operating businesses, ideally the kind that Yahoo would like to run. At at least one-third of the value of that financial vehicle would have to consist of the operating entities.Yahoo would then exchange its stake in Alibaba for that subsidiary.The maneuver is a bit complicated, but it has been part of deal-makers’ toolboxes for some time. Warren E. Buffett of Berkshire Hathaway fame has been an occasional practitioner. He traded his company’s stake in Procter & Gamble in exchange for the battery maker Duracell and $1.8 billion in cash. And he exchanged shares in Graham Holdings — the business formerly known as The Washington Post Company — for television stations, cash and some stock that Graham held in Berkshire.Yahoo discussed a cash-rich split-off before, specifically a little under four years ago. But the monthslong talks between Yahoo and Alibaba broke down for a variety of reasons: concern that the Internal Revenue Service wouldn’t bless the deal as tax-free; technical aspects like breakup fees and valuations; and complications in picking out desirable operating businesses to go into the subsidiary.Yet Starboard believes that such a plan would be worse for Yahoo shareholders than alternatives like spinning off the Alibaba and Yahoo Japan stakes into separate publicly traded entities. In its letter to the company’s management on Thursday, the hedge fund highlighted several concerns. They boil down to the following four points:• The market value of the operating businesses involved in a cash-rich split would be hard to determine
• The overall value of such a trade would probably be lower than simply spinning off the minority stakes
• Any cash that Yahoo received could be used for “large and potentially value destructive acquisitions”
• Cash-rich splits are inherently complicatedThe letter also contained the assertion that Yahoo had acknowledged privately that a cash-rich split “would be clearly inferior” to other options like a spinoff of the Alibaba and Yahoo Japan stakes.Starboard, which is also opposed to Yahoo making any big acquisition (other than one of AOL), implied that any move to pull off a cash-rich split could lead to a messy board fight.“Should you instead choose to proceed down a different path by pursuing large acquisitions and/or a cash-rich split, both of which have been speculated, such actions would be a clear indication to us that significant leadership change is required at Yahoo,” Jeffrey C. Smith, the hedge fund’s managing member, wrote in the letter.A spokeswoman for Yahoo declined to comment.