LONDON — The public is getting its annual peek at the top earners in Europe at major banks.As a result of Europe’s myriad bonus rules and regulations, banks are required to disclose lots of granular data about how much they pay their material risk takers, also referred to as “code staff.” Figures recently released show that Goldman Sachs paid the most among its peers. It paid, on average, $4.7 million to 121 people that the firm classifies “material risk takers” in 2013, the year for which most recent data was made public. That is substantially more than JPMorgan Chase, which paid an average $2.4 million to the 209 people it classified in the “code staff” category. Barclays, which gave about $2.2 million per risk taker, while Citigroup’s average was $2.1 million for each of its 182 material risk takers.The figures, some of which are new, show which banks will have to radically alter compensation in 2014 to comply with the European bonus cap. That law, passed in 2013, requires that banks limit bonuses to 100 percent of salary (it can go as high as 200 percent with shareholder approval). Though the year is over, details on the pay packages for 2014 have not been released yet.Goldman’s bonuses known as variable pay was 5.5 times that of its fixed pay, or salaries; JPMorgan’s variable pay was 4.1 times higher.“Inevitably that ratio will decrease as a result of the bonus cap,” said Tom Gosling, a partner at PricewaterhouseCoopers in London.Citigroup, at the other end of the spectrum, was 1.6 times, or much closer to the cap of 100 percent of salary.For several years, European regulators have sought to crack down on bonuses paid by financial firms through laws and regulations. One proposal requires that noncash compensation be deferred for long periods so that banks, and regulators, can reclaim money if regulatory violations or other issues are later uncovered. The changes are meant to address the concern that giant, short-term bonuses rewarded reckless behavior, fueling the financial crisis.In response, some banks in Europe have gotten creative. They introduced “allowances” or “role-based pay” that they classified as fixed pay, though most were not applied to pensions and were discretionary.Although Britain’s national banking regulator agreed with the workarounds on bonus caps, late last year the European Banking Authority, another regulator, issued an opinion saying the allowances were variable pay, not fixed.As banks hand out their 2014 bonuses, including the allowances, some are considering scrapping those allowances for simple increases in fixed pay.“A lot of firms may decide it’s not worth it and move to a salary model,” Mr. Gosling said. The inevitable result of the trends will be that more bankers will get significantly better salaries, an outcome that has come under heavy criticism from regulators such as Andrew Bailey, the head of the Prudential Regulation Authority, and politicians like George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer.This summer, the Prudential Regulation Authority said that banks should be able to claw back bonuses – vested and unvested – for up to seven years. It also said certain pay should be deferred for five to seven years, not the standard three to five. But if banks start paying more in salaries rather than bonuses, it will be more difficult to claw back. That is likely to please bankers.“I don’t think there are that many employees unhappy with where packages are going after the bonus cap, which is ironic,” said Mr. Gosling.