Some of Wall Street’s largest investors are playing a game of high-stakes poker in preparation for a big casino company bankruptcy.The wrangling is over Caesars Entertainment Operating Company, a unit of the heavily indebted casino conglomerate Caesars Entertainment. With about a week remaining before the operating company expects to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, in an attempt to restructure its debt, Caesars is trying to rally support among bondholders for a plan that would streamline the bankruptcy process.Caesars moved closer to its goal on Thursday, when BlackRock, the giant asset manager, sold $500 million of first-lien bonds to investors that support the restructuring plan, according to people briefed on the matter who were not authorized to speak publicly. The sale was first reported by Bloomberg News.With the sale, Caesars now has support from holders of close to 60 percent of the first-lien bonds, one of the people briefed on the matter said.Caesars needs support from at least 60 percent of these bonds by Monday for the reorganization plan to take effect. But the company is ultimately aiming higher, seeking support from holders of at least two-thirds of the bonds. If Caesars achieves that level, the entire class of bondholders will be legally deemed to have accepted the plan.On Thursday morning, Caesars announced that it had gotten support for the plan from investors that own, or will own, 55 percent of the bonds.Brian Beades, a BlackRock spokesman, declined to comment. Stephen Cohen, a spokesman for Caesars, said the company had no comment beyond the announcement on Thursday morning.The behind-the-scenes negotiations cap a long and difficult restructuring effort by Caesars, which became saddled with a large amount of debt through a 2008 leveraged buyout worth more than $30 billion. The private equity firms that bought Caesars, TPG and Apollo Global Management, continue to control it.Under the reorganization plan, the Caesars operating company would reduce its debt to about $8.6 billion from a total of $18.4 billion. Annual interest payments would be reduced to about $450 million from $1.7 billion.The wrangling over the plan, which some bondholders agreed to in December, has pitted TPG and Apollo against major debt investors. BlackRock left the talks shortly before the plan was signed, people briefed on the matter said.But as recently as Tuesday, TPG was expecting BlackRock to return to the table, according to a tape recording obtained by DealBook. “The big one that’s outstanding is BlackRock,” Clive Bode, a TPG lawyer, is heard saying in the recording. “The indications are BlackRock’s coming in.”Owen Blicksilver, a TPG spokesman, declined to comment.A version of this article appears in print on 01/09/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Restructuring Caesars.