AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonThe billionaire hedge fund manager Kenneth Griffin and his wife, Anne Dias Griffin, have reached a divorce settlement, putting an end to a domestic dispute that had thrust the private couple into the spotlight.“We were informed yesterday that the case had settled,” Nairee Hagopian, a clerk for the judge presiding over the case, said Wednesday. She said that lawyers and both parties came to the courthouse on Tuesday afternoon and that “the judgment of the dissolution was entered.”The two parties began talks this week in an attempt to avoid a public trial that was set to begin on Monday.Last July, Mr. Griffin filed a divorce petition in Cook County, Ill., citing “irreconcilable differences” with his wife of 11 years, who is also a hedge fund manager. The move set off a war of words between the two, who had become fixtures in their hometown Chicago’s social and political scene.Mr. Griffin is the head of Citadel, a $26 billion hedge fund and securities firm that has helped him to amass a personal fortune of $7 billion, according to Forbes estimates. Ms. Dias Griffin founded her own hedge fund, Aragon Global Management, with a seed investment from the billionaire investor Julian Robertson.Soon after Mr. Griffin filed the divorce petition last year, Ms. Dias Griffin fired back that she had been blindsided by the move. Things quickly turned nasty. Mr. Griffin disclosed the terms of their prenuptial agreement, revealing that Ms. Dias Griffin had received millions of dollars at the start of their marriage and $1 million for each year of their marriage as part of the agreement.In separate court filings, Ms. Dias Griffin argued that she had been forced to sign the prenuptial agreement. She contended that Mr. Griffin had forbidden her from entering family homes in Hawaii, Miami, Colorado and New York. She also accused Mr. Griffin of closing their charitable organization and threatening to destroy part of their main residence in Chicago.In Illinois, divorces take place in open court, but parties can request that their files be sealed and seek mediation.Mr. Griffin and Ms. Dias Griffin will have joint custody of their three children, according to a judgment of dissolution of marriage by Judge Grace. G. Dickler, which was filed to the court on Wednesday morning. The court did not disclose the details of the settlement.Mr. Griffin has been in the spotlight for building his hedge fund and making large sums of money for investors. The firm’s flagship Kensington and Wellington portfolios gained 13 percent so far this year through the end of August, according to a person briefed on the hedge fund’s performance. He has also garnered attention for his ambitions to turn Citadel into a major brokerage firm.But Mr. Griffin’s political donations — he was the single biggest financial backer of Mayor Rahm Emanuel’s most recent campaign for re-election — and his insatiable appetite for art and real estate have made him famous beyond the hedge fund universe. Most recently, Mr. Griffin paid about $200 million for three full floors of a condominium tower in Midtown Manhattan, according to media reports.No lawyer on either side responded to requests for comment.Advertisement