Federal Reserve officials were encouraged by the strength of the economy at the December meeting of the Fed’s policy-making committee, according to an official account published on Wednesday. But the signs of optimism were tempered by concern that the weakness of the global economy, and the weak response of foreign governments, could weigh on domestic growth, Binyamin Appelbaum reports in The New York Times. As a result, the account of the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee made clear that Fed officials were determined not to act too quickly on raising interest rates.Most Fed officials have concluded that the labor market is now strong enough to start raising interest rates, but they have held off because of the slow pace of inflation. The meeting account emphasized that the damage from the recession remained sufficiently substantial that recent job growth was not yet driving up wages, Mr. Appelbaum writes. Most officials do not expect to raise the Fed’s benchmark rate before the middle of the year. Yet the account also emphasized that most Fed officials remained convinced that inflation will rebound ‒ and they may begin raising the benchmark interest rate before they are certain.Meanwhile, in Europe, an official report on Wednesday showed that consumer prices in the eurozone fell 0.2 percent in December from a year earlier, the first time they have turned negative since the dark days of the global financial crisis in 2009, David Jolly writes. The latest data is adding concerns that Europe is headed for a new financial and economic crisis, putting pressure on the European Central Bank to take more aggressive action to avoid a downward price spiral that could undermine the economy for years to come.Still, the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index closed 1.2 percent higher on Wednesday. European stocks rose the most in three weeks in early Thursday trading, buoyed by optimism that monetary policies by the European Central Bank and the Fed would support the economy. Oil also extended its gains to top $51 a barrel after a decline in United States crude stocks snapped a four-day drop on Wednesday.LENDERS ENGAGE RIVALS  |  Entrenched financial players are facing challenges from start-ups armed with new technology. But rather than play defense, banks and credit card companies are trying out a new strategy: cooperation, Randall Smith writes in DealBook. Consider MasterCard. When employees there found they had a new competitor, Behalf, an upstart small-business lender, MasterCard engaged Behalf and worked with the start-up to help arrange for its customers to use MasterCard’s system to pay their vendors. The MasterCard-Behalf alliance has not been publicly announced.“The new attitude comes as disruptive businesses are being taken more seriously,” Mr. Smith writes. A year ago, MasterCard created a division to engage with financial innovators, making a handful of investments in start-ups. In October, it announced a partnership with Zwipe, which makes a credit card with a fingerprint sensor, and in November, it bought a stake in a company now called Nymi that makes a wristband that uses a heartbeat to authenticate a user’s identity. In December, it invested in Dynamics, which makes cards with buttons and displays that allow users to, for example, pay in different currencies or choose credit or debit.And MasterCard isn’t the only established company adopting such a spirit of cooperation. Last month, American Express opened a new technology hub to expand its presence in Silicon Valley, focusing on innovations in big data, cloud computing and mobile payments. Citigroup has a venture capital arm that has invested in companies “with the potential to disrupt and transform” financial services. And in August, Wells Fargo inaugurated a “start-up accelerator” to invest in companies that are developing tools for the financial industry.STANDARD CHARTERED TO CLOSE EQUITIES BUSINESS  |  Standard Chartered said on Thursday that it would close its unprofitable equity sales and research business, eliminating about 200 jobs in an effort to cut about $100 million in annual costs by 2016, Neil Gough writes in DealBook. The latest round of cuts at the British bank is in addition to a program announced in November to cut 4,000 jobs by the end of 2015, for an additional annual savings of $400 million.The bank, which makes most of its money in Asia, has been seeking to sell or close underperforming or ancillary business units to bolster profit by reducing costs as part of a restructuring announced last year. The process includes the sale last month of its consumer finance business in Hong Kong and China for an undisclosed sum. The bank is also pruning its network and plans to close 80 to 100 branches. The bank will continue to operate its convertible bonds, equity derivatives, macroeconomic research and fixed-income research units.ON THE AGENDA  |  The Challenger job cut report is out at 7:30 a.m. The Gallup payroll to population report is released at 8:30 a.m. Weekly jobless claims are out at 8:30 a.m. Data on consumer credit comes out at 3 p.m. Eric S. Rosengren, president of the Boston Fed, gives a speech on monetary policy at the Wisconsin Bankers Association’s 2015 Wisconsin Economic Forecast Luncheon in Madison, Wis. Narayana Kocherlakota, president of the Minneapolis Fed, speaks at a town hall forum in Minneapolis at 8 p.m.GROSS HELPS FUEL FUND WITH OWN CASH  |  A brokerage tied to William H. Gross ‒ who abruptly left Pimco, the giant asset manager he co-founded, in September to join the Janus Capital Group ‒ poured money into Mr. Gross’s new fund, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing industry executives. The previously unreported development helps explain why money seemed so easily to follow Mr. Gross. Janus disclosed that investors put $1.1 billion into Mr. Gross’s new fund, the Janus Global Unconstrained Bond, in October and November, pushing the fund past the $1 billion threshold for big investors.What Janus did not tell investors, according to industry executives, was that most of the money came from the small Southern California brokerage office where one of Mr. Gross’s personal financial advisers works.“The Morgan Stanley wealth-management office in La Jolla, Calif., routed more than $700 million to Mr. Gross’s Janus fund in October and November, according to people who viewed brokerage firm fund asset data from Albridge, a data firm owned by Bank of New York Mellon Corp. The transfers accounted for more than 60 percent of the money raised by Mr. Gross in the first few months after he left Pimco,” The Wall Street Journal writes. “It isn’t clear whether the money originated from one investor or one financial adviser, or from more than one, although Mr. Gross acknowledges at least some of the money came from him.”After questions from The Wall Street Journal, Janus on Wednesday tweeted a comment attributed to Mr. Gross that read, in part, “Yes I do believe in and invest in Janus Global Unconstrained Bond Fund!”  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailNestlé Sells Spanish Frozen Foods Brand to Findus Group  |  The deal to sell the La Cocinera brand is the latest in a series of sales by Nestlé as it reduces its brand offerings to focus on more profitable business lines. DealBook »Extenet Systems Said to Weigh Sale  |  Extenet Systems, which makes small wireless towers to help large telecommunications carriers improve their service, is said to be exploring a sale that could fetch more than $700 million, Reuters reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.  REUTERS Greenbrier Buys Stake in Brazil Railcar Maker  |  Greenbrier, which supplies transportation equipment to the railroad industry, said on Wednesday that it had agreed to buy a 19.5 percent stake in Amsted-Maxion Hortolandia, a South American railcar maker, for $15 million, The Wall Street Journal writes. Greenbrier also has an option to buy an additional 40.5 percent stake by 2017.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Société Générale Said to Consider Stake in Polish Bank  |  Société Générale, the second-biggest French bank, is said to be considering buying 26 percent of Poland’s Alior Bank from Carlo Tassara, its biggest shareholder, Bloomberg News reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the situation. The stake held by Carlo Tassara is worth about $385 million.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Republicans Lose House Vote on Bill Easing Dodd-Frank  |  House Republicans lost a bid to pass legislation to relax some requirements under the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial regulatory law, Bloomberg News writes. The measure would delay until July 2019 a provision of the law’s Volcker Rule intended to limit risky investments by banks.  BLOOMBERG NEWS U.S. Oil Producers Cut Rigs as Price Declines  |  Falling oil prices have prompted producers to slash the number of drilling rigs around the country, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMES Dick’s Sporting Goods Said to Explore Going Private  |  Dick’s Sporting Goods is said to be holding early-stage conversations with buyout firms about going private, Reuters writes, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter. Shares of the company rose as much as 13.5 percent, to $55.88, on the news of a possible sale, giving it a market value of roughly $6.7 billion.  REUTERS Goldman Invests in German Online Spectacles Retailer  |  Goldman Sachs’s private equity arm is taking a roughly 20 percent stake in Mister Spex, Germany’s top online spectacles retailer said on Wednesday.  REUTERS K.K.R. Said to Hire Real Estate Debt Team  |  The private equity firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, which created a new real estate business in 2011, is said to have hired a team of debt experts from Rialto Capital Management with plans to begin making real estate debt investments for the first time since forming its property group, The Wall Street Journal writes, citing an unidentified person familiar with the matter.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Shareholders Said to Call for MSCI to Break Up  |  Shareholders at MSCI, led by the activist hedge fund ValueAct, are said to be urging the data analysis company to consider breaking itself up and putting its stock market indexes business on the auction block, The Financial Times reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the situation.  FINANCIAL TIMES New York Regulator Said to Investigate Hedge Fund Over Payday Loans  |  Benjamin M. Lawsky is said to have sent a subpoena to Medley Opportunity Fund II last week as he investigates the hedge fund’s ties to payday lending, Bloomberg News writes, citing an unidentified person with knowledge of the matter. Mr. Lawsky is seeking records from the fund on its investments in payday lenders, including lending relationships or joint ventures, the person said.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Online Ticket Seller Trainline Said to Plan I.P.O.  |  Trainline.com, Britain’s biggest retailer of rail tickets, is said to be planning an initial public offering in London, Bloomberg News reports, citing unidentified people with knowledge of the matter. The company, which was acquired in 2006 by Exponent Private Equity, could be valued at about $755 million, two people said.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Tailored Accounting at I.P.O.s Raises Flags  |  “Forty companies went public in 2014 reporting losses under traditional accounting rules but showing profits under their own tailor-made measures,” The Wall Street Journal writes.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Soylent Said to Be Raising Financing at $100 Million Valuation  |  Soylent, which makes a food-replacement drink invented by engineers, is said to be raising over $10 million in funding, led by Andreessen Horowitz, giving the start-up a $100 million valuation, ReCode reports, citing unidentified sources.  RECODE Co-Founder of Diapers Site Starts Amazon Rival  |  Marc Lore, a co-founder of Diapers.com, which was acquired by Amazon.com in 2010, is taking on his former employer with a new e-commerce site called Jet.com, The Wall Street Journal writes. The new site has $80 million in venture capital and debt.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Fed Nomination Follows Lobbying Push  |  President Obama’s decision to nominate Allan R. Landon, a former chief executive of the Bank of Hawaii, for a Federal Reserve board seat follows a yearslong campaign by community bankers to install one of their own at the central bank, The Wall Street Journal reports.  WALL STREET JOURNAL China Wants Taxes Paid by Citizens Living Afar  |  National and municipal tax agencies in China are quietly beginning to enforce a little-known and widely ignored regulation: Citizens and companies must pay domestic taxes on their entire worldwide incomes, not just on what they earn in China, The New York Times writes.  NEW YORK TIMES Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 