By PAUL MOZURJAN. 7, 2015
HONG KONG —  Samsung, the world’s No. 1 maker of smartphones, had a tough end to 2014: On Thursday, the South Korean company said its operating profit and revenue probably fell almost 40 percent in the quarter ending in December compared with the same period in 2013.In a news release, Samsung said it expected an operating profit of about 5.2 trillion won, or $4.7 billion, in that quarter, down 37 percent from 8.3 trillion won a year earlier. Sales totaled about 52 trillion won, down roughly 12 percent from 59.3 trillion a year earlier.Samsung’s forecast signals the fifth consecutive quarter of decline in operating profit and reflects continuing troubles for the company’s mobile division. Though it makes more smartphones than any other company, Samsung has had difficulty competing with a swarm of new Chinese rivals, which are offering ever more competitive phones at cheap prices in their home market, now the world’s largest for smartphones.Despite that, analysts said there was reason to be positive about the earnings estimate, which was better than expected because of the company’s well-performing semiconductor division.AdvertisementThe estimates show investors “where the bottom is” and clear up some uncertainty facing the South Korean electronics giant, according to Arete Research analyst Kim Nam-hyung.Advertisement“They will be launching some good and competitive products in China and other emerging markets, but does it make a big difference for earnings? No,” he said, pointing out that the company’s semiconductor business would be the most likely driver of growth in 2015.Although Samsung has made its name in recent years selling consumer devices like handsets and televisions, competition in those businesses is cutthroat, and margins are thin. Instead, Samsung’s memory units and processors, which make all manner of gadgets run, are increasingly bolstering earnings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“More than ever it’s important to realize that Samsung has two very different mobile businesses. The handset division continues to slump even in the face of new products and additional marketing, and there are no signs it’s getting better,” said Ben Thompson, an independent technology analyst at Stratechery.com.“Handsets broadly, though, continue to be big business, and it’s here that Samsung the component maker is doing very well — so well that they beat estimates despite their handset slump,” he added.Mr. Kim said he expected the company’s memory business to perform better in 2015 after some “start-up costs” in 2014. He also said Samsung would probably rekindle a partnership with Apple to produce the chips for the coming iPhone, a huge boon to both sales and profit.In the period from July to September, Samsung’s global market share for smartphone sales fell 8 percent from the same period a year earlier, to 24 percent, according to the research firm IDC. Samsung, the only handset vendor in the top five to lose market share, is a sharp contrast to the Chinese upstart Xiaomi, whose market share jumped 211 percent during the same period.“With continued competitive pressure from nearly every side, coupled with cooling demand for its high-end devices, the company’s volumes have fallen from their previous highs at the start of the year,” the IDC report said, adding that demand for cheaper phones would continue to force down the prices of Samsung handsets.Final fourth-quarter results were expected to be released at the end of January.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Samsung Predicts Big Drop in Its End-of-Year Quarter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.