AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinA criminal trial of three former leaders of Dewey & LeBoeuf, already more than four months long, is edging closer to the finishing line.A Manhattan jury on Wednesday acquitted the three of several charges that they had falsified the business records of the once-prominent law firm. But the jury of seven women and five men still has dozens of other charges to consider against each of the defendants, after being instructed by the trial judge to continue to work and attempt to overcome what appears to be an impasse in the deliberations.The partial verdict in the trial, which began in late May, came on the 14th full day of deliberations in the trial of Steven H. Davis, Stephen DiCarmine and Joel Sanders, who prosecutors contend oversaw a scheme to manipulate the financial records of the law firm, which collapsed in bankruptcy in May 2012.It may be too soon for the defendants to celebrate, given that so many charges, including several counts of grand larceny and scheme to defraud, are still outstanding. The acquittals did provide for some moments of relief, however.During a break for lunch at the courthouse in Lower Manhattan, Mr. Davis, the former chairman of Dewey, said he felt good about the partial verdict. Some courtroom spectators hugged him.Mr. Davis was acquitted of 19 charges. Mr. DiCarmine, the firm’s former executive director, was acquitted of 17 charges while Mr. Sanders, the firm’s former chief financial officer, was found not guilty of 13 charges.The former Dewey & LeBoeuf executives were accused of masterminding a four-year scheme to manipulate the finances of the law firm in a bid to keep it afloat during the financial crisis.If the jurors do not convict the defendants on the remaining charges, it would be a blow for the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., as this was one of his office’s most significant white-collar cases. The case has been closely followed in the legal community given that Dewey at its peak employed more than 1,200 lawyers.Even a mistrial on the remaining charges would be something of a defeat for Mr. Vance given the resources his office has poured into the prosecution and the prospect of having to endure another lengthy trial if he decided to retry the defendants on the counts on which the jury could not reach a verdict.One juror spent the morning seeing a doctor, complaining of vertigo, causing some concern she might not be able to continue the deliberations. The juror returned to the courtroom by noon.The trial judge, Justice Robert M. Stolz of New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan, told prosecutors and lawyers for the defendants that he would instruct jurors to deliver a partial verdict when they were ready to resume deliberations. The judge did not say why he wanted to take a partial verdict, but it was apparent he was afraid of a potential mistrial as the deliberations grind on, putting an obvious strain on the jury.On Tuesday, the jurors sent the judge a note saying they could not reach a unanimous verdict on a majority of the dozens of charges against the three defendants. Earlier in the week, one juror sent out a note mentioning a visit to a hospital emergency room to get treatment for muscle spasms from sitting too long in the jury room chairs.The long deliberations have caused some legal observers to wonder whether the case presented by Mr. Vance’s office, which included a total of 150 charges, was too complex.Mr. Davis was an architect of the 2007 merger of two law firms that created Dewey & LeBoeuf, and he led the firm until April 2012, a few weeks before it filed for bankruptcy. Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders were other major figures in the firm’s management team.The trial cast a light on the behind-the-scenes battles that often take place between high-salaried partners at those firms.The jury’s task in reaching a verdict was complicated by the fact that each defendant was charged with dozens of felony counts and some of the witness testimony appeared to be stronger against Mr. Sanders than against Mr. Davis and Mr. DiCarmine.An important prosecution witness, Frank Canellas, the firm’s former finance director, who pleaded guilty and agreed to cooperate with the investigation, testified that he never had any direct conversations with either Mr. Davis or Mr. DiCarmine about any improper accounting maneuvers being carried out by his team.During the long deliberations, the jury asked for much of the physical evidence introduced at trial, including dozens of internal emails and spreadsheets. But they only asked twice to have trial testimony read back, which many courtroom observers found unusual, given the dozens of witnesses who testified during the trial.In all, seven former Dewey employees pleaded guilty a year before the trial began and all testified at the trial that they had participated in a scheme to make the law firm’s finances look better than they really were. But all the employees, who pleaded guilty in hopes of getting sentenced to little or no prison time, said they had not thought they were doing anything wrong at the time in making year-end accounting adjustments to Dewey’s books and records.The prosecution called more than 40 witnesses during the trial and introduced into evidence emails sent by the defendants, some of which used potentially incriminating language or suggested the men were concerned about the law firm’s financial situation.But in a daring move, the lawyers for the three former Dewey leaders chose not to call any witnesses to testify. The move indicated that they believed the defense had poked enough holes in the prosecution’s case during cross-examination.In closing arguments, lawyers for the defendants noted that prosecutors did not call any accounting experts to testify about the nuances of accounting treatments for such things as crediting a fee paid by a client early in the year toward the books and records of the year just passed.A fourth man who was indicted, Zachary Warren, a relatively low-level employee at the law firm, is scheduled to be tried separately by Mr. Vance’s office.Advertisement