By JAD MOUAWADJAN. 7, 2015
Federal regulators said on Wednesday that airlines would be required to develop new safety management programs by 2018 to help identify potential hazards and prevent accidents.The Federal Aviation Administration said airlines would have six months to submit these risk-based plans, known as safety management systems. Most airlines already have programs to identify safety problems, but the agency wants to establish a process that applies to the entire industry.Michael P. Huerta, the F.A.A.’s administrator, said that the system would allow regulators and the airlines to be more proactive in addressing hazardous patterns.For instance, Mr. Huerta said, it might help identify airports with higher incidences of rejected takeoffs across various carriers. That could reveal operations procedures that needed to be changed, he said.AdvertisementThe approach is common around the world and is recommended by the International Civil Aviation Organization, an arm of the United Nations.AdvertisementUnder a safety management system, common in other industries, airlines would set up a formal process to analyze data collected from various parts of their operations.In developing the rule, the F.A.A. examined more than 100 accidents between 2001 and 2010, and said that many could have been avoided, or their causes identified beforehand, if the airlines had adopted safety management systems.Airlines already share a huge amount of information with regulators. They have voluntary systems to encourage employees to highlight hazards or problems without fear of retribution. Still, industry representatives said they welcomed the new system.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’ve long endorsed a risk-based approach to both safety and security,” said Nicholas E. Calio, president of Airlines for America, the industry’s trade group. “Data helps drive better decision-making,” he added, and described the new system as “a very good program.”The safety record of the airline industry has improved in the past years, and accident rates in both the United States and around the world have fallen. In part, these improvements have been the result of more reliable airplane engines and technology.Despite a number of crashes and accidents last year, including the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over Ukraine and the crash of AirAsia Flight 8501 in the Java Sea, 2014 had the lowest number of commercial jet crashes in modern history, according to figures compiled by the nonprofit Aviation Safety Network.Fatal accidents in the United States are also rare. In 2013, an Asiana Airlines Boeing 777 crashed while landing at San Francisco International Airport, killing three people.In 2009, a regional passenger plane crashed near Buffalo, killing 50 people. After that accident, Congress ordered the F.A.A. to require airlines to act swiftly to adopt safety management systems. The systems are intended to foster “a safety culture to improve the overall performance of the organization,” the F.A.A. said.“Aviation is incredibly safe, but continued growth means that we must be proactive and smart about how we use safety data to detect and mitigate risk,” said Anthony Foxx, the United States transportation secretary.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: F.A.A. Orders Airlines to Devise Plans to Identify Risks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.