By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMJAN. 7, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Federal Reserve officials spoke with growing optimism about the strength of the economy at the December meeting of the Fed’s policy-making committee, according to an official account published on Wednesday.Some officials cited the strength of recent economic data, including surveys of consumer and business confidence and the growth of payrolls, as evidence that growth may finally exceed their expectations after years of disappointment.Others said they expected a “quite large” boost from falling oil prices.The signs of newfound optimism were tempered, however, by concern that the weakness of the global economy, and the anemic response of foreign governments, could weigh on domestic growth.And the tone of the December meeting continued a pattern in which the Fed entered almost every year since the financial crisis expressing confidence that the economy was finally gaining momentum.AdvertisementAs a result, the account of the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee  made clear that Fed officials remain determined to err on the side of caution by continuing to suppress interest rates. Most officials do not expect to raise the Fed’s benchmark rate before the middle of the year.AdvertisementThe Fed issued a statement after the December meeting saying it would be patient in deciding when to start raising the rate. Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chairwoman, said at a news conference after the statement was released that a first increase would probably not be made before the committee’s third meeting of the year, in late April.A wide range of economists share the Fed’s cautious optimism that the economy, which has slowly gained strength in recent years, will continue to do so. A survey of professional forecasters  by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia reported an average expectation of 3 percent economic growth this year.Fed officials saw the woes of other countries as the greatest risk to this forecast, according to the account of the December meeting, which was published after the standard three-week delay.Most officials agreed that falling oil prices would do the domestic economy more good than harm, leading to increased spending and job growth. But they worried about the consequences for foreign economies and the stability of financial markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Participants generally regarded the net effect of the recent decline in energy prices as likely to be positive for economic activity and employment,” the account said. “However, many of them thought that a further deterioration in the foreign economic situation could result in slower domestic economic growth than they currently expected.”The account said these concerns were “nearly balanced” by recent signs that domestic growth “may end up showing more momentum than anticipated.”The labor market has grown steadily in recent months, making it easier for Americans to find jobs. The economy added 321,000 jobs in November, the strongest month in nearly three years. The December data will be released on Friday.Most Fed officials have concluded that the labor market is now strong enough to start raising interest rates, but they have waited because of the sluggish pace of inflation. The meeting account emphasized that the damage from the recession remained sufficiently substantial that recent job growth was not yet driving up wages. “Most participants saw no clear evidence of a broad-based acceleration in wages,” it said.AdvertisementFalling oil prices, meanwhile, are suppressing price inflation.By the Fed’s preferred measure, inflation was just 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in November. Oil prices have put further downward pressure on inflation.And the meeting account said that “a number of participants” expressed concern that inflation would not rebound to the 2 percent annual pace the Fed has established as its target.Yet the account emphasized that most Fed officials remained convinced that inflation will rebound — and they may begin raising the benchmark interest rate before they are certain.“The committee might begin normalization at a time when core inflation was near current levels,” the meeting account said, “although in that circumstance participants would want to be reasonably confident that inflation will move back toward 2 percent over time.”A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Fed Committee Hopeful but Wary at Latest Session.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.