By DARREN DAHLJAN. 7, 2015
Craig Rottenberg worked as an investment banker and started a tech company, but a decade ago he returned to his family’s roots. As president of Long’s Jewelers, a chain based in the Boston area, “I am a fourth-generation jeweler,” he said.But the dynamics of buying jewelry have changed significantly in recent years. Mr. Rottenberg, 41, said his family had invested in a website to cater to younger customers who now routinely go online to research and buy rings, necklaces and bracelets. But he found that the business just wasn’t large enough to support the kind of marketing it would take to compete online with the likes of chain stores like Kay Jewelers and Zales.“It’s hard to support both retail and e-commerce,” Mr. Rottenberg said. “At some point there is conflict between the two, and one side suffers.”He found an answer two years ago in a partnership suggested by one of the business’s longtime suppliers, Ritani, a privately held company that designs and makes engagement rings for independent jewelers in the United States and Canada.AdvertisementWhat Ritani proposed — as it had with other small jewelers — was a kind of relationship increasingly referred to as “clicks and bricks.” In this case, it enabled customers from the Boston area who shop on the Ritani site to have their jewelry delivered to Long’s store, at which point the customer could review the ring and decide to exchange it or even return it.AdvertisementTo give Long’s an incentive to serve customers who come in to pick up rings they have already paid for, the store is given a small percentage of all sales closed in the Boston area, since Long’s had been Ritani’s exclusive retailer in the area for the last 10 years. The retailer also earns performance incentives for selling additional Ritani products over the counter.But the real upside with the new arrangement, Mr. Rottenberg said, is the opportunity to interact with a new set of customers who might not otherwise have entered his store.“It’s been a win-win strategy that’s leveraged both of our strengths,” Mr. Rottenberg said. “We get the halo effect from the tremendous work they do marketing and building a world-class e-commerce experience. At the same time, it’s powerful for them to give customers the choice of how and where they buy their rings. And they need us to do that.”The clicks-and-bricks idea is simple: Retailers want to be wherever their customers happen to be shopping, either online or in stores. And while e-commerce sales continue to grow, they still pale in comparison to sales made in traditional brick-and-mortar locations, where retailers can help customers more.Ritani is hardly the first to try to combine local shops and national marketing. For example, 1-800-Flowers has long combined an online e-commerce engine with local florist shops that fulfill orders. “Local stores have the ability to bring back the lost art of human customer service that creates a meaningful experience,” said Michael Dill, managing partner of Match Marketing Group in Norwalk, Conn. “Winning on Main Street will be a balance of smart mobile and social campaigns connected to a human experience that you just can’t get online or in a warehouse.”Similarly, fast-growing retailers like Warby Parker, Bonobos and Birchbox, all of which started as e-commerce ventures, have experimented with more traditional retail stores. Physical stores can also be useful when an e-commerce site has many customers in a concentrated geographic area, where they can serve as both a sales channel and an advertisement for the online brand, said Bruce Clark, a marketing professor at the D’Amore-McKim School of Business at Northeastern University.“A physical store will rarely be able to carry the e-commerce site’s full inventory,” Mr. Clark said, “but at a minimum should be able to act as a showroom. It also will be a useful venue for supplemental services.”AdvertisementThat said, opening and running physical stores while also supporting a top-notch e-commerce operation is an expensive proposition and not something that every growing business can afford. That was the dilemma that prompted the partnership between Ritani and local jewelers like Long’s.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brian Watkins, who worked at retailers like Blue Nile and Nordstrom before becoming Ritani’s president in 2011, said research showed that while increasing numbers of customers were starting their jewelry shopping online, only 10 percent of these customers closed their transactions over the web. Especially given the expense of the item, they wanted to touch and feel it before completing the purchase. Mr. Watkins said the research also found that when customers could buy online or in stores, they spent more and developed more brand loyalty.“That’s when I realized that the next generation wanted a clicks-and-bricks option,” he said. “There’s something to be said about picking up a Ritani ring from the same shop that someone’s parents might have bought their ring from 30 years ago. We wanted to leverage that local brand equity these multigenerational shops have.”Without the resources to open a chain of physical stores, Mr. Watkins pursued his partnership model with the company’s existing partners instead.It was a significant bet by Mr. Watkins and Ritani. The company raised $15 million from Cantor Ventures and the Julius Klein Group to finance the introduction of the concept, which has included a robust build-out of the company’s website and efforts to draw traffic from search engines. Since a trial with six jewelers in October 2012, the program has expanded to some 200 retailers (each with exclusivity in its area), and sales through Ritani’s website have jumped to $30 million from $13 million.Ritani’s retail partners are also seeing growth from the venture.Dean Abell, one of the owners of Sarah Leonard Fine Jewelers in Los Angeles, was initially skeptical about the Ritani proposition. But Mr. Abell, whose grandparents started the business in the Westwood Village neighborhood in 1946, concluded that it would be a way for the store to connect with younger customers it might never otherwise see. After two years, he said he could not point to any tangible increase in sales, but added that he was optimistic.“In the past, someone might have just bought a diamond online and that would have been it,” Mr. Abell said. “Now people are coming through our door and spending time with us. It’s become an opportunity for us to build long-term relationships where maybe they’ll come back and shop with us again.”Aida Alvarez, senior vice president for merchandising and marketing at C.D. Peacock, a 178-year-old jeweler with four stores in the Chicago area, said her company’s two-year-old partnership with Ritani had already paid off. She said 84 percent of the customers who visited her stores to pick up Ritani products had come back for either a service call or to buy something new, from wedding bands to birthday presents.“My current average customer is currently 40-plus years of age,” Ms. Alvarez said. “We had a hard time attracting first-time bridal customers. But Ritani has given me a chance to acquire new millennial customers I couldn’t get on my own.”A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: An Online Jeweler Creates Links With Brick-and-Mortar Shops.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.