Bitstamp, the prominent Bitcoin exchange that suspended its services this week after a security breach, has resumed operations, capping a period of uncertainty in the virtual currency industry. “We are happy to announce that we are back open for business with a newly redeployed website and back-end systems that are safer and more secure than ever,” Nejc Kodric, the chief executive of Bitstamp, wrote in a blog post on the exchange’s website on Friday afternoon. Bitstamp, one of the biggest Bitcoin exchanges, went dark after some of its virtual wallets were compromised on Sunday, resulting in a loss of roughly 19,000 Bitcoins worth about $5 million. In a message on Tuesday announcing its decision to close, the exchange emphasized that the lost Bitcoins represented only a “small fraction” of its total Bitcoin reserves, most of which are held in secure offline storage systems out of the reach of hackers. The exchange, based in London, also urged customers not to deposit Bitcoins to previously issued Bitcoin deposit addresses.The blog post on Friday did not provide more specific details on the breach.Though much smaller in scale, the breach at Bitstamp — and the subsequent service suspension — immediately drew comparisons to Mt. Gox, which collapsed last February after saying it lost 750,000 of its customers’ Bitcoins and more than 100,000 of its own coins, worth about $500 million at the time. Mt. Gox eventually filed for bankruptcy protection, alarming the virtual currency industry and calling into question the security of the Bitcoin system.Bitstamp is the third-biggest Bitcoin exchange, accounting for 5 percent of Bitcoin transactions, according to Bitcoin Charts, which provides data related to the Bitcoin network. Bitcoins were trading around $290 on Friday, according to CoinDesk, about where they had been trading all week.In his blog post on Friday, Mr. Kodric outlined the events that led to the suspension of Bitstamp’s services and reaffirmed the exchange’s commitment to its customers. “We can assure customers that any Bitcoins held with us prior to temporary suspension of services on Jan. 5 at 9 a.m. U.T.C. are completely safe and will be fully honored,” Mr. Kodric wrote. “Our team has been working day and night to rebuild and restore security to the Bitstamp site so customers can resume transacting with us quickly, safely and confidently.” He also wrote that the exchange had managed to preserve evidence “for a full forensic investigation of the crime.”Bitstamp said it had adopted new security measures and protocols, including BitGo multisignature technology, which provides more protection against theft, to prevent future breaches. The exchange said its systems were also running on “100 percent new hardware deployed from a completely secure backup of our code and data.” “While this is a time of challenge for our company, we expect to emerge from this experience having set an even higher bar than before for trust and confidence in our services,” Mr. Kodric wrote.The news that Bitstamp was back online prompted relief among some virtual currency supporters, who continue to fight the negative perception of Bitcoin.“I see this as a win for Bitcoin,” one Reddit user wrote.