PELTZ IGNITES PROXY FIGHT AT DUPONT  |  Trian Fund Management, the investment firm run by Nelson Peltz, announced on Thursday that it had nominated four director candidates to the board of DuPont, escalating its campaign to break up the $67.5 billion chemical maker, DealBook’s Michael J. de la Merced and Andrew Ross Sorkin report. The proxy fight, the first major challenge by an activist investor in 2015, would be one of the biggest tests in DuPont’s two centuries as an industrial powerhouse. DuPont is one of the biggest companies ever to face a proxy battle.Mr. Peltz’s firm, which first emerged as a prominent investor of DuPont in the fall of 2013, is one of the chemical producer’s biggest shareholders, owning a roughly 2.68 percent stake worth some $1.8 billion. DuPont’s problem, according to Trian, is a combination of underperformance and a complex business structure that has saddled the company with excess costs and bureaucracy. DuPont has already been slimming down to bolster shareholder value, but some of the steps it has taken, including selling its coatings business, have drawn Mr. Peltz’s ire.Besides himself, Mr. Peltz nominated John H. Myers, the former chief executive of General Electric’s asset management arm; Arthur B. Winkleblack, a former chief financial officer of Heinz, and Robert J. Zatta, the acting chief executive of Rockwood Holdings. Mr. Peltz already sits on three boards, that of Wendy’s, the snack maker Mondelez International and the Madison Square Garden Company.DEBT BUYER ENCORE CAPITAL FACES FINE  |  Large buyers of bad consumer debt are deluging courtrooms across New York State with shoddy lawsuits, according to a review of debt collection lawsuits along with interviews with state judges and prosecutors. Now, as part of an effort to stamp out such practices, New York’s state attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, is expected to reach a settlement on Friday with a debt buyer, the Encore Capital Group, over concerns that the company filed thousands of flawed debt collection lawsuits against state residents, Jessica Silver-Greenberg writes in DealBook, citing several people briefed on the matter.“The settlement, which requires Encore to pay a $675,000 penalty and vacate more than 4,500 court judgments against borrowers, is part of a broader push by state and federal authorities to root out questionable debt collection practices that can stymie vulnerable borrowers just as they are trying to dig out from the financial crisis,” Ms. Silver-Greenberg writes. The action against Encore Capital, based in San Diego, is the latest in a series of enforcement actions Mr. Schneiderman has brought against debt buyers, who scoop up billions of dollars in long-overdue credit card bills, auto loans and other debt from lenders.To obtain payments on some of that debt, buyers like Encore Capital often turn to the courts in a practice that some state authorities say effectively turns the civil court system into a debt collection arm. In New York State alone, according to a tally by Mr. Schneiderman’s office, Encore Capital and its subsidiaries filed more than 239,000 lawsuits from 2007 to 2012. Encore Capital collected $564.7 million in legal collections in 2013, according to a regulatory filing, up more than 49 percent from those in 2011.CALL FOR NEW DEAL ON GREEK DEBT  |  Over the last year, investors have piled into Greek bonds and banks, wagering that the country was primed to recover from a five-year depression that wiped out a quarter of the country’s gross domestic product. But now, the possibility that Alexis Tsipras, who heads the opposition Syriza party, will win an election later this month has investors worried, DealBook’s Landon Thomas Jr. writes. Mr. Tsipras has talked of restructuring Greece’s debt and rolling back harsh austerity measures and has raised questions about the conduct and management of Greece’s sickly banks.The concern now is that Mr. Tsipras will force Greece into default and perhaps a messy exit from the euro, “an event that could unleash a new wave of investor contagion,” Mr. Thomas writes. But some analysts say that a radical new Greek government would not be as radical a step as investors fear. As one analyst notes, Mr. Tsipras’s argument that Greece’s onerous debt is not sustainable and should be reduced has also been put forth by the International Monetary Fund, one of Greece’s larger creditors.Yanis Varoufakis, an economist and adviser to Mr. Tsipras, proposes a grand bargain of sorts by which Europe agrees to exchange its current obligations for new Greek bonds that are linked directly to Greece’s economy. If the economy grows, bondholders receive a nice return; if it does not, the bonds pay nothing. Mr. Varoufakis is insistent that what Greece ‒ not to mention broader Europe ‒ needs now is a huge public spending program, similar to the New Deal that helped lift the United States out of a depression in the 1930s. And he has proposed using the European Investment Bank, which is owned by European Union member states, as the lead investor in this respect.IT’S JOBS DAY  |  Economists expect the unemployment rate to drop to 5.7 percent, from 5.8 percent in November, when the Labor Department releases its December figures at 8:30 a.m. The consensus is for employers to have added 240,000 jobs in December.ON THE AGENDA  |  In addition to the jobs report, data on wholesale trade is out at 10 a.m. Jeffrey M. Lacker, president of the Richmond Fed, gives a speech at 1:20 p.m. at the Virginia Bankers Association and the Virginia Chamber of Commerce’s 2015 financial forecast event. Charles L. Evans, president of the Chicago Fed, is on CNBC at 8:40 a.m.SANTANDER PLANS CAPITAL INCREASE  |  Santander said on Thursday that it would begin a capital increase of as much as 7.5 billion euros, or $8.9 billion, and cut its dividend payouts sharply to ease investor concerns about the strength of its balance sheet, Raphael Minder writes in DealBook. The capital increase is equal to almost 10 percent of its current stock market value. The move is the latest indication that Ana Patricia Botín ‒ who replaced her father, Emilio Botín, as executive chairman in September after his death ‒ is looking to make a strong imprint on the bank.Santander does not regularly make public its capital ratio, unlike most of its European rivals. But Javier Marín, the bank’s chief executive before being removed by Ms. Botín in November, estimated before his ouster that the capital ratio would be about 8.5 percent at the end of 2014 under Basel III rules, below the 9 percent level the bank had initially forecast. The latest plan should raise that ratio to about 10 percent, according to a note published on Thursday by Citigroup analysts.Santander said that the fund-raising would be completed overnight. The additional funding is being raised in an “accelerated’’ and discounted sale of almost 1.3 billion shares to institutional investors. The bank ‒ which estimated that its net profit had reached €5.8 billion in 2014, an increase of 32 percent from the previous year ‒ also announced a cut in its dividend payouts. |  Contact: @melbournecoal | emailLi Ka-shing to Reorganize His 2 Main Companies  |  Under a complex deal, the property company Cheung Kong will take over Hutchison Whampoa, a holding company for a network of global businesses including ports and utilities; the enlarged group would then be split into two new companies.
DealBook »OneWest Said to Seek Wall Street’s Help on CIT  |  Joseph Otting, the chief executive of OneWest Bank, is said to have sent an email, the contents of which were described by executives at investment banks who received the email, to his contacts on Wall Street this week asking for help to discourage bank overseers from holding public hearings on its $3.4 billion takeover by the CIT Group, Bloomberg News writes. Mr. Otting’s email includes a link to a petition addressed to Janet L. Yellen, the chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, and others stating that “there is no need for a public hearing.”
 BLOOMBERG NEWS Facebook Buys Video Start-Up QuickFire  |  Facebook has purchased QuickFire Networks, a start-up that helps users view high-quality video with low bandwidth, Reuters writes. The terms of the deal were not disclosed.
 REUTERS XL Group to Buy Specialty Risks Insurer Catlin  |  The XL Group has agreed to purchase the Catlin Group for $4.2 billion as the property-casualty insurer expands in specialized commercial coverage, Bloomberg News reports.
 BLOOMBERG NEWS Top Bankers in Europe Making Big Bonuses  |  Figures recently released show that Goldman Sachs paid, on average, $4.7 million to 121 people classified as “material risk takers” in 2013.
DealBook »Those Who Nailed 2014 See Volatility This Year  |  A survey of investment professionals whose forecasts proved accurate in 2014 indicates a roller-coaster ride for stocks, bonds and oil prices, James B. Stewart writes in the Common Sense column.
 NEW YORK TIMES Janus Chairman Did Not Know Details of Gross’s Investment  |  Glenn S. Schafer, the chairman of the Janus Capital Group, said he did not know that a single California brokerage office that handles money for William H. Gross accounted for a vast majority of the cash in Mr. Gross’s new mutual fund at the company, The Wall Street Journal reports.
 WALL STREET JOURNAL Full Report on ‘London Whale’ Incident Sheds Light on New York Fed Role  |  The Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s failure to examine JPMorgan Chase’s investment unit ahead of the bank’s 2012 “London whale” trading incident stemmed from turf battles with other regulators, overreliance on JPMorgan’s solid reputation and distractions related to the financial crisis, according to a report from the Fed’s Office of Inspector General.
 WALL STREET JOURNAL Caesars Gets More Support for Restructuring Plan  |  With about a week remaining before its operating unit expects to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, Caesars is trying to rally support among bondholders for a plan to streamline the bankruptcy process.
DealBook »Carlyle Hires Information Chief From T. Rowe Price  |  Georgette Kiser will be Carlyle’s chief information officer, a managing director and a member of the firm’s management committee.
DealBook »Cinven Said to Consider Sale of Truck Parts Maker  |  The buyout firm Cinven is said to have mandated Rothschild to explore options including a sale or stock market listing of the Jost Group, its German truck and trailer parts maker, Reuters reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the deal.
 REUTERS Dick’s Sporting Goods Is an Attractive Candidate for Private Equity Firms  |  The financial health of Dick’s Sporting Goods suggests that there is ample room for a new private equity owner to generate a nice return, Kevin Allison of Reuters Breakingviews writes.
DealBook »Activist Hedge Fund Warns Yahoo Against Making a Big Acquisition  |  Starboard Value warned that deals for CNN or Scripps Networks Interactive would be unwise. The hedge fund would, however, support a merger with AOL.
DealBook »More on the Complex Tax-Minded Deal That Starboard Doesn’t Want Yahoo to Do  |  Yahoo isn’t a stranger to the complex deal structure known as a “cash-rich split-off” that could be used to sell off its stakes in its Japanese affiliate and Alibaba Group ‒ a type of transaction that a prominent activist hedge fund opposes.
DealBook »Another Hedge Fund Said to Close  |  Bramshott Capital, which is led by Paul Findley, a former portfolio manager at Moore Capital, is said to be shutting down after poor returns in 2014, Reuters writes, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.
 REUTERS Box Could Go Public This Quarter  |  Box, an online storage provider, is said to be looking to go public in the next six weeks, VentureBeat writes, citing an unidentified source familiar with the matter.
 VENTUREBEAT Uber Tests a Cargo Delivery Service in Hong Kong  |  The ride-sharing start-up Uber began testing UberCargo in Hong Kong on Thursday, a new service that allows customers to transport goods locally by cargo van, the Bits blog reports.
 NEW YORK TIMES BITS Democrats Step Up Efforts to Block Obama’s Trade Agenda  |  President Obama is facing new opposition from his own party to one of his top priorities: winning the power to negotiate international trade pacts and speed them through Congress, The New York Times reports.
 NEW YORK TIMES Congress Passes Measure to Cover Terrorism Risk  |  To win passage of a revamped backstop to terrorism insurance, Senate Democrats assented to easing regulations on derivatives, The New York Times writes.
 NEW YORK TIMES Editorial: The Stumbling, Tumbling Euro  |  The currency markets have a message: European leaders are not doing enough, The New York Times editorial board writes.
 NEW YORK TIMES Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 