By IAN AUSTENOCT. 7, 2015
OTTAWA — Canadian Oil Sands has rejected a hostile takeover bid from Suncor Energy valued at 6.6 billion Canadian dollars ($5 billion), including debt. The company also introduced a poison pill plan aimed at undermining any other unfriendly offers.Canadian Oil Sands, which owns 36.74 percent of Syncrude, a major oil sands operation, said its board had rejected another offer worth 12.96 Canadian dollars a share from Suncor in April. The current all-share bid values Canadian Oil Sands at just under 9 Canadian dollars a share.“The board will consider Suncor’s unsolicited offer in both the current context and in light of the strong long-term potential of Canadian Oil Sands,” Donald J. Lowry, the chairman of Canadian Oil Sands, said in a statement.When announcing the hostile bid on Monday, Steve Williams, the chief executive of Suncor, acknowledged that his company had lowered its valuation of Canadian Oil Sands since the spring. But he said the current bid price reflected both the current state of the oil market and the outlook for the oil sands, a particularly costly form of production.AdvertisementMr. Williams suggested in an interview with Bloomberg News this week that a rejection by Canadian Oil Sands was likely. .AdvertisementIn a statement on Wednesday, Mr. Williams said he was disappointed but not surprised by Canadian Oil Sands’ action and called the poison pill “inappropriate.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.”With a 43 percent premium to market price and investment in a company that has a strong track record of returning cash to shareholders, we’re confident in the value our offer provides to C.O.S. shareholders.” he said.Under the hostile bid, Suncor is proposing to exchange one quarter of its shares for each Canadian Oil Sands share. That values the company at 4.3 billion Canadian dollars. Suncor already owns 12 percent of Syncrude, so adding Canadian Oil Sands’ stake will allow it to control just under half of the operation’s equity.Canadian Oil Sands’ poisons pill defense can kick in if any other company obtains more than a 20 percent stake. It will allow other shareholders to buy additional stock at a discount.The only other obvious bidder for Canadian Oil Sands is Imperial Oil, Exxon Mobil’s main Canadian subsidiary. It owns 25 percent of Syncrude and manages its operation. Some analysts, however, are skeptical that it will enter the bidding.Sycrude’s and Suncor’s main oil sands mines are among the oldest operations and are more or less neighbors. Combining their management and operations could produce significant cost savings.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.