By JONATHAN WEISMANJAN. 8, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The Senate on Thursday gave overwhelming final congressional approval to a revamped federal backstop to terrorism insurance, just eight days after lawmakers allowed it to lapse. Businesses had pleaded for the bill, saying it was necessary to avoid losing some important investments.But to win passage, Democrats had to grudgingly assent to an easing of regulations on exotic financial instruments, known as derivatives, by some users.The first bill to pass the Republican-controlled 114th Congress offered a glimpse of how Republicans will try to chip away at President Obama’s agenda over the next two years.The bill passed the Senate 93 to 4, a day after the House approved it 416 to 5. President Obama is expected to sign it.AdvertisementDevelopers, insurance companies and real estate firms were growing increasingly anxious after Congress allowed federal terrorism insurance to lapse at the end of the year. Within days, about 750,000 private insurance policies were canceled, following clauses that said they could exist only if the federal government were prepared to shoulder some of the costs in the event of a catastrophic attack.AdvertisementMany other policies had 30-day or 60-day notification clauses, so continued congressional inaction would have resulted in growing costs. But those costs would not have been clear unless terrorists actually struck.“It was the equivalent of everyone deciding they’re not going to be inoculated against measles,” said Robert P. Hartwig, president of the Insurance Information Institute in New York. “Something has to happen in order for it to matter.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Under the six-year legislation, first passed after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, insurers would once again be required to offer terrorism coverage to businesses, developers and event planners. The federal backstop would kick in when losses reach $100 million, but that threshold would rise $20 million a year until it reached $200 million — double the threshold of the law that lapsed Jan. 1.Some conservatives, including Representative Jeb Hensarling of Texas, chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, have been skeptical of a federal role in terrorism insurance, but they extracted a major concession to get the insurance bill through. They attached an unrelated measure that exempts farmers, ranchers, small businesses and other nonfinancial “end users” of derivatives from capital requirements imposed by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street regulation law.Democrats saw that move as a sign of things to come in a Republican-controlled Congress. Senators Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, tried to strip out the Dodd-Frank rollback in the newly Republican-controlled Senate.Mr. Schumer called the provision “a pound of flesh in a must-pass piece of legislation,” but he conceded that the provision was “one of the smaller rollbacks” championed by Republicans.Still, Ms. Warren declared before the amendment vote, “If we fail to challenge this cynical strategy now, it will only encourage Republicans to pull our financial regulations apart piece by piece.”The amendment did not even come close, falling on a bipartisan 66-31 rebuke, just a day after Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the Democratic leader, proclaimed, “Any attempt to erode protections for working American families, the dismantling of Dodd-Frank, will be met with a swift and unified Democratic opposition.”A version of this article appears in print on January 9, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Congress Passes Measure to Cover Terrorism Risk.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.