By BILL VLASICJAN. 8, 2015
Mary T. Barra, the chief executive of General Motors, on Thursday provided her forecast for the auto industry this year, CNBC reported.DETROIT —  In her first year as chief executive of General Motors, Mary T. Barra was engulfed by the gravest safety crisis in the company’s history.Now, as G.M. looks ahead to a new year, Ms. Barra vowed on Thursday to put its record number of recalls in 2014 behind it and build on its renewed commitment to vehicle safety.“It was a year of great disappointment, but also great progress,” Ms. Barra said at a media round table.Ms. Barra opened her remarks with an immediate reference to the recalls of millions of small cars with defective ignition switches that can shut down engine power and disable airbags.AdvertisementG.M. has made compensation offers to the families of 42 people who died in accidents in the affected vehicles, as well as to more than 50 people injured.“It was clearly a tragedy, and it was deeply troubling,” Ms. Barra said. “But we quickly acknowledged our shortcomings and set about addressing them.”AdvertisementThe ignition-switch defect led to big changes within G.M., including the dismissal of 15 employees, a restructuring of its vast engineering operations and the appointment of its first vice president overseeing safety.After enduring widespread criticism for G.M.’s decade-long failure to fix the switches and testifying at four congressional hearings, Ms. Barra said she had taken a tougher stand on mistakes inside G.M. that compromise safety and quality.“I hate excuses,” she said. “We have to be quick and have to respond, and I’m committed to driving G.M. to be the company we know we can be.”While she did not lay out specific goals for 2015, Ms. Barra said G.M. expected to expand sales in its two largest markets, the United States and China, and break even in its long-troubled European division.“It starts with the core of our products,” she said. “We have many launches this year, and we are going into them to win, not just to compete.”G.M. ended the year on a high note in the United States, where its sales rose about 5 percent for the full year. The company still trailed the industry’s overall growth, however, and its market share remained stagnant.AdvertisementNext week, the company will unveil significant products at the Detroit auto show, among them a new sport utility vehicle for the Buick and a revamped version of the Chevrolet Volt plug-in hybrid.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Barra said G.M. did make big gains last year in the all-important truck segment with the introduction of new midsize pickups and had opportunities to increase its share of the passenger-car market.And while the company issued a record 84 separate recalls in the United States last year, Ms. Barra said there was little evidence that consumers had avoided G.M.’s new models because of the broader safety problems.She stopped short of predicting whether G.M.’s recalls would dwindle substantially in the year ahead, but she said the company had adopted a “zero defect” mentality. “If we find an issue, we’re going to fix it,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on January 9, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: G.M. Chief Pledges to Move Beyond Recalls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.