By BEN SISARIOJAN. 8, 2015
In the race to sign up subscribers for digital music, the French streaming service Deezer has had success around the world but is little known in the United States, where it faces more established competitors like Spotify, Rhapsody and Google Play.Trying to change that — and instantly acquire a sizable American audience — Deezer is buying Muve Music, a subscription service for prepaid mobile phones that has catered to mostly low-income consumers, a demographic often ignored by music technology companies.Deezer and Cricket Wireless, the phone service that has offered Muve since early 2011, announced the deal on Thursday. The price was not disclosed, but Deezer said it had acquired the intellectual property behind Muve, and would discontinue that service in early February, moving its customers to Deezer.Muve grew largely under the radar of the music technology world, offering its customers unlimited downloads and bundling its cost in with the price of Cricket Wireless service. By fall 2013, it had grown to two million subscribers; that number was never updated publicly, but was believed to have declined somewhat.AdvertisementCricket’s parent company, Leap Wireless, was bought by AT&T in 2013 for $1.2 billion, and Muve Music had been up for sale since at least May.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Deezer has established itself as the second-largest streaming service in the world, with 16 million users — including six million who pay for subscriptions — in 180 countries. Spotify, the leading competitor, has 50 million users, 12.5 million of whom pay, and is in 58 markets around the world.AdvertisementIn its version for Cricket customers, Deezer will offer streaming of its catalog of some 35 million songs for $6 a month, but no longer bundle it as part of the cost of wireless service. The standard subscription rate for most streaming services is $10 a month, although various discount plans are also available for students and families.“Our customers know music, use music and are willing to pay for music,” Jennifer Van Buskirk, president of Cricket Wireless, said in an interview.For Deezer, the deal is the latest step in a slow-moving plan to enter the American digital music market, which in its early years the company explicitly avoided. Last year, a version of Deezer in high-fidelity audio was made available through a partnership with Sonos, a system of wireless speakers, and later the company made another partnership with the Bose speaker line.A version of this article appears in print on January 9, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: French Streaming Service Acquires Toehold in the U.S.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.