By RAVI SOMAIYAOCT. 7, 2015
The New York Times Company released a strategy memo to its staff on Wednesday outlining an ambitious plan to double digital revenue to $800 million in 2020 from $400 million in 2014, in part through a focus on increasing subscriptions and engagement with its most loyal readers.The memo, which was signed by the company’s chief executive, Mark Thompson, and the executive editor of The Times, Dean Baquet, is based on the findings of an executive committee that met over the summer. Outlining a strategy that includes a shift away from platforms and departments and more toward the reader, the memo concludes, “What’s needed adds up to a transformation of the company.”The Times Company, like most other publishers, faces a complex and shifting industry, with precipitous declines in high-margin print advertising, which was long the bedrock of the newspaper business model. The company has been seeking to increase digital and other revenue to compensate, most notably through charging readers to subscribe online.In recent weeks, The Times publicly celebrated a milestone, passing one million digital subscribers, and it has sought to emphasize the breadth and depth of its coverage by presenting selections of its best journalism and a map showing the geographical locations that reporters have filed stories from.Advertisement“Many of our competitors focus primarily on attracting as many uniques as they can with a view to building an advertising-only business,” the memo said, referring to unique visitors to websites. “We see our business as a subscription service first, which requires us to offer journalism and products worth paying for.” That engagement, it said, will also help attract advertisers.Twelve percent of Times readers, the memo said, deliver 90 percent of its digital revenue. “To double our digital revenue, we need to more than double the number of these most loyal readers,” it said. “We will need to develop them increasingly from younger demographics and international audiences.”AdvertisementThough the print newspaper remains vital, the memo said, the company aims to recreate its “same daily must-read essentiality” on smartphones. And though The Times will continue to make its journalism available on other platforms — it has teamed up with Facebook recently, for example, as part of that company’s Instant Articles program — it will focus on making its own products and services, the memo said.A 12-page strategy document that expanded on the memo said that The Times plans to build on the success of a section focused on cooking that it began last year. It has five million monthly users, the document said, which has prompted an expansion of “this service approach to other areas starting with real estate, health, and film and television.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Together,” the document continued, “these efforts aim to reimagine our features sections for the mobile era with the same vigor and creativity that we put into launching them in the 1970s.”The company has had several rounds of buyouts and layoffs in the last several years. The memo did not directly address the possibility of further job losses, but it said that cost-cutting in general would continue to play a part in the planning.“Of course, we will have to keep our costs in mind in the years to come,” the memo said, “but our message today is not about cutting, it’s about growth.”A version of this article appears in print on October 8, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: The New York Times Company Outlines a Strategy to Double Its Digital Revenue.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.