By NEIL GOUGHJAN. 8, 2015
HONG KONG — China is increasingly likely to take new action to bolster growth, economists said, after figures released on Friday showed that inflation in the country remains near its lowest levels in five years.Sluggish economic growth and falling prices for oil and other key commodities are resulting in weakening inflation in some of the world’s biggest economies. On Wednesday, data from the eurozone highlighted the risk of deflation after prices fell 0.2 percent in December, turning negative for the first time since 2009, during the global financial crisis.In China, prices are falling because of weak domestic demand and the downturn in commodity markets. For example, prices for coal, iron ore and copper are at their lowest levels in at least five years, and China is the world’s biggest consumer of all three.Consumer prices in China rose a meager 1.5 percent in December from a year earlier, the official statistics agency said Friday. The slight uptick from November’s 1.5 percent increase was because of a spike in prices of fresh fruit and vegetables. Producer prices continued to fall for the 34th consecutive month, declining 3.3 percent from a year earlier, driven by declining commodity prices.AdvertisementThe easing inflationary pressure gives the central bank more room to attempt to lift growth and experiment with financial liberalization. In November, the central bank, the People’s Bank of China, cut benchmark interest rates for the first time since the summer of 2012. Analysts expect more rate cuts to follow in the coming months, as China’s economy is forecast to have grown in 2014 at its slowest pace in over two decades. Final figures for last year’s gross domestic product are scheduled to be released on Jan. 20.Advertisement“Tepid domestic demand and falling commodity and energy prices are expected to bring consumer price index inflation down to 1.5 percent while producer prices decline further,” Tao Wang, an economist at UBS, wrote Tuesday in a research note on economic forecasts for 2015. “We believe rising deflationary pressure will spur the central bank to cut benchmark lending rates,” Ms. Wang wrote.The growth outlook varies considerably across the world’s major economies. The recovery in the United States continues to see strong growth and declining unemployment, but Japan is in a recession and the eurozone economy grew at an anemic 0.2 percent annualized pace in the third quarter compared with the second quarter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In China, the picture is more complicated. The economy is expected to have grown last year at its slowest annual pace since 1990, but forecast at 7.4 percent, the increase in China’s G.D.P. remains the fastest of any major economy.China’s president, Xi Jinping, has said that the world should get used to this “new normal” of China growing at a slower but more sustainable pace. Policy makers hope to curb China’s reliance on credit-fueled investment and government spending, replacing them with consumer demand as a crucial driver of growth.But the continued weak price increases signal a potential risk that China could tip into deflation, where an economy becomes trapped in broad and persistent price declines that depresses spending and curtails employment, curbing overall growth.Wary of these risks, economists generally expect the central bank to respond with more interest rate cuts. They are divided, however, over whether this would also include a move to allow banks to lend out more of the cash that they are currently required to hold on reserve — a reduction of the so-called reserve requirement ratio.“China’s central bank appears to be reluctant to cut reserve requirement ratio to counter falling prices and economic slowdown,” Li-Gang Liu, the chief China economist at the Australian and New Zealand Banking Group, wrote Friday in a research note.“Chinese authorities will need to use both structural reform measures as well as monetary policy tools to head off the risk of deflation, especially when domestic demand remains weak and commodity and energy prices continue to fall,” he wrote, adding that such structural measures could include making China’s water, energy and utility prices more market driven.A version of this article appears in print on January 9, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Modest Rise in Inflation Gives China Room to Act.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.