A New York fund is the latest to try to breathe life into the long-ailing Italian shoemaker Bruno Magli.Marquee Brands, a brand acquisition company set up in September by the New York-based private equity firm Neuberger Berman, is set to announce on Monday that it will acquire the luxury shoe label for 28.5 million euros, or about $34 million.An Italian court had been evaluating offers for Bruno Magli after the shoemaker applied for insolvency proceedings in July with debt of nearly €20 million. The Carlyle Group was also said to be in the running to acquire the brand. Bruno Magli, a purveyor of fine shoes that dates back to 1936, has lost money and accumulated debt for years despite efforts to transform the label into a lifestyle brand.The current owner, the Swiss asset management firm Da Vinci Invest, acquired Bruno Magli last January, but has failed to revive the company — as did its previous owner, Fortelus Capital Management, which bought the brand in 2007.Marquee Brands claims it can do better. The fund has already begun to build partnerships with “better retailers across the globe,” will extend the Bruno Magli line into other categories and will again try to refashion the label into a lifestyle brand, according to a draft of the announcement it plans to send out Monday.Bruno Magli’s corporate offices will be based at Marquee’s New York headquarters, but the brand’s core footwear and leather products will continue to be designed in Bologna and made in Italy, according to the draft announcement.“We have a thorough brand strategy already created that will allow it to naturally develop into new categories,” Cory M. Baker, Marquee’s chief operating officer, said in the announcement. Marquee Brands will “continue to build a portfolio of high-quality brands,” the statement reads.Mr. Baker declined through a representative to give further details, citing legal restrictions on speaking publicly while his company was still soliciting funds from investors.Though private equity has long dabbled in the world of fashion, working with traditional brands long set in their ways — and loath to relinquish control to financiers from New York or London — can be difficult.Bruno Magli’s chief executive, Giuseppe Pirola, already appeared to be pushing ahead with his own plans for a turnaround.“We will invest the new resources in relaunching the brand in Italy, starting from reopening the flagship store in Venice and keeping operative the shops in the outlets Barberino, Serravalle Scrivia and Agira,” Mr. Pirola said in the Italian financial publication Milano Finanza over the weekend.The Bruno Magli deal, which Marquee said was expected to close early this year, comes as luxury shoes have waltzed into the spotlight. Last year, the growth of high-end shoes overtook that of leather goods, like designer bags, for the first time since 2007, according to a recent wealth report by Bain and Company. Luxury shoes, which tend to be cheaper than designer purses, are “emerging as an evident status symbol,” Bain said.Earlier this month, Coach said it would buy Stuart Weitzman, the maker of midrange luxury footwear, for up to $574 million in cash. Jimmy Choo, the high-end luxury brand whose sandals can sell for thousands of dollars, went public in October in an initial public offering that valued the company at 545.6 million British pounds.Bruno Magli representatives were not available to comment on Sunday. The Carlyle Group could also not be reached.In the United States, Bruno Magli is perhaps best known for its connection to the O.J. Simpson murder trial in 1995. Bloody footprints said to be made by Bruno Maglis were found near the body of Nicole Brown Simpson. Though O.J. Simpson initially denied owning Bruno Maglis, the jury in his murder trial was later shown photographs of Mr. Simpson wearing Bruno Magli suede lace-ups at a football game.A version of this article appears in print on 01/12/2015, on page B8 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Fund Said to Be Near Deal to Acquire Bruno Magli.