AdvertisementSupported byWorkspaceInterview by Patricia R. OlsenMichelle Kumbier is senior vice president for motorcycle operations at the Harley-Davidson Motor Company, Milwaukee.1. Into the woodsOur entire building houses our product development center. There’s a wooded area behind the building, and I can look out my window and watch the seasons change. We also have a small test track on our grounds where I can watch the test drivers ride our products.Blending inI recently worked with our facilities manager to redo my office. I’m the top executive in this building, but I didn’t want to be set apart from other employees, so I chose black furniture in a minimalist style.A welcoming angleMy desk is perpendicular to the wall so that I face the door. I want to be looking out so employees feel welcome to stop in.The daily hello I like to walk about during the day and engage with employees. I look them in the eye and say hello. I try to know everyone’s first name. There are over 1,000 people here and they come and go, but I pride myself on trying to remember names.Early riser I’m out of the house by 6:30 a.m. at the latest. On Mondays I meet with my staff, and Tuesdays with my peers and my boss, at 7 a.m. Occasionally, we have 4 a.m. conference calls with members of our global team.2. A source of inspirationOn my credenza is a ceramic pink boot, an award I received from the Manufacturing Institute. It’s given to women at any level in a manufacturing environment who exhibit strong leadership. It’s a celebration of me as a woman and my role in the science, technology, engineering and production, or STEP, world. To me, the award means I have a responsibility to pay it forward and inspire other women in this industry.3. Reading is fundamentalThe books on my credenza are on leadership. I believe in lifelong learning and try to inspire my employees to believe in that. You don’t become a leader and then forget about it; you need to continue to grow and develop.4. Bringing nature insideI’ve had the plant since I’ve been in this office, about six years. I spend a lot of time here and it’s a breath of fresh air. It represents oxygen to me, a little bit of life in the office. I don’t even know what kind it is.5. Don’t eat the carrotThe papier-mâché carrot is a memento from our efforts the last few years to improve our processes and grow the business. I needed to align 200 managers from different departments behind our vision and direction. I worked with them on what it means to be a great leader, by leading with a carrot and not a stick. I gave them smaller carrots, and two engineering supervisors in the group had this made and presented it to me.Family timeI have two sons, one at Purdue University and one who’s a senior in high school. We stay connected throughout the day by texting.Lunch? What’s that?I eat on the fly, which is one thing I’d like to change. I usually work through lunch, but I’d like to go to the cafeteria and sit down with employees. I also drink way too much diet soda during the day. It’s about the only vice I have left. I cut it off at 4 p.m. so I can sleep at night.Taking a break I have four weeks of vacation. My husband and I take motorcycle trips and travel to warm places such as Hawaii. Otherwise vacations are centered on our children’s activities, such as taking one son to college and visiting colleges with the other.6. On the road againI’ve had my motorcycle license for over 10 years and have ridden seriously for the last six. This photo is from a ride from Denver through Utah that I took with a couple hundred of our dealers. I have to be able to ride motorcycles competently to be able to evaluate our products and those of our competitors.Interview conducted and condensed by Patricia R. Olsen. Advertisement