AdvertisementSupported byPrototypeBy Claire MartinThe three parking spots on the street directly in front of Tony’s Pizza Napoletana, in the North Beach neighborhood of San Francisco, have been the site of a rap-music video, poetry readings, a fashion photo shoot and jazz mini-concerts.People sit down to drink coffee in these parking spots. And they eat pizza — a lot of it, according to Tony Gemignani, the chef and president of the pizza restaurant and its sister takeout business, Slice House.In 2011, Mr. Gemignani had bamboo flooring, tables, brightly colored cafe chairs and dwarf fig and olive trees installed on a platform that extends from the curb over the pavement. In this way, the parking spots are transformed into a micro park, or parklet. Since then, the Slice House’s business has quadrupled, he says.“It’s a go-to for people,” he says of the parklet. “I mean, it just grabs you.”About 51 such parklets, each occupying one to three street parking spaces, have sprung up across San Francisco since 2010, and at least a dozen more are being designed or built, or are in the process of receiving city permits, says Robin Abad Ocubillo, the parklet program manager for the city’s Pavement to Parks program.In the last couple of years, at least 72 more parklets have materialized worldwide in places like Philadelphia, New Orleans, Seattle, Chicago, Mexico City and Auckland, New Zealand. (In cities with cold weather, sponsors of parklets are typically required to remove them in winter.) This year, the Los Angeles metro area will welcome four of them, sponsored by local business improvement districts and chambers of commerce. In San Francisco, parklets are open to the public, but they’re typically commissioned by small businesses hoping to attract customers, brighten streetscapes and create gathering spaces.It usually takes 12 to 18 months for a business to get a permit and build a parklet; the cost can range from roughly $8,000 to $14,000 a parking spot, according to Mr. Ocubillo. A majority of parklets are privately financed and maintained. But in San Francisco, some have received partial funding from the city.The idea for parklets began to germinate in 2005, when members of a San Francisco arts collective called Rebar wanted to apply their artistic flair to small fragments of real estate. They were also interested in challenging “the boundaries of the short-term lease offered by a metered parking space,” says John Bela, one of Rebar’s co-founders. And they questioned what they saw as an automobile-centered approach to urban planning and design.They started an experiment. In a stretch of downtown San Francisco that lacked greenery, they found an empty parking space, rolled out a patch of grass turf and set up a park bench and a potted tree. They put up a sign that read, “If you’d like to enjoy this little park, please put some coins in the meter.” Then they went across the street to watch.The land next to a parking spot, Mr. Bela says, probably rented for a couple of hundred dollars a square foot per year, “but you could rent this little piece of land, 200 square feet, in downtown San Francisco for a couple dollars an hour.”Mr. Bela and the others saw a pedestrian wander into the spot, put money in the meter and sit on a bench. Soon another sauntered in, and the two struck up a conversation. Just like that, the exercise was a success. Without much effort or expense, the parking spot had been transformed into a mini-park.The experiment expanded into a daylong, international event, Park(ing) Day, in which people in cities worldwide created their own microparks in parking spaces. Then, in 2010, Rebar was commissioned to create a semipermanent version of one of the parks, and the parklet was born.Since then, Rebar has designed 10 parklets, and other firms have contributed their own designs. Last spring, two Rebar co-founders branched off to join Gehl Architects, based in Copenhagen; they now head Gehl’s San Francisco branch, Gehl Studios, doing urban design projects, including parklets, around the world.Many parklets are sponsored by cafes and restaurants, but the form also attracts galleries. The parklet at the Luna Rienne  in San Francisco is host for a revolving collection of installations by local artists.“We thought it would be fun to have an extension of our art gallery out in the street,” says Olivia Ongpin, curator of the gallery, which started its parklet in 2011.“Having the extra exposure has been helpful,” she says. “We’d been here for several years, and once we put it in, neighbors were like, ‘Oh, we didn’t even know you were here.’ It’s sort of a billboard.”Not all neighborhoods have been enthusiastic about parklets. The main complaint is that they usurp parking spaces that residents or business customers need.Neighbors initially objected to a parklet designed by Rebar for the Rapha Cycle Club San Francisco. The parklet was built out of a 1973 Citroën H van once used to pick up cyclist stragglers on twisty mountain roads during the Tour de France. The front and back of the van were cut off to serve as bookends to a parklet filled with wooden benches and plants.Complaints rolled in after the parklet was installed in late 2012. Residents and business owners “felt it was going to take away a few spaces in an already challenging parking landscape,” the cycle club’s manager, Charlie Cunningham, said in an email.Unfortunately for the club — which is a retail store, cycle club, gallery and cafe rolled into one — the parklet was installed before a permit was issued. For more than a year, its fate was in legal limbo, but that didn’t stop Rapha patrons, local residents and area cyclists from using the parklet and its built-in benches. In Mr. Cunningham’s opinion, the parklet helped usher in more business and tourists to the area.Last summer, he received letters of support from neighborhood associations and local residents, and he says he was able to prove to the local city supervisor that the original objections had been resolved.It’s hard to quantify economic impact of parklets beyond the benefit to the sponsoring business. But Pavement to Parks in San Francisco and the People St parklet and plazas program in Los Angeles are both trying to measure the effects.A pilot program by People St, which is overseen by the Los Angeles Department of Transportation, includes a handful of converted spaces. “The existing businesses are seeing increased foot traffic and other factors that may be contributing to an increase in sales tax receipts,” says Valerie Watson, the assistant pedestrian coordinator for the department’s Active Transportation Division.For Mr. Gemignani in San Francisco, the investment in a parklet has been well worth it. When he went to an informational meeting before he commissioned his version, he says, other local business owners were skeptical about developing their own. Everyone complained about the price, he says, adding that he spent nearly $30,000 on his parklet. “But it was one of those investments that was a no-brainer for me,” he says. “Now everyone wants one.”Advertisement