AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam Bryant This interview with  Marla Malcolm Beck, chief executive of Bluemercury, a beauty products and spa services retailer, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences for you?A. My dad was an entrepreneur. He started an insurance agency and a real estate company, and I worked in his office from the time I was 9. When I was in high school, I used to balance his books. I was also editor of the yearbook. That was interesting, because I learned that I’m not really a good project manager; I’m better with ideas and the creative side.I also have a lot of sports-failure stories. I loved volleyball, but during my freshman year in high school, I didn’t even make the J.V. team. I was devastated, so I asked the coach what I had to do to make the team the next year, and she pointed me to a program where I played volleyball on the side for six months. I then made the J.V. team, and played varsity in my junior year and senior year, when I was the captain. I had a number of experiences like that, which taught me I could actually do anything. You just have to invest the time. You could completely fail, pick yourself up and do something great.Did you want to be in leadership positions?I just always ended up in them, even though I was shy. I wasn’t the best volleyball player on the team by any means, but I was reliable. It was always about no drama — just, “Let’s get the job done.” I probably got that from my dad. He had an amazing work ethic.What did you study in college?Political economy. I was interested in international business, but I wanted more of the theoretical and philosophical grounding. In college, I ran a student organization that was started after World War II to bring together students from around the world. We would find internships in San Francisco for foreign students. It was a global matching system, and for every one we found, we would send someone overseas on an internship.That’s another failure story, a very public failure. I ran uncontested to be the president, gave a speech and didn’t even get a majority of the votes. In the second election, someone ran against me, but I had interviewed a lot of people about why I didn’t get the position the first time, and they said I wasn’t human enough, I wasn’t passionate enough. So I talked more about the mission and my dreams for the organization, and I think people respected me for getting up there again, and I got most of the votes.And after college? I worked in consulting, for McKinsey, for two years before going to business school, where I caught the entrepreneur bug. I thought I would get closer to entrepreneurship by going into private equity, which I did, but within three months I knew it was completely wrong for me. The firm I had joined was buying and consolidating companies more as a financial play than to build businesses. I was also meeting all these entrepreneurs, and I started thinking, “I can do that.”I had always wanted to run a company. Whenever I was in an organization or part of a team, I felt that I should be in charge, mainly because I knew where we should go. I’ve always been good at figuring out the right path. I just see where things are going, how everything comes together. That’s my core skill set.What about leadership lessons since starting Bluemercury 15 years ago?Early on, I kept a lot of the hard problems to myself. Not only did that put more pressure on me, but also people can start working on the wrong things, and you have no way to course-correct if you don’t give them the “why.”I don’t think I was brave enough early on, and I’m more brave now about not keeping things to myself — things that are working, things that are not working, and just being more fluid with communication. I still catch myself now when I’m asking people to do things, and I have to go back to why it’s important and why we need to do this as a company.How do you hire?I’m the queen of the seven-minute interview. I interview for only seven to 10 minutes, and I have a framework — it’s skill, will and fit. In about two minutes, I can ascertain skill, just based on what they’ve done. I’ll ask, “What’s the biggest impact you had at your past organization?” It’s important that someone takes ownership of a project that they did, and you can tell based on how they talk about it whether they did it or whether it was just something that was going on at the organization.Will is about hunger, so I’ll ask, “What do you want to do in five or 10 years?” That tells you a lot about their aspirations and creativity. If you’re hungry to get somewhere, that means you want to learn. And if you want to learn, you can do any job.In terms of fit, I’m looking for people who have some sort of experience with a smaller company. At big companies, your job is really one little piece of the pie. I need someone who can make things happen and is comfortable with ambiguity. What advice do you give to graduating college students?The best advice I heard when I was in college was “Be an expert at something.” So bring an expertise or skill set into an organization, or be the expert at something that nobody else is doing. The second thing I would say is “Go into tech.” If you look at all the skill sets companies need, they involve a comfort level with technology.I would also tell students that nobody ends up in the first job they choose out of college, so just find something that is interesting to you, because you tend to excel at things you’re interested in. But just go do it. You have nothing to lose.This interview has been edited and condensed. Advertisement