AdvertisementSupported byOff the ShelfBy Paul B. BrownTHE problem with most New Year’s resolutions is that they aren’t any fun. Sure, many of us should eat less — and healthier. And of course, more exercise would be a good thing. But actually doing these things can be hard.It’s no different with financial resolutions. Spending less and saving more is a wonderful concept. But it would be much more enjoyable to take a big vacation in Bora Bora — and to lie on a hammock and consume high-calorie food and drink once we’re there.The authors of two new personal-finance books sympathize. They know it’s tough to achieve your financial goals unless you can somehow transform the flat, boring numbers in your savings and retirement accounts into something that has meaning.In “Picture Your Prosperity” (Portfolio/Penguin), Ellen Rogin and Lisa Kueng, both veterans of the financial services industry, suggest that you create an image of what financial success looks like — arguing that if you can visualize it, you can achieve it. And Tony Robbins, the self-help guru, talks about using finances as a tool to achieve the best “you” possible in “Money: Master the Game” (Simon & Schuster). In “Picture Your Prosperity,” there isn’t much financial advice — and that is by design. There are only a handful of pages devoted to such things as asset allocation. And while the authors say that one of the three model portfolios they offer will fit your risk tolerance, the options are all conservative.For example, the most aggressive one, which they liken to a sports car, has just 70 percent of its holdings in stock — with 20 percent in bonds and an additional 5 percent each in real estate and commodities. That’s more like a Honda Accord with a spoiler than a Lamborghini.And when it comes to saving strategies, the authors don’t go much deeper than saying you should pay off your credit card every month and make sure you’re actually using that gym membership you bought.So what fills the rest of this 272-page book? A relentlessly upbeat tone that says in countless variations, “Yes, we know investing is challenging, but you can do it,” and an urging to picture your desired financial future. To help you create that image, the authors provide 32 small color photographs — of things like an airplane, which can represent travel, and an artist’s palette to symbolize avocations you might want to pursue.Once you create that picture, “please don’t put it in your sock drawer,” the authors write. “We get that you probably won’t display it above your sofa, but it should be somewhere you can see it every day.” A constant reminder of what you are saving for will help keep you focused and committed to your goal, the authors write, as will periodic checks on your progress. If your goal is to completely pay for your child’s college education, for example, yet you aren’t putting very much money toward it, something is out of whack.WHILE the book offers very good advice about how you can visualize your financial goals, achieving them will take more help than it provides. That’s where Mr. Robbins could come in.If anything, his 656-page book contains even more exhortations. (“Remember, it’s not conditions but decisions that determine our lives.”) And he acknowledges that he consulted with financial experts like John C. Bogle, who founded the Vanguard Group, and the hedge fund manager Paul Tudor Jones II in formulating his advice.The results are a distillation of just about every good personal-finance idea of the last 40 years. Mr. Robbins passionately advocates diversification, buying index funds to keep investment expenses low and increasing the percentage you save every time you get a raise.Here’s my interpretation of that: Say you make $100,000 annually and are saving 10 percent. If you get a $5,000 raise, instead of putting away $10,500, you might increase your savings rate to 12 percent, or $12,600. Another $5,000 raise two years from now? Increase the rate to 14 percent and save $15,400. “It’s painless,” Mr. Robbins writes, because the higher savings rate is more than offset by the size of your raise.All of this is good, but the book has three flaws.It often repeats itself, and at length. For example, the idea of increasing your savings percentage with each raise is discussed in four separate places. Mr. Robbins says the repetition is intended to underscore important points. But it’s annoying.Also, his “all seasons” portfolio, with just 30 percent of its holdings in equities and 55 percent in bonds — the rest in gold and other commodities — is intended to serve investors in both up and down markets. Yet it seems extremely conservative, especially given today’s low bond yields.And the problem with providing constantly supportive messages is that it can make reaching goals appear easier than it is. For example, Mr. Robbins correctly points out that prepaying your mortgage lets you own your home faster. His suggestion: “Next time you write your monthly mortgage check, write a second check for the principal-only portion of next month’s payment.”Coming up with that additional money isn’t easy for many people, though for Mr. Robbins it evidently is. He writes about (and plugs) the resort he owns in Fiji and discusses how he moved to Florida when California raised its state income tax to a point where he felt “no longer welcome.”A vast majority of us are not in his situation. But then again, it may give us something to aspire to. Advertisement