AdvertisementSupported byBy Conrad De AenlleStocks ended the fourth quarter of 2014 near record highs, but they traveled a circuitous route to get there — falling, then soaring, then falling again before making a strong late run. Bonds went in either direction, depending on the quality of the vehicle used for the trip. And in the quarter’s biggest surprise, oil headed due south.Crude oil prices plunged 41.4 percent for the quarter, to end the year at a five-year low after several large producers, first Saudi Arabia and then other members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, indicated that they had no intention of curbing production to prop up prices. The move was a reminder of how powerful market forces and the law of supply and demand can be.The Econ 101 refresher course was well timed, nearly coinciding with another significant event: The Federal Reserve signaled to the markets that it would wean them off the stimulus that had helped support them for several years. The central bank suspended its program of bond purchases, or quantitative easing, in October and hinted last month that it would let short-term interest rates rise by midyear.The stock market took the policy changes and oil price decline in stride. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index finished 2014 at 2,058.90, up 4.4 percent for the quarter and 11.4 percent for the year.The rally helped the average domestic stock fund tracked by Morningstar to rise 4.3 percent in the quarter, but most other broad stock fund categories declined. The average international stock fund fell 2 percent, pulled down by losses of 2.7 percent for portfolios that focus on Europe and 2.3 percent for Asia funds. Diversified emerging-market funds were down 4.9 percent, on average. The declines were attributable partly to a stronger dollar, which reduces the value of assets denominated in other currencies. Foreign stock markets did not perform well enough to make up for the weakness in other currencies.Domestic funds were more the exception than the rule for another reason: The United States is seen to stand apart when it comes to economic progress and central bank policies. The American economy has displayed unusual strength, including an upward revision of third-quarter economic growth to a 5 percent annual rate, and the Fed is looking to tighten credit.Japanese and Chinese authorities, by contrast, responded to persistent sluggishness by accelerating bond purchase programs in the fourth quarter or by taking other extraordinary measures. The European Central Bank is expected to follow suit, since the region’s economy remains weak.The United States may be strong enough to support the global economy, some investment advisers say. But it’s also possible that other regions may be so weak that they will drag down the American economy with them.“When we look ahead to 2015, one thing that seems likely is that it’s not going to be steady as she goes,” said Ben Inker, co-head of asset allocation at GMO, an investment management firm. “The world is going to go one way or the other.”Investors trying to determine which way things will break will receive little guidance from the sharp drop in oil prices, Mr. Inker added. It’s a portentous event for the global economy, but it’s hard to know what it portends.Cheaper oil “has got to be a good thing, net, for most of the developed world and a fair chunk of the emerging world,” he said. But if the decline hints at a deceleration of growth and broader deflation, he warned, “we’re going to look back and say that the global economy came unstuck in the second half of 2014, but we didn’t realize it.”Bob Baur, chief global economist at Principal Global Investors, is more optimistic. Vigorous central bank support should benefit European and Asian markets, in his view, and the Fed’s withdrawal shows that American growth is back on track, although he, too, advised investors not to expect a smooth ride.“With the U.S. economy still healthy and the eurozone and Japan likely to exceed low economic expectations,” Mr. Baur said, “we’d suggest overweighting each area’s equities in one’s global portfolio and underweighting the rest of the world.” That would mean emerging markets, which he warned “face significant headwinds in 2015 with tighter Fed policy, a stronger dollar, a slower-growing Chinese economy and local financial stress and squeezed profits.”His outlook isn’t ideal for the United States, either, in the short run. American stocks could suffer a 15 percent correction early in the year as investors adjust to a less generous Fed, he warned, before bouncing back to end 2015 with a net return in the high single digits.Rebecca H. Patterson, chief investment officer at Bessemer Trust, a firm that advises wealthy families, encourages staying big and local.“We’re still overweight the U.S., with the bulk of exposure in large-capitalization stocks,” she said. “We don’t think the dollar rally is over, and to the degree that you get a rally in Europe, you’re going to lose out on the currency. The surprise in 2015 might be not more dollar strength but the degree of dollar strength.”The dollar has been especially strong against the Japanese yen, one reason behind the bullish stance that John Vail, chief global strategist at Nikko Asset Management, has toward Japan’s economy and stock market. He says corporate profits are benefiting from the Bank of Japan’s weak-yen policy and from Abenomics, measures to stimulate the economy introduced by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.“Abenomics has been a miracle for the corporate sector,” Mr. Vail said. “Taxes have been cut, and profit margins” are rising rapidly, “higher than in 1988.”The resurgence may have escaped notice because the yen’s decline has limited the rise in Japanese stock prices when expressed in dollars, but Mr. Vail expects the exchange rate to stabilize while profits and stocks will keep rising, creating a sweet spot for investors.Asian stocks in general “have a greater deal to offer” than American ones, as Mr. Vail sees it. He says South Korea, in particular, is “moving in the right direction.” The belief that the Fed will raise interest rates helps account for the dollar’s strength against the yen and other currencies. But Komal S. Sri-Kumar, president of Sri-Kumar Global Strategies, an investment consulting firm, wouldn’t count on a Fed rate increase anytime soon or on the economy, in the United States or elsewhere, displaying robust growth.“I said there wouldn’t be an increase in interest rates in 2014 when the consensus was that the Fed would hike, and they won’t hike this year, either,” he predicted.To show why it won’t need or want to, he highlighted extremely low government bond yields worldwide, which imply that investors foresee almost no inflation for several years. He also pointed to recent weakness in the junk-bond market as a warning for the global economy. Yields have risen on the debt of riskier issuers, especially energy companies suddenly facing lower revenue. “If we have a series of defaults in the energy sector, there could be spillover effects elsewhere,” Mr. Sri-Kumar said.Fourth-quarter fund results indicate a flight to safety by bond investors. Funds that hold long-term government issues rose a robust 8.8 percent, but declines in high-yield and emerging-market portfolios left the average bond fund nursing a loss of 0.1 percent.European government bond yields could continue to fall if the European Central Bank picks up where the Fed left off and introduces a bond-purchasing program early this year.“The eurozone requires a weaker euro for many countries to regain competitiveness, so the E.C.B. is going to start purchasing sovereign paper in the first quarter,” Mr. Sri-Kumar said. “There should be one more burst of yield decline.”Mr. Inker likewise foresees quantitative easing “as a possible way to reduce some of the real strain in Europe.”  He acknowledged, however, that a new source of strain — a familiar one, really — has emerged.The Greek Parliament was dissolved in late December after the ruling party lost a crucial vote. That party backs the austerity program introduced in 2012 as a condition for the debt bailout that kept the country in the eurozone. A general election will be held on Jan. 25, with voters expected to back a coalition led by a party that wants to renegotiate the bailout terms, something that Germany and other large European Union members would probably resist.“This could get kind of scary,” Mr. Inker said. “Fringe parties are getting significant support throughout Europe. If they kick out the elites, it’s not clear what happens.”Whatever impact central bank policies have on the real world, they have worked wonders for the markets. Mr. Sri-Kumar questioned how much more bang the bankers could get for their trillions of bucks.“They’ve carried the distortion as far as it can go,” he said. “Central banks may lose the ability to keep postponing the inevitable through increasing the money supply. If we had normal interest rates, stock and bond prices wouldn’t be where they are.”He encourages staying in United States Treasury bonds, which he expects to rally, with 10-year yields falling to 1.75 percent from their year-end level of 2.17 percent. European government debt should do well too, in his opinion, but American investors could lose money if the euro continues to drop. As for stocks, he would stick to the safest sectors, including consumer staples, utilities and health care.Mr. Inker agreed that investors should be “somewhat more conservatively positioned than normal.” With American stock and bond prices so high, that means looking abroad, especially to the developing world. But he acknowledged a conundrum: While foreign markets are cheaper, their economies appear more fragile, so it’s hard to know which direction to take.“You can either have scary stuff that’s cheap,” he said, “or stuff that allows you to sleep at night but where it’s hard to see how you’ll get much return on it.”Advertisement