Updated, 8:51 p.m. | Antonio Weiss, a senior investment banker at Lazard, withdrew his name from consideration to be a senior Treasury Department official in the face of liberal opposition Monday, and will instead serve as a counselor to the secretary of the Treasury, Jacob J. Lew.Mr. Weiss, nominated to be under secretary of the Treasury for domestic finance, had run into a buzz saw of resistance, led by Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, who opposed the nomination of a Wall Street executive for a key financial post.But the opposition’s victory was tempered by the administration’s decision to bring Mr. Weiss on board anyway. Rather than face months of contentious confirmation hearings, financial vetting and a public debate on the Senate floor, Mr. Weiss will be able to join the Treasury Department almost immediately.“Given his tremendous expertise and shared passion for helping working families, I asked Antonio to join Treasury in a different role — as a counselor to me — and he accepted,” Mr. Lew said in a statement Monday evening.Mr. Lew expressed disappointment at the turn of events. “I continue to believe that the opposition to his nomination was not justified,” he said.The events underscored the growing power of the Democratic Party’s populist wing, but also its limits. Mr. Weiss had impeccable Democratic credentials, as a donor and an outspoken advocate for liberal economic policies. Supporters even pointed to his position as publisher of the literary Paris Review to attest to his intellectual panache.But to a growing list of Senate Democratic opponents, Mr. Weiss’s years as a Wall Street dealmaker made him unsuitable for a post that oversees many of the Wall Street regulations imposed under the 2010 Dodd-Frank law.“I think that he and perhaps the president understand there are many of us in the Senate who believe that we need high-ranking administration officials who do not come from Wall Street but in fact are prepared to stand up to Wall Street,” said Senator Bernie Sanders, an independent from Vermont and an early opponent of Mr. Weiss.Administration officials had hoped such voices would lose their clout in a Republican-controlled Senate. But Republicans stayed largely silent on whether they would support Mr. Weiss, letting the Democrats fight among themselves.Ms. Warren said that Mr. Weiss was not qualified for the domestic finance post because much of his investment banking career has been spent on international mergers and acquisitions. Lazard’s work helping Burger King acquire the Canadian fast-food chain Tim Hortons, then move its headquarters abroad, presented the greatest obstacle to Mr. Weiss’s nomination.Mr. Weiss’s supporters said that his role in the merger was marginal, and that it was a merger of equals, not a classic inversion, in which a major American company buys a much smaller company for tax purposes. Nonetheless, it cost Mr. Weiss the support of Senator Richard Durbin of Illinois, the No. 2 Democrat.Senator Tammy Baldwin, Democrat of Wisconsin, said small businesses, home buyers and community banks needed “a stronger voice in financial policy making to provide services that work for Main Street, not Wall Street.”Mr. Weiss was facing the prospect of shuttling between Washington and New York for months, wooing senators, answering the Senate Finance Committee’s famously difficult questions on taxes and finances, and if he made it through the process, he would have little time to actually serve.Instead, the White House spokeswoman Jennifer Friedman said Mr. Weiss asked this weekend that his name be withdrawn “to avoid the distraction of a lengthy confirmation process.”Liberal groups that have been pushing Democrats to adopt a more populist tone claimed victory Monday night as they sought to elevate Ms. Warren — and push her to run for president.“As we said from the start of this fight, Antonio Weiss’s nomination wasn’t just about an important Treasury Department post, it was about the soul of the Democratic Party,” said Charles Chamberlain, executive director of Democracy for America, which is pushing for a Warren White House bid. “Hopefully, the White House will learn from this experience that standing up to Wall Street is both good policy and good politics, and make its decisions accordingly.”But so far, that appeal has not had a huge impact. In less than a month, lobbyists from the major financial firms have twice attached measures to unrelated bills that roll back banking regulations — and gotten them signed into law. One of the last acts of the 113th Congress was to block regulations mandating that the trading of exotic financial instruments known as swaps be done with money not insured by federal entities like the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. That measure was attached to a large bill that funded the government through September.One of the first acts of the 114th Congress was to shield nonfinancial-firm users of derivatives, another risky financial instrument, from regulations. That was attached to a reauthorization of federal terrorism insurance. On Tuesday, the House again will vote on legislation to ease up on Wall Street regulations that were part of the Dodd-Frank law. The bill is expected to pass easily with bipartisan support.MoveOn.org, another liberal group, promised to keep fighting.“This is a defining issue of our time, and we will not back down, no matter how condescending the big banks or their allies are, or how much they spend on lobbyists,” said Anna Galland, executive director of the group’s tax-exempt arm, MoveOn.org Civic Action.A version of this article appears in print on 01/13/2015, on page B1 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Nominee for Treasury Post Withdraws.