The stock exchange operator BATS Global Markets has agreed to pay $14 million to settle accusations by the Securities and Exchange Commission concerning two exchanges it acquired through its merger with Direct Edge last year.The two exchanges, known as EDGA and EDGX, failed to disclose enough information about various types of orders used by traders for buying and selling stocks, the S.E.C. said on Monday. The agency said the penalty was its largest to date against a national securities exchange.In a statement, BATS said the Direct Edge system that drew the regulatory crackdown was put in place before the merger, which was completed in early 2014. The company did not admit or deny the S.E.C.’s findings and said it agreed to the settlement “in order to put this matter behind us.”A federally regulated stock exchange has to maintain a set of rules to tell investors how it operates. The rules, which must be approved by the S.E.C., include disclosures about types of orders that can be used on the exchange.In this case, the S.E.C. claimed the rules of EDGA and EDGX failed to give investors a complete picture of what are known as price-sliding order types. Price-sliding allows quotes that might otherwise be canceled to be booked at a slightly lower or higher price.From 2010 until late 2014, the S.E.C. said, the Direct Edge exchanges operated under rules that described a single price-sliding process, when in actuality there were three variations of price-sliding available. The rules failed to fully describe how these order types interacted with each other and with other order types, according to the S.E.C.At the same time, Direct Edge seemed to maintain better communication with certain high-frequency traders in its markets. The two exchanges provided thorough disclosure of the order types to high-frequency trading firms, which it also solicited for input on developing a certain order type, the S.E.C. said.The agency said this thorough disclosure should have been provided to all investors, not just a select few.“Exchanges must ensure that their order types are described accurately in their rules and communications to all members,” Andrew J. Ceresney, director of the agency’s enforcement division, said in a statement.BATS, in its statement, said it had already created a reserve to pay for the S.E.C. settlement. It plans to hold a conference call with customers on Tuesday.A version of this article appears in print on 01/13/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Regulatory Fine.