

Related Links


Shire to Buy NPS Pharmaceuticals for $5.2 Billion  (Jan. 11, 2015)

Shire is gambling its AbbVie breakup fee on risky M.&A.The pharmaceutical company, based in Dublin, has agreed to buy NPS Pharmaceuticals of the United States to expand in lucrative rare drugs. The 51 percent premium for NPS is covered almost entirely by compensation from the collapse last year of Shire’s sale to AbbVie, its larger American rival. That does not much mitigate the risk of making a deal ahead of an important regulatory ruling.It is no surprise to see Shire’s chief executive, Flemming Ornskov, back on the acquisition trail. NPS had been tipped as a target back before AbbVie began a bid for Shire itself, only to be wrong-footed by a Washington clampdown on tax-driven mergers.The strategic logic of buying NPS is hard to fault. The deal cements Shire’s position as a specialist in rare-disease drugs, which focus on illnesses affecting less than 200,000 patients and so benefit from generous patents or tax incentives. Shire gets access to Gattex, for short-bowel syndrome, and Natpara, for hypoparathyroidism.The financial wisdom is not so clear. Given the niche focus, cost synergies are scant. Shire says it could cut 25 to 35 percent of 2017 costs, or $100 million based on Deutsche Bank estimates. Taxed and capitalized, those would cover only half the premium. There are possible revenue synergies too, if Shire can crank up sales of Gattex and develop Natpara.The snag is that Shire is playing its chips just days before the United States Food and Drug Administration decides whether to approve Natpara. An advisory panel last year voted 8 to 5 to recommend the drug, but worried about its side effects. The risk is that Natpara is not approved after all, or safety concerns could limit its potential.Moving now may have helped Shire avoid a bidding war, or paying even more when uncertainty eases. And by reinforcing its position in the highly valued rare-disease sector, Shire may defend its premium rating, currently 18 times next year’s forecast earnings. Yet with American health care providers increasingly focused on costs, and some rare-disease treatments costing over $400,000 a year, the bet assumes that this area of medicine will escape the broader trends in the pharmaceutical industry.Neil Unmack is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.DealBook readers: The Breakingviews predictions book for 2015, “Animal Spirits and Crisis Ghosts,” is a collection of pithy commentary that reflects two conflicting sentiments coexisting in finance and economics. Stocks and other assets keep recording solid, but not yet outlandish, price gains, which have encouraged mergers, initial public offerings and shareholder activism. At the same time, policies inspired by the global financial crisis in 2008 are restraining certain industries, in particular banking, where regulators want bigger, and therefore more expensive, capital cushions. Click here to read the book. (Or download the PDF.)