Updated, 5:20 p.m. | The data storage giant EMC has reached a truce with a prominent activist hedge fund — for now, anyway — by agreeing to add two directors to its board.EMC said on Monday that José E. Almeida, the chairman and chief executive of the medical device maker Covidien, and Donald J. Carty, a former vice chairman and chief financial officer of Dell Inc., had been appointed to its board. Together, the two will expand the board to 13 members.With the appointments, EMC has made peace with Elliott Management, which emerged last year with a stake of just more than 2 percent and became an advocate of breaking up the $60 billion company. The efforts by Elliott, which has taken on the likes of Hess and Juniper Networks, represented its most ambitious campaign yet. The hedge fund had urged EMC to break up its so-called “federation” model of different businesses. Among them is an 80 percent stake in VMware, a seperately traded software virtualization company that analysts and investors have long considered EMC’s most valuable asset.Other operations include the security software provider RSA and Pivotal, a cloud computing company.Elliott stepped up its public campaign in the fall after two other big technology companies, eBay and Hewlett-Packard, announced plans to split themselves up.But even before Elliott unveiled itself as an investor, EMC had been studying ways to improve its stock price. That review eventually included talks to merge with HP, though negotiations eventually ended over disagreements on price and other matters.Ultimately, the company offered to add two new directors, chosen with Elliott’s input, according to a person briefed on the matter. The offer was made in the interest of giving the storage provider more time to complete its strategic review, though the hedge fund is still pressing for some kind of corporate breakup.Elliott said on Monday that it had agreed to vote in favor of EMC’s entire slate of director nominees at the company’s annual investor meeting this year. The armistice will only extend through September, however, meaning that the hedge fund will be free to again agitate publicly after that time if it isn’t happy with the company’s direction.“Both Joe and Don are strong and experienced executives, and we believe they will bring invaluable perspectives to the board’s ongoing review of EMC’s strategic direction,” Jesse Cohn, the Elliott portfolio manager who led the campaign, said in a statement.Joe Tucci, EMC’s founder and chairman, said, “Joe Almeida and Don Carty are two highly experienced leaders of major global corporations who will bring added depth and insights to our board of directors. We are delighted to welcome both Joe and Don to the board.”