Almost a month after Family Dollar postponed a shareholder vote on its planned $8.5 billion merger with Dollar Tree, the company is making a direct pitch to investors to try to win support for the deal.In a public letter to shareholders released on Monday, Howard Levine, Family Dollar’s chairman and chief executive, implored investors to support the deal despite a higher $9.1 billion bid from its larger rival Dollar General.A new vote on the deal is scheduled for Jan. 22.The letter is the latest move in the battle over the fate of Family Dollar, which agreed in July to merge with Dollar Tree to compete against other low-cost retailers. But Dollar General, blindsided by the move, countered with its own takeover bid.In his letter, Mr. Levine wrote that the company estimated the number of overlapping stores that the Federal Trade Commission would find troubling in a combination of Family Dollar and Dollar General was 3,500 to 4,500. That is well beyond the 1,500 stores that Dollar General has committed to divesting to win antitrust approval and even more beyond the 700 stores that the retailer has said the government would most likely require to be sold.By contrast, he added, the trade commission at the moment thinks that 310 stores would be problematic in a merger of Family Dollar and Dollar Tree. Dollar Tree also has offered a compromise that would bring that number down below 300.“In sum, antitrust clearance of the Dollar Tree merger on its terms and in a timely manner is a virtual certainty,” Mr. Levine wrote.Should shareholders not support the Dollar Tree transaction, the fate of Family Dollar would be as a weakened stand-alone company, Mr. Levine wrote, a tough situation given the forecasts of continued pressure on sales.And according to Mr. Levine, his counterpart at Dollar Tree told him in a letter that the costs of financing their planned merger would rise substantially after Jan. 22. Moreover, Dollar Tree would view any attempt to further postpone the shareholder vote on the deal again as a breach of contract that would result in termination of the merger and a $305 million breakup fee from Family Dollar.“After two delays, we have been more than reasonable but have reached the end of our patience,” Robert Sasser, Dollar Tree’s chief executive, wrote to Mr. Levine. “We hope that Family Dollar’s shareholders decide to support Dollar Tree’s transaction, with the premium value, certainty, timing advantages and further upside it offers. But we are prepared to accept whatever judgment they make.”A version of this article appears in print on 01/13/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Direct Appeal.