The Irish drug maker Shire has agreed to acquire NPS Pharmaceuticals for $5.2 billion, the first big corporate acquisition of the year, DealBook’s David Gelles reports. Shire, based in Dublin, said on Sunday that it would pay $46 a share for NPS, which is based in New Jersey and specializes in drugs for gastrointestinal disorders. That represents a 51 percent increase over NPS’s share price on Dec. 16, before rumors of the deal first surfaced. Shire will pay for NPS using all cash.The deal will allow Shire to move on from its failed $54 billion sale to AbbVie last year. After the misstep, it was unclear what Shire’s next move would be. Some analysts speculated it remained a takeover target for another big global drug maker. Flemming Ornskov, Shire’s chief executive, said the acquisition of NPS, the biggest in Shire’s history, was a turning point after the failed AbbVie deal. “This is a statement of our intent to be a strong, thriving independent company,” Mr. Ornskov said.Also on Monday, the Swiss pharmaceutical giant Roche said that it would acquire a majority stake in the tumor-testing company Foundation Medicine for more than $1 billion, Andrew Pollack writes in DealBook. The deal is aimed at improving both cancer treatment and drug development.TUMBLING OIL WORRIES BANKS  |  With the falling price of crude oil, banks that have extended loans to energy companies are bracing for a jolt, DealBook’s Michael Corkery and Peter Eavis report. “While it may take some time for the crunch in the oil industry to translate into losses, one thing already seems clear: The energy banking boom is over,” they write.This week, as many of the biggest banks report their earnings for the final three months of 2014, investors will press the banks for answers on how a sudden slump in the oil and natural gas industry may hurt their bottom lines, Mr. Corkery and Mr. Eavis write. When times are good, oil producers turn to Wall Street and local banks to help them sell billions of dollars in bonds, raise equity and arrange lines of credit. If oil prices remain near $50 a barrel for long, economists and industry analysts expect a sharp slowdown in production this year, idling energy bankers and cutting into their lucrative fees.Wells Fargo and Citigroup are among the biggest banks that may be the hardest hit by lower investment-banking fees. At some of the bigger banks in Canada, like Scotiabank, a slowdown in fees could be even more pronounced. And Wall Street firms that financed energy deals ‒ including Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs and UBS ‒ may now have trouble offloading some of the debt, as they had originally planned. As oil has dropped in recent months, the value of the bank’s collateral has sunk.KICKING DODD-FRANK IN THE TEETH  |  Congress appears intent on further rolling back regulations put in place to keep markets and Main Street safe from reckless Wall Street practices, Gretchen Morgenson writes in the Fair Game column. The attack began with a bill that failed in a fast-track vote on Wednesday in the House of Representatives. It is scheduled to come up again in the House this week. The bill, intended only “to make technical corrections” to the Dodd-Frank legislation of 2010, could end up gutting some of its provisions.The bill, the Promoting Job Creation and Reducing Small Business Burdens Act, has three troublesome elements, Ms. Morgenson writes. First, the bill would give big banks holding collateralized loan obligations, or bundles of debt, until 2019 to sell those stakes, two years longer than currently allowed. The bill would also prevent the Securities and Exchange Commission from regulating private equity firms that conduct some securities transactions. Finally, the bill would make derivatives trading less transparent by allowing Wall Street firms with commercial businesses to trade derivatives privately and not on clearinghouses.“The truth about Dodd-Frank is it’s pretty moderate and pretty compromised already,” said Marcus Stanley, policy director at Americans for Financial Reform. “Any further compromise and it tends to collapse into nothingness.”ON THE AGENDA  |  Dennis P. Lockhart, president of the Atlanta Fed, gives a speech on monetary policy to the Rotary Club of Atlanta at 12:40 p.m. Alcoa reports fourth-quarter earnings after the market closes. The first College Football Playoff championship game is on at 8:30 p.m.REVOLVING DOOR SPINS AGAIN  |  David A. O’Neil, a longtime federal prosecutor who helped the government extract an $8 billion plea deal from BNP Paribas, will join the law firm Debevoise & Plimpton as a partner in its Washington office, where he will handle white-collar defense and cybersecurity issues, Ben Protess reports in DealBook. Debevoise is expected to announce the hiring on Monday.Mr. O’Neill, the latest prosecutor to file through the revolving door between government and the defense bar, will join Debevoise two years after the firm lost two top litigators to the Obama administration. Mary Jo White left Debevoise to become chairwoman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, while Andrew J. Ceresney, one of her top lieutenants, became the commission’s enforcement director. Debevoise has asked Mr. O’Neill to expand its white-collar practice in Washington, in part by identifying other seasoned prosecutors and defense lawyers who might join the office.  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailAer Lingus Shares Decline 5% After Second Rejection of British Airways Parent  |  The International Consolidated Airlines Group confirmed late Friday that the board of Aer Lingus, the Irish airline, had rejected a revised takeover bid. DealBook »Ireland’s XL Group Agrees to Buy the Bermuda Insurer Catlin for $4.2 Billion  |  The deal, if approved by shareholders, would bolster XL’s property and casualty insurance and reinsurance portfolio and create a combined company worth more than $12 billion. DealBook »A Rare Peek Into How Wachtell Bills for Deal Work  |  A letter obtained by The American Lawyer shows that the law firm uses an unusual billing structure: being paid a percentage of any transaction rather than billing by the hour. DealBook »Banking Bonuses Set to Disappoint  |  Executives say that bankers in London and on Wall Street are fighting over a diminished bonus pool this year, with traders expecting the worst declines, The Financial Times writes.  FINANCIAL TIMESR.B.S. Said to Consider Sale of Asia Corporate Banking Business  |  The Royal Bank of Scotland is said to be looking to put most of its Asian corporate banking business up for sale, Bloomberg News writes, citing an unidentified person with knowledge of the discussions.  BLOOMBERG NEWS JPMorgan Said to Pay $500 Million to End Suit  |  JPMorgan Chase is said to have reached a preliminary settlement to pay $500 million to resolve a lawsuit over $17.6 billion of faulty mortgage-backed securities issued by Bear Stearns, Bloomberg News writes, citing an unidentified person familiar with the situation.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Former Credit Suisse Trader Banned for Life in Hong Kong  |  Hong Kong’s Securities and Futures Commission said it had banned Jagjit Singh Dhillon, a former trader at Credit Suisse, from the industry for life after he made fictitious trades and covered up losses in 2012, Bloomberg News writes.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Fund Said to Be Near Deal to Acquire Bruno Magli  |  Marquee Brands, a brand acquisition company set up in September by the New York-based private equity firm Neuberger Berman, is set to announce on Monday that it will acquire the luxury shoe label for 28.5 million euros, or about $34 million. DealBook »Carlyle Reports Declines in Energy Investments  |  A group of the private equity firm’s energy funds fell 17 percent in the quarter as publicly traded investments in that portfolio declined because of the collapse in oil prices. DealBook »Onex Acquires Survitec from Warburg Pincus  |  The Canadian private equity firm Onex has purchased Survitec, a British safety and survival equipment maker, from Warburg Pincus for $679.7 million.  REUTERS Blackstone’s Mulrow Named Cuomo’s Top New York Aide  |  Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York has appointed William Mulrow, a senior managing director at the Blackstone Group, as his top aide in a move that is part of a wider staff shuffle, Bloomberg News writes.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Paulson’s Fund Said to End Last Year Down 36%  |  With poor performance in his Advantage Plus fund, which fell 36 percent, the hedge fund manager John A. Paulson is said to have had the second-worst trading year of his career in 2014, as a wrong-way energy bet added to declines tied to a failed merger and investments in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, Bloomberg News reports, citing unidentified people with knowledge of the matter.  BLOOMBERG NEWS DuPont’s Main Defense Against Nelson Peltz: Performance  |  In arguing against Nelson Peltz, the chemical maker has repeatedly cited what may be its strongest defense: its stock price performance and return of capital to shareholders. DealBook »A Proxy Fight as Much About Peltz’s Firm as About DuPont  |  Flexing muscle sends a message to other stubborn targets, like PepsiCo, Kevin Allison of Reuters Breakingviews writes. It also gives Mr. Peltz’s potential successors at Trian Fund Management experience in the trenches. DealBook »How Meredith Whitney’s Fund Unraveled  |  Starting her debut hedge fund, the American Revival Fund, without a staff of analysts to help choose investments and relying too much on one investor’s money is said to have helped lead Meredith Whitney astray, Max Abelson of Bloomberg News writes, citing an unidentified person with direct knowledge of the firm.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Dutch Optical Retailer GrandVision Plans I.P.O. in Amsterdam  |  The offering would consist of 20 to 25 percent of the shares held by an indirect subsidiary of the Dutch investment group HAL Holding. DealBook »Box Seeks Up to $162.5 Million in I.P.O.  |  Box, a data storage provider, said that it planned to price its shares at $11 to $13. At the midpoint of that range, the company would be valued at about $1.4 billion. DealBook »Silicon Valley Turns Its Eye to Education  |  Educational technology companies are latecomers to exploiting the potential of the Internet, but venture capitalists seem to believe their time has come, The New York Times writes.  NEW YORK TIMESAlibaba Said to Invest $575 Million in Indian Shopping Service  |  The Chinese Internet giant Alibaba Group and its financial services affiliate, which runs Alipay, are said to have agreed to jointly invest about $575 million in India’s One97 Communications online payment and marketplace businesses, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing an unidentified person familiar with the matter. The funds would go to One97’s Paytm unit.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Uber Cuts Fares in 48 Cities  |  The ride-hailing start-up Uber said the fare cuts would help drivers “beat the winter slump” by generating business in the months after the busy holiday season, the Bits blog writes.  NEW YORK TIMES BITSBitcoin Exchange Bitstamp Resumes Services  |  Bitstamp said it had adopted new security measures and protocols to prevent future breaches. The company had suspended its services after some virtual wallets were compromised. DealBook » Job Growth Fails to Help Paychecks of Workers  |  The unemployment rate fell to its lowest level since June 2008, but average hourly earnings fell 0.2 percent, erasing some of the gains of last month, The New York Times writes.  NEW YORK TIMES European Central Bank Policy Makers Remain Divided on Bond Purchases  |  The E.C.B. is under pressure to interrupt a decline in consumer prices that could undermine corporate profits and lead to a surge in unemployment, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMES Trader With a Taste for Bubbly Convicted in $7.5 Million Investment Scam in Britain  |  The Financial Conduct Authority said that Alex Hope, who reportedly spent more than $300,000 on champagne during a single night out, promised large returns for investors but suffered heavy losses. DealBook »Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 