The Swiss pharmaceutical giant Roche said on Monday that it would acquire a majority stake in the tumor-testing company Foundation Medicine for more than $1 billion, in a deal aimed at improving both cancer treatment and drug development.Foundation is the leader in the growing area of sequencing the genes of tumor samples, looking for mutations that can help predict which drug will be most effective for a particular patient.Roche, which is the world’s largest seller of cancer drugs, said it would use some insights from that testing to develop drugs and better tailor them for specific groups of patients. In addition, Roche, which also has a huge diagnostics business, will sell Foundation’s tests outside the United States.“I think it just brings personalized health care in oncology to a new level,” Daniel O’Day, who runs Roche’s pharmaceutical business, said in an interview.For its part, Foundation, which is based in Cambridge, Mass., will get financial support and work with Roche on some new products. Roche will also help promote such testing to oncologists and pathologists in the United States.“We believe this approach will become the norm in oncology in the not-too-distant future, and this takes us another step in that direction,” Dr. Michael J. Pellini, the chief executive of Foundation, said in an interview.Under the terms of the deal, Roche will invest $250 million in Foundation by acquiring five million newly issued shares at $50 a share, a 109 percent premium to Foundation’s closing price on Friday. Roche will also make a tender offer at the same price to acquire about 15.6 million shares.In total, Roche would pay just over $1 billion and end up with a stake of between 52.4 percent and 56.3 percent on a fully diluted basis, the companies said.Shares of Roche rose less than 1 percent to 280 Swiss francs, or about $276, in early trading in Zurich on Monday.The transaction, which is subject to approval by Foundation shareholders, has been approved unanimously by Foundation’s board. Three venture capital companies holding a combined 31 percent of Foundation shares — Third Rock Ventures, Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers and Google Ventures — have agreed to vote for the transaction and to tender at least a majority of their shares.Foundation’s main product, called FoundationOne, sequences more than 300 genes in a sample of a solid tumor, such as a lung or breast tumor. Often a particular mutation indicates a tumor would be vulnerable to attack by a particular drug. A newer product, FoundationOne Heme, is for blood cancers.Foundation, which went public in 2013, had revenue of $61.1 million in 2014, up from $29 million the year before. It performed more than 24,200 tests for patient treatment in 2014, up from about 9,000 in 2013.The company is still losing money, however.It is working to provide data showing that its tests really help patients, which is necessary for the testing to be reimbursed by Medicare and private insurers. The FoundationOne test has a list price of $5,800, and the hematology test costs $7,200.As another part of the deal, Roche will provide as much as $150 million in research and development funding over five years. The companies will work together to develop a so-called liquid biopsy test — analyzing tumors from a noninvasive blood sample rather than a tumor sample obtained from biopsy or surgery. They will also work on tests to help develop new cancer therapies that work by unleashing the immune system and to select patients for those therapies.Besides running tests to help guide patient care, Foundation has a significant business sequencing tumors for pharmaceutical companies to help in clinical trials and drug development.Some drug companies might be less interested in working with Foundation once it is majority owned by Roche, a competitor. But Mr. Pellini said that he thought that would not happen and that Roche would not have access to data from any of the other drug companies.Mr. O’Day said that Roche wanted a majority stake to foster a deep collaboration but also wanted to allow Foundation to remain independent and agile. Roche will have three representatives on a nine-person board. Under the terms of the agreement it will not be able to buy all of Foundation for at least three years.Roche has some experience with that kind of arrangement. For many years it owned a majority stake in Genentech, the American biotechnology firm that developed what are now Roche’s biggest drugs, the cancer treatments Avastin, Herceptin and Rituxan.But eventually Roche decided to acquire all of Genentech, a move that was resisted by Genentech’s management and led to departures of some top executives.Goldman Sachs is acting as financial adviser to Foundation and Goodwin Procter as legal counsel. Citigroup and the law firm Davis Polk & Wardwell are advising Roche.