By EMILY STEELJAN. 12, 2015
Crowning itself the Robin Hood of the Super Bowl, the beer brand Newcastle Brown Ale is trying to steal the buzz from the world’s richest advertising event and give it to dozens of other marketers that aren’t paying $4.5 million for 30 seconds of commercial time during the game.Newcastle is introducing a cheeky, irreverent campaign on Monday, in which it will try to recruit 20 to 30 brands to help it break into the Super Bowl advertising melee. In exchange for a cash contribution, the other brands’ logos and messages will be incorporated into a spot crafted with Newcastle by the advertising agency Droga5 that will air online and in some local NBC television markets during the game’s broadcast. (Rival beer advertisers are not invited to join.)“We don’t have the money to advertise the normal way, so we found a clever way around it,” said Charles van Es, head of marketing for Heineken USA’s portfolio of brands, which includes Newcastle. “With the whole world going to crowdsourcing these days, we figured we could crowdsource an ad.”The stunt marks the second year in a row that Newcastle is trying to crash the Super Bowl. The technique often is referred to as ambush marketing, where an advertiser tries to capture the attention surrounding a big event like the Super Bowl or the Olympics without paying to be an official sponsor or advertiser.AdvertisementLast year, Newcastle sparked a viral sensation with its tongue-in-cheek “If We Made It” digital campaign that imagined the “mega-huge football” ad it said it would have made but couldn’t afford. The highlight was a two-minute video starring the Academy Award nominee Anna Kendrick ranting about Newcastle revoking its offer to have her star in a Super Bowl spot.AdvertisementNewcastle credits the campaign for increasing awareness in the United States of the beer, whose roots lie in the northeast of England. The company also said that its Super Bowl ambush encouraged people to try the beer for the first time.“You don’t need the dinosaur channels like television anymore,” Mr. van Es said. “We’re in a new age. You can use digital and get the same buzz.”Even if Newcastle wanted to purchase a Super Bowl spot, it would be unable to buy commercial time during NBC’s national broadcast of the game. The beer giant Anheuser-Busch perennially locks up the ad time as the exclusive beer advertiser during the national broadcast. But Newcastle said it had found a workaround to air a commercial during the game: Buy time on NBC’s local affiliates.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Newcastle controls just 0.3 percent of the $100 billion beer market in the United States, according to Beer Marketer’s Insights, an information provider to the industry. In comparison, Anheuser-Busch’s Bud Light makes up about 18 percent and Budweiser about 7.5 percent, according to Beer Marketer’s Insights.But Anheuser-Busch has seen its share of the beer market fall as it faced assault from craft beers and imported brews, such as Newcastle. While Anheuser-Busch is estimated to spend more than $500 million a year on advertising in the United States, Newcastle’s total media budget for the year is less than the cost for one Super Bowl spot. Mr. van Es said that Newcastle is spending less than $1 million on buying ad space for what it is calling its “Band of Brands” campaign.On Monday, Newcastle will debut an online video starring the actress Aubrey Plaza of the NBC comedy “Parks and Recreation” making a blasé pitch for why other marketers should join Newcastle in its quest to cram their brand into the spot.“Instead of blowing Newcastle’s marketing budget, let’s team up to blow all of our marketing budgets,” Ms. Plaza says.Newcastle said that once it determines the other marketers that are joining its maneuver, the advertisers will meet to lend their input on the campaign. It also hopes that social media and public relations efforts from the various brands will drive more chatter about the undertaking. Newcastle marketing executives provided few details about their plans for the commercial.Said Scott Bell, group creative director at Droga5, “The idea is just going to be too crowded and crazy.”An article on Monday about an effort by Newcastle Brown Ale to recruit additional brands to help it break into the Super Bowl advertising event described the ale incorrectly. It is a beer brand, not a beer maker. (It is brewed by Heineken.)A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Beer Maker Calls for Other Brands to Join a Sly Super Bowl Ad Campaign.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.