AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelThe demand for original scripted television series is white hot.Against a backdrop of sharp ratings declines, rising competition from digital services, a deteriorating advertising market and fierce battles with cable and satellite companies, television groups are pouring more resources than ever into developing programs they hope will help their networks stand out from the pack and lure viewers. Those programs are taking center stage this month during the industry’s Television Critics Association winter presentations in Pasadena, Calif. The tour started last week with Netflix and a lineup of cable networks introducing their coming shows. This week, the broadcast networks — ABC, CBS, NBC and Fox — will be showcasing their offerings.“The old days of three networks serving the same thing over and over and over has just been blown up,” said Doug Herzog, president of the Viacom Entertainment Group. “People expect more.”With presentations featuring network executives, producers and stars, the broadcasters are aiming to generate buzz around their programming. CBS is first out of the gate on Monday, with panels scheduled for “The Dovekeepers,” an event series from executive producers Roma Downey and Mark Burnett, and “The Odd Couple” a remake of the 1970s comedy, this one created by and starring Matthew Perry. Television executives said they could not remember a time when the competition for breakthrough concepts and creative talent was fiercer. Not only are traditional broadcast and cable networks doubling down on programming bets, but digital insurgents like Amazon, Hulu and Netflix are also upping the ante with their own original content. “The environment is more competitive than ever before,” said Charlie Collier, president of AMC, home to “Mad Men,” “The Walking Dead,” “Hell on Wheels” and, until its final season last year, “Breaking Bad.”Mr. Collier has had a front-row seat to the rising competition. Nearly eight years ago, AMC shifted gears from its roots as a classic-movie cable network to original programming with “Mad Men,” its drama about the advertising industry in the 1960s. Now in its final season, “Mad Men” has company on the network. AMC is scheduled to televise nine original scripted series this year, about double the previous year’s number. New series include “Better Call Saul,” a prequel to “Breaking Bad,” and “Humans,” a science-fiction series about the consequences of life with robots.Along the way, Mr. Collier said, he has had to fight for projects against a constantly growing competitive lineup. He said AMC’s track record has helped it lure creative projects, talent and, ultimately, viewers to the network.“There are so many new entrants trying to break through,” he said. “I think it makes a difference.”A result of the surging demand for hits is surging costs. Programming expenses at broadcast networks rose 9 percent, to nearly $19 billion, in 2014 from the previous year. At cable networks, programming expenses increased 13 percent over the same period, to $31 billion, according to Michael Nathanson, a media analyst with MoffettNathanson Research.“As a programmer, you have to put your money to work,” Mr. Nathanson said. “What can you do to attract audiences? It has to be something great, and it has to be scripted.”Mr. Nathanson says the networks are likely to come under pressure as they continue to spend more on programming while also facing a tough television ad market, which is expected to decline slightly this year. At the same time, reality programming, which is cheaper to produce, is coming under more ratings pressure. “There is not a lot you can do to drive profitability,” he said. “This is just where the business is right now.”Indeed, television long has been a hit-driven business, and just because networks are pouring more dollars into programming does not mean that they will land a hit. That is especially true as viewers spend less time watching live television and more time using a proliferation of digital devices and services.The streaming network Hulu has a number of original series in the works, including “11/22/63” from J. J. Abrams. The show, from Stephen King’s best-selling novel of the same name, is about a time traveler who tries to stop the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. The network is also planning a comedy from Amy Poehler called “Difficult People,” about best friends living in New York City. “There is a precious resource of the top talent, and just like in any creative field, you are always searching for those pockets of inspiration, vision and talent,” said Craig Erwich, head of content at Hulu. “Hits are not easy to come by.”Advertisement