JAN. 11, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.08 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.02 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Board of Education, $236.5 million of general obligation. Competitive.TUESDAYNew Trier, Ill., High School District, $89 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Klein, Tex., Independent School District, $80 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Orange County, Calif., Sanitation Department, $131 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementSpokane, Wash., $58 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYNorth Little Rock, Ark., School District, $65.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementONE DAY DURING THE WEEKBaldwin County, Ala., Board of Education, $171.9 million of refinancing school warrants. Raymond James.University of Arkansas, $72.8 million of various facility revenue refinancing bonds. Stephens.California Statewide Communities Development Authority, $135 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Palomar Community College District, Calif., $120 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Colorado, $99.8 million of mortgage bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Forsyth County, N.C., $72.2 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Illinois Finance Authority, $502 million of revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Indiana, $400 million of University of Notre Dame debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.Jacksonville, Fla., $100 million of transportation authority debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.King County, Wash., $811.1 million of sewer revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Los Angeles County Public Works Financing Authority, $167 million of lease revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Maine State Housing, $67 million of debt securities. Bank of America.Florida, $180 million of Lakeland Regional Health Systems debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.AdvertisementMichigan, $50 million of Wayne State University debt securities. Bank of America.New York City Transitional Finance Authority, $750 million of building aid revenue bonds. Ramirez.New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority, $400 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Ohio, $165 million of debt securities. PNC Capital Markets.Oklahoma City, $66 million of debt securities. Bank of America.Oregon Department of Transportation, $379 million of highway user tax revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Salem-Keizer School District, Ore., $51 million of taxable general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Riverside, Calif., Unified School District, $50 million of special tax revenue refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.San Jose, Calif., Unified School District, $140.7 million of revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Santa Clara, Calif., $91 million of transportation debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Texas, $123.6 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Wisconsin Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $129 million of revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.