By THE NEW YORK TIMESJAN. 11, 2015
• A Show of Optimism in Detroit The annual Detroit auto show kicks off on Monday with a full slate of media previews that reflect growing optimism and financial strength in the industry despite its recent safety travails.Sales in the United States surged to 16.5 million vehicles in 2014, and automakers are expecting even better results in the year ahead. To capitalize on the demand, companies are unveiling a raft of new models that expand traditional vehicle segments and fill untapped niches in the market.General Motors, the nation’s largest automaker, will be among the busiest manufacturers at the show. After stumbling through 2014 with a record number of safety recalls, G.M. is determined to shift attention back to products like the Buick Cascada convertible, a new version of its Chevrolet Volt plug-in hybrid and an all-electric concept car that can travel 200 miles on a single battery charge.Other carmakers will be appealing to consumers who crave faster cars with a touch of glitz. For Ford Motor, the emphasis will be on high-performance variations of mass-market models such as the Focus sedan. Newly merged Fiat Chrysler will show off a two-seat Alfa Romeo sports car, while Honda debuts a much-anticipated revival of its sporty Acura NSX luxury car.AdvertisementAt the other end of the spectrum are mainstream sport utility vehicles from Volkswagen and pickup trucks made by Toyota and Nissan. Industry analysts expect trucks and S.U.V.s to continue to gain share in 2015, particularly if gas prices remain at notably low levels.AdvertisementThe Detroit show also highlights the executives who sit atop the automotive world and their prospects in the coming year. No one will be under greater scrutiny than Mark Fields, who last year replaced the retiring Alan Mulally as chief executive at Ford. At G.M., the spotlight will again shine on Mary T. Barra, the beleaguered chief executive who is anxious to move past the company’s recent safety crisis. And the leader of Fiat Chrysler, Sergio Marchionne, will update his plans to integrate the Italian and American sides of the industry’s newest global competitor.One new face at the show could prove to be one of the industry’s most influential people in 2015 — Mark Rosekind, who was recently confirmed by Congress as the nation’s top auto regulator at the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration. While he is likely to keep a low profile during the event, Mr. Rosekind’s agenda to toughen safety rules will have widespread influence on carmakers and consumers alike. — Bill Vlasic• Major U.S Banks to Report EarningsThe country’s largest banks will all report their fourth-quarter and year-end financial results this week. JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo will kick off the earnings season on Wednesday, with Bank of America and Citigroup reporting on Thursday and Goldman releasing its results on Friday. The Wall Street trading operations that helped lift bank earnings in the third quarter are expected to deliver much weaker results in the fourth.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many analysts are expecting profits to come in lower than they did a year earlier. The results will be closely watched for any indications of how much the recent economic weakness in Europe may be spreading around the globe. Banks had been planning for interest rates to rise for much of 2014, but recently rates have been heading down again. — Nathaniel Popper• Results of E.U. Hearings on Trade Agreement With the U.S.Cecilia Malmstrom, the European Union trade commissioner, is expected on Tuesday to present results of a public consultation on a hotly contested investment clause that has complicated trade negotiations with the United States. The clause, of a planned trans-Atlantic trade agreement, has sparked outrage among labor unions and environmental groups, which say it would give corporations too much power to override policies of sovereign governments.But the United States and many European trade experts say the clause, allowing so-called investor-state dispute settlement, should be part of modern trade agreements. Ms. Malmstrom is not expected to make a definitive case for including or discarding the clause but to highlight the main issues raised by the consultation, announced in March last year. — James Kanter• December Sales Report for Retail and Food ServicesOn Wednesday, the Commerce Department will release its advance retail and food services sales figures for December, a closely watched barometer of the strength of the economic recovery. Analysts say that sales may have cooled in December from the previous month, when retail sales jumped 0.7 percent and food services 5.1 percent from the same period last year.Still, lower prices at the gas pump, as well as job growth, are breathing life back into retail spending after a year of uneven growth — good news for the economy overall. — Hiroko Tabuchi• Opinion on Debt-Purchase Plan From a European JuristA senior adviser at Europe’s highest appeals court is expected to issue a nonbinding opinion on Wednesday on a plan by the European Central Bank to buy bonds of stricken eurozone countries. The program, announced in 2012, has never been deployed but was widely credited with helping rescue the eurozone.AdvertisementThe opinion from Pedro Cruz Villalón, an advocate-general at the Court of Justice of the European Union in Luxembourg, will be closely studied for any sign that the court will restrict the remit of the central bank, amid expectations that the bank could soon unveil plans for large-scale purchases of government debt, or so-called quantitative easing. Judges endorse the advice of their advocates-general in the majority of cases, usually months later. — James KanterA version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Detroit’s Auto Show, and U.S. Banks’ Financial Reports.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.