AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra AlterSimon & Schuster is making a push into paid online video, with a new website offering online courses from popular health, finance and self-help authors.The cost of the first batch of online courses ranges from $25 to $85, and includes workbooks and access to live question-and-answer sessions with three authors: Dr. David B. Agus, the best-selling author of “The End of Illness”; Zhena Muzyka, who wrote the self-help book “Life by the Cup”; and Tosha Silver, the author of the spiritual advice book “Outrageous Openness.” The courses will be available on the authors’ individual websites and on the company’s new site, SimonSays. “Today’s consumers have made it plain that they want and expect more from authors than just books,” Carolyn Reidy, president and chief executive of Simon & Schuster, said in a statement. “This initiative is also another way for us to expand what Simon & Schuster can provide to our authors, building audiences for their books and creating new revenue streams.”With the online courses, Simon & Schuster aims to tackle two looming problems facing authors and publishers: finding new business opportunities in a sluggish book market and grabbing the attention of readers who are increasingly distracted by social media and free online content. Globally, one billion people watch 300 million hours of YouTube videos every day. And book sales have flagged. Simon & Schuster’s sales fell 11 percent in the third fiscal quarter of last year. Sales of digital content, which accounted for 28 percent of the company’s sales, were flat. Simon & Schuster plans to release 12 to 15 more courses this year, and is focusing on writers who have established, dedicated fan bases and a well-defined philosophy or message to deliver. Eventually, the online courses, which are planned as stand-alone products rather than supplements to books, could include videos by entertainers and experts who have not yet published books. “The videos might lead the way to a book,” said Liz Perl, the company’s executive vice president and chief marketing officer. The video courses are Simon & Schuster’s latest effort to stake out territory in the exploding market for online video. Last year, the company and the United Talent Agency created an imprint dedicated to publishing works by YouTube stars like Shane Dawson and Justine Ezarik, in hopes that their millions of fans would follow them to print. Simon & Schuster also recently announced plans to feature some of its authors on podcasts on Play.it, a new podcast network from CBS, the publisher’s parent company. Breaking into online video could prove tricky, especially because Simon & Schuster will charge for content in a medium that consumers are accustomed to getting free. The company is relying heavily on authors to promote these online products, on their individual websites, through social media and in personal appearances. Simon & Schuster plans to share revenues from the courses with the authors and creators, though the company would not disclose how it would divide profits. Authors will be able to set their own prices. Dr. Agus, whose course is titled “A Short Guide to A Long Life,” decided to make his classes cost the same as a typical co-pay for a doctor’s office visit: $25. Advertisement