By REUTERSJAN. 11, 2015
GANDHINAGAR, India — Global statesmen and business titans descended on the home state of Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India on Sunday to pay homage to the man they count on to unleash big-bang economic changes.Big business cheered Mr. Modi when he won India’s strongest election mandate in 30 years in May, and he has caught its attention with eye-catching initiatives like his Make in India campaign.Now, in his home state of Gujarat, he has turned the assembly he founded as the state’s chief minister in 2003, called Vibrant Gujarat, into a pitch to put his nation  firmly on the investment map.“India is marching forward with a clear vision to become a global power, even as most of the world is struggling with low growth,” the country’s richest man, Mukesh Ambani, told an audience of hundreds of chief executives and politicians.AdvertisementA roll call of world leaders — including the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon; the World Bank head Jim Yong Kim; and Secretary of State John Kerry — converged on Mr. Modi’s hometown, Gandhinagar, for Vibrant Gujarat, a three-day Davos-style meeting. President Obama will also visit India this month.AdvertisementEight months into Mr. Modi’s rule, the failure of India to emerge from its longest growth slowdown in a generation is raising questions about how much substance there is behind the premier’s promise of “red carpet, not red tape.”The Make in India campaign has drawn comparisons to the manufacturing miracle that turned China into the world’s second-largest economy. But skeptics argue that India’s competitive strengths are not in making things, but in areas like information technology and business process outsourcing, in which it is a world leader.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Vibrant Gujarat, held every two years, has yielded billions of dollars in investment promises, but only a fraction of the deals announced have come to fruition. In keeping with tradition, Mr. Ambani said his conglomerate, Reliance Industries, would invest 1 trillion rupees, or $16 billion, in its home state of Gujarat over the next year to 18 months.“There is an air of optimism in the air of India,” said Sam Walsh, the chief executive of the global mining giant Rio Tinto, who flagged two potential projects: a $2 billion iron ore project in Odisha State and an investment in Madhya Pradesh that could employ 30,000 diamond cutters.Mr. Modi needs investors to fulfill their monetary commitments to end the stagnation in capital investment that has held India’s growth to 5.3 percent. That is expected to accelerate this year to 6.4 percent, said Mr. Kim of the World Bank, who called India a “bright spot” in an otherwise gloomy economic landscape.Mr. Modi has made headway on making it easier for outsiders to invest more in real estate, insurance and defense, but a rigid labor market and rotten infrastructure are huge deterrents.“Investors want credibility, stability and at the same time flexibility. Right now, India is a bit of an inflexible market,” said Kilbinder Dosanjh, a director for Asia at Eurasia Group, a geopolitical risk consulting firm.A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.