Ocwen Financial, the subprime mortgage servicing firm that has already been under intense regulatory scrutiny in New York State, is now entangled with a California regulator in a dispute that complicates the company’s ability to operate in that state.Officials at the California Department of Business Oversight are pushing to suspend Ocwen’s license to operate in the state for 12 months.The request to suspend Ocwen’s license comes after the company failed to provide the department with information that it requested about its servicing operation, said Tom Dresslar, a spokesman for the agency.“It has been extremely frustrating,’’ Mr. Dresslar said in an interview on Tuesday. “As a regulator, we cannot let them stiff us on information that we need to perform our task of protecting consumers.”Last January, the department started reviewing whether Ocwen was complying with a recently enacted California Homeowners Bill of Rights, which among other things, entitles state residents to certain protections during the mortgage modification and foreclosure process.The regulator said that over the last year, Ocwen had repeatedly failed to turn over all the information it had asked for, even when the department issued an administrative subpoena compelling the company to do so.Ocwen said it was cooperating with the regulator.“We believe we have provided the requested information in the format requested,” Ocwen’s chief executive, Ronald M. Faris, said in a statement. “We expect  that we will receive follow up requests or clarifications and that further document and information exchanges may take place. We expect our ongoing cooperation will result in a satisfactory outcome for all parties.”A state administrative law judge will decide whether to approve the department’s request for a suspension order. A hearing on the matter is scheduled for July.News of Ocwen’s tussle with the California regulator, which was first reported by The Los Angeles Times, sent the company’s shares tumbling about 36 percent to $7.78 a share on Tuesday. A year ago, the stock closed at $52.78.Before its regulatory problems, Ocwen was heralded as more responsive and more nimble than the big banks when it came to servicing subprime mortgages. But regulators said the company subjected homeowners to the same problems as the banks.In December, Ocwen’s chairman, William C. Erbey, agreed to step down as part of a settlement with Benjamin M. Lawsky, New York State’s superintendent of financial services. The agreement capped an aggressive investigation by Mr. Lawsky’s office into Ocwen’s servicing practices and corporate governance.By PETER EAVISA national monitor has found that Ocwen has failed to comply with a settlement to ensure that struggling borrowers are treated properly.A version of this article appears in print on 01/14/2015, on page B7 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Regulatory Woes.