Standard & Poor’s has publicly fought a Justice Department lawsuit, but behind the scenes, the bond-ratings agency now wants peace, Ben Protess reports in DealBook. “After S.&P. mounted a two-year campaign to defeat civil fraud charges ‒ portraying them as retaliation for cutting the credit rating of the United States ‒ the ratings agency is now negotiating with the Justice Department to settle the case, according to people briefed on the matter,” he writes.The Justice Department and more than a dozen state attorneys general are demanding that S.&P. pay more than $1 billion to settle the case, the people briefed on the matter said, a penalty that would be big enough to wipe out the rating agency’s operating profit for a year. S.&P.’s recent change of heart, which could lead to a settlement in the first quarter, “would provide a coda to a painful period for the ratings agency and the broader financial industry,” Mr. Protess writes. A settlement would come after S.&.P. engaged four law firms for the case and spent tens of millions of dollars in legal fees.TREASURY NOMINEE WITHDRAWS  |  Antonio Weiss, a senior investment banker at Lazard, has withdrawn his name from consideration to be under secretary of the Treasury for domestic finance and will instead serve as a counselor to the secretary of the Treasury, Jacob J. Lew, Jonathan Weisman writes in DealBook. Mr. Weiss had faced liberal opposition, led by Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, who resisted the nomination of a Wall Street executive for a key financial post, especially one who spent much of his investment banking career on international mergers and acquisitions.“Mr. Weiss was facing the prospect of shuttling between Washington and New York for months, wooing senators, answering the Senate Finance Committee’s famously difficult questions on taxes and finances, and if he made it through the process, he would have little time to actually serve,” Mr. Weisman writes. Instead, a White House spokeswoman said Mr. Weiss asked this weekend that his name be withdrawn “to avoid the distraction of a lengthy confirmation process.”Responses were predictably mixed. Tony Fratto, a partner at Hamilton Place Strategies and a Treasury and White House official under President George W. Bush, told Politico’s Ben White that Mr. Weiss’s decision was “really a shame,” calling it an embarrassment for the Obama administration. On the other side were signs of relief. Senator Joe Manchin, Democrat of West Virginia, called Mr. Weiss’s move “a smart thing” and said the role required “a little more balance” with regard to banks.David Weigel of Bloomberg Politics writes: “Warren’s victory against Weiss may be covered as a victory by ‘the left.’ It could just as easily be covered as a victory against ‘the financial industry.’ One of those causes is more popular.”OIL PRICES PLUNGE  |  Oil prices tumbled on Monday to their lowest levels since the depths of the 2009 recession, with several international banks predicting even lower prices later this year because of an oversupplied global crude market, Clifford Krauss reports in The New York Times. “The latest daily downward spiral of more than 5 percent has brought several crude oil benchmarks down by more than 55 percent since June in one of the fastest drops ever for the volatile commodity,” he writes.The plunge began after Goldman Sachs released a bearish oil report Sunday night predicting that the American price benchmark, which dropped to about $46 a barrel on Monday, would fall to $41 in three months and $39 in six months ‒ before recovering to $65 by the end of the year. Consumers continued to benefit from the price slide, as the average price for a gallon of regular gasoline on Monday was $2.13, according to the AAA auto club, 7 cents lower than a week ago, 47 cents lower than a month ago and $1.17 below a year ago.The oil market extended its losses on Tuesday to trade below $45 after the oil minister for the United Arab Emirates said the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries would continue to expand output capacity. Futures declined for a third day in New York, falling as much as 4 percent. Stocks in Europe were up slightly in Tuesday morning trading after opening lower. Japan’s Nikkei 225 closed down 0.6 percent. The dollar fell to 117.74 against the yen, its weakest since Dec. 17, before recovering somewhat.ON THE AGENDA  |  The N.F.I.B. small business optimism index is out at 7:30 a.m. The Labor Department’s Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey is released at 10 a.m. The Treasury budget report for December is released at 2 p.m. Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, is on Fox Business Network at 9 a.m.ETHICAL QUESTIONS OF INVESTING IN POT  |  When the venture capital firm run by Peter Thiel invested millions of dollars in the marijuana company Privateer Holdings, the move was heralded as a watershed moment for the fledgling cannabis industry, Andrew Ross Sorkin writes in the DealBook Column. But, Mr. Sorkin adds, “the injection of venture capital money into the cannabis industry will put pressure on some emerging fault lines.”“Public pension funds and university endowments are increasingly shying away from putting their money in so-called sin industries and focusing on more ‘socially responsible’ investments, but it’s unclear where marijuana falls on this spectrum,” Mr. Sorkin writes. “The outcome will have profound implications for the future of the marijuana industry and the involvement of traditional sources of capital: venture capital, private equity and Wall Street.”  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailFamily Dollar Urges Shareholders to Back Dollar Tree Deal  |  In a public letter, Howard Levine, Family Dollar’s chief executive, made a direct pitch to investors to try to win support for a merger with Dollar Tree despite a higher bid from Dollar General. DealBook »Malaysia Said to Call Off Bank Merger  |  Malaysia is scrapping a proposed $20 billion merger that would have created the country’s biggest bank after CIMB Group Holdings and RHB Capital failed to agree on new deal terms, Reuters writes, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.  REUTERS Portugal Telecom Shareholders Agree to Put Off Vote on Asset Sale  |  The decision comes amid questions about whether an asset sale to Altice would scuttle a proposed merger between Portugal Telecom and the Brazilian carrier Oi. DealBook »Shire Gambles AbbVie Breakup Fee on a Risky Deal  |  Shire is paying a 51 percent premium for NPS, and it is making a potentially risky deal ahead of an important regulatory ruling, Neil Unmack of Reuters Breakingviews writes. DealBook »Falling Oil Prices Help Overhaul of a Hong Kong Empire  |  Selling a stake in Husky Energy is vital to keeping Li Ka-shing’s grip on the telecommunications-to-property empire, Una Galani of Reuters Breakingviews writes. DealBook »Canary Wharf Owner Urges Investors to Reject Takeover Bid  |  The Qatar Investment Authority and Brookfield Property Partners have offered to pay about $3.9 billion for the outstanding shares of Songbird Estates, which has a controlling stake in the Canary Wharf Group. DealBook »AmerisourceBergen to Buy MWI Veterinary Supply  |  AmerisourceBergen, a drug distributor, will pay about $2.5 billion in cash for MWI, expanding into the animal health business. DealBook »Regulators Again Reject Doral Financial’s Capital Plan  |  The troubled Puerto Rico bank warned of possible “additional regulatory enforcement actions up to and including the appointment of a receiver or conservator for the bank.” DealBook »Gross Says Pimco Fired Him  |  William H. Gross said in an interview that he was fired from Pimco, the first time he has publicly confirmed that he was dismissed from the giant asset manager he co-founded.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Deutsche Bank Said to Weigh Sale of Postbank  |  Deutsche Bank is planning to unveil in the spring the results of a strategy review, which could include the sale of its Postbank retail unit, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter and an internal document.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Ireland Hires Goldman to Advise on Allied Irish Banks Stake  |  The Irish government said Goldman Sachs would provide advice on how to make sure the bank is appropriately capitalized to maximize the potential return for taxpayers. DealBook »Dimon Says He Struggled With Disclosing Illness  |  Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, said on Monday that he “had little choice but to go public with his illness because his condition had deteriorated noticeably,” Reuters writes.  REUTERS Citigroup Scales Back Consumer Banking  |  Citigroup has been quietly cutting back its consumer banking presence in some of the world’s top cities, pulling out from markets where it does not have enough branches to be competitive.  REUTERS Standard Chartered Said to Near Private Equity Sale  |  Standard Chartered, a British bank that makes most of its money in Asia, is said to be close to selling private equity investments valued at about $600 million, Bloomberg News reports, citing unidentified people with knowledge of the talks.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Helios Raises $1.1 Billion African Private Equity Fund  |  The private equity firm Helios Investment Partners has raised its biggest fund dedicated to the continent.  WALL STREET JOURNAL EMC to Add 2 Directors in Temporary Truce With Elliott Management  |  The hedge fund had pushed for a breakup of EMC, but after the deal to expand the board to 13 members, Elliott will vote in favor of EMC’s entire slate of director nominees. DealBook »Salus Capital Offers Bankruptcy Loan to RadioShack  |  Salus Capital Partners is said to have offered RadioShack $500 million in bankruptcy financing in a move that could increase the lender’s influence if the struggling retailer ends up in Chapter 11, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Investors to Stick With Hedge Funds  |  Institutional investors plan to put more money into hedge funds this year despite disappointing investment performance and recent withdrawals, according to a survey.  FINANCIAL TIMES Prestige Cruises Withdraws I.P.O. Plan  |  Prestige Cruises International, which was acquired by Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings for $3 billion in September, filed to withdraw its plan for an initial public offering.  REUTERS Instacart Raises $220 Million  |  The new round brings the total amount of financing raised by Instacart, a grocery delivery start-up, to $275 million and values the company at $2 billion, the Bits blog writes. NEW YORK TIMES BITS Capital One Buys Level Money  |  Capital One has acquired Level Money, an app for tracking spending that had raised $5 million from Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers and others, The Verge writes. Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.  THE VERGE BATS to Pay $14 Million Penalty Stemming From Direct Edge Merger  |  The Securities and Exchange Commission says two exchanges that BATS acquired through its merger with Direct Edge failed to give investors a complete picture of certain order types for stocks. DealBook »Elusive Middle Ground in Punishment of White-Collar Criminals  |  Conflicting ideas on federal sentencing guidelines for white-collar crimes lead to criticism that they need to be overhauled, writes Peter J. Henning in the White Collar Watch column. DealBook »Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 