AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — Amid open speculation about when the party in Silicon Valley will end, the cloud software provider AppDirect is intent on showing that it can still raise money — and a lot of it.The company, which helps customers like AT&T sell software through online marketplaces it builds, plans to announce on Wednesday that it has raised $140 million in a new round of funding, only eight months after raising its last round.The new investment was led by JPMorgan Chase’s asset management arm, with all of AppDirect’s previous investors — the Foundry Group, iNovia Capital, Mithril Capital Management, StarVest Partners and Stingray Digital — reinvesting as well.The round on Wednesday will push AppDirect into the realm of “unicorns” — start-ups worth at least $1 billion. (The investment values the company at about $1.35 billion, though excluding the investment, that valuation comes up a bit short of the category’s threshold.)But for Daniel Saks, the co-chief executive of AppDirect, the new round was less about bragging rights than about getting more fuel for the company’s growth and preparing it for any rough times.The company said that it now had more than one million subscribers, up almost 300 percent from this time last year. It employs more than 350 people around the world.The speed of fund-raising has increased for many start-ups this year, as entrepreneurs have heeded advice from venture capitalists and others to raise cash now and prepare a cushion.“It’s an important thing for us to control our destiny,” Mr. Saks said in a telephone interview. “We want to be a long-term, enduring brand.”Among other things, that means ensuring that the company does not simply take the financing to focus on expanding its market.“We don’t intend to take all the cash and move it into growth,” Mr. Saks said.The opportunity to bring in money soon after raising $50 million in February came by luck, Mr. Saks said. This year, his management team was introduced to Larry Unrein, the head of the private equity arm of JPMorgan’s asset management business. Mr. Unrein, whose business had invested in companies like Twitter and the co-working space WeWork, was intrigued by what AppDirect was building and quickly proferred money.At first, AppDirect took $30 million from JPMorgan. But further discussions and analysis of where the market was heading helped persuade the AppDirect team to make a bigger fund-raising effort. That eventually became a new $100 million investment from the bank’s asset management business, along with the $30 million from the JPMorgan division and $10 million from the previous investors.“The AppDirect team has taken an ‘under the radar’ approach that has enabled it to quietly build one of the fastest-growing businesses in the Bay Area,” Mr. Unrein of JPMorgan said in a news release.Advertisement