AdvertisementSupported byBy Aaron M. KesslerDETROIT — The nation’s new top auto safety official delivered a frank message to carmakers at the Detroit auto show on Monday, demanding that recalls be aggressive, pre-emptive and aim to fix every vehicle they affect.That could mean the number of recalls will increase in 2015, but that would be a sign of vigilance, not overreaction, said Mark Rosekind, administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.Earlier on Monday, the chief executive of Fiat Chrysler, Sergio Marchionne, criticized some of the recall response in 2014. “In some instances, we may have overreacted to a particular problem,” Mr. Marchionne said, adding that cases like the national recall for potentially explosive Takata airbags “may have been overkill.”Mr. Rosekind brushed aside the criticism as missing the point. He said that given recent history, he preferred that the industry err on the side of being too careful.“I’d rather have people be pre-emptive than waiting too long and finding out they made a mistake, because you can’t save those lives after they’re gone,” he told reporters under the shadow of Joe Louis’s statue at Detroit’s Cobo Center.Mr. Rosekind met with executives of about a half-dozen companies as he toured the auto show before flying back to Washington. He also held a private meeting with a large group of company representatives, where he said he would stress a few distinct priorities.Among them, Mr. Rosekind said he believed that emerging safety technology — like forward-collision-warning systems and semiautonomous features aimed at avoiding crashes — should not be limited to expensive, luxury automobiles.“Safety should not be based on the price of your car,” Mr. Rosekind said.He said that for now the agency would wait to see if the industry itself moved toward making such technology standard on most vehicles. But Mr. Rosekind said a government mandate was not off the table.“The issue is going to be how much the manufacturers are going to do that on their own, versus what we have to do,” he said.The New York Times has exposed missteps and delays by automakers and federal safety regulators in responding to deadly defects in automobiles during what became a record year for recalls.More vehicles, including old models, have been recalled in the United States in 2014 than ever before. Explore the size and scope of the recalls, and find out if your car has been affected.Bill Vlasic contributed reporting.Advertisement