AdvertisementSupported byBy Aaron M. KesslerDETROIT — Rock music shook the room as the gleaming blue pickup drove up behind Toyota’s top American executive, William D. Fay. Mr. Fay left no doubt about his delight with the redesigned Tacoma, enthusiastically telling reporters at the North American International Auto Show here that he hoped the truck would “set the benchmark” for midsize pickups 20 years after it first came to America. Mr. Fay might as well have been talking about pickups as a whole. The industry is coming off one of the most successful years for pickups in recent memory as an improving economy and low gas prices led to a surge in truck sales around the United States. Whether it was for work or play, more buyers visited truck showrooms in 2014 than ever.But while the market for trucks had traditionally been the bread and butter of America’s Big 3 automakers, on Monday Japanese automakers were determined to make their mark: Both Nissan and Toyota introduced powerful, rugged trucks aimed at capturing a greater share from General Motors, Ford and Fiat Chrysler.Nissan is targeting the lucrative full-size truck segment by putting a beast of a diesel engine into its aptly named Titan. The company’s chief executive, Carlos Ghosn, said that the 5.0-liter V-8 engine — capable of towing 12,000 pounds — was not best-in-class so much as “best new class.”The current diesel-powered champion, Chrysler’s Ram pickup, had record sales in 2014, and full-size trucks across the board surged ahead. For most vehicles, automakers increased the usual discounts and deals over what they offered last year. But for full-size trucks such incentives actually went down by nearly 13 percent, according to data from Kelley Blue Book.Mr. Ghosn’s American competition greeted the new competition with equanimity.Robert Hegbloom, head of the Ram brand, said in an interview on Monday that Nissan was trying to stretch its light-duty truck into meeting the demands of two types of buyers.He said he felt comfortable with the progression of trucks Ram offered — starting with its light truck, the 1500, and then for those seeking more commercial-grade power, the heavier-duty 2500 and 3500. He said Nissan did not have anything to match the 2500. “Light-duty customers look for fuel economy,” Mr. Hegbloom said. “I don’t think they’ll want to sacrifice that for the towing power of a heavy-duty truck they don’t need.”Toyota had already done well in the midsize-truck category, partly because the segment had until recently been all but abandoned by other automakers. But new competition — from the Chevrolet Colorado, for example — meant Toyota needed an upgrade for the Tacoma, a model first introduced in 1995.Mr. Fay said on Monday that Toyota would add a third shift at its Tacoma plant in Mexico to increase production of the new model. But he acknowledged that when it came to overall pickup truck sales, Toyota would probably remain in more of a niche compared with American trucks. “We’re not going to chase the Silverado or F-150 anytime soon,” he said. “But I think the combination of the two trucks provides us a very competitive entry into nearly 300,000 consumers.”Advertisement