AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioSince it started in the Southern California desert in 1999, Coachella has become the premier name in pop festivals. Now it is extending its reach to the Alabama coast through a deal with a smaller festival.Goldenvoice, the company behind the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, announced on Monday that it had entered into a joint venture with the Hangout Music Festival in Gulf Shores, Ala., and that it would help produce that festival. The Hangout partnership is the latest step in a nationwide expansion for Goldenvoice, a subsidiary of the global concert giant AEG Live, as well as for the broader Coachella brand. Last year, Goldenvoice struck a similar deal with the Firefly festival in Dover, Del. On Monday, the retail chain H&M, a festival sponsor, revealed a Coachella-branded clothing line that capitalizes on the event’s reputation for hippie chic.The deal signals the growing importance of festivals, a number of which have joined forces in recent years. Last year, Live Nation Entertainment, the world’s largest concert promoter, bought C3 Presents, the company behind the Lollapalooza and Austin City Limits festivals, and SFX Entertainment has built a portfolio of dozens of dance events around the world, like Electric Zoo, Sensation and Tomorrowland. Coachella, held over two weekends each April in Indio, Calif., sold $78 million in tickets last year, when the festival featured Outkast, Arcade Fire and Muse. The lineup for this year’s event, scheduled for April 10 to 12 and April 17 to 19, will include AC/DC, Jack White and Drake. Hangout, which started in 2010 and is among a wave of smaller events that sprang up in recent years as festivals became a major part of the touring business, sold just over $10 million in tickets last year, according to Goldenvoice. The festival is held on public beaches along the Gulf of Mexico that are within a few hours’ drive of cities like New Orleans and Tallahassee, Fla.“When we visited the festival we were absolutely blown away,” Paul Tollett, chief executive of Goldenvoice, said of Hangout. “We haven’t found a fan or musician who doesn’t love this festival.”This year’s Hangout, from May 15 to 17, will feature Foo Fighters, the Zac Brown Band, Beck and Skrillex, it was also announced Monday. Hangout’s founders, Shaul and Lilly Zislin, “will continue to play an active role in the festival,” Goldenvoice said. Over the years Coachella has become perhaps the music industry’s most sought-after stage, with a prominent slot there seen by talent agents as a crucial step for a hot new artist or a reuniting supergroup. In 2007, Goldenvoice started Stagecoach, a country festival in the same venue as Coachella, and in 2012, it expanded Coachella from one weekend to two.Advertisement