
Frequent Flier By                     
ROBERT GOGEL

JAN. 12, 2015
I RUN a global outsourcing company, Integreon, that provides legal, document, research and business support to law firms, financial institutions and multinationals. My job as chief executive means I’m kind of like a casting director, making sure we have the right people at the right place at the right time. That involves an incredible amount of travel helping clients.I actually don’t mind the flying. I meet interesting people, and I have some great discussions. I am one of the lucky ones since I can sleep on a plane with no problem, and wake up just when my meal comes.I have to admit that everything that happens before I get on that plane has the potential to make me nuts. I am of the vintage that remembers a New York City-to-Boston shuttle that cost practically nothing. I grew up on Long Island, and when I was young, if you went to the airport — or even to a Yankees game — you dressed up. Now airports are like mini-cities where people strive to dress down. But I suppose if you’re being frisked by security, you want to be comfortable. I even find myself wearing the largest shoes possible when I fly. I want to be able to get them off and on easily at security. I look like I’m wearing clown shoes, but I’m all right with that.I’m a very seasoned traveler, but that doesn’t mean I don’t have problems, and there have been a few times I’ve been pulled aside by security. I’m sure that looking in my briefcase and seeing 14 different currencies and 30 chargers, none of which work, by the way, probably sets off the need for a few questions.When people ask me where I live, my stock answer has become Seat 11D, which typically kick-starts a conversation about the challenges and rare joys of being a voyager across the globe. But sometimes fellow passengers can make your flight miserable.AdvertisementI was returning from São Paulo, Brazil, to Paris, where I live now, and a man sitting across the aisle started drinking. I didn’t think much about it because I see people drinking on flights all the time with no issues, so I just fell asleep. I woke up to two attendants holding the guy down. It was really unnerving, as was the gentleman two rows ahead of me who started yelling too. He wasn’t drunk, but since he was in business class he felt he shouldn’t have to put up with the noise, which he was obviously contributing to.AdvertisementAll of my travels have made me a huge fan of the free toiletry bags that are often distributed on international flights. These bags are packed with lip balm, hand cream, eyeshades, pens and other items, and when you empty them, they’re perfect for carrying chargers and storing foreign currency.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I remember talking to a seatmate and complaining about how cheap and poorly made they are now compared with the past. A few minutes into the conversation, I discovered that the guy I was talking to manufactured most of them. Sometimes it’s better not to talk.On a recent flight from London to Asia, I got a new toiletry bag and eagerly stashed it in my briefcase.After landing, I headed off to my meeting and soon realized that the toiletry bag that I picked up wasn’t mine. Rather, it was most likely my seatmate’s bag, who apparently also liked to use it for storage. However, this bag was stuffed with two dozen foil-wrapped packages of condoms and a travel-size gel bottle. I started laughing, tossed the contents and kept the bag. I’m positive no claim was going to be filed.As told to Joan Raymond. Email: joan.raymond@nytimes.com Q. How often do you fly for business?A. Usually every week, all over the globe.Q. What’s your least favorite airport?A. It’s probably J.F.K., mostly because of baggage issues, and even though I’m pretty good at navigating most airports, I never seem to be in the right place when I’m there.Q. Of all the places you’ve been, what’s the best?A. Paris. Everything about it is great.Q. What’s your secret airport vice?A. Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups. The large ones.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Clown Shoes and Other Surprising Travel Necessities.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »