By MARTHA C. WHITEJAN. 12, 2015
For the beleaguered and bored waiting out delays in the nation’s airports, there isn’t much to turn to beyond the TV on the wall or an uninspired restaurant. But some airports are trying to change that, as they install iPads by the thousands so that travelers can browse and, officials hope, eventually buy.In November, OTG, a company that designs, builds and operates airport dining outlets, began installing 1,500 iPads in eating and waiting areas at Newark Liberty International Airport’s Terminal C. Part of a $120 million upgrade to the terminal, some 6,000 iPads will be in place by the middle of next year.Travelers will be able to browse the web and track their flights as well as order food and beverages and, in the future, sundries like neck pillows. Customers who are members of United Airlines’ loyalty program will also be able to pay with United Mileage Plus miles.The goal is to turn one of air travel’s most unpleasant experiences — waiting for a flight — into something more endurable.Advertisement“This is a brand new way of interacting with customers,” said Albert Lee, the company’s chief technology officer. “Technology is a core part of that experience.”AdvertisementOTG is leading the push to adopt iPads at airports.While the use of tablets at dining establishments is not new — restaurant chains like Chili’s Grill & Bar as well as Panera Bread have tried it before — OTG says that the tablets are particularly well suited to airports, because travelers can easily check their flight status or order a cheeseburger from their seat at the gate and have it delivered. To pay for it, they can use frequent-flier miles.This payment innovation should benefit United as well, said Jay Sorensen, president of IdeaWorksCompany, a consultancy for the airline industry. “It promotes the feeling among members that miles are a universal currency,” he said.OTG has already installed its iPads at gate areas and in restaurants at New York’s two other area airports, Kennedy International and La Guardia, as well as at Toronto Pearson International Airport and Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport. It also has restaurant iPads at Philadelphia International Airport. Newark’s Terminal C, when renovations are completed, will be by far the largest of these projects.For many travelers, the distraction is welcome.“I usually try to make it a point to go through JetBlue so I can go to Terminal 5,” said Kristen Kawachi, a Hawaii resident who regularly travels to the East Coast. On a trip through the airport a year and a half ago, she encountered the iPads, which are coupled with outlets where travelers can charge their devices.“I just thought it was really convenient because then I didn’t have to lug my things around and bump people in line,” said Ms. Kawachi, who said she usually traveled alone and did not have anyone else to watch her carry-on luggage while she bought food. “It does make it a lot more convenient and the charging station just made it really easy for me.”Tablets can also speed up transactions, which is helpful when dealing with on-the-fly customers, said Warren Solochek, vice president for business development at the NPD Group, a market research firm.“One of the very top complaints people have at full-service restaurants is the amount of time it takes between when they finish their meal and when they can actually leave,” he said, a concern that is even more pressing for diners who hear their flight’s call to board.Advertisement“The advantage of the iPads is, in the airport environment, it’s so dynamic,” said Anthony Joseph, president of Concessions International, which recently installed iPads so customers could gain access to menus at two of its dining locations in Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tableside devices in airport restaurants offer the same promise — and present the same challenges — as they do in other places: They cut down on ordering errors, but less technically skilled customers might find the devices intimidating.“What we’re finding is there’s a mix,” Mr. Joseph said. “There are some customers who really appreciate it, but the balance is we don’t want it to detract from customer service.”A few months after installation, he said, his company removed iPads that had been placed at one bar, after determining that people who chose those seats wanted to chat with the bartender rather than peck away at a screen in silence.And, most important, the technology has to work. “Everybody has issues with computers at one time or another,” Mr. Solochek said.When Keon De Roche, a resident of Washington, traveled through Toronto’s Pearson airport last summer, he discovered the technology’s limits.“I thought it was a really great touch and I hope more airports will adopt that,” he said, adding that the function to order food did not work, so he just browsed the web while waiting for his flight. “I was just killing time.”For plenty of travelers, that is enough. “I thought it was fantastic,” said Carmen Vega, who used an airport iPad during a layover in Toronto while on a trip to Barcelona to visit family last summer.Although Ms. Vega owns a tablet, she said it was more convenient to use the one already available than dig through her bag. “You’re carrying so many things when you travel,” she said. " I ended up using theirs just because it was more comfortable.”A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Touch to Ease Stress.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.