By REUTERSJAN. 12, 2015
NEW DELHI — India’s economic outlook got a boost on Monday after data showed industrial output had made an impressive recovery and retail prices had risen at a slower-than-expected pace, lending credence to Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s sales pitch to global investors.Production from mines, utilities and factories rebounded in November much more quickly than expected, government data showed on Monday. The data point to annual growth of 3.8 percent year-to-year, the fastest since June.Retail inflation rose to 5 percent in December, below the 5.4 percent annual rise predicted by analysts in a Reuters poll. Consumer prices were up 4.4 percent year-to-year in November, their slowest pace since data were first compiled in this way in January 2012.Mr. Modi, meeting with captains of industry in his home state, Gujarat, said on Sunday that India’s economic outlook was robust. India is the only large economy expected to grow more quickly this year than last, he said.AdvertisementThe data Monday will bolster hopes of an interest-rate cut by the Reserve Bank of India when it reviews its monetary policy next month.Advertisement“Keeping aside the base effect impact, this inflation data has been positive,” said Shubhada Rao, chief economist at YES Bank in Mumbai. “I would think that the stage is quite set for a Feb. 3 5-basis-points rate cut.”A basis point is equal to one-hundredth of a percentage point. The bank has kept the interest rate unchanged at 8 percent over the past year, ignoring calls from the government and industry to ease policy to stimulate investment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Stagnant capital spending has been a prime cause of India’s worst economic performance in a quarter-century.To speed recovery, Mr. Modi has passed a raft of overhauls, mostly by executive order. But global challenges, lukewarm domestic demand and unused industrial capacity mean capital investment has not picked up and the economy remains way below potential.The government and industry have been encouraging Raghuram Rajan, governor of the reserve bank, to ease monetary policy in order to increase consumption and help kick-start investments.Concerned about slow economic growth, some government aides are also pushing to loosen fiscal deficit targets in the federal budget next month to fund infrastructure projects that could increase growth.Analysts, however, warn against easing targets for the deficit as that could delay the rate cuts as Mr. Rajan has set fiscal consolidation as a precondition for lowering rates.“The real action could be seen only after the budget,” said Devendra Kumar Pant, chief economist and senior director at India Ratings & Research.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.