By KEITH BRADSHERJAN. 12, 2015
After years of promises by the industry followed by manufacturing delays, a major automaker is finally on the verge of starting sustained exports from China to the United States.The Volvo Car Corporation announced at the Detroit auto show on Monday that it planned to begin shipping a midsize sedan from Chengdu in the next several months. Volvo, which a Chinese investor bought from the Ford Motor Company in 2010, said it would ship 1,500 to 2,000 cars to the United States this year, with increases in subsequent years based on demand.Volvo already makes the same model, the S60 Inscription sedan, for the Chinese market, albeit under a different name, the S60L. It sells about 26,000 cars there, so Volvo can add production for the American market at a modest cost.A self-made automotive tycoon, Li Shufu, who holds a controlling stake in Geely Auto and separately owns Volvo through his personal holding company, has long talked of exporting cars from China to the United States. Geely Auto, too, has repeatedly said that it would like to undertake its own exports.AdvertisementBut these plans have been consistently delayed. The global financial crisis and the long slowdown that followed in the American auto market proved a setback.AdvertisementGeely also initially struggled with quality issues and the Chinese government had warned its automakers not to export until they were completely ready to meet Western quality and safety standards. Volvo already has a reputation for quality and for safety, making it easier for Mr. Li to allay the Chinese government’s concerns.China is a huge supplier of low-cost auto parts to assembly plants and car repair shops in the United States. But its exports of fully assembled cars to the American market have been negligible, even as China has emerged as the world’s largest auto market and largest assembler of cars. Several years ago, China’s commerce ministry set 2015 as its goal for China to begin exporting cars to the West.While there have been limited efforts by Chinese companies to export to smaller European countries and to niche segments like electric cars in the United States, major manufacturers with factories in China have been wary of sustained exports of mass-market models to the highly competitive American market.A big reason for the country’s slowness in exporting cars to the United States lies in the dominance in the Chinese market of joint ventures between multinationals, like Volkswagen, General Motors and Ford, and their state-owned Chinese partners. The multinationals have been wary of antagonizing powerful unions in their home countries — the United Automobile Workers in the United States and its counterparts in Germany in particular — by bringing in Chinese cars. And the state-owned manufacturers are too reliant on the multinationals’ designs and technology to export cars to the West on their own.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Volvo does not have these constraints. At the same time, beginning exports to the United States could give Mr. Li a considerable increase in prestige within China, even as Geely has been facing challenges at home.Several large Chinese cities have joined Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou in recent months in limiting the issuance of new car license plates in response to severe air pollution and chronic traffic jams. Geely and other indigenous producers, like BYD, of inexpensive, often utilitarian cars have lost market share as buyers have chosen costlier models from multinationals when they are able to obtain scarce license plates through auctions or lotteries.Yale Zhang, the managing director of Automotive Foresight, a consulting firm in Shanghai, said the S60 Inscription was fairly big for a midsize sedan and thus was a better choice for exports to the United States than to Europe.“Chinese consumers, like U.S. consumers, like something bigger, so exporting this to the United States makes sense,” Mr. Zhang said.AdvertisementOther automakers and various consulting firms have said that factories in China can match quality levels in the West when producing cars according to the designs and procedures of multinationals. Chinese brand automakers have lagged on quality, although they are closing the gap; they have tended to design high-quality parts, but still lack the engineering expertise to integrate the many systems required for a modern car.Volvo, which is still based in Sweden, said that its Chengdu factory was just as good as its European factories. “Levels of installed technology and equipment are the same as the company’s European facilities, as are the working environment, safety and environmental performance standards,” Volvo said.The company also announced at the Detroit show that it would introduce two other models in the American market this year: the S60 Cross Country, a sedan with some of the same rugged designs as the company’s Cross Country wagons, made in Ghent, Belgium, and the XC90 R-Design, a seven-seat sport utility vehicle, made in Gothenburg, Sweden.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Volvo to Export Sedan Made in China to U.S.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.