Across much of the United States, companies are not required to report a data breach if it is limited to the theft of email addresses and passwords, even though many companies do so of their own volition.Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York attorney general, intends on Thursday to propose a bill that would expand his state’s definition of what constitutes the type of private information whose breach would mandate a disclosure to include email addresses and passwords. Companies would be required to keep this data secure and notify consumers and employees in the event of a cyberattack or other data breach involving that information.The proposal would be a significant change to the state’s current definition, which mainly covers the unintended disclosure of a person’s Social Security number, driver’s license or credit card number. The proposal would update a consumer protection measure that Mr. Schneiderman sees as “outdated and toothless,” given a growing number of hackings at big companies.“It’s long past time we updated our data security law and expanded protections for consumers,” Mr. Schneiderman said.The attorney general, a Democrat, expects to attract both Democratic and Republican sponsors for the bill, said a person briefed on the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity. The attorney general, who cannot introduce a bill on his own, wants the proposal in New York to become a model for expanding the safeguarding of personal information in other states.Earlier this week, President Obama said that he intended to push for a federal law that would set a national standard for when companies must inform consumers of a breach that resulted in the disclosure or theft of personal information. The measure would require companies to notify consumers within 30 days of the discovery of an incident.The various proposals to stiffen company reporting requirements in the case of a data breach come after several prominent corporate hackings, including those at Target, Home Depot, Staples, JPMorgan Chase and Sony Pictures. Last summer, Mr. Schneiderman issued a report that said the number of data breaches reported to New York authorities had more than tripled from 2006 to 2013.In New York, the proposed expanded definition of private information would also include data about a consumer or employee’s medical history, health insurance information or biometric data. The expanded definition would go beyond a standard adopted in California in 2013 that also requires companies to notify consumers if their email addresses and passwords are pilfered or hacked. Last summer, Florida stiffened its breach notification requirements as well.Biometric identification of consumers and employees is likely to grow in the coming years. Apple, for instance, is already using a fingerprint identification system — a type of biometric data — in its Apple Pay electronic payment system. For several years, some banks have used biometric identification systems to safeguard access to safe deposit boxes.The New York bill would reward businesses for taking steps to protect personal information and cooperating quickly with New York authorities in the event of a breach. It would provide them some protection from liability in civil lawsuits if they can demonstrate having taken adequate steps to protect private information from being hacked or inadvertently released.“We are trying to find a way that businesses can pick up the phone and report an incident without feeling like law enforcement is breathing down their necks, while at the same time allowing us to do meaningful investigations and get to the root of why consumers weren’t adequately protected,” Mr. Schneiderman said of his proposal.The measure would include some guideposts about the kind of security measures large corporations and small businesses should be expected to enact to protect customer and employee personal information.New York’s current law concerning the notification of security breaches has not been updated since 2005.Mr. Schneiderman is part of a group of about 15 state attorneys general who have been conducting an investigation into last summer’s cyberattack at JPMorgan Chase that affected 83 million consumers and small businesses. The attorneys general want the bank, the nation’s largest in terms of assets, to explain how it can be certain that no sensitive account information was compromised.The group, led by the state attorneys general from Illinois and Connecticut, sent a letter on Jan. 8 to JPMorgan and its outside lawyers seeking more details about the nature of the breach and what measures the bank is taking to prevent a similar incident.JPMorgan has said the breach, which went undetected at the bank for at least two months, resulted in the hackers’ getting access to only customer phone numbers, addresses and email addresses. More sensitive information, like financial information, Social Security numbers, and email password and user identification combinations, remained safe, the bank said.JPMorgan began working with federal law enforcement officials in the investigation of the breach shortly after it was discovered in early August.The bank has noted that under existing federal and state laws it was not required to publicly disclose the breach to consumers since the data taken was largely contact information, yet it did so on its own accord.A version of this article appears in print on 01/15/2015, on page B3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: New York Attorney General Seeks Expanded Reports on Data Breaches.