JPMorgan Chase is the nation’s largest bank, but investors certainly don’t think it’s the best. That mismatch is a major force behind the growing calls to break up JPMorgan.The break-up question was at the forefront on Wednesday, when JPMorgan, which has $2.6 trillion of assets, more than any other American bank, reported its fourth-quarter earnings. On calls with reporters and analysts, Jamie Dimon, the chief executive, stood behind the bank’s current mix of businesses, which include consumer banking, lending to corporations, an investment bank and an asset management arm.“Our model makes sense,” Mr. Dimon said on the analyst call.Outside of JPMorgan’s top echelons, however, there is skepticism.Analysts have started to float ideas about how to divvy up the bank. Goldman Sachs’s banks analyst did so in a research note earlier this month. The ideas are not necessarily drastic and often focus on shaving off smaller units rather than swinging a cleaver down the middle of JPMorgan.Mr. Dimon still has a strong reputation as a manager among many shareholders, so the break-up chatter may wane as he resists it.  And he may find it easier to resist it if the American economy continues to gain strength and bolsters earnings at JPMorgan.Yet Mr. Dimon has also shown that he can be a realist. And the numbers reflected in the stock market suggest that the break-up discussion isn’t going away. It might even lead to a debate over whether it makes sense to split the bank in two, separating Main Street from Wall Street.One way to measure the satisfaction that investors have in a bank’s business model is to look at a valuation measure that compares the lender’s value on the stock market with its net worth, or “book value,” which is found on its balance sheet.Right now, JPMorgan’s book value is slightly below its stock market value. When a bank trades close to its book value like this, it can be a strong signal that investors are not excited about its ability to generate higher profits in the future. When they are excited, investors are willing to pay more than book value. They feel that way, for instance, about Wells Fargo, whose stock market value is 1.6 times higher than its book value.Book value effectively reflects how much capital a bank has. And the more capital a bank has, the harder a bank has to work to earn a return on that capital that will satisfy investors. And JPMorgan has to hold a lot more capital than Wells Fargo. One reason it has to hold more is that it is far larger than Wells Fargo, which has $1.7 trillion in assets.Regulations brought in since the 2008 financial crisis force the largest banks to hold substantially more capital. The theory is that the collapse of a huge, complex bank like JPMorgan would hurt the wider financial system and the economy, so it needs to hold more capital to increase the chances that it could withstand turbulence. Large banks that have big Wall Street businesses also have to hold more assets they could sell quickly to raise cash in a crisis situation. That can also hurt profits because such easy-to-sell assets don’t earn much.The crucial question now for JPMorgan is whether its huge size and its heavy Wall Street focus are acting as a dead weight on the bank’s overall returns. If so, it is possible that splitting off the businesses less affected by regulation – like consumer lending and making loans to small and medium-size companies — could “unlock” value embedded, but not recognized, in such businesses.The untapped value could be substantial.The first step is to create a “New Chase Bank” entity that combines JPMorgan’s consumer lending operations and the entity that lends to small and medium-size companies. Combined, these units would have assets of $650 billion, a small enough amount to avoid some of the more onerous capital requirements.New Chase would have around $62 billion of capital, using the entities’ latest numbers. That works out at around 10 percent of assets, which is relatively solid.New Chase’s earnings for 2014 of nearly $12 billion would translate into a 19 percent return on that capital. The return would probably be lower if a split did occur. There would be the additional expenses that would come with forming a standalone entity, as well as some lost synergies. But it is hard to see how those drags would bring that 19 percent return far below Wells Fargo’s 13.4 percent return on capital for 2014.And since New Chase would look a lot like Wells Fargo, and probably earn similar returns to Wells, it would arguably deserve Wells’s current overall valuation of 1.6 times book value. Applying that multiple to New Chase’s book value would give New Chase a theoretical stock market value of $100 billion.Put another way, New Chase could conceivably command nearly half of JPMorgan’s current stock market value with just a fourth of its current assets.It is possible that JPMorgan’s stock market value already reflects investors applying that multiple to the New Chase entities. But if that’s the case, investors are particularly unimpressed with the outlook for all its other businesses, which are dominated by Wall Street activities. And if a split were to take place, those newly separate Wall Street businesses — let’s call them “JPMorgan Redux” — might find it harder to operate with same level of profitability. In other words, investors may lose money on their stock in JPMorgan Redux that offset any gains on the New Chase shares.Alternatively, the managers of each new entity might be find it easier to focus on their newly streamlined corporate missions. The returns at both JPMorgan Redux and New Chase might then improve.Chase Manhattan and JPMorgan merged in 2000. It is not assured that the couple will make it to its 20th anniversary.By NATHANIEL POPPERJPMorgan Chase reported an unexpected drop in profit, to $4.9 billion, or $1.19 a share, during a sluggish fourth quarter.By MICHAEL CORKERYProfit rose 2 percent, to $5.71 billion, and revenue increased 4 percent as the bank continued to lend more money and decrease the amount it set aside to cover soured loans.