Family Dollar should go ahead and sell itself to Dollar Tree, despite a higher offer from Dollar General, a major shareholder advisory group said on Wednesday.Institutional Shareholder Services has urged Family Dollar shareholders to approve the $8.5 billion deal with Dollar Tree, saying that Dollar General’s bid, while higher, remains too risky.“Shareholders should vote for the Dollar Tree transaction, which offers significant value and near certainty of closure,” I.S.S. said in a report. A vote on the deal is scheduled for next Thursday.The recommendation comes two days after Family Dollar made a direct appeal to its shareholders, urging them to approve the agreed upon deal with Dollar Tree.Dollar General has offered $9.1 billion for Family Dollar. But antitrust regulators are likely to require more divestitures from a combined Dollar General and Family Dollar than they are from a combined Dollar Tree and Family Dollar.In his letter to shareholders on Monday, Howard Levine, Family Dollar’s chairman and chief executive, said the Federal Trade Commission was likely to find between 3,500 and 4,000 overlapping stores a potential problem in a combination of Family Dollar and Dollar General. That is far more than the 1,500 that Dollar General has committed to divesting to get the deal through.Mr. Levine added that he believed the F.T.C. had found only 310 stores of concern in a combination between Family Dollar and Dollar Tree, and that the final number could be closer to 300. Dollar Tree has also pledged to do whatever is necessary to close its deal.And while Dollar Tree and Family Dollar have been agitating for the deal to close in recent weeks, Dollar General has made no public comments recently, even after pledging to provide an update last month.“Dollar General’s near-silence on regulatory progress – particularly its failure to meaningfully follow through on its own unforced commitment to provide a meaningful update in December – speaks volumes,” I.S.S. wrote in its report.A vote on the combination of Family Dollar and Dollar Tree has already been postponed once – a delay that I.S.S. endorsed last month. But another postponement, even though the F.T.C. has not weighed officially in on either deal, could be costly to Family Dollar shareholders. Last quarter’s results were worse than expected, and the costs of financing the Dollar Tree deal could rise after next week, putting the Dollar Tree offer in jeopardy.“Given the additional month created by the December adjournment has not led to any material improvements in Dollar General’s deal certainty, the risk that an additional adjournment could jeopardize the Dollar Tree transaction, and the significant downside risk of being unable to close on either of these two transactions – underscored a week ago by Family Dollar’s disappointing earnings miss – no additional adjournment appears warranted,” I.S.S. said.A version of this article appears in print on 01/15/2015, on page B7 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Backing a Bid.