Many people doubt the strength of the United States economy. Wells Fargo’s chief executive, John Stumpf, is not among them.As global stock markets swooned and oil prices remained below $50 a barrel on Wednesday, Mr. Stumpf boasted that Wells Fargo expanded its lending to businesses and consumers in the fourth quarter and further reduced its credit losses. And he said the bank anticipated even more opportunity to increase lending in the coming year.“We are not saying we are off to the races, but we are a bit more optimistic in 2015 than we were at this time in 2014,” Mr. Stumpf said in an interview.Wells Fargo, which derives most of its revenue from the United States, is often seen as a bellwether for the financial health of the nation’s consumers and businesses.And as if to draw a stark contrast to its Wall Street rivals like JPMorgan Chase, which reported an unexpectedly sharp decline in profit on Wednesday, Mr. Stumpf said Wells’s results were buoyed by the bank’s focus on the “real economy.” Its trading and investment banking units are smaller than some of the other large banks, which can help results when markets turn unpredictable.Wells Fargo said its profit rose about 2 percent, to $5.71 billion, compared with $5.61 billion in the period a year earlier, while revenue increased roughly 3 percent, to $21.4 billion.The earnings translated into $1.02 a share, matching the expectations of analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters.The bank’s loan total grew $40.3 billion, to $862.6 billion, or 5 percent, from its level a year ago.Wells Fargo shares fell 60 cents, or 1.16 percent, to $51.25 in a down day for the market.Of course, the stronger the economy, the better the chances that large banks like Wells will get what they desperately want: higher interest rates. An increase in rates is expected to bolster Wells’s returns significantly, though executives said on Wednesday that the bank could remain profitable without help from the Federal Reserve.“There is an upside when short-term rates move,” John Shrewsberry, the chief financial officer, told analysts in a conference call. “But we are continuing to compete and perform in this interest rate environment.”It wasn’t all rosy for Wells in the fourth quarter. The bank’s expenses rose as deferred compensation and advertising costs increased. Analysts also pressed executives on Wednesday about the bank’s exposure to the energy sector in the face of plunging oil prices. Energy loans make up 2 percent of the bank’s total loans. In addition, the bank holds about $1.5 billion in both leveraged loans in its trading portfolio and shares of energy companies.Wells is a significant player in the oil and gas industry, helping finance hundreds of exploration and production companies and other energy-related companies. In light of lower oil prices, Mr. Shrewsberry said Wells was reviewing all of its energy loans to reassess the risks.Mr. Shrewsberry said it was too early to determine whether the bank would need to reserve for potential losses, though it was likely that energy lending would not grow in the coming year.Still, he predicted other types of commercial and industry loans were likely to increase again in the coming year. With employment continuing to improve, bank executives expect broad lending growth from autos to industrial loans.“It feels like a good year for loan growth,” Mr. Shrewsberry said.