JPMorgan Chase kicked off fourth-quarter earnings season, reporting an unexpected drop in profit, DealBook’s Nathaniel Popper writes. The bank said its earnings fell 7 percent, to $4.9 billion, or $1.19 a share, from the $5.6 billion, or $1.30 a share, in the period a year earlier. The most recent results fell short of the $1.31 a share expected by analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters.Net revenue at the bank dropped 3 percent, to $22.5 billion, from the fourth quarter of 2013. On a so-called managed basis, revenue was $23.55 billion, slightly below the $23.6 billion anticipated by analysts. For 2014 as a whole, JPMorgan reported profit of $21.8 billion, a 21 percent increase.Wells Fargo reports fourth-quarter earnings at 8 a.m.METLIFE TAKES REGULATORS TO COURT  |  MetLife sued the Financial Stability Oversight Council on Tuesday to fight its designation as “systemically important,” Mary Williams Walsh writes in DealBook. The move makes the insurer the first financial company to go to court over the issue since the government started singling out so-called too-big-to-fail institutions under the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul law in an effort to stem any future financial crises.In its lawsuit, MetLife said that the council had made “numerous critical errors” in deciding that MetLife was systemically important and therefore in need of close oversight by the Federal Reserve. In a complaint, the insurer said it would be “irreparably harmed” if the designation was left in place and called it “arbitrary and capricious.” MetLife pointed out that the Fed had not yet written the rules that systemically important nonbank companies would ultimately have to follow, but seemed to leave open the possibility that it would accept being designated a “systemically important financial institution,” or SIFI, in the future, once those rules are known.The other two insurers designated systemically important are the American International Group and Prudential Financial. A.I.G. made no attempt to fight its designation. Prudential unsuccessfully challenged its designation in an evidentiary hearing by the council, but decided not to proceed to court.The Wall Street Journal writes: “Regulators don’t react well to being challenged, so MetLife is taking some political risk with its suit. It might have been easier to roll over, as everyone else has, and play the inside game of trying to maneuver special regulatory favors and exemptions under the non-bank rules. The company deserves credit for challenging a regulatory process that is expanding the federal safety net without transparency or any evident need.”ON THE AGENDA  |  Data on retail sales is out at 8:30 a.m. Import and export prices are released at 8:30 a.m. Data on business inventories is released at 10 a.m. The Fed’s regular report on economic activity across the country, a report known as the beige book, is out at 2 p.m. The Securities and Exchange Commission holds an open meeting on security-based swaps at 10 a.m.BITCOIN INDUSTRY WRESTLES WITH SLUMP  |  The price of Bitcoin slid further on Tuesday, to about $224, its lowest level since before it gained widespread traction in 2013 and started to soar in value, Sydney Ember reports in DealBook. The yearlong downward spiral suggests that confidence in the virtual currency, which reached its peak price of about $1,200 in December 2013, may be dwindling. Bitcoin’s price dropped to around $190 early Wednesday, according to CoinDesk.With no signs of a rally in the offing, the industry is bracing for the effects of a prolonged decline in prices. In particular, Bitcoin mining companies, which are essential to the currency’s underlying technology, are flashing warning signs. Some that invested heavily in resources when the price of Bitcoin was rising are struggling to keep their operations open and selling their Bitcoins to keep their electricity running and return money to their lenders.  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailAlibaba Buys Controlling Stake in AdChina  |  The Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba Group said on Wednesday that it had acquired a controlling stake in AdChina, an online marketing company, Reuters writes. Alibaba did not close the size of the deal or the stake it would take.  REUTERS Ryanair Expects Revised I.A.G. Bid for Irish Airline Aer Lingus  |  Ryanair, the largest shareholder of the Irish airline Aer Lingus, said it would be prepared to consider an offer between 2.50 and 2.70 euros a share from the parent of British Airways. DealBook »DRW to Acquire Chopper Trading  |  The DRW Trading Group has agreed to acquire its smaller rival, Chopper Trading, in a deal that would join two of the best-known companies in Chicago’s proprietary trading community, The Financial Times reports. The terms of the deal were not disclosed.  FINANCIAL TIMES Wall St. Chips Away at Dodd-Frank Rules  |  In the span of a month, the nation’s biggest banks and investment firms have twice won passage of measures in Congress to weaken regulations intended to help lessen the risk of another financial crisis, The New York Times writes.  NEW YORK TIMES Pitt Said to Star in Film Version of ‘The Big Short’  |  Brad Pitt, Christian Bale and Ryan Gosling have signed on to star in “The Big Short,” a film adaptation of “The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine” by Michael Lewis, Variety reports, citing unidentified sources.  VARIETY Barclays Names Former Bank of America Executive as Chief Operating Officer  |  Jonathan Moulds spent 15 years at Bank of America, most recently as chief executive of Merrill Lynch International and as head of Bank of America Merrill Lynch in Europe. DealBook »R.B.S. Receives Waiver From U.S. Capital Rules  |  The Royal Bank of Scotland, which plans to reduce its United States assets to less than $50 billion, has been granted a waiver by the Federal Reserve from tougher new rules coming in the next year for overseas banks, Reuters writes.  REUTERS Oil Output Seen Rising, Despite Fall in Its Price  |  The Energy Information Administration forecast oil production in the United States of 9.3 million barrels a day in 2015, up from last year, and rising to 9.5 million in 2016, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMES Copper Drops Sharply  |  Copper traded at its lowest price levels in more than half a decade amid a broader commodities rout.  REUTERS PetSmart Discloses Talks With Rival Before Sale  |  The pet supply retailer PetSmart, which agreed in December to sell itself to a group led by the investment firm BC Partners for about $8.7 billion, disclosed on Tuesday that it had been in talks to acquire or merge with an unidentified, privately held rival but ended talks over competition and antitrust concerns, Reuters writes.  REUTERS K.K.R. Said to Revive I.P.O. for Precision Engineering Company  |  The private equity firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts is said to be seeking to revive an initial public offering for MMI International, a precision engineering company based in Singapore, The Wall Street Journal writes, citing unidentified people familiar with the situation.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Jamba Reaches Deal With Activist Investment Firms  |  Jamba, the holding company of the Jamba Juice Company, said on Tuesday that it would appoint Glen W. Welling of Engaged Capital and James C. Pappas of JCP Investment Management to its board effective immediately, The Wall Street Journal writes. The men will also be part of Jamba’s nominees at the company’s annual meeting.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Bank of America Severs Ties With Hedge Fund Clients  |  Bank of America cut ties with about 150 hedge funds last year in its prime brokerage group because new regulatory requirements intended to make the financial system safer are forcing lenders to reduce costs, Bloomberg News writes.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Sunrise Communications of Switzerland Plans I.P.O.  |  The initial public offering on the SIX Swiss Exchange is expected to raise 1.35 billion Swiss francs, or about $1.32 billion, which will be used to reduce the Sunrise Communications’ debt. DealBook »Etsy Said to Plan I.P.O.  |  Etsy, a website that sells handmade crafts, is said to be working on an initial public offering that could take place as soon as this quarter, Bloomberg News reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter. The company is seeking to raise $300 million, one person said.  BLOOMBERG NEWS China Railway Signal Said to Seek $2 Billion in I.P.O.  |  The China Railway Signal and Communication Corporation, China’s biggest provider of rail traffic control systems, is said to be looking to raise about $2 billion from an initial public offering in Hong Kong, Bloomberg News writes, citing unidentified people with knowledge of the matter.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Fitness Software Firm Mindbody Said to Select Banks for I.P.O.  |  Mindbody, a company that makes software to help run fitness and yoga studios, is said to have selected banks, including Morgan Stanley, Credit Suisse and UBS, for a potential initial public offering that could value it at more than $700 million, Reuters writes, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.  REUTERSStart-Up Lender Raises $200 Million From Ex-Owner of Los Angeles Dodgers  |  The MGG Investment Group raised the money from Frank H. McCourt Jr., the real estate developer who formerly owned the Los Angeles Dodgers, and hopes to capture a slice of the small-business lending market. DealBook »California Regulator Pushes to Suspend Ocwen Financial’s License in State  |  The request to suspend Ocwen’s license comes after the company failed to provide California’s Department of Business Oversight with information that it requested about its mortgage loan servicing operation. DealBook »Silk Road Trial Begins  |  A lawyer for Ross W. Ulbricht, who is accused of creating the defunct online marketplace Silk Road, acknowledged in his opening statement that Silk Road was his client’s idea, but that Mr. Ulbricht was not the mysterious Dread Pirate Roberts.  NEW YORK TIMES Supreme Court Backs Borrowers’ Right to Rescind Certain Mortgages  |  The Supreme Court on Tuesday ruled unanimously that borrowers need only notify the creditor within three years of their intent to rescind certain mortgage loans, rejecting the position of Bank of America’s Countrywide Home Loans subsidiary, which argued that borrowers must take the additional step of filing a lawsuit within three years if the two sides disagree on whether proper loan disclosures have been provided.  WALL STREET JOURNALE.C.B.’s Bond-Buying Program Deemed Legal  |  The opinion by one of the advocates general at the Court of Justice of the European Union in Luxembourg represented a victory for Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMES Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 