LONDON — Barclays said on Wednesday that it had appointed Jonathan Moulds, the former head of Europe for Bank of America Merrill Lynch, to the recently created position of group chief operating officer.Mr. Moulds, 49, will oversee continuing restructuring at Barclays as it shrinks its investment bank to focus on less risky and high-capital business lines. The British lender announced plans last year to eliminate up to 19,000 jobs by 2016.He will also be responsible for the execution of the restructuring of operations in Britain, and for the creation of an intermediate holding company in the United States.The structural changes are intended, in part, to appease regulators, who want to reduce the impact that a future financial crisis could have on the bank’s operations, and particularly on its retail customers.Mr. Moulds will join Barclays on Feb. 2. He will be a member of its executive committee and will report to Antony P. Jenkins, chief executive of the bank.“There are multiple major change programs in flight across the group,” Mr. Jenkins said in a news release on Wednesday, “designed to achieve our ambitious goals, and which will in turn help to drive the sustainable returns our shareholders deserve.“A group C.O.O. will give us additional leadership bandwidth and capability to make that happen,” he added.Mr. Moulds, a native of Yorkshire in England, spent 15 years at Bank of America, most recently serving as chief executive of Merrill Lynch International and as head of Bank of America Merrill Lynch in Europe. He left Bank of America in 2012.He is the chairman of the London Symphony Orchestra’s advisory council and of the orchestra’s development board, and he is a founding member of the international council of Carnegie Hall in New York.“This is a period of profound change for Barclays as the group builds momentum in the implementation of its strategy and deals with external forces including structural reform,” Mr. Moulds said in the news release. “Playing a part in leading the transformation of Barclays represents a hugely exciting professional challenge for me.”A version of this article appears in print on 01/15/2015, on page B7 of the NewYork edition with the headline: New Hire.