AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiThe chief executive of Saks Fifth Avenue’s parent company on Tuesday denied accusations made by a former employee that she was harassed, then dismissed, over her transgender identity.Gerald L. Storch, the chief executive of the parent company, Hudson’s Bay, also said Saks was a strong advocate for the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people. He declined to discuss an assertion by the luxury retailer’s lawyers, made in response to the former employee’s lawsuit, that “transsexuals are not a protected class” under the Civil Rights Act. But in a follow-up statement, the company said that it believed the act protected all people from sexual discrimination — but that the ex-employee was not asserting that in this case.Leyth O. Jamal, 23, stated in a lawsuit filed in September that managers at a Saks store in Houston constantly referred to her as a man, instructed her to use the men’s restroom and pressured her to change her appearance to a more masculine one, despite being aware of her transgender identity.Ms. Jamal also asserts that a male colleague repeatedly asked whether she was a prostitute in front of customers and colleagues, and made threats of violence. Saks terminated Ms. Jamal in July 2012, after she brought a complaint to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.Speaking by phone on Tuesday, Mr. Storch denied Ms. Jamal’s claims.“In the strongest terms, I want to underscore that Saks Fifth Avenue did not discriminate against the plaintiff,” he said. “It’s preposterous to think that in any way Saks Fifth Avenue is anything but a strong advocate for L.G.B.T. rights.”Ms. Jamal said in an interview that she was “shocked and hurt” by Saks’s response. “They say that they support L.G.B.T. rights fully. And the end of L.G.B.T. is trans,” she said, referring to transgender. “It’s contradictory and actually pretty hurtful.”In a follow-up statement, Saks stressed that it “believes that all persons are protected against sex discrimination under Title VII” of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits discrimination by employers on the basis of race, color, religion, sex or national origin.It said, however, that the plaintiff had based her case not on sex discrimination but on the issue of gender identity and transgender status, which it said some courts have ruled fall outside Title VII’s mandate. Saks will follow that precedent, the retailer said, “unless or until it is modified by the courts or the legislature.”The Supreme Court has not yet determined whether Title VII’s ban on sex discrimination covers gender identity. But the E.E.O.C. has ruled that Title VII prohibits transgender discrimination.Advertisement