

 Eduardo Porter
 

ECONOMIC SCENE
JAN. 13, 2015
How much money does Arkansas save by offering stingier Medicaid than Vermont?It looks like a straightforward calculation. Arkansas makes it tougher for children to qualify for Medicaid than Vermont does, and it spends much less on each beneficiary. Even though Arkansas’s poverty rate is double Vermont’s, Medicaid’s costs in Arkansas in 2012, the most recent year for which figures are available, were $600 less per resident than in Vermont.But there is a price to pay for such parsimony. Children in Arkansas get fewer regular checkups at the doctor and dentist. More adults forgo care because of the expense. More Arkansans are overweight and have diabetes. More are disabled. They die younger.This is not to pick specifically on Arkansas or to extol the virtues of Vermont. The contrast between these two disparate states frames a broader debate about the purpose of the American government. With a new Republican majority in Congress looking to further the cause of low taxes and less spending, it is easy to forget that tightfisted government imposes very real costs. That we can’t easily measure them doesn’t mean they don’t exist.Over the last couple of years, voters have been spared the bitter partisan brawl over taxes and spending that scarred President Obama’s first term in office.AdvertisementHaving gained hefty spending cuts — notably through the process known as sequestration — Republicans concentrated on other goals, like sinking the Affordable Care Act. Content to have raised some taxes on the wealthiest Americans, the president, too, turned his attention elsewhere.AdvertisementBut the fundamental partisan conflict never went away. When the new session of Congress opened last week, Republicans put the fight squarely back on the table.First they got rid of Douglas Elmendorf — a well-respected economist who, though a Democratic appointee, was widely considered a nonideological shooter — as the head of the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office.Next they proposed  changing the rules governing how the budget office conducts its economic analysis of legislation in a fashion that many experts believe could ease the way for Republicans’ ambitious tax-cutting agenda.Republicans’ underlying assumption is that tax cuts amount to a tonic for economic growth, encouraging investment and toil. Many analyses by the budget office, they argue, misjudge the effect of tax cuts on the budget by underestimating their role as economic stimulus.They are not entirely wrong. Most economists agree that cutting taxes is likely to deliver some increase to growth. But it is substantially weaker than what Republicans often claim.At the same time, the implicit proposition underlying the Republican case is that public spending amounts at best to money down the drain and, more often, to an albatross around the economy’s neck, discouraging work among beneficiaries of government largess.The evidence for that is even weaker. Under such assumptions, the return to Vermont’s additional Medicaid spending would shrivel to nothing. That is, pretty much, how the budget office scores Medicaid spending today. That truly misjudges the role of government in the long-term health of the American economy.Advertisement“Of course there are positive returns to spending on health, education, nutrition,” said William Gale, a tax expert at the Brookings Institution. “They are saving a lot of money and generating revenues. The macro effects are big relative to the expenditures.”A study published this week about the long-term impact of changes in Medicaid eligibility, by Amanda Kowalski of Yale University, and David Brown and Ithai Z. Lurie from the Treasury Department’s Office of Tax Analysis, underscores just how costly scrimping on Medicaid can be.
            Investment by the federal government in things as diverse as defense systems, roads, college educations and civilian research and development is shrinking as a share of the economy.        Federal investment as a shareof gross domestic product6%5ACTUALPROJECTED4NONDEFENSE321DEFENSE0’70’80’90’00’10’20Using national data, the researchers estimated that for children born in 1981, Vermont’s more generous eligibility standards would have cost the federal and state governments $4,796 more a child than in Arkansas, measured in 2011 dollars.They also found, however, that easier access to Medicaid translated into more payroll and income taxes when the children grew up. By the time Vermont’s children are 60, Professor Kowalski and her colleagues estimated, they will have repaid 56 cents of each additional Medicaid dollar spent on them when young.There’s more. Healthier children are more likely to become more productive adults who need less government assistance. Children with behavioral problems who receive counseling are less likely to end up in prison — a big expense line on state budgets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In his recent book “We Are Better Than This,” Edward D. Kleinbard, former chief of staff of Congress’s Joint Committee on Taxation, now at the University of Southern California, put it cleanly: “Healthy and adequately nourished citizens are more productive, and will contribute more to the prosperity of society, than will sick and emaciated ones.”Not least, they will probably lead healthier, more satisfying lives. “One reason for the increased tax payments is that the children survived to pay them,” Professor Kowalski told me.Government spending is not always written off as a waste. In recent years, some of the Congressional Budget Office’s analyses have assumed a positive rate of return to the government’s civilian investment. That investment totaled $318 billion in 2012, or roughly 9 percent of total government spending.The estimate, however, is not quite hard science. The government invests in all sorts of things — bridges to nowhere, college education and vital research. Systematically evaluating the long-term return of these endeavors is daunting. Few economists have even tried.AdvertisementSo the budget office uses a sort of rule of thumb: It assumes the rate of return to public investment will generally range from zero to the rate of return to private investment, averaging half the private return. This still often undervalues the productivity of what the government does.Some economists argue that public investment is often more productive than private investment. Even the International Monetary Fund, long an exponent of fiscal rectitude, argues that public infrastructure investment largely pays for itself, especially in periods of repressed economic activity and low interest rates like today.Consider early childhood education. James Heckman of the University of Chicago has estimated that early investment in poor children’s development yields an enormous a rate of return for society at large from things like higher productivity and less crime.Most glaringly, government spending not classified as investment — like Medicaid or food stamps — is assumed to deliver no economic return at all.Republicans’ attempts to recast budget rules might be portrayed as a political tactic of little consequence — an assertion of power with no economic or budgetary substance.The stakes are high, though. Under current laws, the C.B.O. has projected that civilian government investment will shrink to roughly 1.3 percent of the nation’s gross domestic product by 2020. That is the smallest share since the government started keeping track in 1962.Federal income support programs like food stamps and the earned-income tax credit are also projected to shrink over the coming decade. And Republicans are unlikely to abandon their long-held plans to cut Medicaid and gut the Affordable Care Act.It’s one thing to shrink a government that is believed to do no good. It would be more difficult if voters understood how much bang they get for the government’s buck.Email: eporter@nytimes.com; Twitter: @portereduardo
A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Costs of Stinginess in Medicaid.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »