By ADAM LIPTAKJAN. 13, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The Supreme Court on Tuesday seemed to be looking for a middle ground in a case about what efforts the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission must make to settle cases informally before it files lawsuits.Justice Anthony M. Kennedy captured the court’s frustrated mood near the end of the argument.“I think there’s substantial merit to your position that the courts have gone too far,” he told a lawyer for the commission. “But you have given us no midway, no alternative.”A federal law requires the commission to “endeavor to eliminate” discriminatory practices by using “informal methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion.” The question for the Supreme Court was whether judges have a role to play in making sure the commission tries hard enough to use those informal methods before going to court.The case arose from a complaint by a female applicant who said she had been denied a coal mining job at a Mach Mining facility near Johnston City, Ill., because of her gender. The commission determined that there was reason to believe the company had discriminated against a class of women seeking jobs there.AdvertisementThe discrimination claim itself was barely mentioned in the court on Tuesday, though Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg gave an outline.Advertisement“The charge here is the employer violated Title VII” of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 “because he outright refused to hire women,” Justice Ginsburg said. “And there is lots of evidence of that. There are no women working there. They build a new facility; they don’t have a women’s bathroom in it. They hire people that are recommended to them by the current employees and the current employees are all male and recommend all men.”The central issue in the case was not whether all of that was true and unlawful but whether the commission’s lawsuit ought to have been dismissed because the commission had not tried hard enough to resolve the matter informally.Thomas C. Goldstein, a lawyer for the company, said there was a role for courts in examining whether the commission’s conciliation efforts were adequate.But Justice Kennedy said the law had granted the commission enormous discretion about how to conduct and conclude the informal negotiations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Justice Elena Kagan agreed. “The statute makes entirely clear that the E.E.O.C has the prerogative to decide what kind of offer by the employer is acceptable or not,” she said. “And there’s nothing to suggest that the E.E.O.C. even has to be reasonable in determining what sort of offer by the employer is acceptable.”Mr. Goldstein responded that the process still had to meet minimal standards.“The E.E.O.C. can declare what the finish line is,” he said, “but Congress said they’re going to have to go through a process.”The law also requires the commission to maintain the confidentiality of the settlement proceedings unless the other parties agree to make them public. Justice Kagan said that provision also suggested that judges should not be in the business of intrusive examinations of the adequacy of conciliation efforts.Nicole A. Saharsky, a lawyer for the commission, took a hard line, saying there was almost no role for the courts in second-guessing the commission’s efforts to settle cases. The inevitable result of such judicial oversight, she said, would be elaborate and costly ancillary litigation based on murky standards that would delay “the main event” of determining whether the employer had discriminated.AdvertisementHer position struck several justices as extreme. “There should be judicial review,” Justice Stephen G. Breyer said. “There is of everything, just about. But the issue is how much.”Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. also questioned the commission’s position.“You are arguing that there is no judicial review, full stop,” he told Ms. Saharsky, adding: “I am very troubled by the idea that the government can do something and we can’t even look at whether they’ve complied with the law.”If a consensus seemed to be forming that some kind of modest judicial oversight was warranted in the case, Mach Mining v. E.E.O.C., No. 13-1019, Mr. Goldstein’s brief rebuttal appeared to imperil it. He rattled off a series of factors that he said courts should consider in determining whether the settlement efforts are adequate.Justice Kagan said the list was counterproductive.“That is intrusive,” she said. “I mean, you’re doing your best job of proving Ms. Saharsky’s point here.”A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Supreme Court Seeks Compromise on Equality Cases.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.