By JAMES KANTERJAN. 13, 2015
BRUSSELS — The European Union’s top trade official said on Tuesday that the bloc should continue studying a controversial provision in a proposed trade agreement with the United States, but stopped short of endorsing the measure.At issue is a so-called investment guarantee, which would give companies the right to sue national governments to enforce the terms of any eventual trade deal. While American businesses and the United States government are pressing to include that provision, many Europeans oppose it. The measure has become one of the main sticking points in negotiations over the proposed trade pact, known as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.A review of more than 150,000 public comments on the matter “clearly shows that there is a huge skepticism” toward the investment guarantee provision, Cecilia Malmstrom, the European Union’s trade commissioner, said in a statement on Tuesday.The trade pact itself is no sure bet, as negotiators on both sides of the Atlantic have shown little progress after more than a year of periodic talks. For European opponents of the investment guarantee provision, the concern is that if it became part of a trade agreement, it would give companies a legal opening to erode European standards in environmental protection, food quality and labor rights.AdvertisementThe issue has become the rallying point for groups that mistrust the European Union, which they see as being unable to control migration and trim unemployment in the bloc, and are suspicious of the United States, which is widely regarded as mismanaging its global power and clumsily imposing electronic surveillance that threatens the privacy of European citizens.AdvertisementPowerful figures like Sigmar Gabriel, the German economy minister, have called that clause unnecessary, and Matthias Fekl, the French junior minister for trade, has said that including it would make any deal unacceptable to Europe.But many American and European trade experts say the guarantee should be part of any modern trade agreement between the European Union and the United States, which have the two largest economies in the world. Such proponents note that recently agreed-upon European accords with Canada and Singapore contain the guarantee, although those pacts still await ratification by European lawmakers.On Tuesday, Ms. Malmstrom said she was still not ready to recommend how to modify the guarantee or say whether it should be jettisoned. Instead she highlighted the main issues raised by the results of the 140-page review of public comments and noted there were “areas that can be reformed.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The proposed trade pact has been under formal negotiation since early 2013, when it was announced by President Obama in his annual State of the Union address. It was initially welcomed by European Union leaders as a debt-free way to spur economic growth in a region plagued by a long debt crisis and high unemployment.Yet progress has been slow.Despite seven rounds of rotating meetings in Washington and Brussels, the negotiators have been at odds over how to lower tariffs and, among other sticking points, whether to include financial services in any deal.The next round of talks is scheduled in Brussels during the first week of February. But talks on the investment guarantee will remain suspended until the European Commission, the European Union’s executive branch, can try to hash out a possible compromise. Officials said on Tuesday that they had no firm timetable for taking that step.The call for comments on the investment guarantee was conducted by the European Commission from March through July, and generated 150,000 responses. European Union officials said that was probably a record for such an exercise, although it indicated there might have been considerable lobbying by advocacy groups, as about 145,000 of those responses were submitted through online platforms using “predefined, negative answers.”The comments — officially known as a public consultation — showed trade unions and other campaign groups seeking more assurances that governments could regulate in the public interest, and seeking obligations on businesses to abide by standards on human rights, the environment and corporate social responsibility, according to the commission.But “excluding investment protection from the T.T.I.P. negotiations is simply not an option,” said Lourdes Catrain, a partner in Brussels with the law firm Hogan Lovells, using the trade proposal’s acronym.Advertisement“The United States is the E.U.’s largest trading partner, and it clearly wants investment protection," said Ms. Catrain, whose firm advised companies participating in the public consultation. “Leaving it out of that deal would weaken Europe’s negotiating position with China and other parts of the world where European companies are seeking similar investment protections.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.