By EMILY STEELJAN. 13, 2015
After more than four decades of making films, Woody Allen is coming to television — streaming television.Amazon announced on Tuesday that it had signed Mr. Allen to write and direct his first television series. The company said it had ordered a full season of half-hour shows, as yet untitled, which will make their debut on the service next year. It provided few other details.“I don’t know how I got into this,” Mr. Allen, 79, said in a statement. “I have no ideas, and I’m not sure where to begin.”The series, like other Amazon original TV productions, will be available exclusively on the company’s Prime Instant Video service in the United States, Britain and Germany. The service costs $99 for an annual membership and includes free two-day shipping of certain Amazon products, and is a way for the company to tie its entertainment offerings to its huge retail operation.AdvertisementRecruiting Mr. Allen signals Amazon’s goal to continue to push the envelope as it expands its creative ambitions. Just this Sunday, Amazon’s original series “Transparent,” a dark comedy about a family in which the father comes out as transgender, won a Golden Globe for best television comedy. (It was the first time a streaming service had won a best-series in the TV category at the Globes.)AdvertisementThe deal with Mr. Allen also raises the stakes in the heated competition among digital companies and traditional networks. Amazon, Netflix and Hulu are pouring resources into creating original streaming series. HBO, the premium pay channel, also has joined the fray, saying it would offer a stand-alone streaming service this year.Roy Price, vice president for Amazon Studios, said that the company was thrilled to work with Mr. Allen, whom he described in a statement as having created some of the best movies ever. He said that the project came together after a couple of meetings with Mr. Allen in New York.“I had always thought Woody Allen’s characters and comedy would translate beautifully to TV, particularly now with more serialized story lines and openness to nuanced characterization,” Mr. Price said in an email.In his statement, Mr. Allen said, “My guess is that Roy Price will regret this.”Some Hollywood executives said that Mr. Allen was not known to be widely pitching a series. He did not pitch one to Netflix or Hulu, said people with knowledge of the situation.Mr. Allen is a polarizing figure, and the association could carry risks for Amazon. He came under heavy scrutiny in February when his adopted daughter, Dylan Farrow, wrote an open letter accusing him of sexually molesting her as a child. Mr. Allen has denied the abuse claims, first raised in the 1990s during a custody battle with Dylan’s mother, Mia Farrow. He was never charged with criminal wrongdoing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Though Dylan Farrow, in her letter, challenged actors to examine their willingness to work with Mr. Allen, he has remained a fixture in the film industry. Over his career he has turned out movies at a rate of about one a year, and his next work — untitled and starring Emma Stone and Joaquin Phoenix as lovers — will probably be released this summer.In contrast, several other media groups dropped projects with Bill Cosby after a wave of accusations by women who said that he drugged and raped them decades ago. NBC and Netflix canceled Cosby projects and TV Land stopped reruns of “The Cosby Show.” Mr. Cosby has denied the accusations.“Amazon has a formula; they know what sells,” said Brian Wieser, a media analyst with Pivotal Research. “Presumably they are making a calculation in terms of not offending some of their customers while concurrently appealing to others.”AdvertisementThe news also represents a substantial shift in Amazon’s strategy. When the company created its studio group about five years ago, it tried a tech-driven online submission process rather than recruiting well-known directors, writers and actors. TV pilots were posted online and the company decided whether to go forward with projects based on viewer feedback. Mr. Allen’s project is Amazon’s first straight-to-series deal, meaning that it has ordered a full series and the project will not go through its pilot process.Rich Greenfield, a media analyst with BTIG Research, said that as streaming services like Amazon, Netflix and Hulu invest more in talent, traditional television networks will come under increased pressure.“Once you’ve watched ‘Orange Is the New Black’ and ‘Transparent’ and binged through 10 episodes,” he said, “it is increasingly hard to go back and watch television with 20 minutes of painful commercials and multiple weeks in between episodes because of show interruptions.”Amazon is escalating its ambitions in the face of a proliferation of original content for online streaming. Netflix recently announced that it was renewing its “Marco Polo” series for a second season and is releasing other projects this year, including the comedy “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt” from Tina Fey and Robert Carlock. Hulu, too, has announced multiple projects, including the much-anticipated “11/22/63” from J. J. Abrams, based on Stephen King’s best-selling novel of the same name about a time traveler who tries to stop the assassination of John F. Kennedy.A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Allen Deal Reiterates Amazon’s Intentions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.