By JENNY ANDERSONJAN. 13, 2015
LONDON — Driven by drastically falling oil prices and lower food prices, British inflation fell to 0.5 percent in December, a steeper drop than was expected and the lowest rate recorded in the past 15 years.While far below the government’s inflation target of 2 percent, the annual rate was welcomed by many economists as a result of lower oil prices, and not a broad drop in demand for goods and services in critical areas of the economy.Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, said the rate was good news for British households in the short term, as rising wages and falling prices mean every pound stretches further.“The issue is to make sure that this doesn’t become more generalized and that we don’t see low and falling prices more generally,” he added in an interview with the BBC.AdvertisementFears of sustained deflation have gripped Britain’s neighbors in the eurozone, where consumer prices contracted 0.2 percent in November. Unemployment in the bloc has remained stubbornly high, at 11.5 percent in November, with places like Italy increasing to 13.4 percent as efforts to jump-start the disparate economies in the region have faltered.AdvertisementBut in Britain, unemployment has fallen to 6 percent, and services inflation of 2.3 percent looks robust. About 77 percent of the British economy is driven by services. Wage growth is starting, at long last, to rise. And while the United Kingdom in 2009 began its campaign to stimulate the economy through large-scale asset purchases, known as quantitative easing, the European Central Bank is just gearing up for it.“There’s a bigger risk that deflation will be ingrained in the eurozone because of the labor market,” said Samuel Tombs, senior economist for Britain at Capital Economics in London. “Unemployment is higher, and downward pressure on wage growth is significant.”Mr. Tombs said he was not worried about deflation in Britain. Even if the figure dipped into negative territory, he believes it would be good for the British economy, reflecting lower commodity prices but not underlying weakness.The fall means that Mr. Carney by law must write a letter to George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, explaining why the central bank’s 2 percent target was so undershot. The inflation rate in December fell from 1 percent in November.The drop in consumer prices in December was driven by sharply lower gas prices, flat utility bills and stable food costs amid a price war among supermarkets, economists said. The fall in the price of crude oil — the international benchmark dropped below $46 a barrel on Tuesday, plummeting about 8 percent in two days — means that inflation could fall even further.Some economists predicted that inflation could fall into negative territory.The British pound fell after the data was published, to $1.5083 against the dollar.Hailing the benefits of low inflation for consumers, Prime Minister David Cameron and Mr. Osborne, whose Conservative Party is seeking to hold onto power in the May election, seized the political moment on Twitter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The fall in inflation is good news for families,” Mr. Cameron posted on Twitter. “Our long-term economic plan is on track and helping hardworking taxpayers.”AdvertisementWhether voters will give them credit for that is unclear as oil prices and the supermarket wars — the factors driving inflation lower — have nothing to do with domestic policy.Other economists also welcomed the news. “With inflation likely to fall further and earnings growth now finally trending upwards, consumers should see appreciable improvement in their purchasing power in 2015,” Howard Archer, chief economist for Britain and Europe at IHS Global Insight, said in a note.For much of the past several years, the growth rate in paychecks in Britain had not kept up with increases in consumer prices. But now, salaries are outstripping inflation. Annual weekly earnings were up 1.8 percent in October, Mr. Archer noted, putting them more than a percentage point higher than consumer price inflation.The drop in the inflation rate will also heighten expectations that the Bank of England will not raise interest rates any time soon.Mr. Carney told the BBC that he still expected interest rates to rise, though perhaps in a more muted fashion. “Relative to a year ago,'’ he said, “it’s probably a little more gradual and a little more limited than it was then, largely because of factors outside our shores.'’Britain was showing healthy economic gains in 2014, raising expectations for a rate increase early this year. But concerns emerged late last year that the British economic recovery might be losing steam on the back of weakness in the eurozone and a slowing housing market.In December, the Office for National Statistics lowered its estimate for growth over the last 12 months to 2.6 percent, from 3 percent. It said the economy grew by 0.7 percent from July to September, down from 0.8 percent in the second quarter.“The worry here is that our economy is too driven by consumption and not balanced enough,” said Liz Martins, an economist for Britain at HSBC.She predicted that Britain’s gross domestic product would grow 2.4 percent in 2015, down from her previous estimate of 2.6 percent.A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Inflation in Britain Falls to 15-Year Low.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.