AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — Volkswagen moved on Wednesday to fill a key management gap created last week by repercussions from the diesel emissions scandal.The company promoted Oliver Blume, head of production at the company’s Porsche unit, to chief executive of the unit. Mr. Blume, 47, replaces Matthias Müller, who was named chief executive of Volkswagen last week.Though Porsche’s production volume is dwarfed by its parent’s, its high-priced sports cars are one of Volkswagen’s most important sources of profit. Porsche is especially crucial to the company’s health after revelations that 11 million of Volkswagen’s cars contain software designed to fool emissions tests and allow the vehicles to generate far more pollutants than allowed.There were early, tentative signs on Wednesday that the damage to Volkswagen’s reputation could begin to affect sales and profit. A German factory canceled plans to add extra shifts, and a Volkswagen unit that provides financing to car buyers said it would impose a hiring freeze.With the company in a state of shock, Volkswagen overseers were trying to determine who was responsible for decisions that led to the scandal. The executive committee of the Volkswagen supervisory board was meeting late Wednesday to receive an update on the state of an internal investigation.Many more management changes are likely as other top executives fall victim to the scandal. Several high-ranking executives have already been suspended while the company examines what role, if any, they played in allowing the illegal activity to take place.Among them is another Porsche executive, Wolfgang Hatz, head of research and development for the unit. Mr. Hatz, 56, was previously head of engines and transmissions development for the Volkswagen group. He was suspended with pay, a company spokesman said, confirming German news media reports.Porsche sold 109,000 cars in the first half of the year, only 2 percent of the Volkswagen group’s total production. But Porsche generated 25 percent of Volkswagen’s first-half operating profit of 6.8 billion euros, or $7.6 billion, because the profit margin is so high on its sports cars, which start at about $50,000 in the United States for the two-seat Boxster but can easily top $200,000.As far as is known, no Porsche vehicles contained the illegal software, and the unit has been relatively unscathed by the scandal.Mr. Blume continues Volkswagen’s practice of naming insiders to key posts. Like Mr. Müller, Mr. Blume has spent his whole career at the organization, joining the Audi unit of Volkswagen as a trainee in 1994 after pursuing a university degree in machine tool making.Mr. Blume’s name has not come up in connection with the scandal. But he was head of production planning for Volkswagen brand cars from 2009 to 2013, when the company was selling vehicles with the illegal emissions software. That past could fuel criticism that Volkswagen is not doing enough to bring in outsiders with no stake in the existing system.Mr. Blume fills the vacancy created when Mr. Müller replaced Martin Winterkorn as Volkswagen’s chief executive. Mr. Winterkorn resigned last week; he maintained that he had no knowledge of the illegal software.Volkswagen also said on Wednesday that Stephan Grühsem, head of communications for the group, would leave the company immediately. Mr. Grühsem was not implicated in the scandal but was seen as a confidant of Mr. Winterkorn. Hans-Gerd Bode, previously head of public relations at Porsche, will take over as head of communications for the parent company.Volkswagen said on Wednesday that a motor factory in Salzgitter, southwest of the company’s headquarters in Wolfsburg, would cancel plans to add extra shifts in coming weeks. The factory had planned two extra weekend shifts. No workers at the factory, one of the company’s largest, will lose their jobs or suffer a pay cut because of the decision, a Volkswagen spokesman said.In addition, Volkswagen Financial Services, which provides loans to car buyers and is based in Braunschweig near Wolfsburg, said it would impose a hiring freeze for the rest of the year and not renew the contracts of 29 temporary workers. A spokesman described the measures as precautionary.Advertisement