
UPDATED October 9, 2015

Related Article
Thomas J. Donohue, the chief executive of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, has proven a powerful ally of the tobacco industry over the past three decades. His advocacy is part of a broader transformation of the chamber into the country's largest lobbying organization. Tobacco industry records made public as part of government litigation, which are detailed below, highlight the longevity of Mr. Donohue’s ties and the extent of his work.In 1983, during Mr. Donohue’s first stint at the chamber, he wrote a letter to the chief executive Liggett & Myers, a cigarette maker, to mollify his concerns about a chamber booklet that said smoking led to workplace absenteeism. Mr. Donohue offered to let them submit new evidence for a revised version. By 1985, the industry was citing a chamber study showing no link between absenteeism and smoking. In his letter to Liggett, Mr. Donohue wrote: By 1986, Mr. Donohue was running the American Trucking Association. He created a subgroup and collected money from tobacco and alcohol companies to lobby against excise taxes. He wrote letters to House members protesting one proposal, scheduled a breakfast featuring Dick Cheney and appeared before the Senate Finance Committee in 1986 and 1987. One Lorillard document from this era referred to him as “a good friend to the Tobacco Industry.” Mr. Donohue summed up his arguments in a letter to newspaper editors, when he framed a proposed excise tax increase as a social injustice. He wrote: The tobacco industry was estranged from the chamber in the mid-1990's. One Philip Morris executive, in a letter to Mr. Donohue shortly after he returned to the chamber in 1997, complained that “there hasn't been much bang for the buck” and called the chamber “aloof and distant.” Mr. Donohue sought to change the perception, saying in a letter, that the chamber's small businesses could “provide the foot soldiers, and often the political cover, for issues big companies want pursued,” adding, “By agreeing to be such a strong supporter, you will always be heard here and will always have a voice.”He also wrote a similar letter to an executive at R.J. Reynolds: An internal Chamber memo from 1998 shows the steps the chamber took to block anti-smoking legislation proposed by Senator John McCain. By 1999, Mr. Donohue is winning accolades from the tobacco industry, as well as additional contributions. In an e-mail, a Philip Morris executive says “the chamber is doing good work.” An internal memo from the company that year also hailed the chamber's turnaround under Mr. Donohue, though it misspelled his name. In a 1999 Philip Morris internal e-mail, the company lays out its plan for a polling project of consumer sentiment on government sponsored litigation. While Philip Morris will recommend the pollster and review the questions, the chamber will be the public face of the poll. “PM stays in the background,” the company says in the memo. The chamber’s press release, which did not mention Philip Morris, began this way: Advertisement