UBS has agreed to pay $14.5 million to settle accusations by the Securities and Exchange Commission that a subsidiary violated federal securities laws in its operation of a private stock trading system known as a dark pool.The UBS subsidiary ran afoul of regulations by allowing traders to buy and sell stocks priced at increments smaller than a penny, and it further erred by failing to adequately disclose this system and another trading feature to all investors in its market, the S.E.C. said on Thursday. The settlement includes a $12 million penalty that the S.E.C. said was the largest it had ever levied against an alternative trading system.UBS, the big Swiss bank, neither admitted nor denied the agency’s findings. In a statement, the bank said it was “pleased to resolve charges by the S.E.C. arising from historical shortcomings in the operation” of the trading system.“The issues that led to these charges were remedied in mid-2012, and the firm has updated and enhanced its supervisory and operational procedures,” the UBS statement said.The case is the latest example of a long-running regulatory crackdown over the vast plumbing of the stock market. Last year, the New York State attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, accused Barclays of favoring high-frequency traders over other investors in its dark pool. Barclays has disputed the accusations and sought to have the case dismissed. Other banks, including UBS, disclosed that they were facing regulatory inquiries over their dark pools.The S.E.C. has taken action in this area as well, filing a case last year against the dark pool operator Liquidnet Holdings. But the latest charges against UBS show the agency flexing its muscles in a bigger way.“The UBS dark pool was not a level playing field for all customers and did not operate as advertised,” Andrew J. Ceresney, director of the agency’s enforcement division, said in a statement. “Our action shows our continued commitment to policing the equity markets to ensure fairness and compliance with all laws and rules.”The S.E.C. zeroed in on a UBS system called PrimaryPegPlus that let traders place orders in increments of a fraction of a penny, violating a set of rules known as Regulation National Market System, according to the agency. Placing buy orders at a fractionally higher price or sell orders at a fractionally lower price could let high-frequency trading firms unfairly jump ahead of others in the market, the S.E.C. said.In a disclosure failure, the UBS dark pool pitched this pricing system almost exclusively to high-frequency traders and similar firms, according to the S.E.C.The agency also faulted UBS’s disclosure regarding a market feature that was intended to shield orders from interaction with high-frequency traders.The existence of this shield was not disclosed to all participants in the market, and not all participants were able to use it, the S.E.C. said. It was available only to UBS clients that paid to have their trades handled through UBS’s own trading software, according to the agency.In addition to the $12 million penalty, the $14.5 million settlement includes forfeiture of $2.2 million of profit earned from the dark pool.A version of this article appears in print on 01/16/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Dark-Pool Settlement.