LONDON – The Royal Bank of Scotland is experiencing a shake-up in its compliance staff, with its general counsel and three other staff members having left or preparing to leave the bank.Chris Campbell, the lender’s group general counsel, retired last month after nearly a decade at the bank, an R.B.S. spokesman confirmed on Thursday.John Collins, the R.B.S. deputy general counsel, has succeeded Mr. Campbell as the company’s top legal officer. He previously worked as general counsel at the Dutch financial services company ABN Amro and as a lawyer at Citigroup.Carolina Garces-Monterrubio, a former compliance officer for R.B.S. for Europe, Middle East and Africa, and Mary Squire, the former head of sanctions and anti-money-laundering for the Americas, have both departed for HSBC, an HSBC spokeswoman confirmed on Thursday.Ms. Garces-Monterrubio will serve as HSBC’s global head of anti-money-laundering for its commercial bank, while Ms. Squire will serve as HSBC’s head of anti-money-laundering for the Americas.Nic Fanucci, who serves as the R.B.S. director of advisory, providing the bank with advice on managing conduct risk, is expected to leave later this year and join Standard Chartered as global head of legal and compliance for transactions and products.The Wall Street Journal reported the moves earlier on Thursday.The departures come as R.B.S., which is based in Edinburgh, and its global rivals are facing increasing legal costs associated with past improper conduct and greater regulatory scrutiny in Britain and in operations overseas.As a result, experienced compliance personnel are in great demand and increasingly becoming a bigger part of a global lender’s costs.The increased regulatory demands – often from multiple regulators – prompted Jamie Dimon, the JPMorgan Chase chief executive, to say on a conference call on Wednesday that “banks are under assault.”In October, R.B.S. warned in its third-quarter results that “ongoing conduct and regulatory investigations and litigation continue to present challenges and are expected to be a material drag on both earnings and capital generation over the coming quarters.”R.B.S. was one of a group of the world’s biggest banks that paid a combined $4.25 billion in November to settle civil inquiries by regulators in Britain, the United States and Switzerland, accusing them of conspiring to manipulate the foreign currency markets.The bank, in which the British government holds a stake of 80 percent, also continues to face higher legal costs for the improper sale of loan protection insurance, a product that has cost British banks billions of pounds in redress, and a potential fine related to its selling of mortgage securities in the United States.A version of this article appears in print on 01/16/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Departures.