Updated, 5:54 p.m. | The monthslong race for Family Dollar appeared near an end on Thursday, as Dollar General pleaded for more time to complete its $9.1 billion hostile takeover bid amid steep regulatory hurdles.In highlighting the obstacles that it still faces — principally a disagreement with the Federal Trade Commission over how many stores it would need to sell should it buy Family Dollar — Dollar General was seen by analysts as conceding defeat. That would leave Family Dollar clear to merge with a smaller rival, Dollar Tree, in an $8.5 billion deal.The statement on Thursday comes just a week before shareholders of Family Dollar are set to vote on that company’s planned $8.5 billion merger with Dollar Tree. Two prominent investor advisory firms have urged shareholders to vote in favor of the lower offer, arguing that it provides more certainty.In its announcement, Dollar General asked Family Dollar shareholders to reject the competing bid and instead support its own offer, despite not yet having won approval from the trade commission. Yet it offered no additional money to entice those investors into rejecting the agreed-upon Dollar Tree offer.Meanwhile, Dollar Tree has said that it would not abide by any more delay to a vote on its offer. Family Dollar had postponed a previous vote on the deal last month, after lacking enough support from investors.Seeking to counter Family Dollar’s contention that the F.T.C. might force the divestiture of 3,500 to 4,500 stores in such a deal, Dollar General argued that the agency was using “an untested theoretical” model to estimate the effect on consumers. Using more traditional methods to calculate competitive harm, the company argued, would show that it would have to sell less than 1,500 stores.By contrast, the trade commission at the moment thinks that 310 stores would be problematic in a merger of Family Dollar and Dollar Tree, according to Family Dollar. Dollar Tree also has offered a compromise that would bring that number down below 300.“In sum, antitrust clearance of the Dollar Tree merger on its terms and in a timely manner is a virtual certainty,” Howard Levine, Family Dollar’s chairman and chief executive, wrote in a public letter to investors this week.Instead, Dollar General said that the only way it could move forward was to sue sue the trade commission if it does not approve Dollar General’s offer within 30 days of the company declaring itself in “substantial compliance” with the agency’s rules — a move that is expected by Feb. 10. That potentially risky court fight would take months to complete.Shares of Family Dollar were down about 1.5 percent, at $75.14. Shares in Dollar General were down about 2.6 percent, at $65.87.A version of this article appears in print on 01/16/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Countermeasures.