Updated, 12:25 p.m. | BlackRock, the world’s largest money manager, continued to benefit from strong investor inflows in the fourth quarter, although the company’s growth was down slightly compared with results in the period a year earlier.The company announced on Thursday that earnings for the fourth quarter of 2014 fell more than 3 percent, to $813 million, or $4.77 a share, from $841 million, or $4.86 a share, in the period a year earlier.For the full year, the firm produced $3.3 billion in earnings, up 12 percent from 2013.Assets under management continued to rise, hitting a high of $4.6 trillion, an 8 percent increase compared with those in the quarter a year earlier.Driving the improvement, as has been the case in past quarters, were strong inflows into retail mutual funds and especially exchange-traded funds, which are securities that track a stock or bond index or a smaller basket of assets and that can be bought and sold like normal stocks.More than any other large manager, BlackRock has cashed in on the booming market for these liquid fund offerings. The company’s iShares business has quickly become its most dynamic area, as retail and institutional investors become enamored of the sector.Growth in the segment where BlackRock had its start, managing bond portfolios for large institutional investors, has been paltry by comparison.In an interview on Thursday, BlackRock’s chief executive, Laurence D. Fink, underscored that strong inflows from exchange-traded and retail funds were driving continued asset growth for the firm.He also said he was not concerned about the recent wobbles in the market or the plunging price of oil.“For some reason, the world wants to translate everything into a negative,” Mr. Fink said. “The meltdown in the oil market will translate into the largest redistribution of wealth we have seen in 20 years.”Given its immense size, BlackRock’s ability to grow as it has in the past will be constrained, not the least in an environment in which interest rates edge upward, as many expect to be the case in 2015.The slower growth in the fourth quarter — third-quarter growth for last year was up 26 percent — may well suggest a degree of caution on the part of investors in this regard.Like all asset managers, BlackRock has been a primary beneficiary of the extra loose monetary policy environment of recent years, and its robust growth has given the firm and Mr. Fink a degree of influence that surpasses his peers on Wall Street.BlackRock, to date, has also not been subjected to the regulatory scrutiny of large investment banks, which have been required to raise large amounts of cash and cut back on risky trading initiatives.That could change, though. Global financial watchdogs are looking closer these days at asset managers, and have expressed concern about their ability to unload hard-to-sell financial assets like leveraged loans, junk bonds and emerging market bonds in a broad market panic.The challenge for the firm will be its ability to navigate choppy and uncertain markets as opposed to just drawing in assets during good times.For the moment at least, the money is still rolling in.For the quarter, $23 billion flowed into BlackRock’s retail funds and $44.3 billion went into exchange-traded funds.Last year, BlackRock captured 31 percent of the record $330 billion investors poured into exchange-traded funds. The share going into E.T.F. bond funds, BlackRock’s specialty, was even larger, at 48 percent.Although exchange-traded funds represent just 23 percent of funds BlackRock has under management — institutional investors take up the largest share, at 65 percent — the asset class has become one the firm’s top fee generators.BlackRock has consistently said that the firm’s ability to meet its ambitious target of 5 percent internal growth will depend on its ability to keep raking in E.T.F. money.BlackRock manages more equity as opposed to bond assets, but it has struggled to secure a reputation as world-class stock picker.Over the last five years, only 41 percent of the firm’s actively managed funds have beat their benchmark indexes. By contrast, 87 percent of the firm’s managed bond funds are performing better than their benchmarks.Mr. Fink accepted that BlackRock needed to do better in improving its stock-picking skills. And he pointed to the firm’s Aladdin initiative — a technology platform that aims to improve how BlackRock portfolio managers share trading information and react to risk — as a step in that direction.“Most firms fail because they are not sharing information across platforms,” Mr. Fink said. “This is where we are differentiating ourselves.”A version of this article appears in print on 01/16/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: BlackRock Profit Slips Despite Rise in Assets.