Updated, 7:27 p.m. | A steeper than expected trading slowdown dented Citigroup’s earnings in the fourth quarter, contributing to the bank’s failure to meet analysts’ profit expectations and raising a fresh round of questions about the future of the Wall Street trading machine.Citigroup said revenue from trading in fixed-income markets, which includes trading in currencies and commodities, fell 16 percent from a year ago. It was not the only large bank to report disappointing results in the last three months of the year. This week, Bank of America and JPMorgan Chase also reported weaker earnings than analysts had expected.Over all, Citigroup said its profit fell 86 percent to $350 million, or 6 cents a share, from $2.5 billion, or 77 cents a share, in the period a year earlier. The most recent earnings fell short of analysts’ expectations of 9 cents a share.Uneven trading revenue reflects how much of Wall Street’s success rests on events that are becoming harder to predict, like the movement of interest rates.Wild swings in the fixed-income markets at the end of last year hurt Citigroup, one of the nation’s largest banks by assets, in a few ways.The bank’s chief financial officer, John C. Gerspach, said many clients were not willing to place trades because they had little confidence in where the markets would ultimately settle. The bank also suffered some losses on trades it had placed for clients but ended up having to hold in its inventory at the end of the year.Typically, banks can profit from volatility when clients like hedge funds and other large investors pounce on market moves and place big trades.But Mr. Gerspach said that over the last few years, the markets have been roiled by “volatile volatility” as investors have become regularly confused by conflicting signals about the direction of currencies and commodity prices.“It tends to drive people to the sidelines because no one is able to take a view of how they should take a position,” Mr. Gerspach said in a conference call on Thursday.Trading wasn’t the only issue weighing on Citigroup’s earnings. As it warned last month, the bank reported legal and revamping expenses in the fourth quarter of $3.5 billion, as the costs rose for settling investigations into the manipulation of currencies and interest rates and as the bank downsized parts of its business.Citigroup executives said its legal problems masked an otherwise productive year. The bank made progress in shedding unwanted assets across the world, like the sale of its consumer businesses in Spain and Greece, closing bank branches in the United States and generally simplifying its structure. Bank executives said many of the bank’s major legal and revamping costs were behind it.Some investors seemed unconvinced of that rosy view. Citigroup’s shares fell $1.82, or almost 4 percent, to close at $47.23.More than many other large United States banks, Citigroup has a sprawling global operation, which is supposed to supply the bank with a diverse range of revenue sources but can also leave it vulnerable to currency fluctuations.In the fourth quarter, the value of the revenue it generated in some countries was lower after being converted into dollars; the dollar has strengthened against many other currencies. The impact of the strong dollar decreased Citigroup’s revenue by $458 million from the year-earlier period.The next big move for Citigroup will come when the Federal Reserve decides whether to approve the bank’s capital plan. After the bank failed to pass the Fed’s annual stress test last year, many analysts say this year’s test could prove a make-or-break moment for the bank’s leadership. Michael L. Corbat, the chief executive, said the bank submitted its capital plan to the Fed last week.“We believe the submission reflects the progress we have made,” Mr. Corbat said. “We’re fully committed to sustaining and building on these gains.”A version of this article appears in print on 01/16/2015, on page B3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Citi Profit Plunges on Weak Trading and Legal Costs.