Bank of America reported uninspiring fourth-quarter results on Thursday, saying its earnings fell to $3.05 billion, or 25 cents a share, from $3.44 billion, or 29 cents a share, in the period a year earlier, DealBook’s Peter Eavis reports. Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters had forecast that the bank would earn 31 cents a share in the latest quarter.The lower earnings reflected a weaker performance in some core businesses like trading and mortgage banking. In the fourth quarter, Bank of America posted tax-equivalent revenue of $19 billion, a 12 percent decline from $21.7 billion in the period a year earlier. Analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters had expected $20.9 billion. For all of 2014, Bank of America reported $4.8 billion in net income, nearly a 60 percent plunge from $11.4 billion in 2013.After JPMorgan Chase reported sluggish earnings and potential new legal costs on Wednesday, Jamie Dimon, the bank’s chief executive, lashed out at regulators and analysts, including some who are calling for the breakup of what is the nation’s biggest bank. “Banks are under assault,” he said during a conference call with reporters. “In the old days, you dealt with one regulator when you had an issue. Now it’s five or six. You should all ask the question about how American that is, how fair that is.”Citigroup is set to report fourth-quarter earnings at 8 a.m.NEW RULES SOUGHT ON REPORTING DATA BREACHES  |  Across the United States, companies are not required to report data breaches if they are limited to the theft of email addresses and passwords. But on Thursday, Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York attorney general, intends to propose a bill that would expand his state’s definition of what constitutes the type of private information whose breach would require a disclosure to include email addresses and passwords, DealBook’s Matthew Goldstein writes. Companies would be required to keep this data secure and notify consumers and employees in the event of a cyberattack or other data breach involving that information.The proposal comes after several prominent corporate breaches, including those at Target, JPMorgan Chase and Sony Pictures. The New York bill would reward businesses for taking steps to protect personal information and cooperating quickly with New York authorities in the event of a breach. It would also provide them some protection from liability in civil lawsuits if they can demonstrate having taken adequate steps to protect private information from being hacked or inadvertently released.Mr. Schneiderman is part of a group of about 15 state attorneys general who have been conducting an investigation into last summer’s cyberattack at JPMorgan Chase that affected 83 million consumers and small businesses. The attorneys general want the bank to explain how it can be certain that no sensitive account information was compromised. The group, led by the state attorneys general from Illinois and Connecticut, sent a letter on Jan. 8 to JPMorgan and its outside lawyers seeking more details about the nature of the breach and what measures the bank is taking to prevent a similar incident.HOW TO PRESERVE DODD-FRANK  |  During all of their fights against financial reform and Dodd-Frank, the banks have had a stalwart ally: Establishment Democrats, Jesse Eisinger writes in his column, The Trade. “The lack of sweeping financial reform begins at the top. President Obama did not back such a vision, and his administration has repeatedly put forward nominees with Wall Street connections for major oversight roles,” he writes. “If the Obama administration had taken a different stance, financial reform would have been stronger.”The Obama administration now faces a choice in the next two years, he adds. One is to fight a series of rear-guard actions on any specific Dodd-Frank provision the Republicans choose to make a target. Or President Obama and his administration could “go big,” Mr. Eisinger writes, arguing clearly and publicly that the banks have not learned their lesson from the financial crisis and have obstructed the reform process. The president could then call for a significant overhaul of the financial system.Mr. Eisinger adds: “It is by no means easy to fight this industry, especially in the face of Democrats worried about holding on to their diminishing share of its campaign cash. The alternative is to see a capstone achievement crumble.”ON THE AGENDA  |  Weekly jobless claims are out at 8:30 a.m. The producer price index for final demand comes out at 8:30 a.m. The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries publishes its monthly oil market report at 7 a.m.BLACKBERRY’S WILD RIDE  |  A report on Wednesday from Reuters that Samsung had recently offered to buy BlackBerry for as much as $7.5 billion sent BlackBerry’s stock soaring 30 percent, to $12.60 a share. The Reuters report, which cites an unidentified person and documents, said that Samsung had proposed an initial offer price of $13.35 to $15.49 a share, representing a premium of at least 37 percent over BlackBerry’s closing price on Tuesday. Not so fast.Soon after, BlackBerry denied the report, sending its stock down as much as 17 percent, to $10.50 a share, in late trading in New York. In a statement, BlackBerry said: “BlackBerry has not engaged in discussions with Samsung with respect to any possible offer to purchase BlackBerry.” As Bloomberg News noted, the statement did not specify whether BlackBerry had received a proposal from Samsung.  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailShareholder Adviser I.S.S. Backs Family Dollar Sale to Dollar Tree  |  Institutional Shareholder Services has urged Family Dollar shareholders to approve the $8.5 billion deal with Dollar Tree, saying that Dollar General’s bid, while higher, remains too risky. DealBook »Investors Said to Push Aegerion to Consider Sale  |  A number of the top investors in Aegerion Pharmaceuticals, based in Cambridge, Mass., are pushing the drug company to oust is chief executive and consider selling itself after a yearlong slump in its stock price, Reuters writes, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.  REUTERS BGC Partners Raises Offer for GFI Group  |  BGC Partners, based in New York, raised its offer again for the GFI Group to $5.60 a share in a bid to stymie the CME Group’s plans to buy the company, The Wall Street Journal writes. BGC’s latest offer represents a 7 percent premium over the $5.25 a share stock-and-cash deal announced by CME and GFI on Dec. 2.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Chinese Firm to Buy Louvre Hotels Group  |  Shanghai Jin Jiang International Hotels, one of China’s biggest hotel groups, is planning to acquire the Louvre Hotels Group of France, the second-biggest European hotel group, for up to $1.43 billion, The Wall Street Journal writes.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Wells Fargo Posts Gains, Meeting Forecasts  |  Profit rose 2 percent, to $5.71 billion, and revenue increased 4 percent as the bank continued to lend more money and decrease the amount it set aside to cover soured loans. DealBook »House Passes Measure to Ease Some Dodd-Frank Rules  |  The bill would delay by two years a Dodd-Frank requirement that financial firms sell off bundled debt, known as collateralized loan obligations; exempt some private equity firms from registering with the Securities and Exchange Commission; loosen regulations on derivatives; and allow some small, publicly traded companies to omit historical financial data from their financial filings.  NEW YORK TIMES Edmond de Rothschild Group Names Chairman’s Wife as C.E.O.  |  Ariane de Rothschild will serve as chairwoman of the private bank’s executive committee, succeeding Christophe de Backer after he steps down as chief executive at the end of the month. DealBook »Caesars Unit Files for Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Protection  |  TPG and Apollo Global Management are hoping to use the bankruptcy to salvage as much as they can, but they are facing opposition from some of Wall Street’s biggest investors. DealBook »RadioShack Said to Prepare Bankruptcy Filing  |  RadioShack is said to be preparing to file for bankruptcy protection as early as next month and is in talks with a private equity firm that could buy its assets out of bankruptcy, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Ackman Distances Pershing Square From Rivals  |  William A. Ackman of Pershing Square Capital Management told The Financial Times that his investment style differed from that of his competitors and contended that his new closed ended fund, listed in Amsterdam, was a further break with the sector.  FINANCIAL TIMES Former SAC Executive Said to Reach $1 Billion for New Fund  |  Solomon Kumin, who was the chief operating officer at Steven A. Cohen’s SAC Capital Advisors, is said to be on track to secure $1 billion for his hedge fund firm, Folger Hill Asset Management, when it starts trading in March, Bloomberg News writes, citing an unidentified person familiar with the matter.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Etsy’s Chief Hinted at I.P.O.  |  Chad Dickerson, the chief executive of Etsy, which is reported to be planning an initial public offering, told The Washington Post in November that “being a public company could be an outcome for Etsy.”  WASHINGTON POST Study Highlights Silicon Valley’s Powerful Economic Mix  |  A local research group, in a study supported by area businesses, said that the Silicon Valley economy had many upsides but that government should invest more in schools and impose regulations on businesses, the Bits blog writes.  NEW YORK TIMES BITS Investors Put $186 Million Into Lynda.com, an Online Tutorial Service  |  The first major financing deal of the year in education technology dwarfs the biggest deals in the sector last year.  NEW YORK TIMES BITS Snapchat Said to Ask Brands for $750,000 to Advertise  |  The messaging start-up is said to have approached top brands to buy ads, but some say the asking price is too high, AdWeek reports, citing unidentified industry sources.  ADWEEK Chinese Taxi App Raises $600 Million  |  SoftBank of Japan said that it and other firms, including the Alibaba Group, had invested about $600 million in Travice, which operates the Chinese taxi hailing app Kuaidi Dache, Reuters writes.  REUTERS Bigger Settlement Said to Be Reached in Silicon Valley Antitrust Case  |  Apple, Google, Intel and Adobe are said to be offering $415 million to settle accusations that they conspired against their own employee, The New York Times writes.  NEW YORK TIMES Mutual Fund Billionaire Accused of Fraud in Suit  |  A suit contends that Charles B. Johnson helped conceal $150 million in Franklin Resources shares and dividends that were intended to go to the heir of an early investor. DealBook »Americans Pocketing What They Save on Gas, Retail Data Suggests  |  Even accounting for the decline in gas prices, the slump surprised analysts, suggesting consumers were saving more instead of spending, The New York Times writes.  NEW YORK TIMES Devil May Be in the Details on European Central Bank Bond-Buying  |  A widely expected stimulus program will be a test of whether the institution and its president can walk a fine political line and show their resolve, The New York Times writes.  NEW YORK TIMES  India’s Central Banker in Defense Mode  |  Raghuram G. Rajan, the governor of the Reserve Bank of India, finds himself the subject of a political struggle in India as he reduces a benchmark rate, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMES Federal Agents Raid Firm Linked to ‘Wolf of Wall Street’  |  Federal agents raided the medical device firm Med-Care Diabetic and Medical Supplies, based in Florida, which employs a man who inspired the character played by Jonah Hill in the movie “The Wolf of Wall Street,” a lawyer for the company said. Med-Care was accused in a whistle-blower lawsuit last year of participating in a scheme to submit false claims to Medicare.  BLOOMBERG NEWSSign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 