Updated, 7:34 p.m. | Bank of America on Thursday reported fourth-quarter results that fell short of expectations, sending a lackluster signal about the state of banking and the wider economy.Profit fell 11 percent, to $3.05 billion, or 25 cents a share, from $3.44 billion, or 29 cents a share, in the period a year earlier. Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters had forecast earnings of 31 cents a share in the latest quarter.The most recent earnings were reduced by 7 cents a share by arcane financial adjustments that the analysts might not have fully factored into their estimates.But beneath the noise in the numbers, there were few signs of full-throated revival in Bank of America’s sprawling collection of businesses.In the fourth quarter, Bank of America posted tax-equivalent revenue of $19 billion, a 12 percent decline from $21.7 billion in the period a year earlier. Analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters had expected $20.9 billion. The financial adjustments also weighed on revenue.Brian T. Moynihan, the bank’s chief executive, nevertheless sought to sound an optimistic note. “There’s more work and tremendous opportunity ahead as we improve on the platform we’ve built to serve our customers and clients,” he said in a statement, “and we enter 2015 in good shape to manage both the opportunities and the challenges the markets and economy will offer.”The financial adjustments came from two main sources. The first has to do with Bank of America’s bond holdings. Banks often pay more for bonds than they stand to get back when the bonds mature. The banks then must recognize that embedded loss over the life of the bond. In the fourth quarter, a drop in interest rates increased the pace at which Bank of America had to recognize those potential losses. The other was an accounting adjustment related to how it finances certain derivatives.The results of Bank of America, the nation’s second-largest bank by assets after JPMorgan Chase, provide valuable insights into both Wall Street and Main Street. And they suggest that lending to consumers remains lukewarm. The outstanding totals for every type of consumer loan fell at Bank of America in 2014. Over all, the bank had consumer loans of $489 billion at the end of last year, down $43 billion, or 8 percent, from $532 billion at the end of 2013.The revenue that the bank derives from originating mortgages also slowed. In the fourth quarter, it totaled $297 million, a 26 percent slide from $404 million in the period a year earlier.The bank’s loans to United States companies did grow last year, but that growth may come under pressure as the decline in the price of oil has reduced the demand for credit among energy companies.Bruce R. Thompson, Bank of America’s chief financial officer, said on a call with reporters that a “preponderance” of the bank’s exposure to energy companies is to businesses with higher credit ratings. He said the bank had run tests to assess its vulnerability to the decline in oil prices. “We feel very good about where we are,” Mr. Thompson said.Wall Street offered few bright spots for Bank of America. Investment banking revenue of $830 million was down from the year-earlier period, but it was up from the third quarter.Bank of America’s wealth-management unit, which includes Merrill Lynch, has performed strongly in recent years. But in the fourth quarter, its earnings fell to $706 million from $778 million in the year-earlier period, in part because of higher costs.There was some unequivocally good news for Bank of America, however. The financial pain from the housing crash is fading rapidly. For several years after the financial crisis of 2008, the bank was burdened with huge losses on mortgages and large legal payouts. But there were no outsize legal charges in the fourth quarter. The bank has also managed to sharply cut the expenses in the unit that services troubled mortgages that were made before the crisis.Bank of America shareholders will hope the bank passes the Federal Reserve’s stress test this year without a hitch. Last year, the Fed suspended Bank of America’s plans for buying back stock after the bank found errors in how it calculated a measure of its capital. Mr. Thompson declined to say on Thursday whether Bank of America had asked the Fed to sign off on buybacks this year.A version of this article appears in print on 01/16/2015, on page B3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Bank of America Profit Falls 11%, Hurt by Consumer Loans and Investment Banking.