
The casino operator Caesars Entertainment was locked in a bitter standoff with some creditors on Thursday after it put its largest unit into bankruptcy.Caesars — which has labored under a mountain of debt since it was acquired by two private equity firms for about $30 billion in 2008 — filed to put the unit into Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in Chicago on Thursday morning, a move that forged ahead with a planned restructuring over the creditors’ forceful objections.But before it could begin in earnest, the Chicago bankruptcy process was halted by a judge in Wilmington, Del., who is overseeing a rival attempt by the creditors to force the Caesars unit into a separate bankruptcy on their terms.The dueling plans for the unit, Caesars Entertainment Operating Company, set the stage for an unusual fight that will be waged in the weeds of the bankruptcy code. The two private equity owners of Caesars, TPG and Apollo Global Management, are hoping to use a bankruptcy to salvage as much as they can from what has become a money-losing morass.Doing so will be a challenge. Caesars and its private equity backers are facing off with some of Wall Street’s biggest investment firms, including Oaktree Capital Management and Appaloosa Management, which have opposed their plans in behind-the-scenes talks in recent months and then in court filings this week.The question of jurisdiction arose on Monday, when the dissident creditors, which own bonds with a lower priority ranking, filed a petition for an involuntary bankruptcy in Delaware. They contend that a restructuring plan promoted by Caesars would treat them unfairly, and they appear to be betting that a Delaware bankruptcy would give them more legal advantages. Delaware courts are known to be friendlier to Wall Street investors, legal experts say.
PhotoCaesars Palace in Las Vegas. The company said it filed for bankruptcy in Chicago because several of its casinos are in the Midwest.Credit John Locher/Associated Press
Chicago courts, by contrast, have a reputation for a narrow interpretation of the bankruptcy code, said Jason Kilborn, a professor at the John Marshall Law School in Chicago. That, in theory, could help protect the Caesars parent company and its affiliates from lawsuits. (Caesars says it chose Chicago because several of its casinos are in the Midwest.)“The Delaware courts tend to take a very sophisticated, very permissive attitude toward ‘what can we make happen?’ ” Mr. Kilborn said. Chicago courts, he added, “seem to be searching for restrictions on what they can do.”The Caesars unit, which listed about $12.4 billion in total assets and $19.9 billion in liabilities in its filing on Thursday, has a key advantage going into the bankruptcy process. Most of the holders of first-lien bonds, which have a higher priority ranking, have agreed to the restructuring plan, providing Caesars with a powerful argument to use when presenting the plan in court.Whatever the outcome, the bankruptcy of the unit — which owns Caesars Palace in Las Vegas as well as numerous other casinos and hotels around the country — provides a vivid demonstration of the risks of buying companies by loading them up with debt. Caesars, whose buyout was emblematic of private equity’s golden age before the financial crisis, has since become a symbol of that industry’s excesses.While not a failure on the order of Energy Future Holdings, the Texas utility that was the subject of a $45 billion leveraged buyout and is now in bankruptcy, Caesars has created an enormous headache for TPG and Apollo. TPG said in a confidential prospectus last year that the value of its investment in Caesars had declined 12 percent as of June 30.With Caesars suffering as consumers cut back on gambling during the recession, the owners refinanced the company’s debt and engaged in maneuvers to shift assets and rejigger the corporate structure. The moves bought time, but they did not stanch the financial bleeding. The parent company has not reported an annual profit since 2009.Now Caesars is hoping to sharply reduce its debt through a bankruptcy of the operating company, its most indebted unit. Under the restructuring plan, the unit would reduce its debt to about $8.6 billion from a total of $18.4 billion, cutting annual interest payments to about $450 million from $1.7 billion. The unit would also undergo a corporate transformation, becoming a real estate investment trust with an operating entity and a property company.On Thursday, the Delaware judge, Kevin Gross, allowed an effort by the creditors to delay the Chicago bankruptcy process, pending a decision over the jurisdiction. The judge said the Caesars unit could carry out only preliminary tasks in Chicago, like making it possible to continue paying employees. The company plans to keep its operations open as normal.A version of this article appears in print on 01/16/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Filing Begins a Complex Bankruptcy Battle for Caesars.