By KEITH BRADSHERJAN. 14, 2015
MUMBAI — India’s central bank unexpectedly cut its benchmark short-term interest rates Thursday morning by a quarter percentage point as steeply falling prices for oil and other commodities have helped bring inflation under control and allowed the bank to focus more on allowing faster economic growth.Raghuram G. Rajan, the central bank’s chief, strongly hinted in an interview on Wednesday that the next move would be to cut interest rates, but gave no indication that he would act before the bank’s next regularly scheduled review on Feb. 3.The steep fall in world oil prices since the bank’s last interest rate review on Dec. 2 has been a big benefit for India, which relies almost entirely on imports for its oil and had been spending roughly $100 billion a year before oil prices plummeted. But Mr. Rajan remained cautious, saying that “the oil prices will impact us, but we have to make a judgment how long that will last.”Industrialists and some of their allies in the government of Prime Minister Narendra Modi have been pressing for lower interest rates, even as Mr. Modi and his top allies, notably the finance minister, Arun Jaitley, have continued to back Mr. Rajan. In Wednesday’s interview, in a meeting room atop the Reserve Bank’s headquarters overlooking Mumbai’s financial district, Mr. Rajan said several times that he was not being pressed by New Delhi to change course.Advertisement“I don’t feel pressure — I feel I’m doing what is needed, and the government trusts me with that responsibility,” he said.AdvertisementIn a news release on Thursday morning after dropping the benchmark rate to 7.75 percent, Mr. Rajan hinted at further interest rate reductions to come. He noted that when he left interest rates unchanged on Dec. 2, despite some calls even then from industrialists for a rate cut, his accompanying policy statement had said that, “once the monetary policy stance shifts, subsequent policy actions will be consistent with this stance.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Modi’s government has been trying to simplify and streamline India’s complex regulations for mining, land deals, large construction projects and foreign investment. Mr. Rajan’s statement on Thursday indicated that if such efforts strengthened the economy and made it more efficient, further rate cuts would be more likely.“Key to further easing are data that confirm continuing disinflationary pressures,” he said. “Also critical would be sustained high quality fiscal consolidation as well as steps to overcome supply constraints and assure availability of key inputs such as power, land, minerals and infrastructure.”In addition to cheaper oil, prices have fallen faster than expected for fruits and vegetables in India since September, and pressures that would increase cereals prices have ebbed, Mr. Rajan noted on Thursday morning.Chandrajit Banerjee, the director general of the Confederation of Indian Industry, the one of the country’s biggest lobbies, said in a news release that the rate cut had “come as a positive surprise in the new year and would be a huge mood lifter for investors who have been grappling with subdued demand conditions.”India’s overnight interest rates had been far higher than those in almost any other large economy, but that was partly because India still had some inflation, even as many countries have begun worrying about deflation. But even in India, inflation has recently been below the Reserve Bank of India’s targets, with consumer prices up 5 percent in December from a year earlier.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Suddenly, India Cuts Interest Rates.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.