By AARON M. KESSLERJAN. 14, 2015
DETROIT — The automobile industry has spent the last century trying to forge a visceral connection between drivers and their cars. On Wednesday, the head of Google’s driverless-car program came here to declare much of that bond may soon be a thing of the past.Chris Urmson, director of self-driving cars at Google, acknowledged that a certain percentage of consumers are “really passionate about the driving experience” and take pleasure in muscular performance and steering through curves.“But a lot of people buy a car because they want to get from one place to another,” he said.Google hopes to have fully autonomous vehicles on the road by 2020, taking the driver completely out of the equation and handing the virtual wheel to its sophisticated combination of software and sensors, which continue to improve and evolve, Mr. Urmson said. He stressed the potential to “transform people’s lives through mobility,” citing cases of blind and older drivers who would suddenly have more freedom.The Silicon Valley search giant is exploring the idea of teaming up with a traditional automaker to manufacture such a car, he said, and is already in discussions with a number of them. Google is also leaving the possibility open of either licensing its systems or otherwise acting more like a supplier to the industry for self-driving technologies.AdvertisementThe company has already established relationships with some of the automotive world’s largest suppliers, and its fleet of small test cars – devoid of a steering wheel or pedals – were built in Michigan by the German supplier Bosch. Google plans to soon deploy such cars in locations around the country to further test their potential, which Mr. Urmson demonstrated on Wednesday at a conference sponsored by Automotive News.AdvertisementDisplayed on a video screen, a look inside the brain of a Google self-driving car was a colorful palette of green, purple and yellow digital shapes that acted as the car’s virtual “vision” of the world around it as it traveled down the road. Fed by laser, radar and camera sensors, it strives to create a 360-degree awareness and decipher situations human drivers already understand.For example, Mr. Urmson cited instances like recognizing the cones of a construction site and knowing that one lane is about to close, or understanding at a railroad crossing that it is dangerous to stop on the tracks. (In traffic, the Google car is programmed to wait until it can fully cross over). Currently, the company’s software can also recognize things like stop signs, school buses and police cars, and adapt the car’s behavior.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.How governments themselves will adapt to a world that includes driverless cars remains in flux. Mr. Urmson raised eyebrows this week by suggesting that Google does not believe it needs permission from federal safety officials to move ahead with deploying self-driving cars on many American roads.While he took pains to say that the company was working closely with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and the “worst thing we could do is cross them,” he said Google did not believe there was currently a “regulatory block” that would prohibit self-driving cars, provided the vehicles themselves met crash-test and other safety standards.“I think if you ask N.H.T.S.A., they would say they’re not a permission-granting organization,” he said, adding that rather, “they enforce existing regulations.”At the state level, several states like California have already developed rules to allow self-driving cars – though other states have said that their current laws do not necessarily prohibit them in the first place, since no one had envisioned the idea of a car without a driver.A spokesman for the N.H.T.S.A., Gordon Trowbridge, said that “just like any car built for use on U.S. roads, any autonomous vehicle would need to meet applicable federal motor vehicle safety standards, which falls under N.H.T.S.A.’s jurisdiction.”“The agency will have the appropriate policies and regulations in place to ensure the safety of these types of vehicles,” Mr. Trowbridge said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.