By STEPHANIE STROMJAN. 14, 2015
Signs have gone up in about 600 Chipotle Mexican Grill restaurants, informing customers that no carnitas will be served.The fast-growing restaurant chain announced on Tuesday that it had suspended a major pork supplier after a routine audit found that it had failed to meet the company’s standards for animal welfare. “Without this pork, we cannot get enough pork that meets our Responsibly Raised standard for all our restaurants, and we will not be able to serve carnitas in some locations,” Chipotle said in a statement, referring to its standards for the humane treatment of livestock.It declined to identify the supplier but said it would work with the supplier, if asked, to help it bring its operations into compliance with Chipotle’s requirements.Carnitas, which means “little meats” in Spanish, are typically made from pork shoulder, braised in oil for several hours and then shredded. Chipotle, which has more than 1,700 stores around the country, offers carnitas in its burritos and on its burrito bowls and tacos. Chris Arnold, a company spokesman, said in an email that carnitas account for about 6 percent of the chain’s sales and that the company has begun testing pork loin to see if it might serve as a substitute for shoulder.AdvertisementThe chain is popular with millennials, a coveted demographic group for food companies, as well as with consumers who like the option of ordering a meal with exactly the ingredients they want in it. Chipotle’s philosophy, which it calls Food With Integrity, encompasses issues that a growing number of consumers say they care about, such as the humane treatment of animals and labeling items on its menu that contain genetically engineered ingredients.AdvertisementThis is not the first time Chipotle has run short on supplies. Last March, it was forced to respond to reports that it might have to suspend guacamole from its menu because of a possible shortage of avocados, and a year earlier, it informed diners in some restaurants that the beef they were eating was conventionally raised, rather than raised without antibiotics, because it could not obtain the needed quantities of antibiotic-free meat.That is not an option for pork, Mr. Arnold said, because the company’s animal welfare standards for pigs raised outdoors or with ample, clean bedding is so different from pigs raised in industrial settings. In comparison, beef cattle, whether raised conventionally or under humane standards, generally live outside and are allowed to roam.“Conventionally raised pigs generally do not have access to the outdoors, spend their lives in densely crowded buildings, live on hard slatted floors with no bedding and no ability to root, and are given antibiotics to keep them from getting sick,” the company said in its statement. “We would rather not serve pork at all than serve pork from animals that are raised in this way.”The news caused the phones at Niman Ranch to ring all day long, as reporters sought to identify which supplier had been suspended. Niman, which is Chipotle’s largest supplier of pork, said it was not the supplier in question and instead had already increased its shipments to the restaurant chain by 15 to 20 percent to help make up for the shortfall.“They don’t use an entire animal,” said Jeff Tripician, executive vice president at Niman. “They use pieces and parts, and we’re working to determine whether there are other parts of the pig that would also work and thus give them even more supply.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He said Chipotle called Niman over the weekend to tell it about the problem. Demand for pork from pigs raised with access to the outdoors, enough bedding and no gestation crates is rising faster than farmers can keep up with it. “If I double the number of hog farms in our system tomorrow, I think we would be sold out pretty soon,” Mr. Tripician said.Niman is one of the largest suppliers of such pork, which it also sells, along with beef, to other fast-growing chains like Au Bon Pain, Panera Bread and Shake Shack.In the quarter that ended Sept. 30, Chipotle’s same-store sales rose 19.8 percent, compared with McDonald’s — which has 14,000 stores in the United States — whose global same-store sales declined 3.3 percent.Advertisement“There aren’t very many of us who could come up with that kind of supply,” said Michael Yezzi, the proprietor of Flying Pigs Farm, in the Hudson Valley of New York, which sells about 1,000 outdoor-raised pigs a year and is not a Chipotle supplier.Mr. Yezzi said a typical whole shoulder of the sort Chipotle uses for its carnitas weighs about 50 pounds with the bone in, which would supply between 25 and 30 pounds of meat. “If you figure each serving is about two ounces, that means you’d get eight to 10 servings from a pound, or something like 300 servings” from one shoulder, he said. “Then think about how many servings Chipotle might have in a day.”Chipotle also buys from small and midsize suppliers like Polyface Farms in Virginia, but as the chain has grown, it has had to rely on larger businesses. DuBreton, a Canadian meat company, is a Chipotle supplier, but the Chipotle spokesman said that it was not the one that had been suspended. Premium Iowa Pork, another large supplier of antibiotic-free, humanely raised pork to Chipotle, did not return calls to its office, and its executives did not respond to emails.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: After Suspending Supplier, Chipotle Takes Pork Off Menu in 600 Stores.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.