By RAVI SOMAIYAJAN. 14, 2015
Readers in America clamoring for the latest copy of the French satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo will probably struggle to find one the next few days, its distributors and stores seeking the latest issue said Wednesday.There were long lines in Paris early Wednesday waiting for a special issue of the paper, the first since masked gunmen stormed into the offices of the newspaper last week and killed 12 people, in apparent revenge for its publishing cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad. But Charlie Hebdo is not generally stocked in the United States, said Michel Salion, a spokesman for its French distributor, MLP.After the attack on Jan. 8, he said, MLP received an order for 300 copies of the next issue from the United States, which it has shipped. When Charlie Hebdo announced that it would print a special issue, which was released in France this week, a further order for 1,300 came in, he said, and they will be put on a plane on Thursday morning in Paris.That number represents a tiny fraction of what will be printed in Europe — up to five million copies, Mr. Salion said.AdvertisementAt Albertine, a bookstore on the Upper East Side of Manhattan devoted to French works, calls were being answered by a machine on Wednesday. “Due to the volume of calls about Charlie Hebdo,” the message says, “we’re not answering the phone.”AdvertisementA spokeswoman for the store said that it had received more than 500 requests but that she was not providing detailed information on the availability of the newspaper because it was not clear how many copies Albertine would get, and when.Book Culture, a small chain on the Upper West Side of Manhattan near Columbia University, has been “trying like mad” to get 1,000 copies, said its owner, Chris Doeblin. “We would easily sell 1,000 in our store just over the weekend,” he said, citing requests by phone and from people walking into the store.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hudson News, one of the biggest distributors in the Northeast, has also received requests for Charlie Hebdo, said a spokeswoman, Laura Samuels. The company made inquiries to its distributors, she said, but found no available copies, and will “wait and see,” she said. “This is not a normal, business-as-usual situation, as you can imagine.”Emmanuel Saint-Martin, who runs the Francophone magazine French Morning, has been acting as an unofficial liaison for obtaining copies, he said, including persuading airlines like Air France to help transport copies to the United States. None have arrived yet, he said. An app version of the issue, for Apple devices, Android and Windows tablets, which offers translations in English, Spanish and Arabic, will be available on Thursday, he said, which may take off some of the pressure for physical copies.The new issue shows a crying Prophet Muhammad holding a placard with the phrase “Je Suis Charlie” or “I Am Charlie,” which has been adopted as a slogan for solidarity since the attack. Though he appears under a headline that reads “All Is Forgiven," some have criticized the newspaper for again featuring Muhammad, who some Muslims believe should never be depicted.For the bookstore Albertine, the spokeswoman said, security had been stepped up since the attack anyway, because the store is in the same building as the cultural services division of the French embassy.Ms. Samuels, the Hudson News spokeswoman, said the company would address security concerns if and when it obtained copies of the newspaper.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.