By RAVI SOMAIYAJAN. 14, 2015
The Mexican billionaire Carlos Slim Helú has more than doubled his stake in The New York Times Company, to nearly 17 percent, the company said on Wednesday.Mr. Slim exercised warrants to acquire nearly 16 million shares of the company’s Class A stock at a price of over $6.36 a share, the company said, increasing his stake from 7 percent. He now owns nearly 28 million shares in total.The company received more than $100 million in the transaction, it said, which it intends to use to repurchase Class A shares — a different category from the controlling Class B shares held by the Sulzberger family.Mr. Slim, who made his money in telecommunications across Latin America, is one of the world’s richest people, worth about $72 billion, according to Forbes. He lent the Times Company $250 million, at an interest rate of 14 percent, in 2009; at the time, with the world economy struggling and credit tight, the company looked to be in peril. The loan was repaid in 2011, more than three years before it was due. But the warrants, which expired this month, were issued in connection with that deal.Advertisement“The option is a lower price,” Mr. Slim said in an interview with Reuters last July. “I’m sure we should exercise the option, but we look at it like a financial investment that has been very good.”AdvertisementThe company’s shares ended trading on Wednesday at $12.28.The Times Company’s chief executive, Mark Thompson, said in a statement that a repurchasing of shares was the best use of the cash from Mr. Slim.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We believe it is in the best interests of the company to continue to maintain a conservative balance sheet, and a prudent view on the allocation of free cash flow,” he said, “and this one-off repurchase program should not be viewed as a change of position about our capital allocation plans.”The company recently completed a round of buyouts and layoffs in the newsroom of The New York Times after a year of tumult. Last May, Jill Abramson was dismissed as executive editor and replaced with her deputy, Dean Baquet.New ventures like iPhone apps failed to generate significant immediate revenue. Though its digital subscriptions have grown, The Times has been scrambling to make up for the declines in lucrative print advertising that have rocked traditional news organizations as online outlets, and social media, have proliferated.In a call with analysts late last year, Mr. Thompson said the new products reflected a desire to be “unashamedly experimental and willing to adapt.” The chief financial officer, James M. Follo, said the company was “still in the early stages of a multiyear transformation.”Since taking over the newsroom leadership, Mr. Baquet has invested in an audience development team with the aim of broadening the reach of Times journalism.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Mexican Investor More Than Doubles His Stake in Times Company.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.