By PATRICIA COHENJAN. 14, 2015
Services to taxpayers are likely to drop to their worst levels since 2001, when the Internal Revenue Service first started measuring its performance, the agency’s taxpayer advocate said in her annual report released on Wednesday.Five years of budget-cutting have “brought about a devastating erosion of taxpayer service, harming taxpayers individually and collectively,” wrote Nina E. Olson, who leads the Taxpayer Advocate Service, an independent office within the I.R.S.Ms. Olson warned that in this fiscal year — as filing requirements mandated by the Affordable Care Act go into effect — the agency might end up answering as few as 43 percent of the more than 100 million phone calls it expects to receive from taxpayers.Callers who manage to get through are expected to be on hold for an average of 30 minutes. That is a decline from the 61 percent of calls answered and average waiting time of 18 minutes in the 2013 fiscal year.AdvertisementWhen the wait is too long, the agency offers what it calls a “courtesy disconnect” — otherwise known as hanging up.Advertisement“Taxpayers who need help are not getting it, and tax compliance is likely to suffer over the longer term if these problems are not quickly and decisively addressed,” Ms. Olson wrote.The I.R.S. deals with 200 million Americans, more than three times as many as any other federal agency, the report notes, and as the workload has risen, resources have plummeted. Over the last decade, the agency has fielded 11 percent more individual returns, 18 percent more business returns and a whopping 70 percent more telephone calls.In the last four years, however, its budget has been cut by 17 percent after taking inflation into account, and its work force, now at roughly 83,000, has been reduced by 12,000. Further staffing cuts are expected.This year the job will be even tougher because of new forms, calculations and questions related to provisions of the Affordable Care Act and the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act.At the same time, the I.R.S. is also trying to rebuild public trust after revelations that the agency subjected certain tax-exempt groups, including those affiliated with the Tea Party, to especially intense screening.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a memorandum to his staff, the I.R.S. commissioner, John A. Koskinen, warned of a devastating effect from impending budget cuts, including a reduction of 3,000 to 4,000 positions and the possibility of a two-day shutdown of operations. He wrote that there would be probably be fewer audits, and delays were likely in sending back refund checks and instituting new protections against identity theft.Other organizations have pointed out that cutting the I.R.S.’s budget to save money could backfire. An analysis last year by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, an independent research organization, noted: “Each additional $1 spent on I.R.S. enforcement yields $6 of additional revenue from collecting taxes owed under current law, according to the Treasury Department. Cuts in I.R.S. enforcement funding are increasing the budget deficit.”Among the most serious problems cited in Ms. Olson’s report are reductions in some high-volume locations like Manhattan, disproportionate penalties imposed on some taxpayers who did not report offshore bank accounts, and a failure to study whether new penalties promote or discourage voluntary compliance. In 12 states and Puerto Rico, there are no permanent appeals officers, delaying the process for months at a time.The report also notes that local outreach and education have essentially disappeared and virtually zero tax returns were prepared at walk-in assistance sites last year. And once tax season passes, the I.R.S. will not answer any tax law questions at all.AdvertisementMs. Olson repeated her calls to Congress to create a taxpayer’s bill of rights. “The I.R.S. will never be a beloved federal agency, because it is the face of the government’s power to tax and collect,” Ms. Olson wrote. “But it should be a respected agency.”A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Need Help From the I.R.S.? It May Take More Patience This Year.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.