By JONATHAN SOBLEJAN. 14, 2015
TOKYO — Public spending in Japan will rise to a record level in the coming year under a budget proposed by the government on Wednesday, with higher outlays on everything from health care to national defense.But in a sign that the country may be starting to address its huge debt, budget planners said Japan would borrow less money even as it spent more.The delicate dance reflects Japan’s difficult economic picture. The country unexpectedly fell into recession in 2014, despite assertive measures by the government and the central bank to pump money into the economy to support growth.With the budget proposal, Japan is trying to balance its need for growth and discipline.“This budget will contribute simultaneously to reviving the economy and strengthening our finances,” Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said after his cabinet approved the spending plan, which covers the fiscal year beginning April 1.AdvertisementThe budget must still be passed by the Parliament. But that step is in little doubt since Mr. Abe’s coalition is in firm control of the Legislature after having won a renewed majority in elections in December.AdvertisementThe key to the budget is a continuing expansion in tax revenue. Although the economy has been struggling, Japanese corporations are earning record profits — and paying more taxes as a result — thanks in part to the money they earn overseas.Those earnings have been amplified by a sharp decline in the yen’s exchange rate over the past two years. Adjusting for changes in trade patterns and prices, economists say the currency is cheaper now than it has been since the early 1970s. That makes every dollar earned by Japanese businesses more valuable when repatriated to Japan.Another growing source of tax revenue, sales tax, is also helping the treasury. The government increased the national sales tax in April, a widely resented move that was blamed for pushing the nation into recession. But as the economy starts to stabilize again, the measure should help shrink the deficit.The rebound in tax revenue means new borrowing will be a trim — by Japanese standards — ¥36.86 trillion, the smallest amount relative to the size of the budget in six years. Perhaps more important, that debt will be taken on at historically low cost, since the Bank of Japan, the country’s central bank, is holding down interest rates by buying up vast amounts of bonds from the market.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The shift is important. Japan is carrying the developed world’s largest public debt load, with overall government borrowing equal to about two and a half times gross domestic product. In some years, tax revenue has covered barely half of government spending, which is creeping up as the population ages.Across the budget, spending is up.Social welfare programs, including public pensions and health care, are projected to grow more than 3 percent in the coming year. That’s significantly faster than growth in spending as a whole, which is expected to rise 0.5 percent. Welfare programs are expected to absorb a third of the ¥96.34 trillion, or about $814 billion, in overall government expenditures.Mr. Abe has been increasing Japan’s military spending to counter what he sees as the threat from an increasingly powerful China. The defense budget will expand 2 percent in the coming year, to a record ¥4.98 trillion. Although that is still only about 1 percent of Japan’s gross domestic product — about half the ratio of that in China and a quarter of that of the United States — military spending remains controversial in Japan, whose Constitution renounces war.The government’s fiscal projections could be undone by another recession or other unexpected turmoil. But many economists say 2015 should be a better year for the country and for Mr. Abe’s stimulus efforts, known as Abenomics. The prime minister has postponed a second sales tax increase, hoping to avoid a fresh blow to consumer spending, and the recent drastic fall in oil prices should benefit an economy largely dependent on imported energy.AdvertisementOne important question for the future is whether average workers will see more benefits from Mr. Abe’s policies. Despite the explosion in corporate profits, wage gains have lagged behind rises in prices and taxes under Mr. Abe, a weakness that economists say needs to be addressed if Japan is to experience a sustained recovery.“Many companies are sitting on idle money,” said Hiromichi Shirakawa, an economist at Credit Suisse. “We have a generation of cost-cutters in Japanese management."If the government’s budget projections hold, Japan will meet an official target of halving its deficit, minus the cost of debt service, to 3.3 percent of gross domestic product in fiscal 2015, from 6.6 percent in 2010. But a subsequent goal of eliminating the primary deficit altogether by 2020 will be much harder to meet, economists say, requiring significant further increases in economic growth, taxes or both.“The long-term fiscal consolidation plan remains unclear,” Mr. Shirakawa said.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: In Budget Plan, Japan Proposes More Spending and Aims to Borrow Less.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.