By CHARLES DUHIGGJAN. 13, 2015
G. G. Michelson, who helped dismantle barriers for women as a longtime executive of R. H. Macy & Company, as an adviser to mayors and often as the only female member of corporate boards, died on Saturday at her home in Greenwich Village. She was 89.Her death was confirmed by her daughter, Barbara Michelson.Mrs. Michelson’s climb to the executive suite was strewn with obstacles, a passage marked by the struggles of the Depression, family illness, stays in orphanages and a college career that took her through law school but could not promise a woman a job in her chosen field.Mrs. Michelson, who also had a top post with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, was often referred to as a pioneer, but she tended to play down her accomplishments.“Sometimes it’s better to let others view what you’ve achieved in historical terms,” she told The New York Times in 1989, “while you just do the best you can as an individual.”AdvertisementGertrude Geraldine Rosen was born in Jamestown, N.Y., on June 3, 1925. Her mother, Celia Cohen Rosen, had tuberculosis, and her father, Thomas, searched the Southwest for a climate to heal his wife’s lungs.The price of that wandering was high. Gertrude and her siblings spent time in an orphanage as her parents sought work and recovery, her daughter said. Her mother died when Gertrude was 11, and the family moved once again, this time to upstate New York.After graduating from Penn State University, Mrs. Michelson attended Columbia Law School, where she was one of only a handful of women in her class. There she met Horace Michelson, a fellow student, whom she married in 1948.When she graduated in 1947, most law firms had little need for female lawyers, so she focused her job search not on legal positions but on companies that employed large numbers of women, assuming that they would need executives who could bridge the gender divide.She learned that R. H. Macy, the department store chain, had an executive training program and a disproportionately large female sales staff.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Soon after being accepted into the program, she was named assistant to the company’s labor-relations manager.AdvertisementWithin 15 years she was vice president for employee personnel, and in 1970 she was named senior vice president of the company’s New York division for labor and consumer relations, the only woman in the division with that title.As she rose through the organization, she spent much of her time not among saleswomen but negotiating with sharp-elbowed — and almost invariably male — officials of the Teamsters and the other unions that represented Macy’s roughly 20,000 employees.“She probably knew more about the Yankees than anyone in this city,” said Marcia Warner, a cousin. “That was her secret weapon in negotiations. She could talk sports. It threw them off so bad to talk baseball with a woman that they didn’t know what to do.”Mrs. Michelson became a director at Macy’s in 1970 and was later invited to join other corporate boards, including those of General Electric, Goodyear Tire & Rubber and Quaker Oats. She was often the first or only woman on such boards.She also served as deputy chairwoman of the New York Federal Reserve, was a member of the New York State Financial Control Board and was appointed to commissions by several New York mayors, most recently Michael R. Bloomberg, who named her to an advisory commission that reviewed the salaries of elected officials, including the mayor, comptroller and all five borough presidents.In addition to her daughter, Mrs. Michelson is survived by her sister, Mildred Terr, as well as three granddaughters and four great-grandchildren. Horace Michelson, a corporate lawyer, died in 2002.In 1989 Mrs. Michelson was named chairwoman of Columbia University’s board of trustees. She was the first woman to hold such a position at an Ivy League institution.Peter Keepnews contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page A22 of the New York edition with the headline: G.G. Michelson, 89; Broke Glass Ceilings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.