

Related Links


Wet Seal Files for Chapter 11 Bankruptcy

The bankruptcy filing on Friday by Wet Seal, the teen apparel retailer, and the all too obvious moves in the same direction by Radio Shack, illustrate how much Chapter 11 practice has changed since the bankruptcy code was overhauled in 2005. This is especially true for retail companies.In the retail cases of a decade ago — Levitz Furniture, Bradlees, Circuit City and Kmart, some of which I worked on when I was still in practice — the debtors could formulate reorganization plans and then adjust their store leases accordingly. Now the process is turned around. The 2005 amendments to the bankruptcy code greatly shortened the time for assuming or rejecting commercial leases, so the debtor has to enter Chapter 11 knowing which stores it wants to keep and which ones it wants to close. That means an abrupt increase in empty storefronts. Thus, Wet Seal’s announcement last week that it was closing more than half its stores was an obvious signal that it was about to file. The company has lost more than $150 million over the last two years and defaulted on $27 million in senior convertible notes in December. Wet Seal joins recent Chapter 11 filers like Deb Stores, Delia’s, Loehmann’s and Coldwater Creek.The post-2005 reality is further buttressed by provisions in debtor-in-possession loans that tie working capital to the deadline for assumption or rejection of leases. Circuit City remains the symbol for that issue: Its liquidation was the result of its inability to reorganize within the tight timeline its lenders allowed.Is this anti-retail tilt in the bankruptcy code a bad thing? After all, landlords could legitimately complain that in the old cases they were left in a kind of purgatory for years, waiting to learn whether they needed to find new tenants or not.And some of the problems in retail have nothing to do with the bankruptcy code. For example, I have argued previously in connection with the Blockbuster and Borders cases that once retailers start to compete solely on price they make themselves a commodity that is easily underpriced by online retailers; bankruptcy quickly follows.That said, it’s not clear anyone is well served by a forced rush to dump myriad stores into an already depressed shopping mall market.