SÃO PAULO, Brazil – The JetBlue founder David Neeleman has postponed plans for the third time to hold an initial public offering for the Brazilian airline company he founded, as Brazil’s stock market continued to be volatile.The airline, Azul Linhas Aéreas Brasileiras, decided to delay the listing because of the adverse market conditions. It is not expected to try again until the second quarter at the earliest, a person with direct knowledge of the operation said on Friday.The company declined to comment.Azul had filed in December to list shares on both the New York and São Paulo stock exchanges.The airline was reportedly seeking to raise $400 million. The offer, according to the prospectus, was for preferred shares only, which offer dividends but no voting rights. Mr. Neeleman would have retained his 67 percent stake in the common shares, giving him full control of Azul.Although airline companies have received a lift from lower oil prices, emerging market companies have suffered as investors fear slowing growth. In Brazil, the two main recent drivers of growth — commodity exports and consumer demand — have been weakening and the economy is expected to grow less than 0.5 percent this year.Azul, which was founded in 2008, is Brazil’s third-largest airline after TAM and GOL. It recently began international service, with daily flights to Orlando and Fort Lauderdale.Since Azul filed for the I.P.O. on Dec. 1, the São Paulo stock market has dropped 6 percent, and the currency has been volatile, further increasing risks for foreign investors.Brazil was once a robust market for stock offerings, and there were hopes in 2013 that better conditions would return. But over the last two years, the nation has been troubled by poor economic conditions and political uncertainty. Those factors have made investors leery of bringing new companies to market.  Last year, only one Brazilian company, a small-cap veterinary medicine firm, went public.Bernardo Vélez, the Latin America transportation analyst for GBM in Mexico City, said that the depreciation of the real, Brazil’s currency, had particularly hurt Azul’s financials.“They have 55 percent of their expenses in foreign currency and very little international revenue compared to the other big Brazilian carriers,” he said.Mr. Vélez added that the postponement of the I.P.O. is a “slight positive” for other local carriers because Azul had planned to use some of the money raised to pay for an aggressive expansion that could have led to price wars.Azul had tried to hold an I.P.O. in 2013 and early 2014, but those plans too were canceled because of lackluster stock market conditions.The postponement of the listing plans means that the private equity companies that have backed Azul — including TPG Growth, Weston Presidio, Grupo Bozano, Fidelity and Gávea Investimentos (owned by JPMorgan) —  will have to wait longer to cash out.Morgan Stanley, Santander, Itaú BBA, Goldman Sachs, Banco do Brasil, Banco Pine and Deutsche Bank had been the underwriters.