Updated, 8:57 p.m. | While many of its competitors have been retrenching as a result of the challenges facing Wall Street, Goldman Sachs has been betting that the good times are going to return. So far, that bet has not paid off.The bank reported on Friday that the trading desks that once made Goldman the most profitable firm in the industry had a much sharper decline in revenue than similar operations at Goldman’s competitors.PhotoHarvey Schwartz, Goldman’s chief financial officer, said he was happy with the bank’s diverse business lines.Credit Goldman SachsThe disappointing trading results helped drag overall revenue for the bank in the final quarter of 2014 down 12 percent from a year earlier, while profit dropped 7 percent to $2.17 billion, or $4.38 a share. In the fourth quarter of 2013, the bank earned $2.33 billion, or $4.60 a share.For all of 2014, Goldman’s profit and revenue rose slightly, and the headline numbers from the latest quarter, while down, were a bit better than analysts had expected. But the more fine-grained details of Goldman’s quarterly result did not dispel lingering concerns about the slowness with which Goldman’s business model has yielded the promised results.“If you just stand back and look at the last six years of data, you can’t help scratch your head and say to yourself, ‘Gee, this doesn’t seem good,’ ” said Chris Kotowski, a bank analyst at Oppenheimer.The bank’s stock fell about 0.7 percent on Friday, while the broader market was up over 1 percent. Goldman ended the week down 5 percent.The firm’s chief financial officer, Harvey M. Schwartz, said on Friday that he was happy with the diverse array of business lines Goldman had maintained. And some businesses that had not been performing well, such as the stock trading desks, did much better in the fourth quarter.But Mr. Schwartz did indicate that there was room for improvement. “We’d all like to see the environment being one that provided another couple of billion dollars in revenues,” he said. To get that, he said, the bank was relatively dependent on the broader economic environment changing.The most notable weakness for Goldman has come from the traders who buy and sell bonds, currencies and commodities. That business has been the company’s single biggest source of revenue in recent years, but it has been an increasingly challenging one as interest rates have remained low, discouraging trading.In response to that challenge, many of Goldman’s competitors have exited or reduced their emphasis on so-called fixed-income trading. But Goldman has said that it is not pulling back and that it hopes to capitalize as competitors disappear.In the latest quarter, the strategy seemed to backfire. While most of the other big banks reported that fixed-income trading revenues shrank, the drop at Goldman was much more significant. Revenue fell 29 percent from a year ago and 44 percent from the previous quarter.In recent years, Goldman has attributed its sluggish fixed-income results to the lack of activity in the bond and interest rate markets. In this most recent quarter, Goldman said the problems were a consequence of extreme levels of activity in the markets as currencies and bonds fluctuated wildly.Mr. Schwartz acknowledged that Goldman had not found a way to take advantage of either extreme.“I guess — what is it, is it Goldilocks?” he said. “It’s too cold, it’s too hot. We can’t find the right temperature.”In addition to the difficult trading conditions, Goldman’s fixed-income losses were amplified by a bad loan the bank made, alongside some clients, to a Portuguese bank, Banco Espirito Santo, earlier this year. In the fourth quarter, the Portuguese central bank made a ruling that made it unlikely the $835 million loan would be repaid.“We’re very surprised by the Bank of Portugal’s unexpected and very surprising reversal of its prior written decision on this matter,” Mr. Schwartz said.Goldman has continued to be helped by certain business lines. The bank has easily beaten all of its competitors in advising companies on mergers and acquisitions. In the latest quarter, fees from that work rose 18 percent from a year earlier.The work of managing the assets of wealth clients and big investors, something Goldman has been trying to expand, also produced higher revenue.But some of the factors that have been most important in maintaining Goldman’s profits are not things that point to the health of the company’s business and prospects.Goldman has increased its earnings per share by spending some of its retained profit to buy its own shares back from shareholders. In 2014, the bank spent $5.5 billion — a majority of its profit for the year — on so-called share buybacks.Goldman has also been vigorously cutting costs, including the amount it puts aside for employee salary and bonuses. The bank put aside 36.8 percent of its revenue for compensation, slightly lower than the figure in 2013, even though the number of employees increased.