AdvertisementSupported byBy John SchwartzA federal judge will hold BP responsible for spilling 3.19 million barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico in the 2010 Deepwater Horizon disaster — a finding that could lead to a penalty of nearly $14 billion. Judge Carl J. Barbier of Federal District Court in New Orleans issued the ruling on Thursday. In a 44-page finding of fact that anticipates the coming third phase of the sprawling federal case over the spill, Judge Barbier wrote that the company actually spilled four million barrels of oil into the gulf but, considering its collection efforts, BP should be held responsible for a net discharge of 3.19 million, or about 134 million gallons.The estimated number of barrels is substantially less than the five million barrels experts for the federal government estimated (4.19 million after taking collection efforts into account), and substantially more than the 3.26 million the company said had been released (2.45 million after collection).Because Judge Barbier previously found the company grossly negligent in causing the spill, the maximum penalty for each barrel under the Clean Water Act is $4,300. BP is appealing the court’s gross negligence finding. If the government’s estimate had been used, the penalty could have been as much as $18 billion. Under Judge Barbier’s ruling, the figure could be as high as about $13.7 billion. The British oil giant will face a maximum fine of $13.7 billion related to the 2010 oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, a federal judge ruled on Thursday.In Thursday’s ruling, Judge Barbier did not demonstrate how he arrived at the 3.19 million barrel figure. In fact, he wrote, the evidence from the government and from the company was “voluminous, dense, highly technical, and conflicting.” He gave examples of the complexities of the conflicting arguments. “Both sides presented evidence to support their cumulative flow estimates,” he wrote, “and each mounted effective attacks on the other’s calculations.”Ultimately, Judge Barbier wrote, “There is no way to know with precision how much oil discharged into the Gulf of Mexico.” However, “after weighing all of the evidence and considering all of the arguments,” he arrived at four million barrels. Edward F. Sherman, a professor at Tulane University Law School who has closely observed the case, said he found Judge Barbier’s decision to be an intelligent approach to a conflict of experts. “At times we claim precision,” he said, but “there’s no way to precisely find the numbers, so why not pick a number as he did, reasonably between the two numbers provided by the parties?”The oil rig fire and explosion on April 20, 2010, killed 11 men and caused the largest marine oil spill in the nation’s history. The seemingly unstoppable gusher from the undersea well flowed for 87 days and fouled an estimated 68,000 square miles of gulf waters and nearly 500 miles of coastline from Louisiana to Florida.The third phase of the trial, in which penalties will be assessed, will begin on Tuesday. Geoff Morrell, senior vice president for United States communications and external affairs for the company, said in a statement that BP “is continuing to review the court’s decision.” In the penalty phase of the trial, he said, BP “believes that considering all the statutory penalty factors together weighs in favor of a penalty at the lower end of the statutory range.”Wyn Hornbuckle, a spokesman for the Justice Department, said, “We’re reviewing the judge’s decision.”The company says that it has spent $27 billion since the spill, including more than $14 billion on response and cleanup and about $13 billion in damage claims. The company could face additional penalties under what is known as a natural resources damage assessment, as well as other claims.A former federal prosecutor of environmental crimes, David M. Uhlmann of the University of Michigan Law School, called the decision “a major victory for BP” because it reduced the company’s potential liability by billions of dollars. Companies are rarely assessed the greatest possible penalty, and he said that the ultimate penalty could come to $10 billion or exceed it, “but not by much.” Advertisement