By BRUCE WEBERJAN. 15, 2015
Lowell W. Paxson, a media executive who turned bargain hunting and impulse buying into couch potato heaven when he started the Home Shopping Network, died on Jan. 9 in Kalispell, Mont. He was 79.His death was confirmed by John Feore, a friend who was also Mr. Paxson’s lawyer. He did not specify a cause.A high-rolling entrepreneur who eventually started his own broadcast network, PAX TV, Mr. Paxson, who was known as Bud, began his career in radio as a disc jockey, salesman, general manager and small-station owner.He purchased a minority share in his first station, WACK in Newark, N.Y., near his hometown, Rochester, in 1956. He spent the next two decades in a variety of business ventures, many successful and many others, as he would later readily admit, not. It was in 1977, at a radio station he owned in Clearwater, Fla., that his fortunes changed for good.AdvertisementAn advertiser at WWQT-AM was short of funds and had paid his bill in merchandise — 112 electric can openers in a shade variously described as olive or avocado green. As Mr. Paxson told the story, he went on the air himself to offer the can openers for sale at a bargain price. All 112 sold within the hour.AdvertisementThe station began peddling merchandise every day as a regular feature. It became so popular that five years later, with a business partner, Roy Speer, Mr. Paxson put a three-hour version of the radio feature, called the Home Shopping Club, on a local cable television channel.“When someone would call me and order something, if they lived on my way home, I’d deliver the merchandise to them,” Bob Circosta, who was the host of the show, said in an interview with The St. Petersburg Times in 2002. “And nine times out of 10, I’d stay for dinner. That’s a true story.”It was a small beginning to a mega-business that, according to demographic research, appealed mostly to middle-age women, and combined two of America’s favorite activities: watching television and shopping. Persuaded that viewers everywhere would respond as heartily to shopping on television as those in Florida did, Mr. Paxson and Mr. Speer began contracting with cable systems around the country to carry the Home Shopping Club, and it went on the air nationally in 1985 — the first national 24-hour shopping network on television.Still, distribution was limited because the larger cable systems declined to carry the channel. Then Mr. Paxson hit on the idea of buying his own local stations carried by the larger systems.To finance the expansion, Mr. Paxson and Mr. Speer took the company public in 1986 — the same year its chief competitor, QVC, was founded — and within a 12-month period were able to buy as many as 12 television stations. In addition, they helped support other station owners who would agree to carry Home Shopping Network programming. Growth was immediate and astonishing: Sales reached the $1 billion mark in 1990.Mr. Paxson was traveling constantly, both in the United States to acquire stations and abroad, frequently in China, where he sought merchandise to sell on the network. It cost him his marriage; his wife left him on Christmas Day 1986, and by his account he was alone in a Las Vegas hotel room a few days later on New Year’s Eve when he had an epiphany, fervently embracing the Christian faith that he had forgone decades earlier.“I became a Christian fanatic,” he acknowledged.One result was that his business partnership foundered. No longer seeing eye to eye with Mr. Speer about business or personal matters — Mr. Speer did not share his religious devotion and differed with him on the future of the company — Mr. Paxson left the Home Shopping Network in 1990.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The network was sold in 1995 to Barry Diller, and for a time was part of his media company, IAC/InterActiveCorp. It is now called HSN, a division of HSN Inc., which also includes a catalog and online shopping service, Cornerstone. According to the company, the network reaches 95 million American homes, and its sales, including those of its own online service, totaled $2.3 billion in 2013, the latest year for which figures are available.AdvertisementEmbarking on the next phase of an entrepreneurial career, Mr. Paxson started a new company, Paxson Communications, which took advantage of new regulations by the Federal Communications Commission allowing a single entity more leeway in owning multiple radio and television outlets in a single market.By 1997, Paxson had acquired more than 40 radio stations in Florida in all of the state’s major markets, and more than 40 television stations around the country. In 1992, he also started Christian Network Inc., which provided overnight programming for the television stations; now known as the Worship Network, it expanded in 2005 to become a digital, 24-hour network.Mr. Paxson sold his company’s radio division to Clear Channel Communications in 1997 and concentrated on television. In August 1998, his network, PAX TV, was started, with an emphasis on programming free of violence, explicit sex and vulgar language. Its prime-time schedule featured reruns of mild-mannered dramas including “Touched by an Angel,” “Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman” and “Diagnosis Murder.”NBC paid $415 million for a minority interest in Paxson in 1999, but the two companies had a turbulent relationship. After protracted negotiations, Mr. Paxson stepped down and was replaced by an NBC executive, Brandon Burgess, who changed the programming to more hard-edge fare. The company is now called Ion Media Networks.Lowell White Paxson was born in Rochester to Donald and Maybelle Paxson on April 17, 1935. His father was a tool and die maker for the Eastman Kodak Company. A graduate of Syracuse University, he was just out of college when he invested in his first radio station.In later years he was a frequent speaker to Christian groups and a financial contributor to Republican candidates. In 2000, contributions that he and his company made to Senator John McCain’s campaign for the Republican presidential nomination became an issue in the primaries.Paxson executives and lobbyists had contributed $20,000 to the McCain campaign, and Mr. Paxson had lent the senator his private jet on several occasions. One of the senator’s prominent campaign issues was the pernicious influence of money in politics, but it emerged that Mr. McCain, who was chairman of the Senate commerce committee, had written two letters to the F.C.C. urging speedy action on Mr. Paxson’s application for a television license in Pittsburgh, and the application was subsequently approved.Senator McCain, who lost the nomination to George W. Bush, defended himself with some exasperation, saying that the campaign finance system caused politicians to be under suspicion for their every action.“I know Mr. Paxson, but I know lots of people who come to me and say that they are not being treated fairly by the bureaucracy,” Mr. McCain said. “But we are all tainted, because there is so much money washing around. That’s an argument for campaign finance reform.”AdvertisementMr. Paxson, who had homes in Las Vegas, Rancho Santa Fe, Calif., and Lakeside, Mont., was divorced twice. He is survived by his wife, the former Marla Bright, whom he married in 1990; two sons, Todd and Devon; two daughters, Nicole Paxson and Julie Paxson-Linder; and six grandchildren.A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Lowell W. Paxson, Who Started HSN, Dies at 79.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.