AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — Producer prices in December recorded the biggest drop in more than three years as energy prices continued to tumble. With underlying inflation pressures remaining light, it was a cautionary signal for the Federal Reserve as it considers its next move on monetary policy.The Labor Department said on Thursday that its Producer Price Index for final demand declined 0.3 percent, the biggest drop since October 2011, after falling 0.2 percent in November.“That makes the Fed’s job more difficult,” said Augustine Faucher, senior economist at PNC Financial Services Group in Pittsburgh. “The Fed needs to be more cautious about raising interest rates.”In the 12 months through December, prices at the factory gate increased 1.1 percent, the smallest gain since November 2013, after rising 1.4 percent in November. A broader measure of underlying producer inflation pressures that excludes food, energy and trade services edged up 0.1 percent after being unchanged in November.Fed officials have largely viewed the energy-driven weakness in inflation as transitory. But with retail sales and average hourly earnings, another crucial inflation measure, falling in December, some policy makers might question that view. The Federal Reserve has kept its short-term interest rate near zero since December 2008. Inflation is running below the bank’s 2 percent target. Analysts have said they expect consumer inflation data on Friday to show that price pressures remained muted in December.In a separate report, the Labor Department said initial claims for state unemployment benefits rose by 19,000 to a seasonally adjusted 316,000 for the week to Jan. 10.Economists, who had forecast claims falling to 291,000 last week, said the data had been distorted by difficulties adjusting it for seasonal fluctuations. Seasonal quirks also have been blamed for the weak retail sales and wage growth in December.“Seasonal adjustments become particularly difficult around year-end. We expect claims to resume their downward trend in the coming weeks and reflect broader improvement in labor markets,” said Jesse Hurwitz, an economist at Barclays in New York.The four-week moving average of claims, considered to be a more reliable measure of trends, remained below 300,000, a level associated with a strengthening labor market, for the 18th consecutive week.Other reports showed mixed fortunes for manufacturing in January across New York State and the mid-Atlantic region. Economists said this was broadly in line with some cooling in factory activity in response to slowing global demand and a stronger dollar.Wholesale energy prices dropped a record 6.6 percent in December, declining for a sixth month. The fall reflected sliding crude oil prices against the backdrop of weakening global demand and more shale production in the United States. A strong dollar, as the American economy outperforms its peers, is also helping to curb inflation.The International Monetary Fund’s managing director, Christine Lagarde, said on Thursday that weak oil prices were unlikely to bolster the global economy.Concerns about global growth have also undercut copper prices. On Thursday, copper rose on a mix of bargain-hunting, short-covering and hedging by buyers, a day after its biggest slide in more than three years, but more losses were expected. Advertisement