By BEN SISARIOJAN. 15, 2015
The streaming music wars have arrived in India.Rdio, an online music service that competes with outlets like Spotify, Pandora and Deezer, announced on Thursday that had opened in India, beating its Western competitors there.Based in San Francisco and available in 61 countries, Rdio will offer Indian consumers its catalog of more than 30 million songs for $2 a month — a fraction of the $10 fee that is the standard in much of the world.In addition to its paid tier, which lets people choose exactly which songs to listen to, Rdio also offers free access through Internet radio. In that version of the service, listeners select a genre or favorite song as a starting point but cannot pick every song.While India is one of the world’s most populous countries, music sales there are just a fraction of those in more developed nations. Rdio’s expansion there began in March, when it bought the Indian online outlet Dhingana. According to the trade group the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry, 14 digital music services already operate in India, though many of them, like the iTunes store from Apple, primarily sell downloads.Advertisement“India is the fastest-growing Internet market in the world, with one of the most vibrant cultures for music,” Anthony Bay, Rdio’s chief executive, said in a statement. “Our objective is to raise the bar for the digital music experience in India and provide the most robust offering of music from around the world.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.India generated just $113 million in wholesale music revenue in 2013, making it the 19th-biggest market, according to the trade group, based in London. The United States, the top music market, had $4.5 billion in sales in 2013.Streaming and subscription services have quickly become the biggest growth sector of the music industry, generating more than $1 billion in revenue around the world in 2013. According to Nielsen SoundScan, music streaming in the United States was up 54.5 percent last year, and Spotify, the leading service, announced this week that it had 60 million users around the world, a quarter of whom pay. Rdio has never revealed its user numbers, but they are believed to be much lower.AdvertisementTo increase their users’ ranks, streaming services have been aggressively expanding overseas, with markets like Mexico and Spain showing particularly strong growth. Spotify is available in 58 markets around the world and Deezer, based in France, says it is in 180, though neither service is in India. China has been another focus for Western labels lately. Sony and the Warner Music Group signed digital music deals with Tencent, one of China’s biggest Internet businesses.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.