By HIROKO TABUCHIJAN. 15, 2015
Best Buy said on Thursday that holiday-season sales in the United States grew by 2.6 percent as brisk sales of flat-screen TVs and smartphones offset limp demand for tablets. But the retailer said it expected electronics demand to wane in the new year.The company’s shares closed $5.61, or 14 percent, lower at $34.30.Overall revenue for the nine weeks through Jan. 3 grew to $11.37 billion from $11.13 billion over a similar period the previous year, the electronics retailer said. Comparable sales for the holiday season at domestic stores — those open 14 months or more — rose 3.4 percent, while online sales rose 13.4 percent, slowing considerably from the 23.5 percent jump a year earlier.Best Buy’s chief executive, Hubert Joly, said in a statement that a stronger economy had buoyed sales, as had an increase in consumers looking to replace their televisions and smartphones with new models.He said that progress in bringing together Best Buy’s brick-and-mortar and online operations — for example, by shipping online orders from stores — had paid off. But declining electronics prices, as well as volatile exchange rates, would create headwinds for Best Buy in 2015, he added.AdvertisementSharon L. McCollam, Best Buy’s chief financial officer, said the holiday numbers had prompted the retailer to raise its fourth-quarter financial outlook. It now expects comparable sales and operating income to grow at a slightly higher rate, she said.Ms. McCollam struck a cautious note, however, warning that sales over the holiday season had been driven by excitement around certain products and “will not likely continue at holiday levels.”AdvertisementAnalysts have warned that the heavy promotions that drove Best Buy’s sales could put pressure on its margins. Best Buy will report full fourth-quarter earnings in March.A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Best Buy Holiday Sales Increase 2.6% in U.S.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.