By IAN AUSTEN and HIROKO TABUCHIJAN. 15, 2015
OTTAWA —  Less than two years after opening in Canada, Target conceded defeat on Thursday and said it would shutter its 133 stores, bringing an infamously ill-managed northward foray by the American retail giant to an abrupt end.About 17,600 people will lose their jobs, Target said, and the Canadian operation would be placed under bankruptcy protection, underscoring the severity of the blunder by one of the largest retailers in the United States.The decision to abandon the Canadian expansion, which had racked up more than $2 billion in net losses since 2011, represented the boldest move yet by Target’s chief executive, Brian Cornell, who took helm of the retailer in August.“Simply put, we were losing money every day,” Mr. Cornell acknowledged. “We were unable to find a realistic scenario that got Target Canada to profitability until at least 2021.”AdvertisementTarget had already fired the head of its Canada unit last May, just two weeks after the company’s chief executive, Gregg W. Steinhafel, resigned. The money-draining Canadian expansion and the management upheavals coincided with the retailer’s struggles to restore customer loyalty after an extensive data breach that exposed millions of shoppers’ personal data at the height of the 2013 shopping season.AdvertisementAnd this season’s just-ended holiday sales period was the breaking point, Mr. Cornell said in a follow-up conference call.“We had undertaken a massive effort to ensure that we entered the season with stock at an all-time high,” he said. “But the harsh reality is that both sales and profits continued to fall short of our expectations.”While Target stores in the United States were long popular destinations for Canadian visitors, the discount department store struggled to translate its formula to Canada. It expanded widely before gaining a toehold among the country’s shoppers.Differences in suppliers and other factors meant that Canadians found Target’s Canadian stores to be more expensive than they anticipated, and a poorly executed distribution network meant that shelves were often missing basic products. It also failed to understand the depths of Canadian loyalty to certain competitors (including the well-established Walmart and Costco) or the reluctance of its consumers to adopt a one-stop shopping habit.In addition, Target failed to distinguish itself from several Canadian retailers with offerings that cross over some of its key product categories. The Loblaw Companies, Canada’s largest grocer, successfully introduced its line of Joe Fresh low-cost clothing boutiques in many of its stores.Canadian Tire has long been strong in household and kitchen goods in addition to automotive and hardware. And Shoppers Drug Mart, which was acquired by Loblaw last year, has expanded many of its outlets into mini-department stores.At a Target in Ottawa’s Billings Bridge Shopping Centre, next to a major mass transit hub, no signs announced the closing and employees said they were not allowed to discuss it.AdvertisementAs has been the case since Target’s opening, many sections of the store had largely empty shelves, giving the appearance of the end of a going-out-of-business sale. Large sections of shelving were filled with large quantities of a single product like laundry detergent.“They have a little bit of everything but it’s not everything under one roof,” said a shopper, Linda Williams, as she left the store. Ms. Williams, who had just learned of the closing, said that she generally avoided the store because of its limited selection.“Even when you go to a bigger one, it’s just a lot of space with a little bit of product in it,” she said.David Soberman, a marketing professor at the University of Toronto, noted that businesses usually need to operate at full strength for more than a year to find success in new markets, but he faulted Target for using internal management with no international experience to run the company’s first foray outside the United States. “The result was basically problems that when you’re teaching first-year classes at universities you tell students no business should do,” Mr. Soberman said.Target expects to report a pretax write-down of $5.4 billion related to the closing in the fourth quarter of 2014, and $275 million more this year. Pending court approval, Target will contribute up to $59 million to establish a fund to provide employees with a minimum of 16 weeks of severance pay. In court documents, Target noted that because the parent company will contribute all of its cash, the employee fund will not reduce potential payments to other creditors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Unifor, the large union previously known as the Canadian Auto Workers, sharply criticized Target’s treatment of Canadian workers. The retailer was previously criticized for not hiring Zellers employees, many of whom were unionized, when it took over that chain’s store locations.Target’s profound stumble is a sharp contrast to Walmart’s experience in Canada. Walmart entered the Canadian market in 1994 by taking over leases of another struggling discount chain, the Woolco unit of Woolworth. It is now the largest retailer in Canada based on revenues.H&M, Zara and Forever 21 are all expanding their Canadian operations. Nordstrom, moving at a much slower pace than Target, opened its first Canadian store last year and will add two more this year.But other foreign retailers are struggling. Big Lots, which acquired the Canadian retail chain Liquidation World in 2011, closed nearly 80 stores last year as sales faltered. Best Buy has struggled to gain traction at its 120-odd Canada locations. Mexx Canada is closing all of its 95 stores. Even Sam’s Club, Walmart’s membership-only retail warehouse business, shut down in Canada in 2009 facing tough competition from Costco, which has been in the country since 1985 and now has 88 stores.AdvertisementOne widely noted measure of Target’s failure was a sustained nostalgia among many Canadians for the closed Zellers chain. While Zellers stores were disorganized, understaffed and often run-down, many Canadian shoppers have said that they offered better value and had more products in stock than Target.Tiffany Moore, a mother of two small children, said that while she shopped at Target regularly for children’s toys and diapers, she found it expensive for other products, particularly food. Zellers, she said, “had great sales and their reward points were awesome. I liked Zellers a lot better than Target.”Moody’s Investors Service said that Target’s exit from Canada would not immediately affect the agency’s stable, investment-grade outlook for the retailer. “This abject failure does call into question the company’s overall execution ability,” said Charlie O’Shea, a Moody’s vice president.Analysts generally lauded Mr. Cornell for pulling the plug on a lost cause.Oliver Chen, a retail analyst at Cowen & Company, said in a note that he was encouraged by Mr. Cornell’s “speed and agility to cut bait on Canada losses faster than expected.”He called the cash fallout from the decision manageable, and said improved traffic at Target’s stores in the United States, as well as strong digital sales, showed “momentum building” for the retailer’s business back home.“The exit frees up the mother ship to fix itself,” said Craig Johnson of Customer Growth Partners, a retail consulting firm based in New Canaan, Conn. “Canada ended up being a huge distraction, a sinkhole of management attention,” he said.“Because of Canada, they took the eye off the core business back home.”Mr. Cornell said in the call Thursday that Target had a better 2014 holiday season. He said strong sales in November and December would push comparable-store sales growth in the fourth quarter to around 3 percent, above previous guidance of 2 percent.The sudden collapse of Target Canada will create headaches for its landlords, however. Target gathered a base of locations by purchasing leases held by the Hudson’s Bay Company for about $1.8 billion.But for Canadian shoppers, Target’s disappearance will have little effect, Mr. Soberman said.“How many are shopping at Target?” he asked. “Not many, so is it going to change the Canadian retail landscape? I don’t think so.”An earlier version of the picture credits for a photo layout with this article were rendered incorrectly.Ian Austen reported from Ottawa, and Hiroko Tabuchi from New York.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Red Ink Runs Out in Canada.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.