By JACK EWINGJAN. 15, 2015
FRANKFURT — Germany’s economy accelerated in the final quarter of 2014 as consumer spending picked up, according to data published on Thursday, a sign that the largest economy in the eurozone could perform moderately better than expected in 2015.Gross domestic product rose 0.25 percent from the third quarter, according to a preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. For all of 2014, growth was 1.5 percent, in line with analyst estimates, after expanding just 0.1 percent a year earlier. Employment rose to a high, and consumers spent more, the statistics office said.“The German economy turned out to be strong in a difficult global economic environment, benefiting especially from a strong domestic demand,” Roderich Egeler, president of the statistics office, said in a statement.The strength of consumer spending was a relatively new development for Germany, where exports have often driven growth. Because more people are working than ever before, the statistics office said, more people have money to spend.AdvertisementThe number of employed people rose by 371,000, or 0.9 percent, to 42.7 million, making 2014 the eighth consecutive year of employment growth, the statistics office said. The unemployment rate was 5 percent as of November.AdvertisementGermany overhauled its labor laws a decade ago, making it easier to dismiss workers, and as a result making companies more willing to hire.The data released on Thursday could support arguments by some economists that the eurozone economy will perform better than expected in 2015, in part because of cheaper oil but also because of the decline of the euro against the dollar and other major currencies, which makes eurozone exports less expensive for foreign buyers.“The positive fourth-quarter result was probably not just a flash in the pan,” Jörg Krämer, chief economist at Commerzbank, said in a note to clients. “The underlying economic environment has improved considerably, thanks to the decline of oil prices and the euro versus the dollar.”The eurozone economy could get a further push if, as expected, the European Central Bank announces next week that it will begin buying government bonds to stimulate the economy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The German growth numbers did not appear to be enough to reverse the need for such a move, as most of the eurozone continues to struggle. Unemployment across the currency bloc is at an average of 11.5 percent, and consumer prices fell 0.2 percent in December from a year earlier. The central bank aims for an inflation rate below, but close to, 2 percent.But additional data released on Thursday could also raise pressure on the German government to spend more to stimulate growth in other eurozone countries.The statistics office said that the German government, including state and local governments, recorded a budget surplus of 11.9 billion euros, or about $14 billion, in 2014. That was the biggest budget surplus since 2000, when government coffers benefited from auctions of telecommunications licenses.Germany has faced criticism from other European countries for focusing on balancing its budget when the rest of the eurozone is in need of economic stimulus. If Germany spent more on schools, roads and other public infrastructure, some economists argue, the money would also help create demand for products from struggling eurozone countries like Italy.AdvertisementAdalbert Winkler, a professor at the Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, said it made no sense for the German government to be focusing on a balanced budget when the country could borrow money at low interest rates.German two- and five-year bonds have negative interest rates, meaning investors are willing to pay the government to keep their money safe. Even 30-year German bonds had a yield, or effective market interest rate, of just 1.2 percent on Thursday.“It’s in our interest” to invest in public services, Mr. Winkler said.“Germany has always been proud of its infrastructure, its education system,” he said, “but if you look a little closer, you see that things are not as good as they used to be.”A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Economy in Germany Is Gaining Momentum.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.