
Common Sense By                     
 JAMES B. STEWART
 
JAN. 15, 2015
The strong dollar and threat of deflation may be wreaking havoc on European economies, but as an American consumer it has made me feel flush.This week the euro dropped below $1.18, the weakest level in nine years, and it has depreciated over 5 percent in just the last three months. The slide has been so steep that on Thursday, the Swiss central bank untethered the Swiss franc, which promptly soared against the euro. So I figured there’s no better time to go bargain hunting for European imports. (Or book a trip to Europe, but that’s another story.)This week I went on a quest for three things I’d love to buy, if money were no object: a Porsche sports car, a Brunello Cucinelli suit and a bottle of Domaine du Vieux Télégraphe red wine. (It’s just as well a Swiss watch wasn’t on my list.)At a Porsche dealer, Manhattan Motorcars, a gleaming “rhodium silver” Porsche Boxster and its hardtop cousin, a dark blue metallic Cayman, both had sticker prices of about $64,000 — a bargain compared with six-figure Porsche models. A Porsche spokesman told me that the automaker actually raised the suggested retail price to $51,400 this month from $50,400 a year ago for the base model Boxster.AdvertisementAt the elegantly minimalist Madison Avenue outlet for the Italian designer Brunello Cucinelli, Corey Easley, a salesman, showed me several suits and jackets in my size (European 52) in the ethereal fabrics for which Cucinelli is famous.AdvertisementAnd this being January, they were 40 percent off. A soft gray “large check” suit was marked down to $2,670 from $4,450. But a Cucinelli spokeswoman told me this was a slight increase from last year, reflecting higher material and labor costs, and the markdown was seasonal, one of two annual sales. The price didn’t have anything to do with the strong dollar.Nearby, Sherry-Lehmann Wine and Spirits had both the 2011 and 2012 vintages of the Vieux Télégraphe, a Châteauneuf-du-Pape from the Rhône Valley in France. The 2012 was $89.95 a bottle, which was $5 more than the 2011 vintage. That’s in line with the Rhône 50 index, a price index compiled by WinePrices.com, which rose 8 percent last year and hit a high in December.So much for bargains.It turns out that retail pricing, especially for highly differentiated luxury brands with already fat profit margins, is far more complicated than just looking up the latest exchange rates.James B. Stewart, on CNBC, discusses the impact of the Swiss decision to abandon its efforts to hold down the value of the franc, and how currency gyrations may not mean bargains in the United States.Antonio Rodriguez-Lopez, assistant professor of economics at the University of California, Irvine and author of the article “Prices and Exchange Rates: A Theory of Disconnect,” told me that my intuition that prices should be lower thanks to the weak euro makes sense, all else being equal.Naturally, this being economics, all else isn’t equal.“This isn’t happening with the goods you describe, and more generally it will only cause, on average, a 1 or 2 percent decline in the United States prices of imported goods after a 10 percent dollar appreciation,” he said. Economists refer to this phenomenon as “incomplete exchange rate pass-through.”Why that would be is the subject of much academic research, but, using wine as an example, as the euro declines, the “markups are also changing,” he said.“The wine producer will increase its markup in the United States, canceling out the decline in marginal cost,” he said. “French firms will not fully pass through the benefits of a stronger dollar to United States consumers, but will get a cut from it in the form of higher markups.”AdvertisementAlison Kenney Paul, vice chairwoman for the retail and distribution sector for the consulting and accounting firm Deloitte, agreed that many European producers of luxury goods were using the strong dollar to pad their margins.“Demand is good enough that they’ll just take the exchange arbitrage and put it into higher margins,” Ms. Paul said. “You may never see a price difference, and prices could keep inching up. The folks who are buying these brands aren’t that price-sensitive. The luxury of having a great global brand is that you don’t have to rely on price incentives.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.(While bigger profit margins may not do much for consumers, they should be great for profits — and stock prices — of European exporters to the United States.)Ms. Paul noted that there was also a lag between a change in exchange rates and consumer prices. “The supply chain for automobiles or even wine is quite extended,” she said. “There’s a lot in the pipeline already. It may take six months or more before you start seeing an effect.” Bordeaux wine producers, for example, are expected to announce prices this spring for the 2014 vintage, most of which won’t appear on retail shelves for several years.Harald Hendrikse, European auto analyst for Morgan Stanley in London, said that Porsche was something of a special case, even among luxury automakers. “Porsche has the highest margins in the world. It’s not a high-volume manufacturer,” he said. With demand growing and manufacturing already near capacity, “they don’t really have any incentive to cut prices.”“They’re going to get a tremendous benefit on the margins,” he continued.While I didn’t find any bargains among the specific items I went looking for, I did find some on other products, even luxury brands, in the same categories. Sherry-Lehmann was offering a case of 2010 Château Cabrières Cuvée Tradition, another Châteauneuf-du-Pape, for $399.95 (about $33 a bottle), marked down from $559.35. It was throwing in a free magnum (the size of two regular bottles) to boot.Yet, for the wine connoisseur, some of the most sought-after wines, while still expensive, are starting to have some of the biggest discounts. This week, the online wine site Vinfolio offered a 2009 Château Cos d’Estournel, a famed second-growth Bordeaux that earned a perfect score from the wine critic Robert Parker, for $375 a bottle; it sold last year for $453. A 2006 Château La Mission Haut-Brion was $235; it was $285 in October. And a 2011 Rhône, the Chave Hermitage Blanc, was $250 in December; it’s now $215. (It was listed for $315 at Sherry-Lehmann.)Alex Casella, director of wine sourcing for Vinfolio, said buyers who stockpiled French wines, betting on future price increases, were taking advantage of exchange rates to release stocks now at lower prices. “Older vintages of Bordeaux, the ’09s, ’10s, even the ’05s, are where we’re seeing some great deals right now,” he said. “We haven’t seen much movement yet in the midtier wines, like the Vieux Télégraphe.”Tyler Colman, who writes a blog as Dr. Vino, said, “At the very high end, you’ve got strong global demand and very limited production, so you’re not going to see much effect on prices.” He cited wines from Burgundy, which has been plagued by bad weather and small vintages in recent years. (Winemakers, unlike producers of many other goods, have only limited control over the amount they can produce, because of weather and land constraints.)AdvertisementBut Mr. Colman agreed that older Bordeaux vintages coming out of warehouses may be the first to show the effects of the weak euro. “After that, you may start to see declines in other categories,” he said. “There’s a lot of competition out there, and I think people in the supply chain have good reason to keep prices down and try to gain market share. It would be great to see prices take a break. I’d drink to that.”Among luxury automakers, Mercedes-Benz and BMW appear to be in a fierce battle for the crown of best-selling premium import, and they were offering big incentives in December — up to $5,000 per car in the case of Mercedes and $6,000 for BMW, according to Mr. Hendrikse of Morgan Stanley. Some of this may be seasonal, since the end of the year is typically a good time to buy a car. But he noted that the incentives were higher than in the past.“The reality is that every carmaker around the globe is facing lower costs thanks to the dollar, except those producing in the United States,” Mr. Hendrikse said. “So there is going to be more price competition.”As Ms. Paul of Deloitte told me, some bargains are likely to materialize, but “if you want to find them, you’re going to have to look harder.”After my trip to the Cucinelli boutique, I visited the sixth floor of Barneys, just across the street, where the store features its high-end imported brands. An Isaia sports jacket from Italy in a beautiful fabric that fit perfectly was 60 percent off at $1,149, marked down from $2,895.Tempting, but I didn’t buy it. At least not yet.A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Seeking Luxury Deals as Euro Falls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »