By AARON M. KESSLERJAN. 16, 2015
WASHINGTON —  As testing of a potentially dangerous guardrail system continued on Friday, two United States senators sent a harshly worded letter to the federal agency conducting the tests, saying they were inadequate and should be made more rigorous.Senators Richard Blumenthal, a Connecticut Democrat, and Charles E. Schumer, a New York Democrat, wrote to the Federal Highway Administration’s acting administrator, Gregory G. Nadeau, saying that the agency had “failed to answer many of the questions we have raised” about the guardrails. Additionally, they questioned the testing, saying it was not using current safety standards.“We find it difficult to maintain confidence that your agency is taking proper action to ensure that the device meets the highest safety standards,” according to a copy of the letter obtained by The New York Times.Trinity’s guardrail systems, called ET-Plus, are said to potentially jam when hit from the front, causing the metal rail to pierce the passenger compartment like a spear, instead of peeling away. In October, a federal whistle-blower case found that Trinity had defrauded the government by not informing the agency of crucial changes it made to the guardrail in 2005.AdvertisementTrinity says that its product is safe. The federal agency did not join the whistle-blower lawsuit, and for several years approved the guardrail for federal reimbursement money, even as state transportation officials raised concerns. But after the fraud trial, the Federal Highway Administration said it would conduct an investigation, including requiring Trinity to conduct new crash tests. More than 30 states have banned further installation of the device until the testing is finished.AdvertisementThose tests began last month outside San Antonio, and the most recent of eight planned test crashes took place on Friday. Agency officials have not disclosed the results of the six tests that have now been conducted but said last month that they were “unremarkable.”But Mr. Blumenthal and Mr. Schumer wrote that the federal agency improperly allowed Trinity to conduct the new tests under an older safety standard, rather than the latest, more stringent standards put into place in 2011.In San Antonio, Tex., Trinity Industries tested its ET-Plus model guardrail.“It is critical that testing now underway use the most credible and up-to-date methodology,” the letter states, saying that since Trinity broke the law by not disclosing for seven years how it had narrowed the channel of the ET-Plus from five inches to four, the company should have been held to new safety standards in place when the agency became aware of the change, in 2012.Agency officials acknowledged receiving the letter and said they would respond to the senators’ concerns.Tony Furst, the agency’s associate administrator for safety, has previously said the agency’s goal in allowing the use of the older standard was to “rebaseline” the ET-Plus by repeating the exact tests it underwent, and passed, back in 2005, since questions had been raised about those tests’ validity. He indicated that additional tests might take place in the future.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the senators on Friday wrote that the agency “fails to grasp the primary goal of testing.”“F.H.W.A. is attempting to answer whether the agency received credible information from Trinity in past years,” the letter states. “This is undoubtedly an important question; however, the ultimate inquiry is whether this device is safe for today’s roads.”Jeff Eller, a spokesman for Trinity, said that the company was fully cooperating with the federal inquiry, and that it was unfair for a guardrail designed to meet the older standards to be subjected to the newer ones.The senators’ letter, however, raises specific aspects of the newer standards that they say are particularly relevant to the ET-Plus tests, among them that the new rules call for a guardrail head to be “tested from a variety of vehicle impact angles.”Advertisement“Serious allegations have been raised that the device is vulnerable at vehicular impacts of four to six degrees,” they wrote, something using the older standard “will ignore.”The highway administration is also in the process of gathering data from a variety of sources, including records from state transportation departments and accidents detailed by the federal lawsuit itself.A spokeswoman for F.H.W.A. has said the agency is also taking measurements of ET-Plus guardrails around the country.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Senators Question Stringency of Guardrail Testing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.