By JAD MOUAWADJAN. 16, 2015
The Obama administration this week lifted some travel and trade restrictions on Americans traveling to Cuba, but commercial airlines will not be flocking to Havana for at least another year, experts say.The new rules, which took effect on Friday, removed the need for travelers to get approval from the United States government before traveling to Cuba. Now, many more are able to travel legally, spend more money on the island, buy Cuban cigars and increase remittances to their families there.But before airlines can schedule direct flights to Havana and other airports, the two countries must still negotiate a new air service agreement.Until that happens, travelers will have to rely on charter flights booked through specialized travel agencies, and that is not expected to change for the next 12 to 18 months, according to travel experts and industry officials. The timeline could be further complicated by opposition in Congress as well as the presidential election next year, which could delay matters in unpredictable ways.Advertisement“These are big changes and this will take some time, as there has been 50-plus years of mistrust to overcome,” said Tom Popper, the president of Insight Cuba, a travel agency that has been operating in Cuba since 2000 and sends about 3,000 Americans to the country each year.AdvertisementHe did not see the hurdles as insurmountable. “There is excitement in Cuba about those changes, and there is a willingness to change,” he said. “Like us, they are looking at this closely. We’ve been divided forever and all of a sudden, in a three-week period, everything changes.”About 100,000 Americans already visit Cuba each year, a number that has surged since more flexible travel rules were introduced in 2011. Cubans living in the United States make an additional estimated 400,000 visits a year.Still, the new policy means that those numbers are certain to increase. Travel agencies have already reported a jump in interest since the Obama administration announced that it was restoring diplomatic relations with Cuba last month, and they are increasing charter capacity in the coming months to address the expected growth in demand.“This will make a huge difference in the numbers of people who can go,” said Bob Guild of Marazul Charters, a travel agency that has been organizing trips to Cuba for 36 years. “This opens up a chance for the American people to go to Cuba that they didn’t have before.”Outside the United States, many airlines already serve Cuban destinations. Travelers can also go to Canada, Mexico, or several Caribbean countries first and take connecting flights there, a loophole that many Americans have taken to circumvent restrictions imposed by the United States, since Cuba does not ban Americans from entering.The biggest carriers, American Airlines, Delta Air Lines and United Airlines, among others, quickly signaled interest in Cuba after the new policy was announced, but so far have not made plans to fly there. “We look forward to expanding service into Cuba as more opportunities become available,” Delta said.JetBlue operates charter flights from Fort Lauderdale, Fla., while American Airlines has been operating charter flights booked by travel agencies into Cuba for 15 years from Miami and Tampa, Fla. Neither is expected to schedule its own commercial flights until a new air service agreement can be established to replace an agreement dating to 1953.“We are reviewing the changes to the Cuba travel policy and will continue to be guided by the laws and policies of the U.S. government and the governments of the countries we serve, as they evolve,” American Airlines said in a statement.AdvertisementUnited said on Thursday that it planned to seek approval for regular flights from Newark and Houston.The trade group Airlines for America said, “There are still a number of steps to be resolved on this issue.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Department of Transportation issued a notice on Thursday that outlined the steps that needed to be taken before commercial flights could resume.To start, the two governments need to agree on how many flights can operate, at what frequency and from which airports. Cuba, with at least 10 airports, has plenty of gates, but some aviation experts doubt that it will be willing to open up its airspace entirely, to protect the interests of its national airline, Cubana de Aviación.An air service agreement would also encompass things like airport fees and other reciprocal arrangements between airlines and airports.Once an agreement is reached, domestic carriers will most likely face some forms of capacity limits to Cuba, analysts said. This could require the Department of Transportation to seek competitive bids from American carriers interested in flying to Cuba, just as it does to constrained airports in China or Japan, for instance.In its notice, the department said that airlines that served Cuba before the 1959 revolution would not have an advantage over other airlines.Under the new rules outlined by the White House on Thursday, Americans who travel to Cuba for any of a dozen specific reasons will no longer be required to obtain a special license from the Treasury Department. But travel will still be limited to people including those with close relatives in Cuba, those traveling on humanitarian or religious missions, travelers on educational programs, as well as academics and journalists.AdvertisementWhile specific trips for tourism remain officially banned, the government will no longer be able to enforce any direct oversight. The new rules therefore represent a momentous change, and there is likely to be a major touristic rush to Cuba in the coming years, according to travel specialists.“The floodgates have opened,” Arthur Frommer, founder of the Frommer’s travel guide series, wrote on his blog. “Starting now, any determined American will be able to travel, without hindrance, to Cuba.”Travelers will also be permitted to use credit cards, spend more money in Cuba, and bring back more souvenirs, including up to $100 in tobacco or alcohol.Mr. Frommer added, “It’s obvious that Americans who honestly believe they fit within 12 permitted categories of travel for Cuba can simply pack up and go.”A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Airlines Will Miss Initial Rush to Cuba.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.