By BARRY MEIERJAN. 16, 2015
Two former executives of the health technology firm NantHealth said in a lawsuit filed this week that the company made fraudulent claims about the reliability of its system, which links patient information gathered by different medical devices and pieces of hospital equipment.The employees, who were fired by the company, also charged in the lawsuit that NantHealth, which is owned by a billionaire doctor, may have used company donations to attract federal funds so a hospital could buy its products.The accusations were contained in a wrongful-termination lawsuit filed on Wednesday in a federal court in Panama City, Fla. In a statement, NantHealth said two ex-employees, Stephanie Davidson and William Lynch, had demanded $2 million to prevent them from smearing the company with false information.“The company will vigorously defend against these false and libelous allegations,” NantHealth, which is based in Culver City, Calif., said. A lawyer for Ms. Davidson and Mr. Lynch did not respond to calls for comment.AdvertisementNantHealth is owned by Dr. Patrick Soon-Shiong, a surgeon and business entrepreneur who is a part owner of the Los Angeles Lakers basketball team. His business relationships have come under scrutiny before.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An investigation more than a decade ago by The New York Times found that a little-known drug company then headed by Dr. Soon-Shiong had a financial relationship with Premier, a major purchaser of supplies for hospitals nationwide that was supposed to be free of such conflicts.AdvertisementDr. Soon-Shiong was recently profiled on the television newsmagazine “60 Minutes” for his efforts to develop better cancer treatments. In the 1990s, he promoted a novel way of treating Type 1 diabetes that failed to work.In the filing, the two ex-executives said NantHealth hired them in 2014 in connection with the company’s planned initial sale of public stock. However, they claimed that they discovered soon after starting work at the company that its medical data gathering system did not work well and that NantHealth’s claims about it were fraudulent and misleading.One company-sponsored review last year found that its system was “10 years behind in technology capabilities,” the lawsuit charged. In addition, an executive of one hospital using NantHealth’s system was so dismayed by its performance that he threatened to terminate its use and alert other hospitals to the problem, the lawsuit charged.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Employees Accuse Health Firm of Fraud.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.