AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonFor the lucky few who are collectors of Rothkos and Modiglianis, there is a new lender in town.The Carlyle Group, the private equity giant, has teamed up with Banque Pictet to offer loans to collectors using their art as collateral under a new business venture called the Athena Art Finance Corporation.Wealthy collectors of art will be able to borrow against pieces they already own to buy more art, like pieces from artists like Willem de Kooning and Georgia O’Keefe that will go under the hammer in coming auction seasons at Sotheby’s and Christie’s, the company said.“We believe that this is a market where art is an asset class that is becoming very popular for many wealthy people,” said Andrea Danese, chief executive and co-founder of Athena.Athena, which has already raised $280 million, will offer loans worth as much as 50 percent of the value of any specific piece of artwork or a collection of works. These loans will range from six months to seven years in length and will start at $1 million.Carlyle’s investment in the venture comes from its Global Financial Services unit, which is run by Olivier Sarkozy.“The $3 trillion-plus global art market is one of the least developed and least financially sophisticated markets of substantial size in the world,” Mr. Sarkozy said in a statement on Wednesday.In an interview, Mr. Danese said the idea for the venture originated with Mr. Sarkozy, who is the half brother of the former French president, Nicolas Sarkozy. Mr. Danese, who was previously an executive at Bloomberg, said he was introduced last year to Mr. Sarkozy by Daniel L. Doctoroff, the former chief executive of Bloomberg.Eventually, Athena plans to package together series of loans, turning them into new investment products for other investors like private wealth clients and institutions like pension funds.While the art lending market is still fledgling and there are few entrants, Athena estimates that it could be worth billions of dollars. The auction house Sotheby’s has made more than $4 billion in loans against art, according to its website. And a recent report by Skate, an art industry magazine, has estimated that the loan market could be as large as $100 billion, Mr. Danese pointed out.In its new venture, Athena will compete head on with the auction house Sotheby’s and a few private banks that currently lend to art collectors. But Mr. Danese said Anthena’s ambitions go further.“We want to be a market maker in art risk,” he added. “If you think about Solomon Brothers in the old bond market, we want to be in the middle of the floor of risk in the art market.”Advertisement