By EMILY STEELJAN. 16, 2015
NBC News has recruited Noah Oppenheim, a “Today” show veteran, to lead the morning show after a period of turmoil that included the firing of its previous chief after 10 weeks on the job.Mr. Oppenheim will take on the role of senior vice president in charge of “Today,” and oversee both television and digital operations of the show, the network announced Friday morning. In addition to leading editorial content, Mr. Oppenheim is charged with bolstering growth and finding strategic opportunities for the show.Mr. Oppenheim succeeds Jamie Horowitz, a former ESPN executive who was ousted in November after a series of disputes with the show’s staff and NBC News executives. Hiring Mr. Horowitz was seen as a crucial move in the fiercely competitive morning show race with ABC’s “Good Morning America,” but his aggressive efforts to rework the show quickly turned some staff members against him. His dismissal was viewed as an embarrassing setback for the head of NBC News, Deborah Turness, who hired him.The “Today” show is NBC News’s biggest profit center, and for 16 consecutive years it was No. 1 in the morning show ratings. But that streak ended in 2012, when it was passed by “G.M.A.” after the removal of Ann Curry as a “Today" co-anchor. It has lagged “G.M.A." in the ratings ever since.AdvertisementThis season, “Good Morning America” attracted a total of 5.5 million viewers over 2 years old, compared with “Today’s” 4.8 million during the same time period, according to Nielsen.AdvertisementLeading “Today” into stability, let alone a comeback, is one of the several challenges facing Ms. Turness, who started as president of NBC News in August 2013 after working as a top television news executive in Britain. Ms. Turness must also sort out the role of a television news outlet in the age of real-time digital news.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With Mr. Oppenheim, NBC is bringing in a familiar face with past experience on the show. He worked as a senior producer of “Today” from 2005 until 2008, and won an Emmy Award in that period. He went on to become head of unscripted and digital content at Reveille, a Los Angeles entertainment group, and most recently worked as a screenwriter.He also is co-author of the best-selling series “The Intellectual Devotional.”Mr. Oppenheim is expected to start at “Today” in March.News of his appointment at “Today” was first reported by New York magazine.“As many of you know, Noah brings both an insider’s and outsider’s perspective to the role, and his breadth of experience spans both hard news and entertainment,” Ms. Turness wrote in a memo to the staff on Friday.Days earlier, NBC announced that Ms. Curry would leave her full-time position at NBC News for a new role that will allow her to report for other outlets. She also is developing a digital media start-up. Ms. Curry was a “Today” show regular for 15 years and an anchor and correspondent at NBC News for about 25 years.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: NBC Names a ‘Today’ Veteran to Lead the Show.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.