By HIROKO TABUCHIJAN. 16, 2015
The latest victim of changing teenage tastes and lifestyles, the mall-based retailer Wet Seal, said on Friday that it had filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, the end of an era for a onetime Wall Street darling.A financing offer from a boutique investment bank could still keep some of its stores open, Wet Seal said in a statement. But its filing shows how apparel retailers that cater to the young have struggled to stay relevant as teenagers increasingly flock to cheap fast-fashion stores like H&M and spend time on their phones rather than at malls.Last week, Wet Seal closed 338 stores and laid off 3,700 workers, reflecting a sharp fall in its comparable-store sales. Its Chapter 11 filing listed assets of $10 million to $50 million and liabilities of $100 million to $500 million.It was an ignominious move from a retailer that grew from a bathing-suit company to a smash hit among teenagers in the 1980s and 1990s with its bohemian tops and hip jeans. For a generation, Wet Seal and now-defunct peers like Contempo Casuals and Merry-Go-Round were first stops on weekend trips to the mall.AdvertisementThen, like a teenage infatuation, feelings cooled. Teenagers began to spend more on technology than fashion, and less time at malls and more time online. Wet Seal’s finances dropped.Advertisement“It’s almost a curse to have been hot, because it guarantees that you’re going to be looked at as old school,” said Kit Yarrow, a consumer psychologist and co-author of “Gen BuY: How Tweens, Teens and Twenty-Somethings Are Revolutionizing Retail.”“And teens are changing fast. A lot of dollars they spent on clothing is now going into technology, electronics, games and apps,” she said. “They used to get their first kiss at malls. It was the teen playground. Now, they’re going to coffee shops.”In seeking protection from creditors, Wet Seal joins the teenage fashion retailers Deb Shops and Delia’s, which both filed for bankruptcy last month.Analysts had long warned that too many retailers were competing for a shrinking pie in that market and that it was due for a shakeout. Teenagers are increasingly abandoning even some of the biggest teenage clothing retailers, including Abercrombie & Fitch, whose preppy, logo-emblazoned hoodies and sweatpants were once must-haves.Another teenage retail giant, Aéropostale, said last week that comparable sales over the holiday season plunged 9 percent — less of a decline than some of the draconian forecasts floated by Wall Street analysts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Selling to the cool teens doesn’t really work the way it used to,” said MaryLeigh Bliss, editor in chief at Ypulse, a youth research firm based in New York.“But teen retailers are still going along with the idea of exclusivity, and the traditional idea that what the cool kids want is the driving force,” she said. “But what’s cool’s really fragmented.”Wet Seal’s chief financial officer, Thomas Hillebrandt, acknowledged that the retailer had not kept up with the times.Advertisement“The continuing fundamental shift in consumer behavior away from traditional mall shopping toward online-only stores and increased competition throughout the specialty retail fashion industry have created a difficult operating environment,” he said in the company’s bankruptcy filing.A financing deal with the boutique investment bank B. Riley could still help save part of Wet Seal’s business. Under the terms of the deal, B. Riley would lend Wet Seal as much as $20 million to finance its operations during the Chapter 11 reorganization. The loan will convert to equity in the reorganized company if Wet Seal pulls through.“We are pleased to provide financial assistance to the Wet Seal in its efforts to revive this iconic fashion retailer,” Bryant Riley, B. Riley’s chairman, said in a statement.Wet Seal still operates 173 stores in 42 states and Puerto Rico and sells online. It booked net sales of $104.3 million in the third quarter, compared with $114.9 million the previous year.Before the bankruptcy filing, Mr. Hillebrandt outlined plans to make Wet Seal’s offerings sexier and edgier and to aim at an older, and perhaps less fickle, audience: 18- to 24-year-olds, rather than teenagers. That would be an uphill struggle.“I would never say never. I’ve seen brands really turn themselves around,” said Ms. Bliss of Ypulse. “I don’t think teens are leaving because they’re fickle. They’re leaving because you’re not doing the things they want.”A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Chapter 11 for Wet Seal as Tastes Change.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.