By RAPHAEL MINDERJAN. 16, 2015
MADRID — The Spanish energy company Repsol said on Friday that it was abandoning oil and gas exploration off the Canary Islands after an initial survey yielded insufficient results to merit extraction.The project, which started in November, had faced stiff opposition from local politicians and environmental groups. It also coincided with a plunge in oil prices that has put into question the viability of planned exploration projects around the world.Repsol is the lead operator of a consortium that earmarked $350 million for an exploration phase that was expected to last four months. It had teamed up with Woodside Petroleum of Australia and RWE of Germany.The deepwater survey was about 40 miles from Lanzarote and Fuerteventura, part of the Canary Islands off the west coast of Africa. The archipelago, which belongs to Spain, is also a major destination for tourists.AdvertisementThe project’s oil exploration vessel, the Rowan Renaissance, will return to Angola, where Repsol has another venture.AdvertisementRepsol had forecast long-term yields of 110,000 barrels of oil a day from the project, enough to cover about one tenth of Spain’s oil consumption. The company initially put the chances of finding oil for exploration there at between 15 percent and 20 percent.The survey “confirmed that oil and gas have been generated in the basin,” Repsol said in a statement, but "the deposits found have been saturated with water, and the hydrocarbons present are in very thin, nonexploitable layers.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kristian Rix, a spokesman for Repsol, said the decision to withdraw from the project had not been influenced by the recent drop in oil prices. “Angola is an interesting project for us, and it seems more promising at this stage,” Mr. Rix said. “It’s a question of where you best allocate your capital.”Pedro San Ginés, the head of the local authority of Lanzarote, welcomed the decision and called for the Spanish authorities to promote renewable energy projects around the Canary Islands. Mr. San Ginés also said that he would travel to the European Parliament in Brussels next week to push for the creation of an international wildlife sanctuary in the waters near Lanzarote and Fuerteventura.A major oil and gas discovery near the islands could have reduced Spain’s reliance on energy imports, as it imports more than 99 percent of its hydrocarbons.But the project faced fierce opposition from environmental groups. They argued that the project would endanger local flora and wildlife, including dolphins, not only because of the risk of an oil spill, but also because of tremors linked to exploration.The project also turned into a political dispute between the Spanish government in Madrid and the regional government of the islands, which tried unsuccessfully to hold a referendum on the issue last year.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.