AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Kristin Muhlner, chief executive of NewBrand Analytics, a social-media-monitoring company, was conducted and condensed by  Adam Bryant.Q. What were you like when you were younger?A. I grew up in Paducah, Ky. I danced a lot, and I was also the nerdy kid who did science fairs and things like that. I graduated early and went to college in Memphis when I was 16. It was interesting because in Paducah I never quite fit in. I started to feel not so odd anymore at college, which was great.What did you study in college?I was an economics major, but I also ran the school newspaper. I was soliciting various companies to buy ads, and Andersen Consulting, now Accenture, was interested because they were recruiting. As I was working through the business terms with the local partner, he said, “Why aren’t you interviewing with us?” I didn’t even know what they really did, but one thing led to another, and I wound up working for them.They were building up a big staff of programmers at the time, and putting everyone through intense programming boot camp. I absolutely loved it, and I became deeply techie without really intending to do so. I spent a few years there and then went to Deloitte.A big takeaway from that period was that everyone’s replaceable. They run those organizations like they’re armies of soldiers. The wonderful thing is that you cultivate this sense that you are not the center of the universe. If you leave, someone will replace you, the circle will close and it just doesn’t matter. That lesson has been helpful because it is really easy, as you move up in your career, to think that you’ve got to be involved in everything.Other early lessons about leadership?At a small start-up I joined, we grew the company so fast that I once hired 50 people in 90 days. I was trying really hard to keep personal connections with everyone. I was asking them to travel all over the world and do all these insane things on behalf of the business, and I needed them to feel this emotional connection. But it was emotionally draining. And when the bubble burst in 2000 and we had to lay a bunch of people off, I had to let a lot of these people go.For better or worse, I developed a thicker skin. I will continue to be interested in people personally, but I can’t be personally connected anymore. That’s an interesting transition to go through, because you always want to be one of those leaders who care deeply about their staff and look after them, but at some point you have to make the shift and say you’re going to do the right thing for the business.What about lessons you learned after you became a C.E.O.?It’s very easy for people, particularly experienced executives, to look at the leader of the company, and say, “We should be doing this or that,” or, “Wow, he’s really messing up,” and not have an appreciation for all the moving parts. As a leader, you walk into a situation and you realize, yes, maybe this is a B-minus person, and maybe you’d like to have someone better. But sometimes the intricacies of these situations are such that you just need to get the most out of this person at this time.That gave me great patience to let things play out a bit. People often come to you and say, “We’ve got to fix this now.” And it’s very rare that you have to act immediately. You have to have the patience to say, “I’m going to evaluate the situation and the individuals involved, and I might choose to act on this, and I might not choose to act on this right now.”Thoughts on culture?The thing that I hear consistently is that we need to communicate more as a company. I feel like I can send out an email with everything that’s going on in the business every hour, and someone will still tell me I need to communicate more.People think that there’s this big, black box where interesting stuff happens and nothing comes out, when really nothing that interesting happens most of the time. But people just have this incredible thirst to be connected, and they need multiple reinforcing points of communication. I have to remind myself over and over not to assume that everyone knows something.I’ve started sending out an email once a week called “Where’s Waldo?” The email is just to say where people are, like that our V.P. of sales is meeting with this company. It’s amazing the reaction that it gets from people, because they feel like, wow, cool stuff’s happening, and now I know why he’s not responding to my email today. It helps.How do you hire?There are two questions I often ask people that I think get at the heart of who they are. First, I ask them what their passion is. I can get a good sense of who they are, and it helps me understand how they’re going to fit culturally in the organization. I also always ask people, “What will your company think when you tell them you’re leaving?” It can help you get at other aspects of the person — how they work with others and how they’re perceived.What advice do you give to graduating college students?I would suggest they seek out a meritocracy. If you find a meritocracy and you’re highly ambitious and you want to drive your career forward, then nothing’s going to get in your way. If you choose other industries where other factors are at play, you need to be prepared for that. If you believe in your own capabilities, choose industries where those will be celebrated.The other thing I’d say is, don’t wear “busy” as a badge of honor. We’ve become crazy about being crazy, and I’m stunned at how many people are absolutely exhausting themselves. It’s important to figure out how to be ruthlessly efficient and disciplined with your time, and do only those things that matter.This interview has been edited and condensed. Advertisement