
Breakingviews By                     
OLAF STORBECK

SEPT. 30, 2015
Cheating on emissions tests has left Volkswagen with criminal investigations, potentially enormous fines and a corporate governance crisis. One might think the rewards for behaving badly must have been high indeed. Not so.Skimping on emissions technology from 2009 to 2014 probably saved VW a measly 4.3 billion euros ($4.8 billion), according to Breakingviews estimates, less than it has so far set aside to meet recall costs.Some 10.8 million diesel-powered cars were implicated in the emissions-test cheating scandal that came to light on Sept. 18. Of those, 2.1 million were Audis, which on average generated €3,200, or about $3,575, of operating profit per vehicle during the six years in question, based on data from company reports. The rest came from lower-price volume brands and other vehicles, whose operating profit per car averaged €576, ranging from almost €1,000 for VW commercial vehicles to a loss at its SEAT brand. Add those up, and the total operating profit involved reaches €12.1 billion, or $13.4 billion, or 30 percent of all VW’s nontruck automotive operating profit over the six years.Getting those cars fit for United States emissions tests would have come at a cost. Most carmakers rely on one of two main technologies for stripping out nitrogen oxides, according to the International Council on Clean Transportation. Meeting tough American standards probably means using both, as BMW does in America. That typically adds around €400 per car for the more sophisticated technology, according to council data.Apply that cost to all of the 10.8 million cars that VW says were implicated in its emissions-dodging scandal, and it suggests that the carmaker saved no more than €4.3 billion over six years by neglecting to make its diesels clean. If only the 482,000 cars actually sold in the United States legally required this extra technology – because permitted nitrogen oxide levels in Europe are higher, tests less stringent and fines lower – the saving is less than €200 million.Since VW’s misdeeds were uncovered, the company’s shares have plunged, wiping almost €29 billion off the company’s market capitalization. Simply put, shareholders have lost more than €140 in market value for every single euro that VW saved by cutting corners on its diesel engines in the United States. It’s hard to think of a better reminder that cheating doesn’t pay.Olaf Storbeck is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »