AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robert CyranDell’s bid for EMC could signal a peak in the mergers and acquisitions market. The privately held PC maker may offer to buy the $50 billion publicly traded data-storage firm, according to news reports. EMC’s size is one challenge; the scale of borrowing needed is another. And there’s the complexity of spinning off part of EMC’s majority stake in its separately listed $35 billion subsidiary VMware.EMC bills itself as a “federation” that includes data storage, VMware’s server and network virtualization business, and the cloud software company Pivotal. In reality, it is a technology conglomerate, and investors value it that way. Data storage is a revenue producer, but it is under threat. Pivotal is growing fast. VMware, meanwhile, is doing well but it is arguably too dominant: EMC’s 81 percent stake accounts for more than half of its total market capitalization.The simplest response would be to split up EMC, as the activist investor Elliott Management proposed last year. A purchase by Dell — which was taken private two years ago for $24 billion by its founder, Michael S. Dell, and the private equity firm Silver Lake — would be far more convoluted. With a premium, the price tag could exceed $60 billion. Raising $40 billion or more in debt markets would be tough, too, even if EMC’s cash flow could be tapped to support it.Spinning off VMware to EMC shareholders in its entirety could cut the size of the deal by half. But VMware is probably the most attractive asset, since Dell already has a storage business. If Dell wanted to keep a 51 percent economic interest in VMware, it could spin off about 30 percent of the company, worth about $10 billion. But a deal trimmed by that much would still be ambitious — even before taking any additional steps to optimize EMC.As with huge hostile offers and mergers that antagonize antitrust watchdogs, Dell’s interest in EMC is in keeping with the tail-end of a mergers and acquisitions cycle, when complex deals with nonobvious benefits swing into view. An analyst at Bernstein even sketched out a transaction involving a reverse Morris Trust, a rare tax-driven mechanism that has doomed deals in the past. While Dell managed to overcome plenty of hurdles to go private, an attempt to make a merger with EMC work for everyone involved could be a step too far.Advertisement