LONDON — The chief executive of Allied Irish Banks, a nationalized lender, is leaving for a similar position at Clydesdale Bank, the Scottish arm of National Australia Bank.The chief executive, David Duffy, 53, joined Allied Irish Banks in December 2011 and also served as its executive director.The announcement on Monday comes a week after the Irish government said it had hired Goldman Sachs to advise it on a potential capital restructuring at Allied Irish Banks, the first step before any sale of a portion of its stake in the lender, which was nationalized in 2010.“The bank is well positioned to contribute to Irish economic recovery and to serve customer needs,” Mr. Duffy said in a news release.“Now is the right time for a new C.E.O. to lead the bank through the next phase of its recovery and growth, and a multiyear process of returning capital to the Irish state,” Mr. Duffy said, citing government approval of the restructuring plan and the fact that Allied Irish Banks returned to profit and passed stress tests.Allied Irish Banks received 21 billion euros, or about $24 billion, in 2010 as a part of a government bailout. The Irish government now owns about 99 percent of its shares.Before joining Allied Irish Banks, Mr. Duffy was chief executive of Standard Bank International for its operations in Asia, Europe and Latin America, and head of the global wholesale banking network of the ING Group.Mr. Duffy will work with the Allied Irish Banks board of directors to identify a successor, and his departure date is yet to be determined.“During David’s tenure as C.E.O., the bank has been transformed from an organization in difficulty to one which returned to profit in the first half of 2014,” Richard Pym, chairman of Allied Irish Banks, said in a news release. “I will work with David in the coming period to facilitate a smooth transition and wish him every success in the future.”National Australia Bank said on Monday that it expected Mr. Duffy to join Clydesdale Bank “within the next few months.”Clydesdale Bank is one of two banks that National Australia Bank owns in Britain. It was founded in Glasgow in 1838 and has about 140 retail branches in Scotland and other parts of Britain. National Australia Bank also owns Yorkshire Bank, which was founded in 1859 and has about 180 branches in Britain. The British businesses posted a combined profit of 158 million Australian dollars, or about $130 million, for the year that ended Sept. 30, 2014.Mr. Duffy will serve as chief executive of Clydesdale Bank and will be invited to join the boards of Clydesdale Bank and National Australia Group Europe.“David is a highly effective and motivational leader with a wealth of international banking experience and a strong track record in retail banking,” James Pettigrew, chairman of the Clydesdale Bank board, said in a news release.He added, “A passionate and genuine customer champion, David’s broad-based skills, leadership, energy and strategic vision will be invaluable as we move into the next phase of our development.”