By EMILY STEELJAN. 18, 2015
People are spending an exploding amount of time watching video on their mobile phones or streaming programs to their television sets, but so far the industry has struggled to track that behavior.The measurement firm comScore plans to introduce this week a new measurement for tracking video audiences across computers, mobile and other streaming devices. ComScore previously measured digital video audiences only on desktops and laptops.The new metric should provide additional information for television networks and advertisers. ComScore’s initial research revealed that by counting the number of people watching video on mobile and other digital devices beyond a computer, the total digital viewership for television networks increased by a range of 8 percent to as much as 30 percent.“We want to make sure that video audiences get properly counted across all platforms,” said Serge Matta, comScore’s chief executive.Advertisement“Everyone knows, for a platform to increase in usage, you need to have measurement,” he added. “If you don’t, there is no way you will get the appropriate credit and there is not a lot of advertising happening on that platform.”AdvertisementThe initiative is part of a broader plan by comScore to introduce new measurements that account for diverse viewing habits. The company is seeking to provide an alternative to Nielsen, the industry’s longtime leading provider of television ratings, which has faced criticism for not keeping pace with tracking new technologies for television watching.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Television executives said that Nielsen remained the dominant player for traditional ratings, but that comScore is stepping in with a robust alternative for tracking digital viewing.The challenge of measuring how people now watch television was one of the issues that took center stage last week at the Television Critics Association winter press tour in Pasadena. Alan Wurtzel, president of research at NBCUniversal, told critics that the notion that television audiences are eroding was not true.To underscore his point, he cited research that showed how the audiences of NBC’s drama “The Blacklist” increased an additional 17 percent during a seven-day period after the show was televised, after digital viewing, like streaming and mobile, was included.Mr. Wurtzel said that the network would start releasing a new set of ratings for its programs that include traditional ratings figures along with the digital.“The question that I get every single day is: ‘Where have all the viewers gone?’ “ Mr. Wurtzel said. “The reality is, they really haven’t gone anywhere. They’re simply consuming video content differently.”A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: ComScore to Tally Viewers Across Their Many Devices.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.