AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesThe private equity firm founded with a quarter-billion dollar check from the former Microsoft chief Steven A. Ballmer has made its first purchase.The firm, the Stagwell Group, which is being run by the former advertising executive Mark Penn, will acquire SKDKnickerbocker, the public relations group best known for its advertising and campaign work for prominent Democratic clients.It is the first step in what Mr. Penn said would be an attempt to create a cohesive group of advertising, research, public relations and marketing companies.“The goal is to build a great group of companies that have a strong understanding of the digital world,” Mr. Penn said in an interview. “It’s a bit of a Noah’s ark, but we’ll have one of each kind.”Mr. Penn said he also expected to acquire firms that specialize in digital design, Hollywood ventures, ad buying and financial communications.Announced in June, Stagwell has $250 million in assets — most of it contributed by Mr. Ballmer, and some by Mr. Penn — and said it would use debt to strike deals worth as much as $750 million.“I believe in the ability to invest, grow and even shake up firms in the marketing industries,” Mr. Ballmer said when the firm started. But Mr. Ballmer, who also owns the Los Angeles Clippers professional basketball team, is not expected to be as involved in the operations of Stagwell as he is with his National Basketball Association franchise.The groundwork for Stagwell was laid during Mr. Penn’s three-year tenure at Microsoft, where Mr. Penn served as chief strategy officer and a close adviser to Mr. Ballmer.Before that, Mr. Penn worked in both advertising and politics. He founded a market research firm called Penn Schoen Berland and sold it to WPP, the world’s biggest advertising group. At WPP, he became chief executive of Burson Marsteller, the public relations firm.Mr. Penn also has a long history in politics, running polling for the New York mayoral campaigns of Ed Koch in the 1970s. He served as President Bill Clinton’s pollster from 1996 to 2000, and he worked with Hillary Rodham Clinton during her senatorial campaigns and her 2008 presidential run.Over the years, Mr. Penn has worked closely with SKDKnickerbocker as well, including a collaboration with the firm to produce a television commercial featuring Bill Gates when antitrust regulators were pressing for the breakup of Microsoft.The firm that is now SKDKnickerbocker was founded in the 1970s by Bob Squier, one of the innovators of campaign advertising. Mr. Squier worked on both of Mr. Clinton’s presidential campaigns. Before that, his clients included Hubert H. Humphrey in 1968 and Jimmy Carter in 1976.Other prominent campaign wizards joined the firm over the years, including Bill Knapp, who led the creative work for President Clinton’s 1996 campaign and produced the advertising for all three of Michael Bloomberg’s mayoral campaigns, and Anita Dunn, formerly the White House communications director for President Obama.In 2010, the firm merged with Knickerbocker, a public relations firm founded by Josh Isay.With its political work, the firm focuses on Democrats and traditional progressive issues like gay rights, gun control and reproductive health.But in recent years, SKDKnickerbocker has put its campaign tactics to use for a growing list of corporate clients, including US Airways, AT&T, Pfizer and Microsoft. This has meant defending controversial businesses, including for-profit colleges and Herbalife, the supplements company accused of being a pyramid scheme. Today the firm has offices in New York, Washington, Albany and Los Angeles.In recent months, Mr. Penn approached the partners at SKDKnickerbocker about a deal. The purchase price of the firm, which has annual revenue approaching $50 million, was not disclosed. The SKDKnickerbocker partners signed long-term contracts, including Jennifer Cunningham and Hilary Rosen, ensuring the core of the firm will stay together after the deal.“We want to join Stagwell because we think working with the sister companies, especially in the digital and data spaces, is going to help us offer a more comprehensives suite of services,” said Mr. Isay, who will serve as managing partner for the firm. “It’s good for our clients, and it’s good for our culture. This is a new chapter to the story of the firm, not an epilogue.”As other firms are added to the Stagwell portfolio, Mr. Penn plans to run the businesses separately but to encourage collaboration. Rather than centralize back-office operations, he wants to leave the partners at each firm in charge of the businesses they know well.“The big holdings companies are run primarily by accountants, instead of people who came out of the core disciplines,” Mr. Penn said. “Folks at this firm have been the communications director at the White House.”Mr. Isay said he hoped to collaborate with other companies in the Stagwell portfolio and perhaps pick up new accounts.“Too often with big groups, the companies they hold compete with each other,” he said. “That’s disruptive to culture, and it’s not good for clients.”Though Stagwell is structured as a private equity firm, Mr. Penn said he and Mr. Ballmer were looking to buy and hold companies.“We’re looking to buy, hold and grow,” he said. “We’re unlikely to be flipping assets.”Mr. Penn said Stagwell, which is named after a historic estate he keeps on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, would announce more deals in the months ahead.Advertisement