By EMILY STEELJAN. 18, 2015
PASADENA, Calif. —  Jesus, a pregnant lesbian, an Asian-American family. A hip-hop empire, cybercrime fighters and the last man on earth. Those are among the cast of characters broadcasters now are depending on to rescue them from a season of troubling ratings declines.ABC, CBS, NBC and Fox paraded out the stars and producers behind their lineup of coming shows last week during the industry’s Television Critics Association winter presentations here. The broadcasters’ offerings represent an attempt to not only solidify their footing but also break out from the flood of competition on cable and digital media.“Least-objectionable television is dead,” said Paul Lee, president of ABC’s Entertainment Group. “We’re at a world where passion rules, where social conversation is so important and where people can watch what they want to watch, where they want to watch it. So they’re only going to watch the shows that they really love, that they’re really passionate about.”Indeed, viewers have never before had more options. While broadcasters continue to churn out a steady stream of programming, the amount of content on cable and digital outlets is exploding. This year, 113 cable networks are programming 32,828 hours of content in prime time, up from 44 networks and 12,537 hours of content in the 1999-2000 season, according to NBCUniversal research. Streaming outlets like Amazon, Netflix and Hulu also are adding to the deluge.Advertisement“This is the topic that keeps all of us up at night: How are we evolving to how the audience watches television?” said Jennifer Salke, president of NBC Entertainment.AdvertisementFor years, these midwinter presentations offered a chance for critics to take stock of networks’ offerings in the middle of the TV season. Now they have taken on even more importance as broadcast, cable and digital networks all introduce new series throughout the year.The broadcasters attracted attention last week for the introduction of a number of limited-run series aiming to take on the bold cinematic programming that is luring big-screen stars to television. Acclaimed actors said that they were keen to take on such projects, citing the quality of writers and directors now flocking to television along with the fact that these series have set start and end dates, which makes it easier to juggle other film and television projects.One of the most talked about broadcast series was ABC’s “American Crime,” created by John Ridley and starring Felicity Huffman and Timothy Hutton. The show examines the racial tensions ignited after a young couple is attacked in their Modesto, Calif., home. The series is scheduled to begin on March 5.Similarly, “The Slap” on NBC looks at the ripple effect that one event can have across a community. The dramatic mini-series, scheduled to start in February, stars Zachary Quinto, Uma Thurman, Peter Sarsgaard and Thandie Newton in a story about what happens to a Brooklyn community after a short-tempered man slaps a misbehaving child at a gathering.Walter F. Parkes, an executive producer for “The Slap,” called the series “an opportunity to do a kind of event that usually we associate with cable.”Other cablelike “event series” include Fox’s “Wayward Pines,” a thriller from the movie director M. Night Shyamalan. The 10-episode series starting May 14 stars Matt Dillon as a Secret Service agent investigating the disappearance of two federal agents in an Idaho town. CBS is preparing for the March premiere of “The Dovekeepers,” produced by Roma Downey. The show is the first from a new CBS unit, called the limited series and event programming group, and is based on the Alice Hoffman novel of the same name about the Jewish resistance during the Roman siege of Masada in the first century A.D.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Downey and her husband, Mark Burnett, are bringing another religious-themed program to broadcast television with NBC’s “A.D. The Bible Continues” that will make its debut on Easter. Ms. Salke described the series as picking up where the couple’s popular mini-series “The Bible,” on the History Channel, left off. Mr. Burnett described the series as “Taking ‘House of Cards’ and dropping it into the first-century Jerusalem.”Another major theme across the networks was diversity, with critics calling the roster of shows and actors the most diverse they had ever seen. Mr. Lee of ABC said that reflecting the makeup of the audience was as transformative as advancement of digital media. “The changes in demographics in the U.S., ethnographics in the U.S. are every bit as important a revolution as the technological changes that we’re all going through,” he said. “It’s our job to reflect America.”AdvertisementOne highlight was ABC’s “Fresh Off the Boat,” a comedy based on the memoir of the food personality Eddie Huang. The series, which follows a 12-year-old Eddie moving from Washington’s Chinatown to suburban Orlando, is one of the first major Asian-American sitcoms since Margaret Cho’s “All-American Girl” in 1994.NBC announced that it had closed a deal with Eva Longoria for a series called “Telenovela,” pitched as a behind-the-scenes look at the making of a Spanish-language soap opera. The CW toasted its success with “Jane the Virgin,” a melodramatic comedy based on a Venezuelan telenovela. Its star, Gina Rodriguez, won a Golden Globe earlier in the week for best actress in a comedy series.Fox pointed to the early ratings and critical success of its hip-hop drama “Empire” from its creators, Lee Daniels and Danny Strong, and starring Terrence Howard. Dana Walden, chairman and chief executive of the Fox Television Group, called the series “the perfect show for Fox” and announced that the network would pick up a second season.“Shows with people of color can make money,” said Taraji P. Henson, who stars in the series. “When things make money, people become interested.”Executives faced questions about their challenges in finding fresh comedy and reality hits. Nina Tassler, chairwoman of CBS Entertainment, echoed the sentiment of several executives when she said in an interview that the genres were “in a cycle like everything in our business.”A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: As Content Pours From Everywhere, New Network Shows Strive for Boldness.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.