JAN. 18, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing includes the regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills, which will be held Tuesday as the markets will be closed Monday in observance of Martin Luther King’s Birthday. The regular four-week bill auction will be moved to Wednesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.07 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.02 percent.The following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:TUESDAYFlorida Board of Education, $236.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Indiana Finance Authority, $100 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYHorry County, S.C., School District, $112 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Washington, $1 billion of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementTHURSDAYSouth Carolina, $112 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYBeaufort, S.C., School District, $101.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementWaconia, Minn., Independent School District, $72.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAlabama Federal Aid Highway Finance Authority, $508 million of special obligation revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.California East Bay Municipal Utility District, $442 million of water revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Connecticut, $400 million of Yale University debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Florida Housing Finance Corporation, $50 million of homeowner mortgage revenue debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Queen’s Health Systems, Hawaii, $105.1 million of taxable debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Louisiana, $458 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $130.4 million of hospital revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Massachusetts, $585 million of taxable debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Michigan Finance Authority, $402.2 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Michigan, $92 million of limited tax general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Nebraska Public Power District, $171 million of general revenue bonds. Bank of America.AdvertisementOrange County, Calif., $119 million of certificates of participation. Citigroup Global Markets.Pasadena, Tex., Independent School District, $61.8 million unlimited tax school building general obligation. Piper Jaffray.Pennsylvania Higher Education Facilities Authority, $83 million of university revenue bonds. Bank of America.Queen’s Health Systems, Hawaii, $179 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.San Antonio, $291 million of water system revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Seattle, $273.1 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.University of Washington, $200 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Texas Transportation Commission, $1.8 billion of turnpike system revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Texas, $90.1 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Washington, $55 million of school district unlimited tax general obligation refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.A version of this schedule appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.