By THE NEW YORK TIMESJAN. 18, 2015
CHINA WILL RELEASE FIGURES ON FOURTH-QUARTER GROWTHOn Monday night, China will reveal figures showing how much its economy grew in the fourth quarter of 2014. Economists forecast that gross domestic product growth slowed over the last months of the year to 7.2 percent, according to a Reuters poll. This would bring China’s full-year G.D.P. growth below the government’s target of 7.5 percent for 2014, representing the lowest economic growth in nearly a quarter-century. The slowdown has largely been expected and China’s leadership has announced it is prepared for a period of slower growth. But Beijing will now be under pressure to ensure that the slowdown does not accelerate in 2015. China is an engine of the global economy and a slowdown will have implications for markets around the world. ALEXANDRA STEVENSON REPORTS FROM IBM AND G.E. SEEN AS INVESTMENT GAUGESWall Street will be watching the quarterly reports of two corporations seen as barometers of business investment in technology and the industrial economy: IBM’s on Tuesday and General Electric’s on Friday. IBM, the largest supplier of corporate computing technology, faces a shift toward low-cost cloud computing. Analysts will look for evidence it is moving quickly in fields like cloud and big data. G.E. continues its post-financial-crisis strategy of paring its finance arm, GE Capital, and relying more on industrial businesses. On the industrial side, analysts wonder how much falling oil prices will hit orders for oil field equipment, gas turbines and energy-efficient jet engines. STEVE LOHRKERRY TO JOIN ATTENDEES AT WORLD ECONOMIC FORUMThe World Economic Forum begins Wednesday in Davos, Switzerland. Prominent attendees will include Secretary of State John Kerry, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and Li Keqiang, the prime minister of China. The 2,500 participants, representing the global business and political elite, have a lot to discuss this year, including terrorism, armed conflict in the Middle East and Ukraine, and the realignment of economic power because of the drop in global oil prices. The forum continues through Saturday. JACK EWINGEUROPEAN BANK IS EXPECTED TO ANNOUNCE BOND PURCHASES The European Central Bank meets in Frankfurt on Thursday and is expected to announce that it will begin large-scale purchases of eurozone government bonds — so-called quantitative easing — in an attempt to push inflation up from levels considered toxic for economic growth. Statements by top E.C.B. officials indicate that some variety of quantitative easing is all but certain. But many unknowns remain, including how large the E.C.B. bond purchases will be, whether the amount will be enough to reinvigorate growth, and whether the action will alienate Germans who see quantitative easing as a de facto redistribution of wealth to countries like Greece and Italy. JACK EWINGA version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Economic Data From China, and Stimulus From the E.C.B.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.