By HIROKO TABUCHIOCT. 8, 2015
Marissa Webb, the former J. Crew star designer tasked with reviving Banana Republic, is stepping down as the brand’s creative director after just 18 months in the job.Ms. Webb will still advise Banana Republic, Gap’s sister brand, the company said Thursday, although she was expected to step back from the label’s day-to-day operations.Despite generating buzz in fashion circles — and taking Banana Republic to New York Fashion week this year for the first time — Ms. Webb, known for her bright colors paired with military references, did not bring about a sales rebound.Figures released by Gap on Thursday showed that Banana Republic sales in stores open at least 12 months fell 10 percent in September compared with a year ago. It was the brand’s third straight month with a double-digit sales slide.AdvertisementGap said it would not hire a creative director to fill the vacant post, a strategy it has taken at its other lines. Rebekka Bay, another prominent designer who resigned this year after a short stint as Gap’s creative director, has also not been replaced.AdvertisementGap will keep a minority stake in Ms. Webb’s label Marissa Webb, said Liz Nunan, a company spokeswoman.“Banana Republic has been fortunate to have Marissa’s passionate, creative leadership for the past year and a half,” Ms. Nunan said in a statement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As creative director, she’s built and led a team of amazing designers, stylists and visual artists and has pushed the brand forward in terms of its versatile style and modern aesthetic,” she said. “With a strong design team in place, Banana Republic will not fill the open creative director role at this time.”Ms. Webb’s departure from the role, effective Oct. 16, was Gap’s second leadership change in recent weeks. Last week, Gap announced that Stefan Larsson, the president of its value-oriented Old Navy label, would leave the company this year.Old Navy had been one of the only brands at Gap posting consistently strong sales gains. Mr. Larsson is set to become chief executive of Ralph Lauren.In a statement provided by Gap, Ms. Webb said that her new role “opens the door for even more possibilities for my own collection and Banana Republic.”“I am proud to be part of the growth and evolution of both brands,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Creative Director Is Stepping Down at Banana Republic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.