AdvertisementSupported byGlobal ManagerBy Sonia Kolesnikov-Jessop Li Hejun  is founder and chairman of Hanergy Holding, a Chinese company specializing in alternative energy. Q. Do you think you were born to be a leader?  A. Yes. When I was a young child, maybe 7 years old, I liked to lead the neighborhood kids. Then when I was a sophomore at Beijing Jiaotong University, I organized over 30 classmates to sell rolls of films outside the school’s cafeteria. What I did was to allocate different work to different classmates based on their character and strength. Some classmates were in charge of purchasing the films, some were in charge of sales, and some others were in charge of cash. When I look back at this simple experience, I think it involved some basic rules in team management, for example, setting up a common target, knowing what a team member is good at and allocating the right work, managing the process and sharing the results. What touched me the most was it is never easy to make money, but I also realized the power of teamwork. Then when I was about 26 years old, I founded my company and there were only about seven people, but most were my classmates so we were all the same age. I don’t know why they followed me, but I think maybe they believed in me and the mission. Q. Did the fact that you were the same age and had known each other in school make managing them and the business easier?  A. Managing people requires strong vision and having the confidence to stand by that vision. In some sense starting a company and working with my classmates made this easier because we all knew each other and had a certain level of trust and understanding. But, with that said, I had to be firm and set high expectations for everyone, starting with myself. Q. What do you remember of those early days?  A. There were a lot of difficulties during the early years, for example in strategic direction and capital. I think the latter is probably one of the biggest challenges for most start-up teams. It took us eight years to construct the Jin’anqiao Hydropower Station, which is the world’s largest hydropower station built by a private firm. At peak times, the daily cash inflow needed was as much as 10 million renminbi [about $1.6 million], which was really a heavy burden for me. It was a challenge beyond the capital itself, actually. It was also about perseverance and whether you made the right decision about the company’s strategy. But in the end, by sticking to our long-term vision and dedicating ourselves to the clean-energy sector, we have been able to weather these challenges and achieve success.  Q. What makes a leader, in your view?  A. What’s very important is belief in what you’re doing. I have plenty of money to live on and I could just retire and play golf, but I’m fighting for what I believe in, which is to change the world with clean power. And when you have faith in a common cause you can unite everybody around you, which is exciting. I think what differentiates Hanergy from some other companies is that common goal. We are neither thinking about making money nor making a name for ourselves, we focus on the ultimate solution of energy use and ensure a better way of life through safer, more convenient and cost-effective access to energy. That’s why we chose thin film over other solar technologies five years ago. A lot of people in the solar-power sector doubted our choice. But we believe the industry in general is moving in our direction. Q. What do you do as a leader to inspire your employees?  A. Your team members need to believe in you; if they do not, you will fail. But to gain that you have to prove to them that you are trustworthy. In Chinese philosophy, the highest form of belief is implicit belief: You don’t have to defend or explain yourself. In a way, people are in awe of you and trust you. But it’s not just about your employees; your clients and customers also have to believe in you and in your belief and confidence in yourself. Q. When you started as an entrepreneur, China was very different. How difficult was it in those early days?  A. Actually, 25 years ago it was easier because there were no competitors. China was just coming out of its reform and opening up, and the idea of entrepreneurship and private business was new and exciting. In those days, there was a sense of excitement and opportunity, as everyone was rushing to get rich. But starting a business is never an easy task. It requires vision, and long-term vision, not short-term treasure seeking. By focusing on China’s transition away from fossil fuels, I’ve been able to form a long-term plan that is sustainable and impactful. Q. What would you say is the secret to success in business?  A. People, people, people; how you motivate the people, for them to work, is very important. Q. How do you do that?  A. I think people believe in what we’re doing and I also give them opportunities. I can’t say I’m very hands-on, I think it’s more about giving the overall vision, but not micromanaging. I have to trust the people working with me. Obviously it’s very important to identify the right people that work for you, and I guess that’s what I’m good at. Q. How do you identify the right executives?  A. Everybody has a different definition of success. For me it’s not about making a lot of money, but whether you’re making a difference. I think the reason we have a lot of great talent coming to us is because we have a vision and people believe in what we’re doing. Based on this common vision, our employees are self-motivators and very passionate about Hanergy’s business. It is also the reason Hanergy is able to retain talented people. Q. Now you have over 10,000 people working for you. How has your view on leadership changed?  A. I don’t think I’ve actually changed in any fundamental way; my sense of mission remains, as well as perseverance. Q. What would be your advice to a young entrepreneur?  A. Persevere. Stick to one thing more than 10 years or as long as necessary. I think we often overestimate what can happen in one to two years and underestimate what can happen in five to 10 years. And if you stick to your plan in my business, over the long course, you could be amazed by what you achieve. Obviously you have to find the right thing to do [laughs]. Q. If you could talk to your young self, what would you say?  A. When you are 50, you will not regret all the hard work!Advertisement