The Dollar Wars are coming to an end, but the question remains whether it was a takeover battle worth the effort.On Thursday, Family Dollar shareholders will finally vote on a proposed $8.5 billion acquisition by Dollar Tree, which is offering about $76 a share. If they vote yes, as it appears they are leaning, it will be the death knell for a competing bid by Dollar General that is about $4 a share higher.Yes, that is right; Family Dollar, the company that makes its name on saving its customers money, might leave about half a billion dollars on the table.The crux is the Federal Trade Commission, which is poised to block a tie-up of Dollar General and Family Dollar on antitrust grounds but appears willing to allow the Dollar Tree deal to proceed with minimal conditions.The looming failure of Dollar General’s effort goes back to its halfhearted attempts to acquire Family Dollar, disclosed in shareholder litigation that sought to block the vote but was rejected.Before Dollar Tree appeared on the horizon, Family Dollar was discussing a combination with Dollar General. The courtship began in February 2013 when Family Dollar’s chief executive, Howard R. Levine, met with Michael M. Calbert, a Dollar General director. The meetings didn’t progress far and the two sides decided to meet again in the “spring of 2014.”Dollar Tree came on the scene in March 2014 in a dating match arranged by Morgan Stanley, Family Dollar’s investment banker. Negotiations began in earnest, but Family Dollar decided not to reach out to Dollar General to determine whether it could start a bidding war. According to an opinion that rejected a request for a preliminary injunction, Family Dollar did not do so because it had signed a confidentiality agreement with Dollar Tree that prohibited Family Dollar from disclosing the negotiations. Perhaps more important, Family Dollar feared that if Dollar General found out about the negotiations, it might choose to bid for Dollar Tree instead, leaving Family Dollar alone.Family Dollar had another reason to be hesitant. Its legal counsel advised that the Dollar General deal had “a high risk of very significant divestitures or being blocked outright” while the Dollar Tree deal had “limited risk.” The reason was that although all three stores have the word “dollar” in their names, they have different business models. Dollar Tree is a true dollar store, where everything costs a dollar, while the other two price goods at generally $10 or less. Dollar Tree sells a medley of goods, whatever the company can find to sell at its target price, while Family Dollar and Dollar General are places where families on a budget can do regular grocery and other day-to-day shopping. A combination of Family Dollar and Dollar General raises more antitrust issues, particularly because they are the top two players in the dollar store market.Soon after negotiations commenced with Dollar Tree, the activist investor Carl C. Icahn took a 9.4 percent stake in Family Dollar, essentially putting the company into play, with Dollar General the most likely partner. Dollar General contacted Family Dollar, expressed interest in a deal but said it did not want to negotiate with Mr. Icahn.On June 19, a critical meeting took place between Mr. Calbert and Mr. Levine at which Mr. Levine asked for Dollar General to bid. According to the litigation opinion, Mr. Calbert responded that Dollar General “did not intend to make an offer at that time because the timing was not right for General and that General’s interest likely would be at a modest premium to Family’s then-current stock price of $68.14.”This meeting would be the focus of recrimination between the two, with Dollar General arguing that it would have bid had it only known about the Dollar Tree offer, and Family Dollar asserting that it tried to elicit a bid but Dollar General appeared willing to act only if it could get a sweetheart price. Dollar General reappeared only after the Dollar Tree deal was announced in July. On Aug. 18, Dollar General announced its bid, offered to dispose of up to 700 stores — a number it later raised to 1,500 — and included a $500 million breakup fee if the deal did not clear antitrust review.Dollar General’s bid offered more money but less certainty, leaving Family Dollar shareholders with a quandary: favoring the higher bid might leave them with nothing if they rejected the Dollar Tree deal and Dollar General’s deal was blocked on antitrust grounds.The initial sentiment in the market was that Dollar General’s bid was a free option. Both Dollar Tree and Dollar General needed to obtain antitrust clearance. If the Family Dollar shareholder vote was delayed until a review had taken place, shareholders could simply select the higher offer.But the situation shifted in December. There was continuing market skepticism about whether Dollar General was a serious bidder or simply out to disrupt Dollar Tree’s bid and then perhaps consume Dollar Tree itself.Moreover, Dollar General’s news releases were always couched carefully, never promising to clear antitrust review but instead containing statements that Dollar General’s advisers believed antitrust clearance was “capable,” as in, “the Cubs can win the World Series.” Dollar General was also parsimonious in updates despite promising to keep shareholders up to date, further inciting market skepticism.Of course, in its defense, Dollar General engaged real advisers and spent real money.If Dollar General’s strategy was to implode the Dollar Tree deal, it would have worked except for two factors. The first came from Family Dollar. The company appeared to be trying to push along both bids to obtain transparency and clarity for its shareholders without blatantly favoring either one.It was then able to obtain government feedback in December and January that indicated firmly that Dollar General had run into a wall. That indication led to the second factor: Dollar General’s confirmation last week that it had indeed hit a wall with the F.T.C. Dollar General said that it would not be able to comply with an F.T.C. request for additional information until Feb. 10, after the scheduled Family Dollar vote. Dollar General added that the prognosis for clearance was not looking good. “The F.T.C. has departed from the approach used to analyze retail mergers over recent years and has instead relied heavily on an untested theoretical model for predicting circumstances in which pricing will increase,” Dollar General said.It is unclear whether the F.T.C. is indeed using new methods. Dollar General was referring to the gross upward pricing pressure index, an antitrust tool that the government has been using as a source for economic analysis since 2010, when the F.T.C. and the Justice Department adopted new horizontal merger guidelines. Four years seems like enough time for Dollar General to realize this might be a problem for its offer.This is the puzzling part of this deal. Since the F.T.C. successfully challenged a merger of Office Depot and Staples in the late 1990s, any combination of the top two players in a market has been highly suspect, calling into question Dollar General’s belief that it could navigate this problem. (An activist investor, Starboard Value, is revisiting the idea of an Office Depot-Staples merger, showing how quickly markets can change.)Whatever the case, Dollar General’s announcement was a self-inflicted wound that ended a significant amount of pressure on Family Dollar shareholders to reject the Dollar Tree bid. Shareholders might have been more willing to allow the process to unfold until Dollar General essentially admitted that it would have to litigate the matter with the F.T.C.This leaves the vote on Thursday. Dollar Tree has refused to raise its offer, though its stock price has risen, giving some greater return to Family Dollar because part of the deal is in Dollar Tree stock. Dollar Tree has also said it will not agree to any more delays. Meanwhile, the record date — the date by which shareholders needed to own shares to vote — has remained unchanged from Oct. 30, a long time ago when Family Dollar’s shares were trading almost $3 a share higher. Hedge funds are going to lose money on this one.Family Dollar will sweat the vote out, but its shareholders are really left with one choice — the Dollar Tree deal or no deal — the same outcome in almost every other deal. Looking back at this history, one has to wonder what all the fuss was about.A version of this article appears in print on 01/21/2015, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Shareholders Face Quandary in Battle for Family Dollar.