At the end of his book “Capital in the Twenty-First Century,” Thomas Piketty proposes a global wealth tax to help address the problem of runaway income inequality. In contrast with the careful research that went into the book, the suggestion of a global wealth tax struck many tax policy veterans as naïve and unhelpful. By contrast, the White House proposal to treat gifts and bequests as taxable events is eminently sensible as a matter of tax policy. It is also well-targeted at the superrich — the only group that has truly benefited from the economic recovery. While the White House proposal is not likely to receive proper care and feeding from a Republican Congress, it is important nonetheless. It helps set a progressive economic agenda for the 2016 presidential campaigns and establishes goal posts for negotiations over tax legislation in the meantime. Under current law, heirs take the property that they inherit with a “step up in basis” to fair market value. (Basis is the number used to measure taxable gains and losses.) The “step up” means that if property has appreciated in value, the heir gets to use the fair market value of the property as its tax basis going forward, erasing any income tax liability attributable to the appreciation. To illustrate, suppose the founder of a start-up puts $100,000 into a business, expands the business and eventually takes it public. Suppose his shares in the company are worth $200 million at the time of his death, and he bequests the stock to Junior, his son. Instead of a carry-over basis of $100,000 (the cost of the initial investment), Junior takes a basis in the stock of the current fair market value of $200 million. The $199,900,000 of appreciation is never touched by the income tax. Better yet, sophisticated founders often place founders’ stock in trusts to help avoid estate and gift taxes. Under the White House proposal, the founder’s estate would have to pay income tax on the disposition of the stock at a rate of 28 percent upon death, raising (in this example) about $56 million in revenue. It would be hard to call this result unjust, since the gains are derived primarily from the founder’s labor and reinvested capital and have not been previously subject to tax. Pro-business advocates might object that income has been taxed at the corporate level. But with effective corporate tax rates dropping and increasing numbers of companies organizing as pass-through entities and avoiding the corporate tax altogether, reducing double taxation is no longer a strong argument for failing to tax capital gains.The White House proposal is also efficient. Raising the capital gains rate can prompt concerns about the so-called lock-in effect, where holders of appreciated assets avoid selling because of the taxes imposed on the sale. By taking away the largest incentive to hold on to appreciated assets — the step up in basis at death — the proposal significantly reduces the lock in effect and will improve economic efficiency. In other words, if Junior is not the best person to run the business, taxing the founder’s gains at death will make him more likely to sell the business earlier to someone who is.  Concerns about income inequality lie at the heart of the proposal. As Mr. Piketty and his frequent collaborator Emmanuel Saez have shown, the increase in inequality in the United States is mostly attributable to gains by the top 1 percent, and, even more so, by the top 10 percent of the top 1 percent (those who earn more than $2 million a year). They have shown that 95 percent of the income gains from the economic recovery since 2009 have accrued to the top 1 percent of income earners. Treasury estimates show that 99 percent of the revenue raised from the White House proposal would come out of the pockets of the top 1 percent, and 80 percent would come from the top 0.1 percent. Among income tax proposals, perhaps only the proposal to tax carried interest as ordinary income is similarly aimed so precisely at the top 1 percent of income earners.As I stated in a paper published in 2011, “Taxing founders at a low rate is a conspicuous loophole in the fabric of our progressive income tax system, uniquely undermining our shared commitment to equal opportunity and distributive justice.” The current law creates a legacy of dynastic wealth that is exempt from the income tax and can easily dodge estate and gift taxes.