FRANKFURT — It was a parable in the unwritten rules of Davos party-giving.In 2011, the hedge fund investor Anthony Scaramucci played host to a wine tasting at a hotel bar in Davos, Switzerland, featuring only vintages that had received top ratings from leading critics — with prices to match. Soon afterward, Felix Salmon, a Reuters columnist at the time, called the event ‘‘a drunken mess’’ that served mostly to confirm ‘‘in the plutocrats’ minds just how exclusive they, and Davos, really are.’’Ouch. Lesson learned,  Mr. Scaramucci opted for less ostentatious wine the next year and turned the event into a fund-raiser for a nonprofit group that teaches entrepreneurship to young people.‘‘When we first started,’’ said Mr. Scaramucci, the founder and co-managing partner of SkyBridge Capital, ‘‘we weren’t completely in touch with’’  the vibe and sensibilities of the World Economic Forum.He’s not the only one. Over-the-top consumption by the global elite at the Davos evening soirees has often clashed with the World Economic Forum’s claim to be ‘‘committed to improving the state of the world.’’This year the forum organizers have stepped up attempts to maintain a sense of dignity, perhaps stung by last year’s spoof of the Davos party scene on ‘‘The Daily Show With Jon Stewart.’’  Samantha Bee, a correspondent for the political comedy program, reported from Davos — ‘‘the money Oscars’’ — with a supposed sex orgy in the background.‘‘The Daily Show’’ nailed the eternal conflict at the World Economic Forum, which will be held for the 45th time and starts on Wednesday. It is, on the one hand, a venue for discussion of global problems that this year will attract the likes of Secretary of State John Kerry, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and Li Keqiang, the premier of China.But it has proved impossible to suppress the natural inclination of the mostly well-heeled participants to engage in high-altitude, Champagne-fueled revelry. And the tension between saving the world and having a blast may be particularly acute this year. The World Economic Forum takes place less than two weeks after the Paris terrorist attacks and amid a shift in global power politics caused by the plunge in oil prices.‘‘It’s a year of destiny for humankind,’’ Klaus Schwab, the founder and executive chairman of the World Economic Forum, said at a news conference in Geneva last week. (Mr. Schwab is not known for understatement.)Partying is certainly not forbidden at Davos. In the evenings, after the panels and speeches in the Davos Congress Center have ended, the city’s main street is teeming with people trying to stay upright on the icy sidewalks as they make their way from one social event to the next.But as Mr. Scaramucci learned, there are certain standards. The World Economic Forum organization has even tried to codify them.The 2,500 participants this year were required to agree to a so-called Charter of Participation, which specifies that outside events should not be overtly commercial, should not compete with the official program and should be consistent with the mission of improving the world. Georg Schmitt, a World Economic Forum spokesman, said that the charter was not new but that this year it was distributed to all participants, rather than just those classified as forum members.The charter also admonishes participants not to invite people who are not official participants. That is a response to the proliferation of hangers-on who have no connection to the World Economic Forum but have been coming in increasing numbers to exploit the presence of so many wealthy and important people.  The influx has helped drive up hotel prices to the point where a spartan room in a minimally renovated former sanatorium can easily cost 600 Swiss francs, or $698, a night.This year, in another change, the World Economic Forum took firm control over issuing the badges that grant access to the hotels where the biggest parties are held. Some hotels had taken to minting their own quasi-official access passes, which they sold for a fee. Mr. Schmitt, the forum spokesman, said the Swiss police had sought the change for security reasons.There is no sign, though, that the number of parties is diminishing. Adam Solomon, director of sales for LiquidChefs, a London company that provides bar services for parties around the world, said the company would be mixing cocktails for 12 events at the forum this year, up from 10 last year. LiquidChefs will fly in 25 professional bartenders from London just for Davos events, Mr. Solomon said. Clients include Yahoo and Deutsche Bank. LiquidChefs specializes in merging mixology with entertainment — bartenders juggle liquor bottles and perform magic tricks — but many clients in Davos will be trying to maintain a sense of decorum.‘‘You do get a few stragglers who take it too far,’’ Mr. Solomon said. But for the most part, he said, ‘‘Davos is a serious place. A lot of people are there to network and do business.’’The true elite in Davos are not likely to mingle at the large parties sponsored by the likes of the consulting firm McKinsey or the government of Malaysia. On Davos side streets, in penthouses or chalets, technology entrepreneurs, investment bankers and the occasional Russian oligarch stage much more exclusive events with a handful of carefully chosen guests. And they take pains to stay below the radar.‘‘It’s the only place in the world where the first thing you sign is a nondisclosure agreement,’’ said Jacques Lavoisier, the stage name of a French neuroscientist who moonlights as a D.J. and has often performed at World Economic Forum chalet parties. Mr. Lavoisier, who prefers that his real name remain secret to protect his reputation in academia, gives partygoers headgear that allows them to control the music and light show with their brain waves.In Mr. Lavoisier’s experience, parties in Davos rank low on the decadence scale, despite their reputation. Clients typically want him to create a pleasant atmosphere, he said, not drive people onto the dance floor. ‘‘They really want to be able to chat and have a good time,’’ he said. ‘‘It’s not as crazy as people imagine.’’The locals  —  the 11,000 permanent residents of Davos  —  tend to have mixed feelings about the forum. It brings in a lot of money, but it also keeps tourists away during a prime skiing week. The tight security and police checkpoints make getting from one end of town to the other a chore. And the town’s scenic splendor can be marred by the advertising banners, placards and light shows that proliferate during the forum, despite being apparent violations of the organizers’ ban on overt commercialism.But partygoers are among the least of the problems that the World Economic Forum creates, said Michael Straub, the city clerk. As far as public order is concerned, ‘‘we have more problems with hockey fans,’’ Mr. Straub said. (The city hosts an annual international tournament, the Spengler Cup.)Mr. Scaramucci, the hedge fund investor, did not deny that the forum is an occasion for participants to enjoy their good fortune. But he defended the value of an event that get participants to think about something else than just how to make more money.‘‘I come back from Davos every single year having learned something about the world that I couldn’t have learned anywhere else,’’ Mr. Scaramucci said, mentioning topics like the human genome, artificial intelligence and the economy of West Africa. ‘‘Why else would a billionaire stay in a one-star hotel?’’