

Related Links


Timeline: Preet Bharara’s Key Insider Trading Cases

An appeals court decision in December that reversed the insider trading convictions of two hedge fund managers has been the equivalent of dropping a big rock into a calm lake as the waves keep spreading to other cases. The Justice Department is fighting to minimize the impact of the opinion, which raised the bar on what the government must show to establish a violation for trading on confidential information.Defendants are citing the decision to argue that their conduct now does not constitute insider trading, seeking to dismiss civil and criminal charges or withdraw earlier guilty pleas. The Justice Department fired back last week in a brief filed in the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York that argues the law really was not changed all that much.In United States v. Newman and Chiasson, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit concluded that the government must show that someone who received inside information and then traded on it knew that the source received a benefit for providing the tip. What makes the decision particularly troublesome for the government is the requirement that the benefit “must be of some consequence” so that it is not enough to show just “the mere fact of a friendship, particularly of a casual or social nature.”The heightened benefit requirement raises questions in a number of cases that only identified a personal friendship as the basis for showing a violation. Two defendants who once worked for Wells Fargo and shared inside information requested the dismissal of administrative charges filed by the Securities and Exchange Commission because the benefit was only their friendship and “positive feedback” given to the tipper’s managers. In another S.E.C. case filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan related to overseas trading in Onyx Pharmaceuticals before it announced the rejection of a takeover offer, the judge granted the defendants’ request to reconsider whether the S.E.C.’s complaint sufficiently describes the benefit provided to the tipper.  In a prosecution involving tips about an acquisition of SPSS by I.B.M., four defendants who pleaded guilty to trading on the information have asked to withdraw from their plea agreements because of the Newman decision. They have argued that there was no benefit given for information that initially came from a lawyer at a firm advising I.B.M. on the deal and that there was only personal friendship among those who traded. In its brief arguing that the defendants should not be allowed to withdraw their pleas, the Justice Department took its first public shot at the appeals court’s decision in the Newman ruling. Prosecutors said that decision “dramatically (and, in our view, wrongly) departs from” Supreme Court precedents on what is required to prove insider trading. The government faces a deadline of Jan. 23 to ask the three-judge panel that decided the Newman appeal to reconsider its ruling, or to seek further review of the case by the entire Appeals Court for the Second Circuit. The Justice Department can ultimately appeal to the Supreme Court.The brief does more than just say the Newman decision was wrong. It goes a step further by outlining an approach that may mitigate some of the damage from the opinion. The Justice Department argues that it need not show a benefit when it uses what is known as the misappropriation theory of insider trading and that only the recipient’s knowledge that the tipper breached a duty in disclosing confidential information is enough to prove a violation.To understand what the government is arguing requires a short foray into the history of insider trading law. The first Supreme Court decision on the issue was Chiarella v. United States, which adopted what has come to be known as the “classical theory” of liability. Under this approach, defendants only violate the law if they breached a duty owed to the company whose shares were traded by misusing information legitimately provided. That approach limited liability to corporate insiders and those who worked directly for the company, like its lawyers and investment bankers.The classical theory proved to be rather limited because, for example, a lawyer whose firm was working for a bidder planning a hostile offer could buy shares of the target without violating the law.  That was the situation in United States v. O’Hagan, in which the Supreme Court adopted the misappropriation theory to fill the gap. According to the court, “the misappropriation theory premises liability on a fiduciary-turned-trader’s deception of those who entrusted him with access to confidential information.” A third Supreme Court opinion, Dirks v. S.E.C., deals with violations for tipping inside information. Under that ruling, the government must show that the tipper received a benefit from the recipient in exchange for providing the information that establishes the breach of a duty, a requirement for all insider trading cases.In its brief arguing against withdrawing the pleas, the Justice Department asserts that the benefit requirement only applies to cases brought under the classical theory, not those relying on the misappropriation theory, like the information involving SPSS. For the classical theory, the tipper has the information legitimately, so proving a breach of duty requires showing a benefit passed from the recipient to the tipper to establish that the conduct was wrongful. For misappropriation cases, however, the violation arises from the theft of information by the tipper. The Justice Department argues that the tipping itself violates the law and that they do not need to show that the recipient provided a benefit in exchange for it. The information about the SPSS acquisition came from I.B.M.’s lawyer, so prosecutors claim there is no need to show a benefit was given by the recipients as required by the Dirks opinion.One hurdle the government faces in advancing this argument is a statement by the Appeals Court for the Second Circuit in S.E.C. v. Obus, another insider trading case decided in 2012.  The opinion states that “the Supreme Court’s tipping liability doctrine was developed in a classical case, Dirks, but the same analysis governs in a misappropriation case.” The Justice Department does its best to argue that the appeals court really only meant that knowingly misappropriating confidential information is sufficient for liability. Whether that is enough to prove tipping remains to be seen because defendants are sure to point to the language in the Obus opinion as the governing standard.If the Justice Department is successful in advancing the argument about tipping in misappropriation theory cases, it would avoid much of the problem that the Newman case presents. That theory can be used as an alternative basis for liability in most insider trading cases because misuse of information  in breach of a duty will be present. So prosecutors and the S.E.C. could just shift their cases and claim a violation of the misappropriation theory and avoid having to show that a benefit was provided to the tipper.   The standard view has been that the benefit requirement outlined in the Dirks opinion applies to all tipping cases, not just those involving the classical theory. But if the Justice Department is right, then it clarifies how insider trading cases will be pursued in the future.Figuring out exactly what is required to prove a violation reflects the fact that insider trading law is a product of judicial decisions that are not always clear or consistent. Judges sometimes throw in a general statement about the law that is at best peripheral to the issues in a case but can become the basis for a controlling precedent. The courts are finally confronting the issue of what must be shown for a tipping case. So we are seeing the law develop, albeit in fits and starts.By BEN PROTESS and MATTHEW GOLDSTEINThe ruling in the case against two former hedge fund traders, Todd Newman and Anthony Chiasson, is a blow to prosecutors’ campaign to crack down on insider trading.