Updated, 11:59 a.m. | For years, Douglas L. Braunstein and James C. Woolery advised companies on how to defend themselves against activist investors. Now the two veteran Wall Street advisers plan to become shareholder activists themselves.The two men announced on Tuesday that they have formed a new hedge fund, Hudson Executive Capital, aimed at persuading companies to change their corporate strategies.The twist, however, is that the firm aims to do so by working hand-in-hand with management and boards, rather than threatening to wage proxy fights. That sort of “constructive” approach has been espoused by a number of activists, including Nelson Peltz of Trian Fund Management and Clifton Robbins of the Blue Harbour Group.To help lend credence to that approach, Hudson Executive has retained 14 current and former chief executives — including the likes of William Harrison, the former chairman and chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, Ivan Seidenberg, the former C.E.O. of Verizon Communications, and Darwin Deason, the founder and chairman of Affiliated Computer Services — as members of its advisory board.Over all, the firm has raised about $250 million in capital.Tuesday’s announcement marks an unusual turn in the careers of its two founders. Mr. Braunstein had risen through the ranks of JPMorgan, having led deals like InBev’s takeover of Anheuser Busch before becoming chief financial officer in 2010. He left that role in 2012, however, after the bank suffered from a multi-billion-dollar trading loss in London.Since then, he has been a vice chairman of the firm, occasionally working on matters like the EMC Corporation’s response to the activist hedge fund Elliott Management.In a memo on Tuesday, Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JP Morgan wrote: “Doug is a good friend, and we have all benefited from his strategic counsel. Given his energy, integrity and strategic thinking, I have no doubt he will find success as a thoughtful and constructive investor in this new endeavor.”“We look forward to working with him as a client,” he said.And Mr. Woolery had risen through the ranks of the mergers firmament as a partner at Cravath, Swaine & Moore and then as a co-head of North American mergers at JPMorgan, where he worked with Mr. Braunstein. He then left the bank in 2013 to join the law firm Cadwalader, Wickershim and Taft as its deputy chairman.Last year, Mr. Woolery was picked as Cadwalader’s chairman-elect. With his departure, Patrick Quinn will remain the firm’s managing partner, while Christopher Cox will lead its corporate practice.“Doug and Jim have earned their reputations as pre-eminent corporate executives through strategic decision-making and extensive corporate execution experience over the course of their careers,” Mr. Harrison said in a statement. “Numerous management teams, boards and shareholders have benefited from their strategic ideas, investment insight and execution experience and the current market includes many public companies that could benefit from the Firm’s capital and strategic expertise.”Here’s the full memo on Mr. Braunstein’s departure from Mr. Dimon:Dear colleagues,Doug Braunstein, a vice chairman of our firm, announced he will be leaving our company to become Founding and Managing Partner of Hudson Executive Capital, a new fund focused on constructive investing. This is an exciting opportunity for Doug, and we look forward to working with him as a client.As you know, Doug has been an outstanding adviser and leader in our industry, and he has held leadership positions here for nearly 20 years as we have built a world-class investment bank. Doug is a good friend, and we have all benefited from his strategic counsel. Given his energy, integrity and strategic thinking, I have no doubt he will find success as a thoughtful and constructive investor in this new endeavor.While we will miss Doug, please join me in congratulating him on this new role and wishing him the best in the future.A version of this article appears in print on 01/23/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: 2 Wall St. Chiefs to Get a Sweeter Pay Package in 2015.