Anything related to gay and lesbian rights has long seemed to have been officially off limits at the World Economic Forum annual meeting in Davos, Switzerland. But this year, for the first time, the World Economic Forum is addressing the issue on the formal agenda for Davos. And while this may be a “good first step,” the topic nevertheless “looks buried on the Davos program,” Andrew Ross Sorkin writes in the DealBook Column.The issue of gay rights seems to have been included this year mainly because of pressure applied by two activist hedge fund managers ‒ Paul Singer, the founder of Elliott Management, whose son is gay, and Daniel S. Loeb, the founder of Third Point. Last year, the two decided to hold a breakfast off the premises and off the formal program to address the topic. The breakfast, packed with an audience of boldface names, became one of the most talked about events at Davos.Human Rights Watch takes credit for pushing the World Economic Forum to finally put gay rights on the agenda this year. Still, there is only one panel on the agenda, late on Saturday after many participants will have left, that mentions the term “L.G.B.T.” in the program. “And none of the panels include the kind of outspoken, controversial advocates who were at last year’s breakfast,” Mr. Sorkin writes.The World Economic Forum annual meeting begins this week.CHINA’S ACTIONS HIT SHARES  |  Stocks in Shanghai plunged 7.7 percent on Monday, the largest one-day sell-off since the 2008 financial crisis, after regulators there moved to rein in risky trading, Neil Gough reports in DealBook. Regulators, in part, are taking aim at so-called margin accounts, in which investors borrow money to buy shares. Outstanding margin financing had more than doubled in the last six months, recently exceeding one trillion renminbi, or about $161 billion. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index, which had been up 38 percent in the last three months before the rout on Monday, rose 1.9 percent on Tuesday.On Friday, the China Securities Regulatory Commission temporarily banned new margin financing at three of China’s biggest brokerage firms ‒ Citic Securities, Haitong Securities and Guotai Junan Securities. The regulator said the state-owned brokers violated rules by extending margin financing and securities lending to a large number of clients beyond the contracted term, usually six months. Separately, China’s banking regulator moved to tighten oversight of so-called entrusted loans, a rapidly growing segment of the shadow banking industry. PEPSICO AND PELTZ REACH TRUCE  |  After two years of locking horns, the food and beverage giant PepsiCo and the billionaire investor Nelson Peltz announced a truce of sorts on Friday, Michael J. de la Merced writes in DealBook. PepsiCo said that it would add William R. Johnson, the former chief executive of H. J. Heinz, to its board. Mr. Johnson, who will serve as an independent director, is also an adviser to Mr. Peltz’s investment firm, Trian Fund Management.“The settlement will most likely end a long-running campaign by Mr. Peltz and his team to break up PepsiCo, who have asserted that investors would benefit by spinning off the company’s beverage business from its better-performing snacks unit,” Mr. de la Merced writes. Mr. Peltz and his team have said that splitting up the two businesses would free them up to pursue different management strategies. For its part, PepsiCo has defended its current business model after conducting what it called “an exhaustive review” of strategic alternatives.ON THE AGENDA  |  Morgan Stanley reports fourth-quarter earnings at 7 a.m. The National Association of Home Builders housing market index is out at 10 a.m. Netflix and IBM report fourth-quarter results after the market closes. President Obama delivers the State of the Union address at 9 p.m.THE PRICE OF PRIVILEGE  |  Thomas Strong Gilbert Sr. and his son were alike in many ways ‒ graduates of elite boarding schools and Princeton University, handsome, athletic. And on the surface, they both seemed to be “navigating the exclusive glide path of wealth, social position and success that has long defined life inside America’s upper crust,” Landon Thomas Jr. writes in The New York Times. But when Thomas S. Gilbert Jr., 30, was charged with murdering his father, a New York hedge fund manager, the attack sent shock ripples through their rarefied world of private clubs and opulent homes in Manhattan and the Hamptons.“The question was more or less the same: A good man had died, and no one knew why,” Mr. Thomas writes. “But in the asking of this question, a starkly different picture of the Gilbert father and son has emerged.” The senior Mr. Gilbert, who was 70, was “gregarious and gentlemanly,” with “a smile and a friendly word for everyone.” His son, on the other hand, had become a “disturbed loner,” whose life involved “surfing, yoga, many hours spent at the gym and parties.”  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailCitic in Deal to Sell $10 Billion Stake  |  Citic, one of China’s biggest state-owned conglomerates, has sold a 20 percent stake for more than $10 billion to Itochu of Japan and Charoen Pokphand Group of Thailand. DealBook »Twitter to Buy Indian Start-Up ZipDial  |  Twitter is said to be paying about $30 million for ZipDial, an Indian mobile phone marketing start-up, Bloomberg News reports, citing an unidentified person familiar with the matter.  BLOOMBERG NEWS  Google Said to Be in Talks to Acquire Softcard  |  Google is said to have made an offer to purchase Softcard, a mobile payments company, for an amount less than $100 million, the Bits blog writes, citing a person familiar with the matter. PayPal, the e-commerce giant owned by eBay, has also submitted an offer to acquire Softcard.  NEW YORK TIMES BITS BATS Said to Be in Discussions to Buy Trading Platform Hotspot  |  The stock exchange operator BATS Global Markets is said to be in discussions to buy Hotspot, a foreign exchange trading platform, from KCG for roughly $400 million, Reuters reports, citing unidentified people close to the situation.  REUTERS Disappointing Trading Results Hobble 4th-Quarter Revenue at Goldman Sachs  |  Goldman Sachs earned $2.17 billion, or $4.38 a share, during a fourth quarter that was challenging for most of the big banks; overall revenue was down 12 percent from a year earlier. DealBook »Fund Managers Said to Start Dark Pool  |  Nine of the world’ biggest money managers, including Fidelity, BlackRock and Bank of New York Mellon, are starting a private stock trading system known as a dark pool, The Financial Times writes. The project, led by Fidelity, will be called Luminex.  FINANCIAL TIMESInside Goldman’s Loan to Banco Espírito Santo  |  When Goldman Sachs arranged an $835 million loan to Banco Espírito Santo last summer, before the bank collapsed over allegations of fraud, “it was the result of a concerted, monthslong effort by senior Goldman officials to win business with the large Portuguese company,” The Wall Street Journal reports.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Société Générale Splits Chairman and Chief Executive Roles  |  The French bank is handing the role of chairman to Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, while Frédéric Oudéa will remain chief executive. The move is subject to the approval of shareholders. DealBook »Allied Irish Banks’ Chief to Depart for Clydesdale Bank  |  The announcement of David Duffy’s planned departure comes a week after the Irish government said it had hired Goldman Sachs to advise it on potential capital restructuring. DealBook »TPG Set to Receive Commitments From Louisiana Pension Fund  |  Hamilton Lane, the private market consultant for the Teachers’ Retirement System of Louisiana, plans to commit up to $150 million between TPG’s latest flagship buyout fund and a growth equity-oriented fund, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing a presentation.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Founder of British Hedge Fund Convicted of Fraud  |  Magnus Peterson was convicted of fraud, forgery, false accounting and fraudulent trading related to the collapse of the Weavering Capital hedge fund during the financial crisis. DealBook »Ackman Hires Veteran Merger Lawyer  |  William A. Ackman’s hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management, plans to announce on Tuesday that it has hired Stephen Fraidin, a partner at the law firm Kirkland & Ellis, as vice chairman, The Wall Street Journal writes.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Azul, Brazilian Airline Started by JetBlue Founder, Delays I.P.O. Plans Again  |  The delay in the I.P.O. comes as emerging market companies have suffered as investors fear slowing growth, even though low oil prices are helping airlines. DealBook »Google Said to Near Investment in SpaceX  |  Google is said to be close to investing about $1 billion in the Space Exploration Technologies Corp., or SpaceX, to support its efforts to deliver Internet access via satellites, The Wall Street Journal writes, citing an unidentified person familiar with the matter. The investment would value SpaceX at more than $10 billion, the person said.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Banking Start-Ups Adopt New Tools for Lending  |  New software is expected to sharpen assessments of creditworthiness, but even proponents acknowledge the potential for inadvertent discrimination, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMESAlibaba to Invest in Israeli Firm Visualead  |  The Alibaba Group said on Tuesday that it would invest in Visualead, an Israeli technology start-up, in its first move into the country’s technology sector, The Wall Street Journal reports. Alibaba did not disclose the size of the investment, but an unidentified person familiar with the matter said the e-commerce company was investing less than $10 million.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Uber Tries to Mend Fences With Europe  |  Travis Kalanick, the chief executive of Uber, said he wanted to work with politicians to find ways for the company to operate legally across the European Union, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMES S.E.C. Reversal May Clear Way for Shareholders to Challenge Companies  |  The Securities and Exchange Commission is reviewing a rule used to allow companies to prevent proposals by shareholders from being put before investors at annual meetings, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMES Hacker’s List Struggles to Keep Up With Its New-Found Fame  |  The roughly three-month-old online meeting place for hackers and people who want to hire them reports getting a flood of unexpected visitors. DealBook »As Growth Slows, China Pins Hopes on Consumer Spending  |  Beijing, which reported growth of 7.4 percent for 2014, below its target of 7.5 percent, is trying to reduce its dependence on credit-fueled investment and government spending, The New York Times writes.  NEW YORK TIMES British Fraud Office Ends HP-Autonomy Inquiry  |  The investigation followed accusations from Hewlett-Packard that Autonomy had carried out accounting abuses that forced the tech giant to write down $8.8 billion from its takeover of the British company. DealBook »Bankruptcy Code Forces Rush of Empty Stores  |  An overhaul of Chapter 11 in 2005 imposes a tight time frame on handling commercial leases, complicating the process for retailers, Stephen J. Lubben writes in the In Debt column. DealBook »Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 