Over its two years of existence, Porch.com has amassed huge amounts of data from customers who turn to the start-up to find home improvement professionals.Now that business has gathered a huge set of numbers of a different kind: a multimillion-dollar financing round.Porch.com is expected to announce on Tuesday that it has raised more than $65 million in a new round of financing, led by Valor Equity Partners. Others in the round include Lowe’s, Peter Thiel’s Founders Fund and Ty Pennington, the onetime host of “Extreme Makeover: Home Edition.”The investment values Porch.com at more than $500 million, according to a person briefed on the terms of the deal. All told, the company has raised $100 million in financing.It is the latest achievement for Porch and its chief executive, Matt Ehrlichman, as the company has worked to become a repository of data for home improvement projects. Users can see what kinds of projects were done, as well as post pictures of their own projects and read articles on home improvement.The genesis of Porch, according to Mr. Ehrlichman, was simple. Several years ago, he and his family were moving into a new home, but finding the right professionals to handle the renovations proved more difficult than imagined.“It’s remarkable to me that, in one of the areas you will spend more money than anywhere else, there is no ability to become an informed buyer,” he said.So Mr. Ehrlichman, a serial entrepreneur by trade, decided to begin assembling data on contractors and other home improvement professionals. It is that information set, encompassing some 132 million projects, that is the company’s “secret sauce,” in Mr. Ehrlichman’s words.And in June of 2013, the company raised $6.25 million from seed-round investors, including prominent angel financiers like Ron Conway. Last year, it entered a partnership with Lowe’s — struck when executives at the retailer read about Porch in a magazine article and then reached out through Porch’s jobs listings page — in which store employees direct potential home improvement customers to Porch’s offerings online.Since its founding, the company has performed strongly, according to Mr. Ehrlichman. It has expanded from roughly 25 employees at the beginning to more than 300 now.Ultimately, the money will help finance Porch’s continued growth, particularly as the company rolls out its booking service, which allows customers to immediately connect with a contractor.“As one of the fastest growing companies in the industry, Porch is leading in defining the very best customer and contractor experience,” Antonio J. Gracias, the chief executive of Valor Equity, said in a statement.For the moment, management is not thinking of any big moves like a sale of the company or an initial public offering, according to Mr. Ehrlichman. Instead, it will continue to expand its reach.“I wouldn’t be surprised if we’re twice our size a year from now,” he said. “We will continue to grow explosively.”