HONG KONG — Citic, one of China’s biggest state-owned conglomerates, has agreed to sell a 20 percent stake for more than $10 billion to Itochu of Japan and Charoen Pokphand Group of Thailand.The deal brings together three of Asia’s largest companies, and comes as the Chinese government has been pushing its sprawling state-owned companies to become more competitive and open themselves to outside investment.Citic, listed in Hong Kong and formerly known as Citic Pacific, was restructured last year when its state-owned parent company, Citic Group, injected essentially all of its assets into the Hong Kong unit in a $36.5 billion deal. The parent group retains a 78 percent stake in Citic.Itochu is one of Japan’s biggest traditional trading companies, with interests that include textiles, metals and minerals, foods and machinery. Charoen Pokphand, better known as CP Group, is controlled by the Thai billionaire Dhanin Chearavanont and has major investments in food and agribusiness, retail, telecommunications and insurance.Both companies have made substantial investments in China in recent years. CP already had a 1 percent stake in Citic, while Itochu had partnerships with Citic.“Not only have we brought in private investors, but they are attractive global conglomerates who will extend our reach and complement our infrastructure and knowledge,” Chang Zhenming, the chairman of Citic and its parent group, said Tuesday in a statement. “This investment is a continuation of our reform and globalization that began last year.”Citic Group was originally set up in 1979 as the Chinese Communist Party was taking its first tentative steps to reopen the nation’s economy to the outside world. Today, the group bills itself as China’s biggest conglomerate. It controls 14 companies listed in Hong Kong and mainland China, covering businesses as diverse as finance, real estate, mining and manufacturing.In line with the government’s push for reform, other large state-controlled Chinese companies have been attempting to bring in outside investors. In September, the China Petroleum and Chemical Corporation, known as Sinopec, announced plans to raise $17.4 billion by selling a stake in its nationwide chain of gas stations to outside investors.Under the terms of the deal announced Tuesday, CP and Itochu will form a 50-50 joint venture to first acquire a 10 percent stake in Citic from Citic Group for 34.4 billion Hong Kong dollars, or $4.4 billion. Citic will then issue new shares representing a further 10 percent stake to CP and Itochu for 45.9 billion dollars in cash.Both transactions are priced at 13.80 dollars per share, 3.6 percent higher than Citic’s closing price on Monday, before the deal was announced.Separately on Tuesday, Citic said it would write down $1.4 billion to $1.8 billion of its 2014 earnings on the value of its investment in a troubled iron ore mining project in Australia.Shares in Citic rose modestly in Hong Kong in response to the deal, closing up 1.5 percent on Tuesday, at 13.52 dollars apiece. Citic was advised on the deal by its own brokerage unit, Citic Securities. Itochu was advised by Nomura.The companies said the deal remains subject to approval from regulators and Citic’s shareholders. It is expected to be completed in October.A version of this article appears in print on 01/21/2015, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Foreign Investment.