By SERGE F. KOVALESKI and COLIN MOYNIHANJAN. 20, 2015
Bill Cosby’s public defenders have not been numerous of late, but they have included some serious, credible people like Whoopi Goldberg, Ben Vereen and, most recently, Phylicia Rashad — his wife on television for more than a decade — who expressed her full support for him as he confronted accusations that he was a serial sexual predator.In an online interview on Jan. 6, Ms. Rashad made a point of mentioning that her faith in Mr. Cosby was bolstered by the unflinching loyalty of his actual wife, Camille O. Cosby.“This is a tough woman, a smart woman,” she said. “She’s no pushover.”As Mr. Cosby continued his comedy tour last weekend in Colorado and California, his most important character witness remained his wife. When she spoke out last month in his defense, Mrs. Cosby said her support was based on the integrity of her husband, with whom she will celebrate a 51st wedding anniversary this weekend and with whom she has shared multiple triumphs and the pain of a child’s death.But it was also clear from her statement that Mrs. Cosby’s reaction to the allegations was influenced by a longstanding view that the news media trumpeting them was routinely wrong, even dishonest at times, in the way it portrayed African-Americans.Advertisement“There appears to be no vetting of my husband’s accusers,” Mrs. Cosby, 70, said in her statement, “before stories are published or aired.”To review Mrs. Cosby’s life and accomplishments — running a business, amassing a world-class art collection, producing films — is to see that perhaps nothing has motivated her more than her interest in addressing what she views as glaring lapses in the media’s treatment of blacks.In her doctoral dissertation at the University of Massachusetts, in a book she later published, in a series of newspaper opinion articles and in a range of other activities that stretch back two decades, Mrs. Cosby has argued that the media, particularly television, has so distorted the image of African-Americans that it can taint the way young black people come to view themselves.“I don’t want others outside our community to define us, because they are doing a horrible job of it,” Mrs. Cosby said in a 1994 interview. “And they are lying.”To some, Mrs. Cosby’s ability to dismiss the accounts of more than two dozen women who have now publicly accused her husband of some form of sexual abuse, reads like denial, regardless of what the media may have bungled in the past. But Mrs. Cosby has characterized the allegations as a media feeding frenzy, and not unlike those she has seen before.AdvertisementJannette L. Dates, who with Mrs. Cosby wrote a 1992 newspaper op-ed article critical of the media, said Mrs. Cosby was “adamant and passionate” about trying to get network executives and others to be more responsible in their depictions of African-Americans.“She wanted to shake things up,” Ms. Dates said. “We were saying those images are demeaning caricatures. That’s a thread that is still being woven today.”Her quest to create more positive images for blacks began decades ago and included efforts to convince her husband that Heathcliff Huxtable, the character who would evolve into America’s Dad during eight seasons of “The Cosby Show,” starting in 1984, should be a well-to-do doctor with a solid family, not a limousine driver, as Mr. Cosby had proposed.In other settings, independent of her husband, Mrs. Cosby worked to preserve black history because she said it was being ignored. In 1995, she co-produced a play, “Having Our Say,” about two pioneering centenarian sisters raised in the Jim Crow South who became successful after moving to New York. Nominated for three Tony Awards, it ran for almost nine months on Broadway.More recently, in 2001, she helped found an organization, the National Visionary Leadership Project, that videotapes interviews with accomplished African-Americans. Charles J. Hamilton Jr., a former board member, said Mrs. Cosby had been drawn to the project because “major institutions have relegated African-American history to the lower rung of the ladder.”But Mrs. Cosby’s concerns about the media run far deeper than simple neglect. Friends say she became particularly incensed by coverage of the murder of her son, Ennis, in 1997. He was shot to death on the side of a Los Angeles highway while changing a tire by a man who tried to rob him and later referred to him by a racial slur. On the same day as the shooting, a young woman, Autumn Jackson, claiming to be Mr. Cosby’s daughter from an extramarital affair, demanded money from him to buy her silence. She was later convicted of trying to extort millions of dollars from Mr. Cosby.Mr. Cosby ultimately admitted to an affair with Ms. Jackson’s mother, Shawn Berkes, but he denied his paternity, and Mrs. Cosby became frustrated that the media focused so much of its coverage on her husband’s infidelity, not, she believed, on finding her son’s killer.“All old personal negative issues between Bill and me were resolved years ago,” Mrs. Cosby said in a statement she released in 1997. “We are a united couple. What occurred 23 years ago is not important to me except for the current issue of extortion. What is very important to me is the apprehension of the person or persons who killed our son. I appeal to all of you to help us find the murderer.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When The National Enquirer published an article saying the death had pushed her to the edge of a nervous breakdown and that she was sedated, the Cosbys threatened to sue. Mrs. Cosby wrote an opinion article in USA Today with a headline that read “Don’t Believe the Tabs.”AdvertisementThe following year, when the shooter was convicted, Mrs. Cosby wrote another essay in USA Today suggesting that the murderer, an immigrant from Ukraine, was a racist who had killed her son because he had been taught to hate blacks by, among other things, the American media.In a 1998 letter to The New York Times, she complained that the newspaper’s account of the crime had depicted it as an attempted robbery and omitted a racial slur the killer had used, which minimized race as a motivation. (The letter was never published.)“I think the death of her son hardened her,” said Sylvia Faddis, a friend at the time. “And I think she became hard in the years she had to fight for the privacy of their lives. I think it is hard for her to trust anyone.”Mark Whitaker, an author who wrote a largely favorable biography of her husband last year, “Cosby: His Life and Times,” said Mrs. Cosby was hardly the first spouse to see protection of the family as the primary priority when confronted by a situation like this.“You see this with political spouses,” he said. “They come to see things as a battle and a siege and who is on our side and who is not.”An intensely private woman, Mrs. Cosby declined to be interviewed by Mr. Whitaker, and Mr. Cosby’s publicist did not make her available for this article. But she was  interviewed by Oprah Winfrey in early 2000 and said she had known about her husband’s affair with Ms. Berkes since the 1970s. Mrs. Cosby described a period in their marriage when they both had to learn to be unselfish and said she did not believe in “unconditional love” and wanted to be surrounded by “people with integrity.”Around that time, a young actress who had worked on “Cosby,” the CBS show in which Mr. Cosby starred from 1996 to 2000, told New York City police officers that Mr. Cosby had attempted to force her hand down his sweatpants. But no charges were brought in that case, and Mr. Cosby, 77, who has denied all the allegations of sexual abuse, has never been criminally charged.It is unclear when Mrs. Cosby learned of that actress’s account or to what extent she understood Mr. Cosby’s reputation as a womanizer during a period when he was a fixture at the Playboy Mansion and later when he often traveled alone on comedy tours.AdvertisementCertainly Mrs. Cosby knew her husband had settled a 2005 civil suit filed in Philadelphia by a woman who said she had been drugged and sexually abused. The terms of the settlement were never disclosed, but the woman’s lawyer said they had sworn statements from 13 other women who said they, too, had been molested in some way. More than a dozen other women have surfaced in the past few months with similar stories, a number that prompted several institutions that had been Mr. Cosby’s longtime allies, including Spelman College, to drop their ties.One friend, who asked not to be identified for fear of upsetting the Cosbys, said that beyond her love for her husband, Mrs. Cosby simply had not seen the evidence to suggest she should put any faith in the accounts of women she didn’t know as relayed by media outlets she had long distrusted.“She does not believe these women because they have no proof, only their stories,” the friend said.Mrs. Cosby’s faith in her husband is not so different from that of the many ticket holders who still flock to Mr. Cosby’s shows, give him standing ovations and say they are skeptical of accounts of abuse that took as much as 30 years to surface.Such proof is also essential to Mrs. Cosby, who last year wrote an op-ed article in which she related the trusted advice that her father, a research chemist, had drummed into her.“The evidence,” she remembers him saying, “is the truth.”Susan Beachy. Elisa Cho and Alain Delaquérière contributed research.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Well Before Scandals, Cosby’s Wife Faulted Media Treatment of Blacks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.