By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONJAN. 19, 2015
HONG KONG — As demand for exports slips and the real estate sector cools, China has been looking to consumers to help pick up the slack. But the country’s slowing growth will complicate those plans.The economy increased by 7.3 percent in the last quarter of 2014 and 7.4 percent for the full year, the country’s National Bureau of Statistics said Tuesday. While many countries would welcome such growth, the rate fell short of the government’s target of 7.5 percent for the year, a rarity for the highly managed economy.China has rarely experienced a sustained slowdown in its economy, which has expanded seemingly unabated for decades. The last time yearly growth dipped below 7.5 percent was in 1990, after the Tiananmen massacre prompted international sanctions.China’s leaders have said they are comfortable with steadier, albeit slower, growth, calling this period a “new normal.” As the economy downshifts, Beijing is trying to wean its dependence on credit-fueled investment and government spending and move instead to a consumer-driven growth model.Advertisement“We will continue to increase household consumption and make sure that greater internal demand could serve as a new power to drive economic growth,” Premier Li Keqiang said in a speech at a global economic forum in September.AdvertisementBut consumers could retrench if unemployment rises and they lose confidence in the direction of the economy. The stability of the real estate market is also important because Chinese households have much of their wealth tied up in their homes. The recent volatility in the stock market, which has attracted many ordinary investors, may only further undermine confidence.“In a slowing economy, people start to worry about their jobs, and that kind of uncertainty will affect people’s consumption,” said Liu Li-Gang, a China economist at ANZ bank.So far, the signals are mixed.Consumer spending, which makes up for 36 percent of the gross domestic product, has been increasing at a decent pace. Retail sales growth, while slowing, rose 12 percent in 2014, with demand for highly coveted products like iPhones continuing to skyrocket.But many luxury goods, along with the entertainment and services sectors, have been feeling the effect of President Xi Jinping’s crackdown on corruption in China as fewer people buy expensive gifts for officials.More recently, some big mass-market companies have started to show pockets of weakness. The beer maker SABMiller said sales in China had slowed, while they recently fell at the computer maker Lenovo. Unilever blamed the “sharp market slowdown” for its recent quarterly slump in the country.“Households themselves realize the economy is going through a soft patch, and that will certainly have an impact on their appetite,” said Kelvin Lau, economist at the Standard Chartered Bank. “That is why we are seeing some slowdown in retail consumption.”Whether this amounts to a short-term blip or a long-term problem will depend, in part, on China’s ability to push through reforms that encourage consumption and strengthen household income. Consumers like Chen Lu are a critical piece of that economic puzzle.AdvertisementAfter graduating from college, she spent most of her salary on rent. Today, Ms. Chen, 31, is earning more, working as a senior account manager for the listings magazine That’s Beijing. She has plenty of extra pocket money for shopping, travel and going out to eat.“We will never be like my parents’ generation who saved every penny and never spent any,” Ms. Chen said. “We will never go back to that anymore.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Ms. Chen represents a sliver of China’s population. Getting more savers to become spenders will not be so easy.The average Chinese household saves as much as 40 percent of its income, according to China’s National Bureau of Statistics. In contrast, the household savings rate in the United States is 5.2 percent and is 1.8 percent in Japan, according to recent data from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.The main reason is that China just does not have the same safety net as other countries. Most Chinese have to save for retirement and health care because the country’s social welfare system needs to be developed. The Chinese also save money for education.%+124Q ’14+7.3%+  9+  6CHINA’S G.D.P.YEAR-OVER-YEARCHANGE, QUARTERLY+  30’06’08’10’12’14The growth in average wages, which rose by around 10 percent last year, could also slow significantly as companies cut back in the face of economic headwinds. “We have seen some slowdown in wage growth last year because private firms are facing great difficulty and their financing costs remain quite high,” said Mr. Liu at ANZ.China’s leaders have a variety of tools to increase consumption during periods of uncertainty.When Chinese exports plummeted after the financial crisis, the government introduced short-term programs to spur spending. Cities handed out coupons to local stores and restaurants. In rural areas, people were given rebates on big-ticket items like televisions, washing machines and refrigerators.This time around, the government is looking to longer-term policies to drive consumption. “The model of development has changed,” Jiang Jianqing, the chairman of the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, said at the financial forum in Hong Kong, pointing to new government plans to revamp the financial and corporate sectors and improve the average Chinese person’s livelihood.The government has focused on introducing a nationwide pension system, providing universal medical insurance and upgrading the education system. It has experimented with less burdensome tax requirements for businesses. Pilot programs have been introduced in Shanghai and in areas like the logistics sector. This would free up resources that could go toward better pay for employees.AdvertisementBank reform is also on the table. State lenders have been given some leeway to pay depositors more on their savings, giving their money an extra boost and potentially encouraging consumption. Policy makers have pledged more liberalization of deposit rates. And Beijing has lifted restrictions for nonbank lending, paving the way for online retailers like JD.com, Guomei, Suning and Alibaba to begin offering consumer financing options. Still, it remains difficult for most Chinese to obtain a bank loan.While still relatively new, the concept of a minimum wage is also gaining traction, although the legal requirement varies by province. “They are still increasing minimum wage. That would continue to have this marginal boost to income of the low-skilled worker,” said MK Tang, a China economist at Goldman Sachs.Beijing is also testing rural land reforms with pilot programs that allow Chinese farmers to lease land. Such initiatives, economists say, will create a wealth effect that increases rural household income.“You need something to kick-start consumption in order to make households wealthier, and the only way to make them wealthier is through reform,” said Michael Pettis, a finance professor at Peking University’s Guanghua School of Management.But to some economists and business leaders, such reforms are not happening fast enough.Liu Chuanzhi, the founder and chairman of Lenovo, is one of them. “Besides what the government is saying, we want to see concrete policies and measures,” he said. “China has so much potential in this respect.”Michael Forsythe contributed reporting from Hong Kong. Mia Li contributed research.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: As Growth Slows, China Pins Hopes on Consumer Spending.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.