By DAVID JOLLYJAN. 19, 2015
The Danish monetary authorities lowered interest rates further into negative territory on Monday, seeking to reduce upward pressure on their currency, the krone, just days before a momentous meeting of the European Central Bank.Just days earlier, Switzerland delivered a shock to the market, announcing that it would end its policy of seeking to hold down the value of the Swiss franc against the euro.Both the Swiss and Danish authorities, trying to keep their currencies — and exports — globally competitive, acted pre-emptively before a meeting of the European Central Bank on Thursday in Frankfurt. At that meeting, the bank’s policy makers are widely expected to announce a program of large-scale bond buying, an action that could further push down the value of the euro, which has been weakening for months.A weakening euro has the effect of making other European currencies, like the Swiss franc and Danish krone, relatively stronger — which effectively raises the prices of products priced in francs or kroner on the global market.AdvertisementTo reduce demand for kroner and make the currency less valuable, Danmarks Nationalbank, the central bank, said it was cutting the rate on certificates of deposit to minus 0.2 percent from minus 0.05 percent. That will discourage banks from parking excess funds at the central bank.AdvertisementIt is also cutting its lending rate to 0.05 percent from 0.2 percent.“They’re trying to stem capital inflows by making kroner investments less attractive,” said Carl Hammer, chief currency strategist at SEB in Stockholm. Normally, the Danish monetary authorities move only after the E.C.B. takes action, he said, typically a few hours later.“This is unusual,” Mr. Hammer added. “It shows nervousness over the new liquidity the European Central Bank will be creating and where that will go.”News of the Danish central bank move sent the krone down to 7.4340 to the euro from 7.4300 earlier on Monday, its strongest level since the 2012 eurozone sovereign debt crisis.Denmark, a Nordic country of 5.6 million people with a top-notch AAA bond rating, is a member of the 28-nation European Union, but not of the 19-member subset of countries that use the euro currency. The E.C.B. oversees monetary policy for the euro currency union.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Danish central bank has long sought to hold the krone around 7.46038 to the euro, allowing it to trade in a 2.25 percent band either side of that figure.Because the vastly more powerful E.C.B. supports the peg, and could intervene in the currency market if called upon, many economists say a clear distinction should be drawn between Denmark’s currency policy and that of Switzerland, which is not a member of the European Union.Switzerland last week ended a program of trying to protect the franc by buying euros in large quantities, deciding that the euro had grown too weak for the policy to remain effective. The abrupt change cause the franc’s value to soar.Monday’s move by the Danish central bank, simply adjusting interest rates, was a much less drastic action.AdvertisementKarsten Biltoft, a spokesman for the Danish central bank, brushed off any suggestion that Denmark’s peg to the euro was endangered, saying the governors had acted because the krone had become too strong.“The question has come up in light of the Swiss move,” he said, “but there’s no comparison between that case and the Danish case.”He noted that Denmark had been pegging the currency to its European neighbors since 1982, when it adopted a link to the old German mark. “It’s a paperless marriage with the euro,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Denmark Cuts Interest Rates to Hold Down Krone’s Value, but Keeps Its Euro Peg.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.