AdvertisementSupported byInside EuropeBy Paul Taylor | ReutersLONDON — The European Central Bank faces a crucial test of its resolve to do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro when it decides this week on buying government bonds to combat deflation and revive the economy.The adviser to the European Union’s top court and the Swiss National Bank have smoothed the way for quantitative easing, or Q.E. — in effect, printing money. But fierce opposition from Germany’s central bank, politicians and public may yet shackle the E.C.B.At issue is no longer whether the bank buys bonds issued by eurozone governments, which has been widely flagged, but how the program is designed and whether it is seen as credible and sufficient.The risk is that the institution that has held the single currency area together through five years of debt crisis adopts a “Q.E.-lite” plan that sends the wrong signal to markets, misses its target and jeopardizes the central bank’s credibility.News that the E.C.B. president, Mario Draghi, met privately last week with the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, highlights the acute political sensitivity of the decision. While Germany’s central bank, the Bundesbank, is opposed to quantitative easing, which it sees as a back door to financing of feckless governments, creating potential liabilities for German taxpayers, the E.C.B. is hoping Ms. Merkel won’t denounce it and will restrain her conservative allies.Some supporters of quantitative easing fear Mr. Draghi may make too many concessions to Germany by framing a program that is limited in volume and scope, doesn’t share risk across borders, and excludes buying bonds of the countries with the lowest credit ratings.A draft plan circulated by E.C.B. staff this month would cap purchases at 500 billion euros, or $578 million. Some market analysts say it may need to be twice that size — or open-ended — to reach its objective.Mr. Draghi and his supporters are a majority of the E.C.B.’s policy-making Governing Council, but the two German members — Jens Weidmann, the Bundesbank president, and Sabine Lautenschläger, a member of the E.C.B.’s executive board — seem sure to vote against quantitative easing. A few other governors may join them. One option would be to make each national central bank in the 19-nation eurozone shoulder the risk of default on all or most of its own country’s bonds that the E.C.B. purchases.“This would be at best ineffective and at worst dangerous,” said Guntram B. Wolff, director of Bruegel, an economic think tank in Brussels. It “would be a strong signal that the E.C.B. is no longer a ‘joint and several’ institution.”The veteran Danish economist Niels Thygesen, one of the experts who designed the original blueprint for the euro in the 1980s, told Reuters: “If these are the circumstances for some Q.E., it may not be worthwhile even for strong enthusiasts.” It would be a limited program designed by lawyers as much as economists.Yet by declaring E.C.B. bond-buying legal and urging courts to be cautious in challenging the central bank when they lack the expertise, an advocate general at the European Court of Justice, Pedro Cruz Villalón, last week effectively gave a green light for full-blooded action.Although Mr. Cruz Villalón’s opinion concerned a lawsuit brought by German euro-skeptics against an earlier, unused bond-buying program, it had clear implications for quantitative easing. In particular, he argued that announcing limits on bond-buying in advance would undermine its effectiveness, that the E.C.B. should not be given seniority over private creditors in case of a debt restructuring, and that there was no bar on its buying bonds of countries with low credit ratings.This should give Mr. Draghi a free hand to buy bonds of all eurozone states proportionate to their contributions to the E.C.B.’s capital for as long as needed to get inflation back toward the central bank’s target of just below 2 percent, from close to zero now.But the politics involved may make that impossible. Economists distinguish two main ways in which quantitative easing — used in the United States, Britain and Japan — works to revive an economy and raise prices: the “signaling effect” and the “portfolio effect.”In layman’s terms, the signaling effect describes an unambiguous message to financial markets that a resolute central bank is determined to use unlimited resources to achieve its goal. The United States Federal Reserve is the frequently cited model.“Just as markets know never to fight the Fed, they need to understand that you don’t bet against the E.C.B.,” said a senior Eurosystem official, who requested anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly.The portfolio effect describes the mechanism through which a central bank creates money in order to buy bonds from banks, insurers and pension funds, which reinvest it in higher-return assets like stocks and corporate bonds, often outside the eurozone. That exit of funds lowers the exchange rate, making exports cheaper and imports dearer, hence raising the inflation rate.The euro has already fallen from nearly $1.40 in May 2014 to $1.15 last Friday, its slide gathering pace as expectations mount that the E.C.B. will begin quantitative easing.Switzerland’s central bank lifted a hand brake on the euro’s fall last week when it abruptly abandoned a three-year-old cap on the Swiss franc’s exchange rate, which had forced it to buy tens of billion euros to defend the peg of 1.20 francs to the euro.The shock move, which sparked global currency turmoil and inflicted heavy losses on some banks and brokers, showed how hard it is for central banks to tame volatile markets and how easy long-accumulated credibility can be put at risk. That carries lessons for the European Central Bank as it contemplates one of the toughest decisions in its 16-year history. Paul Taylor is a Reuters correspondent.  Advertisement