
Frequent Flier By                     
MICK BATYSKE

JAN. 19, 2015
WHEN I was young I didn’t fly a lot except to go see my grandparents in Naples, Fla., every summer. When I was in college I didn’t fly a lot, either. I was focused on school and on getting a good job. I used to D.J. as a hobby in the evenings to pay for graduate school. Now working as a D.J. is my career, and I fly more than 225,000 miles a year.I will do absolutely everything I can to get to my gigs. To me, my clients are everything, and I get to work with a lot of amazing people and brands. So if someone is willing to bring me somewhere to perform, I’m going to give it my all to make sure I get there.It’s good that I’m a great flier and not scared at all. That’s kind of counterintuitive since I am scared of heights and I really don’t like crossing bridges, especially suspension bridges. I’ll do it, of course, but I don’t enjoy it.A few years ago, D.J.s weren’t as popular in the mainstream, and although I’m friendly, my seatmates would generally stop talking to me once they found out what I did for a living. Now, D.J.s are everywhere, and people are fascinated with the profession so they ask a lot of questions. I don’t mind talking about it, and have actually gotten some clients from chance meetings on the plane.AdvertisementMy schedule can be crazy, and I might fly from my home in Brooklyn to a gig in Miami or Cleveland or even as far as England or Germany and then fly right back home once my gig is done. I once did a 24-hour turnaround to Dubai for a big event. Of course, I was questioned when I tried to re-enter the United States so quickly, and my bags were searched. I understand the issues, but it is kind of unnerving.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I had a client who booked me for an event in San Diego scheduled for a Saturday evening. I decided to fly out Friday night to be safe, but my flight to San Diego was canceled while I was on the jet bridge. We were having some bad snowstorms in New York so it was a little crazy. I quickly sprinted off the jet bridge and found a flight that could get me to Los Angeles, and figured I could find a connection to San Diego once I landed.AdvertisementI thought I had solved my problem, but we sat on the runway for more than three hours in the snow waiting to take off, which we finally did at three in the morning. I fell asleep and woke up when we were getting ready to land and was happy that I had made it to Los Angeles International Airport — but I had slept through the part where we had been diverted to the airport in Ontario, Calif., because of fog.The airline promised us a shuttle, but we all know that could take forever. So I booked a private ride that could get me as far as Los Angeles. I paid way too much money for it, but I wanted to make my gig.Once I got to Los Angeles, I skipped the airport since I wasn’t going to take any chances with a plane ride. Instead, I went right to the train station and bought a business-class ticket. I had a quiet car and enjoyed a beautiful beach view the entire way down the coast. Now, I take the train from Los Angeles to San Diego whenever I can. It’s amazing. An added plus: no bridges to cross.As told to Joan Raymond. Email: joan.raymond@nytimes.com Q. How often do you fly for business?A. On average twice a week, a mix of domestic and international.Q. What’s your least favorite airport?A. La Guardia, mostly because of the central terminal. It’s horrible.Q. Of all the places you’ve been, what’s the best?A. Paris. I love it for business, but I also like it on a personal level. It’s magical.Q. What’s your secret airport vice?A. Getting to my plane about 15 seconds before the door closes. I also buy too many magazines. I can’t help myself.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: For a D.J., a Diverted Flight Brings About a Blissful Train Ride.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »