DAVOS, Switzerland — Fear is back in the valley of the privileged.Financial instability is again a prime source of anxiety for participants at the World Economic Forum after receding last year. Russia and Ukraine, cheap oil, volatile currency markets, deflation, terrorism and even Switzerland are unsettling the global economy and sowing nervousness among the people attending the forum, many of them bankers or investors.The sense of being blindsided by events was summed up by David M.  Rubenstein, co-chief executive of the private equity firm Carlyle Group. He told the audience at a panel on Wednesday that they should take everything he said with a grain of salt because his predictions last year were way off.“I wouldn’t have predicted oil prices  would go down,” Mr. Rubenstein said. “I wouldn’t have predicted U.S.  growth would be as strong as it has been, I wouldn’t have predicted the slowdown in some of the emerging markets, I certainly wouldn’t have predicted deflation in Europe.”The sense of nervousness has been heightened by the terrorist attacks in Paris earlier this month. Security at the World Economic Forum, which every year turns the town into a virtual military protectorate, was tightened  even further. In a new practice, the Swiss police shined flashlights into the shuttle vans that bring participants to hotels and events, requiring passengers to show their credentials.“It’s that fear factor,” Anne Richards, chief investment officer of Aberdeen Asset Management, said in an interview. “What is going to hit now?” Even recent economic events that are mostly positive create instability, panelists said. The plunge in oil prices is great for consumers, but has undercut the Russian economy, with repercussions for Europe. Mr. Rubenstein said that Russian companies had borrowed $650 billion from Western countries, mostly European banks. “If the Russian companies, because of their economies, can’t service that debt, that’s going to be a problem,” he said.Douglas Flint, chairman of HSBC Holdings, noted that when regulators tested the resiliency of banks this year, none considered situations in which oil was $50 a  barrel. “The last several years have  taught us to expect the unexpected and to prepare for the worst,” Mr. Flint said at a different panel discussion.The discussions came a day before the European Central  Bank was expected to announce that it would begin broad-based bond purchases to try to stimulate the European economy. But there was pessimism that central banks could continue to rescue global economies.“We are looking forward to the E.C.B. announcement tomorrow,” said Min Zhu, deputy managing director of the International Monetary Fund.But he said that the eurozone economy required policies to stimulate demand, like spending on public infrastructure or changes in laws that  restrict hiring and firing. “Interest rates are zero already. What do they do?” Mr. Zhu said of central banks. “We  need supply-side policies.”Even a month ago, no one would have predicted that Switzerland, one of the wealthiest and most stable countries in the world, would become a subject of concern. But the country faces an economic crisis after the Swiss National Bank last week abandoned attempts to check the rise of the Swiss franc against the euro. The franc has risen 20 percent  against the  euro since then, an increase that made the stay in Davos even more costly than usual and, more important, threatened the competitiveness of Swiss industry.Axel Weber, chairman of the Swiss bank UBS, said the Swiss central bank “did the right thing” in acknowledging  that it could no longer keep a cap on the franc. He predicted that the Swiss currency would retreat from current levels.“There are challenges and pressures, but I think they are manageable,” said Mr. Weber, the former president of the Bundesbank, the German central bank.But he was pessimistic about Europe. Noting that he had appeared at a panel called, “Is Europe Back?” last year at the forum, he said this time around, “Europe’s not back,” adding, “The problems are back.”A hint of geopolitical tension, in the otherwise convivial atmosphere at the gathering, emerged at a panel sponsored by The Wall Street Journal that examined why economies and financial markets have become more volatile. Arkady Dvorkovich, deputy prime minister of Russia, was critical of the United States. “The problem with American growth, it is more at the expense of other countries sometimes,” said Mr. Dvorkovich, who also called sanctions imposed on Russia in retaliation for its behavior in Ukraine “stupid.”Still, some experts said the gloom was overdone. “The rest of the world will recover over time,” Kenneth Rogoff, an economics professor at Harvard University, said on the same panel. “These things don’t last forever.”Jenny Anderson contributed reporting.