DAVOS, Switzerland — Finance-related panels at the World Economic Forum here on Wednesday focused on the impact of low oil prices, anticipation of the potential impact of the European Central Bank’s decision on Thursday to buy significant pools of sovereign bonds, liquidity concerns and the consequences of heavy-handed regulation. Here are a few of the predictions, pet peeves and random musings of those who spoke. David Rubenstein, co-founder and co-chief executive of the Carlyle Group Bullish on: the United States dollar, China, investing in Japan.Oil prices: “Will stay low for a while.”Concerned about: European banks holding Russian debt. “They could struggle again if Russia can’t pay off that debt.”Other thoughts on energy: Renewables will take a hit from the oil price decline.Regulation: He’s not complaining as it has been a major boon for his business, including its foray into lending.  Unintended consequence of regulation: Most creative minds in finance don’t go to banks anymore. “They go to hedge funds and private equity where they are more adequately rewarded.”Axel Weber, chairman of the board of UBSOil is normalizing and will trade at $50 to $70 a barrel.Bullish on United States and European equities. “I think equity markets in Europe will pick up.”Was the creation of the euro a good idea? “Hard to tell.” Spoke at length about the need for structural reforms. If Europe doesn’t do the structural reforms it needs, “the single euro area becomes an increasingly difficult project to run.”On politics: Politicians need to be brave (easy for him to say). “If they don’t get re-elected, so be it.” Douglas Flint, chairman of HSBC HoldingsLessons learned: That we don’t know much. “The last several years have taught us to expect the unexpected and to prepare for the worst.” He reminded the audience that the banks survived multiple stress tests, none of which tested oil at $50 a barrel.On quantitative easing in Europe: “If Q.E. is a success, and confidence is created, that’s a good thing. But political progress toward reform is put on the back burner.”If quantitative easing fails: “The magical powers of the E.C.B. seem not to be there.”On the markets overreliance on central banks to create cheap money: “They can buy time and create the environment for confidence to improve.” If the time is not used to make reforms, “we lose the opportunity.” On the possibility that Europe will change its rules to jump-start the anemic securitzation market: “Everyone agrees that it needs to change and then we come back in six months and everyone still agrees.”More or less optimistic than he was last year: “Slightly less. I think we’ll get through this year, but I am more cautious.” Anshu Jain, co-chief executive of Deutsche Bank  What worries him: Uncertain political outcomes: Greek, Spanish and British elections. “It’s the unpredictability of outcomes.” Why would anyone want his job? “It’s a chance to make a difference. You can have a tremendous impact.” Impact of quantitative easing: On the upside, it could mean stability for Europe. The downside? Destruction of net interest income. “We have to adapt.”What does the market expect? 500 million euros is too little, 750 million euros is what the market expects, 1 trillion euros and the market is happy. More or less optimistic than the same time last year: “More. I was not very optimistic at this point last year. The U.S. recovery feels very real. It’s not running on one cylinder, it’s running on multiple cylinders.” Another plus: There is more regulatory certainty: “We might not like what we got,” but at least there are not nearly as many rules in flux.Will the bank be the same size in a year: “We are in the process of a strategic review.” The bank will release that review soon, he said. (Stephanie Ruhle, moderator of the panel and anchor and managing editor of Bloomberg TV noted that probably meant the bank was planning on shrinking.)Brian T. Moynihan, chairman and chief executive of Bank of America More or less optimistic? “Very optimistic,” but “the thing about U.S. growth I get concerned about is the world becoming too dependent on it.” Addressing the widespread concern that banks will not be there to provide liquidity in the event of a crisis: “The answer is, we can’t provide as much by the nature of the rules.”  Regulators, he noted, agree with him. But some bankers think they are not doing enough about it.André Esteves, chief executive of Banco BTG Pactual“Its very scary, the lack of liquidity.” Even in certain areas of the United States Treasury market, “there is a lack of liquidity.” What will it take for regulators to change the rules to make it economically feasible for banks to hold more inventory? “Crisis, in a traumatic way.”What keeps him up at night?  “It’s very good to have the shadow banking to support services banks cannot. But it depends on how we manage the regulatory context. We can create the perfect environment for the next crisis.” Min Zhu, deputy managing director of the International Monetary Fund He agrees: “The risks have shifted to shadow banking.” John Rice, vice chairman of General Electric and leader of G.E.’s global operations based in Hong Kong Call a spade a spade: Everybody’s focused on sustainable and inclusive growth. “You don’t have sustainable and inclusive growth if you don’t create jobs.”On the market’s powers of prediction: “When oil was $140, more people were predicting $200 than $50.”Punters on the Swiss francOne participant: “I changed to dollars last week. My wife thought I was nuts. Now I look like a genius. Maybe I should become a currency trader.”