AdvertisementSupported byBy Julie Hirschfeld DavisHAVANA — Penny Pritzker, the commerce secretary and billionaire entrepreneur who travels the world in her private Gulfstream jet, was here this week to try to meld Cuban socialism with American capitalism. It was not always a comfortable fit.“We want to help all Cubans plug into the global economy and enjoy a higher standard of living,” Ms. Pritzker told Cuban officials on Wednesday, gazing across a conference table through black-rimmed glasses at Rodrigo Malmierca, the foreign trade minister. He had just finished telling her that President Obama’s steps to normalize relations with Cuba after a 54-year estrangement were still “not enough,” as long as the American trade and travel embargo remained in place.“The U.S. embargo, which only our Congress can overturn, limits what the president can do in changing our approach,” Ms. Pritzker conceded. In the meantime, she said brightly, it was time to “seize this historic opportunity.”Despite the obstacles, Ms. Pritzker, 56, an heiress to the Hyatt Hotels Corporation fortune who started five ventures of her own, is uniquely positioned for the difficult mission of peeling away decades of hostility with Cuba and getting talks on commerce started. For that matter, her deep connections to the nation’s business community and her long history with the president — nearly 20 years ago her son attended a Chicago basketball program run by Mr. Obama’s brother-in-law — make her a vital ambassador for a president who has often infuriated Wall Street and corporate America.Her trip to Cuba, the 33rd country she has visited in her two years as commerce secretary, comes as Ms. Pritzker is taking on another tough assignment for Mr. Obama: trying to sell Congress on the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the largest regional trade agreement in history, which was completed on Monday and faces opposition among Democrats, including Hillary Rodham Clinton. She has also pressed for and won high-level strategic and commercial talks with India and routinely buttonholes foreign leaders about the concerns of American companies.When President Xi Jinping of China traveled to the United States last month, it was Ms. Pritzker who met him in Seattle and delivered a sharp message, warning Mr. Xi that his country had to treat American companies fairly if he wanted to see further economic cooperation.“This woman works like hell,” said Thomas J. Donohue, the president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, who collaborated with Ms. Pritzker on a United States-Ukraine business forum in July. “She was all over the thing — she grabbed onto it and did not let go.”Ms. Pritzker, who is worth $2.4 billion and is an active philanthropist, has also reached out to Silicon Valley. When Airbnb, the online short-term home-rental company, announced it was expanding to Cuba, Ms. Pritzker picked up the phone and called Brian Chesky, the chief executive, to congratulate him and followed up with an email offering support.“In some ways, I think of her as almost like one of us,” said Mr. Chesky, whom Ms. Pritzker recruited to join a program she started for Mr. Obama that recruits American executives to promote entrepreneurship in the United States and overseas. “She is someone who gets what we do.”But Ms. Pritzker’s business-executive background complicated her path to a top post in Mr. Obama’s administration. As finance chairwoman of his 2008 campaign, she served as Mr. Obama’s crucial conduit to her circle of bankers, executives and Jewish leaders and raised $745 million to elect him. Afterward she was a leading contender for the commerce job, only to withdraw from consideration, with her family’s fortune in turmoil because of the financial crisis and the public backlash against Wall Street at a fever pitch.Ms. Pritzker said the decision had been hers. “It wasn’t right” to join the administration, she said, while she was trying to run a business in an economic meltdown. But others close to Mr. Obama said his advisers had worried that installing a wealthy finance chairwoman in the cabinet would muddy the president’s image as a transcendent figure who rejected business as usual, and that she would face a confirmation fight on Capitol Hill.Adding to the problems, Ms. Pritzker had been part owner of Superior Bank, which collapsed in 2001, partly because of subprime mortgages, and her family had used offshore trusts to pay less in taxes — a practice the president had condemned.If Ms. Pritzker was bitter, she never showed it, colleagues say. She took on a heavy workload on behalf of the Obama administration, serving on two economic advisory boards and leading an effort to link community colleges with businesses to improve students’ competitiveness in the job market. She played a substantial, if lesser, role raising money for his second presidential campaign. When Mr. Obama was re-elected, he turned to Ms. Pritzker to take the commerce post.“Of the cabinet, for sure there’s no one who knows him longer, been more involved in Barack Obama’s getting to where he got to, than her,” said William M. Daley, a former White House chief of staff to Mr. Obama who also served as commerce secretary under Bill Clinton. “Her sucking it up when she was disappointed about not getting something in the first term probably enhanced that.”But union leaders were bitter that the president had selected someone whose family business, they argued, had exploited housekeepers at its hotels. They said the president’s relationship with Ms. Pritzker was a bigger priority for him than his commitment to workers’ rights, and they were wary of her from the start.Labor leaders “had an impression of someone who wouldn’t be able either to sympathize or empathize with workers in America,” said Thomas E. Perez, the labor secretary, who has collaborated with Ms. Pritzker on programs to improve workers’ skills. But, he added, “What they saw was someone who was acutely aware of and committed to ensuring that workers could succeed.”Ms. Pritzker, who rises near dawn for an hourlong daily run and competes in triathlons, paved her way into her family’s male-dominated empire at age 16, when she wrote a letter to her grandfather, A.N. Pritzker, for his 80th birthday, asking why he talked only to the boys, and never to her, about business.“I was born in 1896,” she said he replied. “How am I supposed to know that women are interested in business?” He rewarded her with a weekslong summer crash course in accounting. As an 18-year-old undergraduate at Harvard University, Ms. Pritzker fell in love with her introductory economics class and impressed friends with her work ethic.“What she did know was that she wanted to make a way for herself that would enable her to play a leadership role in her family business,” said Elizabeth Sherwood-Randall, her Harvard roommate, who is now the deputy secretary of energy. Ms. Pritzker went on to earn simultaneous law and business degrees from Stanford University.For the trip to Cuba, Ms. Pritzker traded in the Gulfstream that she uses as her traveling office for a standard blue-and-white government plane emblazoned with “United States of America,” all to make space for a larger-than-usual entourage of aides and to comply with security requirements. In hot and humid Old Havana on Wednesday, she strolled through the cobblestone streets and grand plazas in a sleeveless top and pencil skirt, stopping to peek into the lobby of the Hemingway Hotel and greet Cuban schoolchildren, who sang sweetly of their fealty to Fidel Castro and socialism.On this trip, with the embargo still in place, she was in many ways promoting more promise than policy, a kind of ambassador of aspirations for the power of market forces to help bring change to Cuba.“I hope what I could stand for in their eyes is a businessperson who has enormous sensitivity to the issues of society,” Ms. Pritzker said as her plane prepared to land in Havana this week. “This is more than just, ‘Let’s do commerce.’ There’s a personal aspect of this too.”Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.Advertisement