DAVOS, Switzerland – Top bankers attending the World Economic Forum here are saying that they support the deluge of new regulations introduced since the financial crisis of 2008.They are actually saying that. “The bulk of the regulatory reform was much needed,” Anshu Jain, one of two chief executives of Deutsche Bank, Germany’s largest lender, said on Wednesday at a panel organized by Bloomberg. Mr. Jain even went on to say that his bank would have put in place many of the same changes that governments around the world have imposed on Deutsche’s giant operations. “Our own management would have taken us on the same journey,” he said.Bankers like Mr. Jain say, for instance, that they support higher capital requirements. A bank with higher capital relies less on borrowed money to finance its operations. Banks had too little capital before the financial crisis, so when their borrowed money dried up in the panic of 2008, taxpayers had to step in with bailouts to prevent the banks from collapsing. But several comments made at the forum suggest that bankers may not be as keen on higher capital and other regulations as they say. Jamie Dimon discusses his comment that banks are “under assault” from regulators and touts JPMorgan’s record year for financials.Their qualms revolve around how they see conditions in the bond markets right now. The bankers said they had concerns about bond market “liquidity,” the term used on Wall Street to describe how much trading takes place in an asset, and whether it is easy to price the asset in the market. Bankers say that regulations enacted after the crisis have prompted banks to slash the size of the bond inventories that they hold for meeting client orders. As a result, the bankers say, when there are shocks to the market, the banks buy fewer bonds, which causes prices to move more vigorously.  “The shock absorber used to be the banking system,” Douglas Flint, chairman of HSBC, said, speaking on the same Bloomberg panel. And Mr. Jain said that “lean inventories” might have been behind a short-lived but violent move in the price of the 10-year United States Treasury note in October.Laurence Fink shares his thoughts on changing the tax narrative and implementing reform.Seasoned bond investors take this with a grain of salt. They say investment banks have never beneficently offered to buy large amounts of bonds from their clients in times of stress. The banks certainly did not do that with mortgage securities in 2008. And it is sensible for banks to step back. They may avoid losses if they do not overly expose themselves to falling bond prices.Regulations have, however, most likely played a role in prompting banks to hold lower inventories. A major reason is that the banks find it harder to earn a satisfactory return on the extra capital they must now hold in their trading operations. But the higher capital requirements might have a silver lining. They could now prompt the banks to make their bond-trading operations more efficient. “Liquidity is something that must be priced properly if people want it,” said Anat Admati, a finance professor at Stanford who is at the forum. “There is nothing in capital regulation that prevents liquidity provision.”Stephen Schwarzman shares his thoughts on President Obama’s tax plan and the role of education in boosting the middle class.The bankers in Davos sounded alarmed about what would happen to global bond prices when it became clear that the stimulus policies of the central banks were going to be wound down. The stimulus has caused bond prices to rise for several years, and they may fall when it is clear that the easy money is ending. Such a policy about-face, combined with smaller bond inventories at banks, could lead to big market disruptions, they said.“We’ve somehow got a disconnect between policy and regulation,” Mr. Flint said. But if the markets hold up through future squalls, the liquidity scare may die down. And markets did hold up last week when securities prices across the globe moved in reaction to the surprising decision of the Swiss central bank to end an arrangement that had stopped its currency from appreciating against other currencies. Speaking on the panel, Brian T. Moynihan, the chief executive of Bank of America, attested to the market’s robustness on the day of the announcement. “The volatilities all went through the roof and it all got traded out,” he said, “The system worked all day long.” Even Mr. Jain, later in the discussion, seemed willing to concede that point, saying, “The banking system has proven that it can handle very large moves in the markets.”