Can old dogs make money out of old tricks?That’s the question facing Douglas L. Braunstein, the former JPMorgan Chase mergers boss and finance chief, and James C. Woolery, a longtime deal lawyer. The two have collected $250 million and a network of corporate chieftains to start a fund that will invest in companies and persuade them to do deals that improve share value. The question is whether there’s room for permanently well-mannered activism in 2015.Cage-rattling of all flavors – a range that includes the publicly aggressive variety exemplified by Daniel S. Loeb’s Third Point and the more private style of Nelson Peltz and his Trian fund – has richly rewarded investors of late. The strategy returned 21 percent in 2012, 16 percent in 2013 and 5 percent last year, according to Hedge Fund Research. In each instance, that beat most other hedge-fund approaches, which last year on average delivered a measly 3 percent.That’s one reason behind the timing of Mr. Braunstein and Mr. Woolery’s  creation of Hudson Executive Capital. Another is the booming M.&A. market in which investors are welcoming deals intended to enhance value – even bolstering the shares of acquirers making expensive purchases more often than is usual.The two are determined to use their long deal-making experience to find receptive targets, invest and then begin “constructive engagement,” a term Hudson’s website capitalizes and highlights with an “SM” service-mark symbol. The approach has echoes of decades-old merchant banking methods.With company bosses attuned to governance and the presence of less friendly activists, Hudson’s method may well fill a gap in the market for a time. But even the likes of Mr. Peltz keep the possibility of confrontation in reserve. Without that stick, some companies may not find the carrot sufficiently appealing, especially if stock market players moderate their enthusiasm for deals.Both have a wealth of advisory experience, but neither Mr. Woolery nor Mr. Braunstein has money management on his résumé. The latter also took a lot of stick over JPMorgan’s famous $6 billion “London Whale” loss, which occurred on his watch as chief financial officer. That means investors in Hudson have to believe not just that old ideas will work again, but that the fund founders can learn some new tricks, too.Richard Beales is assistant editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.