For years, renting a tuxedo was a simple proposition. Men went to a specialty retailer or the giant of black-tie rentals, Men’s Wearhouse, and chose an outfit.But a nearly two-year-old start-up, one that claims as much inspiration from the hugely popular Rent the Runway as from its brick-and-mortar competitor, is drawing attention from investors.That company, The Black Tux, plans to announce on Wednesday that it has raised about $10 million in new financing. The investment was led by First Round Capital, which will gain a seat on the start-up’s board.The Black Tux’s take appears to borrow from businesses both old and new: the time-honored tradition of renting a tuxedo, but coupled with fashionable cuts and ordered entirely online.Hatched when the company’s founders, Andrew Blackmon and Patrick Coyne, were preparing for Mr. Blackmon’s wedding in 2011, the company aimed to provide a new way to sell clothing services to men. The two founders said in an interview that they were dismayed at the general inefficiency of the black-tie rental process, as well as what they derided as cheaply made, deeply unfashionable clothes.So they did what many burgeoning online retailers have done in recent years: go straight to a manufacturer to produce higher-quality merchandise. Though neither founder would identify the maker of their wares, they allowed that the tuxedos were made of wool from Tollegno, a popular Italian mill.Like Rent the Runway, customers can order an entire look — tuxedo, shirt, tie, shoes — with a few clicks of a mouse button. But The Black Tux founders claim that they have a distinct business advantage over their famous progenitor, in that there is a lot less risk in their inventory. By contrast, Rent the Runway has to not only correctly anticipate fickle fashion trends, but also buy the right quantities and sizes, while gambling that the styles it procures will not go out of style too quickly.Men’s tuxedos, according to Mr. Coyne, are far less apt to change. Prospective grooms, he notes, often still look to appear like Frank Sinatra circa the 1960s Rat Pack era.Mr. Blackmon reckoned that the company’s potential market, that of tuxedo rentals, could amount to some $3 billion, with enormously profitable margins. Men’s Wearhouse, for instance, enjoys a gross retail margin of roughly 85 percent from its tuxedo business.Since its founding, The Black Tux has managed all of its own logistics out of a huge warehouse in Los Angeles, the founders said. Customers submit their measurements online, and a team of specialists, assisted by algorithms, determines which tuxedo to send. (The company has a multiplicity of sizes — including, for example, several 42 regulars, with varying arm lengths — reducing but not eliminating the need for tailoring.)In meeting with potential investors, Mr. Blackmon said, he and Mr. Coyne repeatedly heard about the following that The Black Tux was garnering solely through word of mouth.“The No. 1 thing they told us was, ‘It’s amazing to see how much you’ve grown without spending on marketing,’” he said.Since its inception, the founders said, The Black Tux has seen double-digit sales growth every month. And during last year’s wedding season, the company oversaw a waiting list of some 30,000.But the new fund-raising round, they added, was intended to cut down on potential inventory shortages. And it will also help the company continue to grow, potentially into even more offerings. Already, customers can order not only three different kinds of tuxedos, but also either a gray or a darker charcoal suit.Some customers who have rented a tuxedo subsequently asked if they could buy the tuxedo outright. That sort of enthusiasm, Mr. Coyne said, might point toward a more ambitious vision of what The Black Tux could become.“Maybe someday we’ll become a men’s wear brand,” he mused.