Shareholders are facing a predicament in the battle for Family Dollar, Steven Davidoff Solomon writes in the Deal Professor column. On Thursday, Family Dollar shareholders will vote on a proposed $8.5 billion acquisition by Dollar Tree, which is offering about $76 a share. If they vote yes, “it will be the death knell for a competing bid by Dollar General that is about $4 a share higher,” Mr. Davidoff Solomon writes.Why would Family Dollar leave about half a billion dollars on the table? “The crux is the Federal Trade Commission, which is poised to block a tie-up of Dollar General and Family Dollar on antitrust grounds but appears willing to allow the Dollar Tree deal to proceed with minimal conditions,” he adds. The impending failure of Dollar General’s efforts goes back to its “halfhearted attempts to acquire Family Dollar.”“Family Dollar will sweat the vote out, but its shareholders are really left with one choice ‒ the Dollar Tree deal or no deal ‒ the same outcome in almost every other deal.” Looking back at the history of the battle for Family Dollar, Mr. Davidoff Solomon writes, “one has to wonder what all the fuss was about.”OBAMA SETS AGENDA TO HELP MIDDLE CLASS  |  In his State of the Union address before Congress on Tuesday night, President Obama claimed credit for an improving economy and laid out an agenda aimed at strengthening the middle class. “The verdict is clear,” Mr. Obama said. “Middle-class economics works. Expanding opportunity works. And these policies will continue to work, as long as politics don’t get in the way.”The president addressed a wide range of issues, including trade agreements, cyberattacks, climate change and immigration. He called on Congress to approve a business tax overhaul and proposed financing his plans for the middle class with tax increases for higher income earners as well as a fee on large financial institutions. “Lobbyists have rigged the tax code with loopholes that let some corporations pay nothing while others pay full freight,” he said. “Let’s close loopholes so we stop rewarding companies that keep profits abroad, and reward those that invest in America.”“Let’s close the loopholes that lead to inequality by allowing the top 1 percent to avoid paying taxes on their accumulated wealth,” the president added. “We can use that money to help more families pay for child care and send their kids to college. We need a tax code that truly helps working Americans trying to get a leg up in the new economy, and we can achieve that together.”S.&P. NEARS SETTLEMENTS WITH U.S.  |  Standard & Poor’s, the giant credit ratings agency, is nearing a series of costly settlements with the government, DealBook’s Matthew Goldstein and Ben Protess report. The settlements, which could wipe out S.&.P.’s operating profit for a year, reinforce the idea that S.&.P. abused its trust as a ratings agency, they write.In one settlement that could be announced on Wednesday, S.&P. may be required to take a timeout from rating some commercial mortgage bond deals under an agreement with state regulators and the Securities and Exchange Commission. Under that settlement, S.&P. would pay $62 million in fines and restitution. The S.&P. has also reached a tentative $1.37 billion settlement with the Justice Department and state attorneys general, in a case premised on the accusations that S.&P. awarded inflated credit ratings to mortgage investments that spurred the financial crisis. That case could be announced late this month.ON THE AGENDA  |  Monthly data on housing starts is out at 8:30 a.m. The World Economic Forum begins in Davos, Switzerland. EBay and American Express report fourth-quarter earnings after the market closes. Laurence D. Fink, the chief executive of BlackRock, is on CNBC at 8 a.m. Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, is on CNBC at 11:30 a.m. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew chairs a meeting of the Financial Stability Oversight Council in Washington at 2:30 p.m. MORGAN STANLEY PROFIT DISAPPOINTS  |  Morgan Stanley said on Tuesday that its earnings in the fourth quarter of 2014 rose to $1 billion, or 47 cents a share, from $95 million, or 2 cents a share, in the period a year earlier, Nathaniel Popper writes in DealBook. Putting aside several one-time charges and tax adjustments, the bank earned 39 cents a share, below the 48 cents a share that analysts had expected.The disappointing results suggest that the bank’s effort to rebuild itself into a more reliably profitable enterprise is going more slowly than expected, Mr. Popper writes. The latest report also indicates that the bank is still vulnerable to the sharp market moves that influenced financial results at other big banks. In the fourth quarter, Morgan Stanley, like most other banks on Wall Street, was held back by its trading operations, particularly by the desks that trade bonds, currencies and commodities. But Morgan Stanley saw an increase in revenue from its stock trading desks.  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailFor a Few Whirlwind Days, Davos Becomes the Deal Capital  |  The World Economic Forum is an endurance contest for deal makers, who have the rare opportunity to see dozens of clients in one setting. DealBook »Keeping a Lid on What Happens in Davos  |  Stung by past criticism, organizers of the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, are making an effort to rein in opulent events. DealBook »Hong Kong Tycoon Li Ka-shing to Buy British Passenger Train Provider  |  CK Investments has agreed to acquire the Eversholt Rail Group from 3i Infrastructure and other investors for about $3.8 billion, including the assumption of debt. DealBook »Orbitz Said to Explore Sale  |  The online travel agent Orbitz Worldwide is said to be working with a financial adviser as it reaches out to potential buyers, Bloomberg News reports, citing unidentified people with knowledge of the matter.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Dropbox Buys Mobile Productivity Start-Up CloudOn  |  The cloud-storage provider Dropbox has acquired CloudOn, a developer of mobile productivity tools, which has a hub in Israel, The Wall Street Journal writes. Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Rival Suitor for New York Clearinghouse Raises Bid  |  The brokerage firm BGC Partners, led by Howard Lutnick, raised its bid to $6.10 a share for the GFI Group, seeking to block the CME Group. DealBook »Salix Said to Be Working With Advisers  |  Salix Pharmaceuticals, which develops and markets drugs to treat gastrointestinal diseases, is said to be working with the investment bank Centerview Partners to explore its options, including a possible sale to a bigger drug maker, Reuters reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.  REUTERS Twitter Acquires ZipDial, an Indian Start-Up  |  Twitter said on Tuesday that it had acquired ZipDial, a nearly five-year-old Indian start-up that aims to help businesses connect with customers in emerging markets who may not have access to the Internet. DealBook »Bond Investors Prepare for Big Deals  |  Investors and bankers are anticipating another wave of big corporate-debt sales this year, as companies rush to sell debt while rates stay low, The Wall Street Journal writes.  WALL STREET JOURNAL JPMorgan Sets Up New Trading Unit  |  JPMorgan Chase has created a new 12-person unit focused on trading credit index products like credit default swap benchmarks and exchange-traded funds, The Wall Street Journal reports.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Nomura to Hire Bankers After Cutting Asia Equity Jobs  |  Nomura is planning to recruit about 20 senior bankers to bolster its mergers and acquisitions business even as it is said to have cut about 12 equities jobs in Asia to focus on more profitable operations, Bloomberg News writes, citing an unidentified person familiar with the matter.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Sycamore Partners Ends Effort to Acquire Express, a Clothing Retailer  |  The private equity firm Sycamore Partners said on Tuesday that it could not get deal financing on favorable terms, and shares of Express tumbled on the news. DealBook »Calpers Is Not in Danger of Breaking Up With Private Equity  |  The California Public Employees’ Retirement System is not planning to significantly reduce its allocation to private equity, but it may redistribute the investments among fewer managers, a spokesman said. DealBook »Activist Investor Steps Up Push for a Merger of Staples and Office Depot  |  Starboard Value will threaten to seek a fight for representation on the board if Staples does not pursue a deal for Office Depot. DealBook »2 Wall Street Deal Makers Form an Activist Fund With a Twist  |  Douglas L. Braunstein and James C. Woolery plan to work hand-in-hand with management and boards rather than threatening to wage proxy fights. DealBook »Comac Said to Return Capital to Investors  |  Comac Capital, a hedge fund based in London run by Colm O’Shea, is said to be returning capital to investors after suffering losses from the jump last week in the value of the Swiss franc, Reuters writes, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.  REUTERS Shake Shack Sets Price Range for I.P.O.  |  The premium burger chain plans to sell five million Class A shares at $14 to $16 a share. DealBook »SpaceX Lands $1 Billion From Google and Fidelity  |  Google and Fidelity have invested in Space Exploration Technologies, or SpaceX, the company founded by Elon Musk, in part to further Google’s goal of extending the Internet’s reach through satellites, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMES Coinbase, a Bitcoin Start-Up, Raises $75 Million in Vote of Confidence  |  Investors in Coinbase include the New York Stock Exchange, the Spanish bank BBVA and Vikram S. Pandit. DealBook »Shazam Tops $1 Billion Valuation  |  Shazam Entertainment, a start-up that helps users discover music, has raised $30 million in new financing, valuing the company at more than $1 billion, Bloomberg News reports.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Porch.com Raises $65 Million in Financing  |  The investment values Porch.com, a home improvement information start-up, at more than $500 million, according to a person briefed on the terms of the deal. DealBook »Echoes of Piketty in Obama Proposal to Address Income Inequality  |  The White House proposal to tax gifts and bequests is carefully aimed at the top 1 percent, Victor Fleischer writes in the Standard Deduction column. DealBook »Fallout Builds From Insider Trading Ruling  |  A court’s reversal of two insider trading convictions has been the equivalent of dropping a big rock into a calm lake as the waves spread to other cases, Peter J. Henning writes in the White Collar Watch column. DealBook »Silk Road Led Agents to Several Suspects  |  A federal agent testified at trial on Tuesday that United States authorities had investigated at least two other people as the suspected operators of the Silk Road website before arresting Ross W. Ulbricht on charges of running a drug trafficking business, The Financial Times writes.  FINANCIAL TIMES Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 