By REUTERSJAN. 20, 2015
BHP Billiton, one of the world’s largest mining companies, said on Wednesday that it would cut its spending on shale drilling over the next six months, part of a broad retrenchment by commodities giants in the face of a collapse in iron ore, copper and oil prices.The company, which is based in Melbourne, Australia, was hit with near across-the-board price declines for commodities in the second half of 2014 from the previous six months. The biggest fall was in its top earner, iron ore, whose selling price slumped 27 percent over the period.The steep fall in commodities prices has had similar effects across the oil industry. On Tuesday, the oil services company Baker Hughes said it would lay off about 7,000 workers, or 11 percent of its work force. Halliburton, another services provider, which is buying Baker Hughes for $34.6 billion, said it planned to cut jobs, too.“We expect our head count adjustments to be in line with our primary competitors,” Halliburton’s president, Jeff Miller, told reporters on Tuesday.AdvertisementLast week, the world’s largest oil services provider, Schlumberger, said that it was cutting 9,000 employees.AdvertisementBHP, which has been cutting spending on expansions across its businesses over the last two and a half years, said it would reduce the number of drilling rigs it was using to 16, from 26, by June 2015. The company said it would update its shale drilling budget, originally $4 billion for this financial year, in February. Some analysts have predicted that the company will cut shale spending in half.“We will keep this activity under review,” BHP’s chief executive, Andrew Mackenzie, said in a statement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Billiton, which differentiates itself from its mining rivals by owning oil and gas assets, said it had spent $1.9 billion on onshore drilling so far this year.The job cuts by Baker Hughes were announced in a conference call after the company said it had exceeded analysts’ estimates with a record $663 million in net income in the fourth quarter of 2014, more than double its earnings during the same period of the previous year.The company said most of the job cuts would come in the first quarter, when it expects to book a one-time severance charge of $160 million to $185 million.With activity in the oil fields in decline, “we’re approaching this year one quarter at a time,” the chief financial officer, Kimberly Ross, said.Halliburton said it took a $129 million restructuring charge in the fourth quarter ended Dec. 31 to “temper the impact of anticipated activity declines.” For the fourth quarter, it earned $901 million, or $1.06 a share, compared with $793 million, or 93 cents a share, in the previous year’s quarter. Earnings adjusted for one-time gains and costs were $1.19 a share.A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Oil Servicers and a Driller Announce Cutbacks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.