By BEN SISARIOOCT. 8, 2015
Sony is considering selling part of its holdings in music publishing — the lucrative part of the music business that deals in songwriting — through a potential deal for Sony/ATV, the catalog of songs that it owns with the estate of Michael Jackson, according to three people with knowledge of the company’s plans.Sony has set off a so-called buy-sell clause in its contract with the Jackson estate that would allow either partner to acquire the half it does not already own, according to these people, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the talks are private and said to still be at an early stage.With a collection of about one million copyrights, including hits by Taylor Swift and Lady Gaga, nuggets like “Stand by Me” and its jewel, 251 songs by the Beatles, Sony/ATV is a prime catalog in the growing business of music publishing, and it is said to be worth at least $2 billion.Sony’s intentions in setting off the sale process were not entirely clear. The troubled Japanese company has considered selling its music publishing assets before, perhaps as a way to raise cash, something that was revealed late last year in private emails among top Sony executives that were made available to the public by hackers. But a person briefed on Sony’s talks said that the company had not decided whether it ultimately wanted to sell its portion or buy the Jackson estate’s half. At this stage, according to another person, the potential sale is not an auction and does not include outside bidders.AdvertisementAnother complication in the process is that EMI, an even larger catalog that Sony/ATV administers, is not included in the deal. Sony, as a minority partner, helped buy EMI for $2.2 billion in an acquisition that closed in 2012. (The other partners in that deal were the sovereign wealth fund the Mubadala Development Company of Abu Dhabi, Jynwel Capital of Hong Kong, Blackstone’s GSO Capital Partners and the Hollywood mogul David Geffen.) The Sony/ATV and EMI catalogs are maintained as separate legal entities but are administered jointly by Sony/ATV; together, the catalogs contain about three million songs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The history of the Sony/ATV catalog goes back to the British company Associated Publishing in the 1950s. Its music division acquired rights to most Beatles songs in 1968, and in 1985 Mr. Jackson bought the collection for $47.5 million. In 1995, Mr. Jackson sold a 50 percent share of the business to Sony for about $100 million, and the two parties control the catalog through a complex arrangement.Mr. Jackson died in 2009, and the business of his estate has been administered by John Branca, a powerful music lawyer who had a long association with Mr. Jackson and helped negotiate his original purchase of the catalog.AdvertisementNews of the possible sale of the catalog was previously  reported by The Wall Street Journal.A version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Sony Weighs Selling Part of Music Catalog.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.