By EMILY STEELJAN. 20, 2015
Netflix is hoping that it will define Internet TV in Swahili, Spanish, Vietnamese, Filipino and dozens more languages within just two years.The company, which already has a presence in 50 countries, announced on Tuesday that it would accelerate its global expansion to operate in 200 countries by the end of 2016.Netflix said that it planned to replicate its subscription-based, advertising-free model for its streaming service and that its business would remain profitable while pursuing such breakneck expansion. Netflix’s international streaming business now loses money, but the company predicted that it would generate global profit by 2017.International expansion is vital for Netflix as its growth slows in the United States. Reed Hastings, Netflix’s chief executive, said accelerating its global ambitions would put the company on track to reaching $10 billion in revenue, which would allow it to reinvest in its service as well as developing and licensing more content.“Once we complete the expansion, we’re going to have a very unique and compelling proposition to producers, which is we can get your content seen and loved around the world,” Mr. Hastings said in an interview. “In Kenya, in Argentina, in Vietnam, in the Philippines, just everywhere in the world that we can.”AdvertisementNetflix said it was still exploring its options for China and called its plans “modest.” The company said it hoped to operate a small service there, focused on its original and globally licensed material.AdvertisementDespite the global ambitions, the quarterly results the company reported on Tuesday underscored the challenges it faces at home.The company said it had exceeded its forecast for total paid streaming subscribers. That number increased to 54.5 million in the quarter that ended Dec. 31, 2014, up 31.5 percent from the same period in 2013. Revenue rose 35.7 percent, to $1.3 billion, compared with the year-earlier period.Some analysts have started to raise questions about Netflix’s long-term prospects, concerned about how much more the company can grow in the United States, where it is profitable, as well as the rising costs tied to paying for content and international expansion.In the United States, Netflix had 39 million streaming members in the fourth quarter, a net addition of 1.9 million. In the year-earlier period, it added 2.3 million members. For the coming quarter, Netflix predicted that growth would slow further.Mr. Hastings called the decline a “natural progression in our large U.S. market as we grow.” He said the company was still on course to reach up to 90 million members in the United States eventually. Netflix previously attributed the growth slowdown to a price increase, but it now says the decline would have occurred regardless of the change.“If you step back and say, ‘Internet TV video is going to be in every home in America in 10 years,’ the clear answer is yes,” Mr. Hastings said during an investor call.Net income for the quarter was $83 million, or $1.35 a share, up from $48 million a year earlier, because of a benefit related to the resolution of a tax audit. Without that tax benefit, net income would have been $45 million, beating the forecast for $27 million. The company lost less money than it had expected in its international business and also benefited from other tax credits.AdvertisementFull-year profit for 2015 is expected be less than that of 2014 because of the company’s global expansion plans.Netflix is pouring resources into original productions. The company said it would release 320 hours of original programming this year, about three times its offerings in 2014. That includes about 65 new and returning series, movies and other content. Netflix said it planned to raise at least a billion dollars of additional long-term debt to finance the material.On the roster for the coming months are new seasons for the company’s popular “House of Cards” political drama and its “Orange Is the New Black” prison comedy. New series include the comedy “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt” from Tina Fey and Robert Carlock, and “Grace and Frankie,” starring Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin as a pair of “frenemies.”The company also recently announced that it was renewing its “Marco Polo” series for a second season. The series cost about $90 million for the first season’s 10 episodes, according to industry executives. While critics called the series a disappointment, Netflix said that the epic drama was a hit on the service and pointed to positive online reviews from viewers.After racing ahead as one of the first streaming services, Netflix now faces a new era of intense competition both for viewers and for content. That includes a planned streaming service this year from HBO.Amazon also has increased its offerings. The company became the first streaming service to win a best-series award in the television category at the Golden Globe awards last week, for “Transparent.” In the days after, Amazon announced that it would produce and acquire films for theatrical release and early distribution on its service, and it announced a deal with the filmmaker Woody Allen to write and direct his first television series.“In some ways, they are a big, aggressive competitor, and in other ways, they see the world like we do,” Mr. Hastings said in an interview. “They are a great ally in changing and improving the customer experience.”Netflix also has found itself at the center of a heated regulatory battle about the future of the Internet. That debate will arrive in Congress on Wednesday, when House and Senate panels hold hearings about the so-called net neutrality issue and whether broadband companies should be able to block or intentionally slow down web traffic.“What has been great for Netflix is the general idea of the Internet as a utility open for all — not for discriminatory use — has really taken hold,” Mr. Hastings said.A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Netflix Accelerates Ambitious Global Expansion as U.S. Growth Slows.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.