By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 20, 2015
In Walmart’s latest move to offer financial services, it will make customers’ tax refunds available in cash at about 3,000 stores.Walmart, the world’s largest retailer, will not charge a fee for the cash pickup, but does charge for cashing checks. It acknowledged that it could get a boost by helping to put cash in customers’ wallets at a time of sluggish sales and customer traffic declines.“We know tax refunds can be one of the largest financial payouts of the year for many of our customers, and the last thing they want is to wait for a refund check to arrive and then spend money on unnecessary fees,” said Daniel Eckert, senior vice president of services for Walmart’s United States division.The service could help people without bank accounts get their refunds more quickly and avoid high check-cashing fees. Walmart says the process will take the same time as if a customer filed electronically and received the money as a direct deposit, which could take a week.AdvertisementThe company, based in Bentonville, Ark., has been expanding its financial services. In April, it introduced a money transfer service that it says will cut fees for its low-income customers by up to 40 percent compared with similar services elsewhere.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the fall, Walmart teamed up with Green Dot, a company known for reloadable prepaid cards, to bring mobile checking accounts to its shoppers. Also in the autumn, Walmart began a partnership with an online health insurance comparison site and agency that lets shoppers compare the cost of health care coverage options at its stores.Walmart already offered tax-preparation services and the option to cash refund checks at its stores. As part of the new service, it is aligning with a Green Dot business called Tax Products Group, and the Republic Bank and Trust Company, two providers of tax-related financial products. Those companies have more than 25,000 tax-preparation locations in Walmart stores and elsewhere.AdvertisementThough Walmart will not charge a fee for the cash pickup, tax preparers can charge a maximum of $7 for the service at the time of filing. Walmart stores charge $3 to cash paper checks under $1,000, and $6 for up to $7,500. Cash refunds up to $7,500 are eligible for this program. The service is not available for people who electronically file their own taxes.A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Tax Refunds at Walmart, in Cash and Free of Fees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.