
Political Economy By                     
HUGO DIXON | REUTERS

JAN. 20, 2015
How is it possible to construct a free-market economy that is also fair? That should be the central question for this year’s annual gathering of the global elite at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.Free enterprise and globalization, the cornerstones of the Davos worldview, have delivered many benefits over the decades. But since the global financial crisis, the goodies have been few and far between in developed Western economies. Much of Europe has been mired in recession. Unemployment, especially among the young, is rife.Even in better-performing economies like the United States’, the middle classes have experienced stagnant living standards. The fruits of economic growth, such as it is, have been gobbled up mainly by the elite.Hence, the growing inequalities across almost every society that have been extensively documented by the French economist Thomas Piketty.AdvertisementSo it should be no surprise that the Davos worldview is under assault. One manifestation is the continuous attacks on the banking industry. But the backlash has gone far beyond finance.AdvertisementIt is most visible in the rise of populist political parties across Europe. Their instincts vary, depending on whether they are coming from the left or the right, but they often wish to stop immigration and control free trade. And many want to write off debts or increase public spending — or do both.A response to the inequality backlash might be to try reasserting free-market values. One could point out that bankruptcy will lead to disruption and even more joblessness. One could argue that protectionism will impoverish countries. One could stress that immigration often enriches the recipient countries, as it is mostly hard-working youngsters who venture abroad. One could even say that globalization has helped hundreds of millions of people escape poverty in developing countries.All this would be true. But it misses the point that the average person in most Western countries hasn’t been doing well, either. Such a situation is probably unsustainable. Most people think it isn’t fair either.The challenge is to devise a modern social market approach to the economy that celebrates freedom and enterprise while also being fair.What, though, is fairness? After all, every political philosopher has a different conception. But any reasonable definition should have at least three elements.The first is that a society should help all its citizens get a decent crack at building a good life. This is not the same as ensuring that they end up with such a life. Governments cannot do this, and, even if they could, it would be wrong to take over people’s lives in this way. There has to be room for individuality, effort, enterprise, creativity and failure.Helping people get a decent crack at building a good life isn’t even as strong a condition as “equal opportunity.” Equality is an impractical objective — and would run into objections from people who want to give the best they can to their own children. A society has to allow scope for that.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fairness does, however, mean helping the young get a good education and a good start in the job market — something that many do not get. Only then will they have the tools to thrive in an increasingly competitive world.AdvertisementThe second element of such a conception of fairness is that the economy should not be distorted in favor of particular segments of society. This typically means sweeping away monopolies, privileges and restrictive practices.The two most popular targets are politicians and bankers. In much of the world, politicians are considered corrupt. Meanwhile, financiers are hated because they kept their profits in the good times but taxpayers ended up covering many of the losses.The final element of fairness would be a tax-and-benefit system under which those with the broadest shoulders carry the heaviest burden and those in the greatest need receive help.The least contentious aspect of this is to crack down on tax evasion and to close loopholes that allow multinational companies to pay little tax. There is also a strong case for using benefits to support workers with low incomes. That distorts the market less than ramping up minimum wages, a policy that can inadvertently increase unemployment.Some left-wingers also want bigger taxes on wealth, and high tax rates for top earners. The snag is that, beyond a certain level, such taxes undermine enterprise and — as a result — jobs. Hefty taxes also give the wealthy a strong incentive to engage in elaborate schemes to hide their money and move it offshore.On the other hand, it would be seem reasonable to put income tax rates and capital gains taxes on more equal footing. Capital gains — the profit on stocks, real estate and other assets — tend to be enjoyed by the wealthiest people, but are often more lightly taxed than income.There is also scope in some countries for higher property taxes. The great advantage of such taxes is that people can’t hide property or move it offshore.In Britain, there is a further reason for overhauling property tax. The current “council tax” system is highly regressive, with low-income people paying a disproportionate share of their income compared with the wealthy. Even if one does not want to impose punitive rates on particularly expensive homes, which is the opposition Labour Party’s plan, the tax should at least be proportionate to the value of the property.Such measures would not please most of the Davos crowd. But the people wining, dining and opining this week at the World Economic Forum should look to their enlightened self-interest. Unless enterprise can be made fair as well as free, there is a risk that what is good about the Davos worldview will be swept away with the bad.Hugo Dixon is editor at large of Reuters News.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »