By NEIL GOUGHJAN. 20, 2015
HONG KONG — On a tour of central Henan Province in May of last year, China’s president, Xi Jinping, first raised the notion of the economy adjusting to a “new normal.” Eight months later, with the economy growing at its slowest pace in more than two decades, it is increasingly clear what this adjustment will mean for China.The leadership in Beijing will tolerate slower growth in order to reduce the economy’s reliance on credit-fueled investment, replacing it with domestic demand as a key driver of growth.The effect of this slowdown on global markets has been drastic. China is the world’s biggest consumer of coal, iron ore and copper — and the prices of all three have in recent weeks fallen to their lowest levels in more than five years.Less certain, however, is what effect this new normal will have for foreign investors in China. Huge changes now underway are prompting a redefinition of China’s traditional role as the world’s workshop and a magnet for foreign investment.Advertisement“For the last 10 to 15 years there was a certain vector to how China was developing, which was export-driven growth; multinationals all coming here; a government that was very encouraging of letting them get business done,” Nitin Nohria, dean of the Harvard Business School, said in an interview last week during a visit to Hong Kong. “There seems to be a shift, and people are trying to understand what this shift implies.”AdvertisementThe change is being reflected in investment flows to and from China. Last week, the Ministry of Commerce said the growth of foreign direct investment into the country slowed last year, rising just 1.7 percent from 2013 to $119.6 billion. By contrast, outward investment from China surged 14.1 percent to $102.9 billion.Rising wages in China are eroding the country’s competitiveness, and leaders in many provinces and cities are actively discouraging low value added industry from setting up in their jurisdictions. As a result, many manufacturers — both foreign and Chinese — have been shifting production to other low cost countries, notably Vietnam, Cambodia and now, Myanmar. In 2013, foreign direct investment into the 10-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations exceeded such investment into China for the first time.At the same time, China’s exports and imports are growing slower, and their makeup is shifting in notable ways. China remains the world’s biggest merchandise trading nation, but the importance of its processing trade — bringing in materials and components for assembly and export — has declined in recent years.Li-gang Liu, the chief economist for China at the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group, notes that in 2014, China’s ordinary imports for final consumption accounted for around 57 percent of total imports, and were more than double the amount of its processing imports by value.“There is still huge room for Chinese consumption to grow rapidly,” Mr. Liu wrote Thursday in a research note. He added, for example, that China’s private consumption represents only 36 percent of its gross domestic product, compared with the world’s average of 60 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The risk is that, while China weans itself of credit-driven investment in infrastructure and state-dominated industries, private consumption will not expand quickly enough to pick up the slack.A sharp downturn in overall growth could ensue.While “new normal” became the buzzword of Chinese officialdom in 2014, almost as frequently mentioned was the idea of a “triple transition.” Simon Cox, a strategist in Hong Kong at BNY Mellon Investment Management, notes that this triple transition consists of a slowdown in the growth rate, structural reforms to give market forces a greater role in the economy, and finding ways to digest the excess capacity that was created by overinvestment in the past five years.“The only danger is that the leadership’s preoccupation with this triple transition in 2015 complicates their efforts to shore up demand in the economy, which remains unnecessarily weak,” Mr. Cox wrote Friday in a research report. “China should accept the new normal of slower trend growth. But in doing so, it should not fall prey to a new subnormal of below-trend growth.”AdvertisementThe danger of growing too slowly, given the high levels of credit in some pockets of China’s economy, is that companies or even local-level governments could have trouble paying their debts and be pushed into default.One such precarious sector is real estate. After a multiyear boom, housing prices in China have been declining in recent months as inventories of unsold homes rise. That is putting pressure on some property developers.This month following the departure of a number of top executives, Kaisa Group, a developer in southern China, defaulted on interest payments on dollar-denominated bonds it had sold to foreign investors. The company has also announced that a number of projects in the southern city of Shenzhen had been suspended by local officials, and that a number of its mainland China bank accounts had been frozen by court orders.The problems at Kaisa have weighed on the prices of offshore bonds issued by other Chinese developers in recent weeks, and last week prompted Moody’s Investors Service to downgrade the company’s debt to its second lowest ranking.“The ratings downgrade reflects our expectation of weaker recovery prospects for Kaisa’s bondholders,” Franco Leung, a vice president at Moody’s, said after the downgrade. “The increased level of legal actions against the company will further disrupt its operations and will erode its asset values,” he added.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.