
After nearly a year of trying, the online file storage provider Box Inc. is finally set to become a public company. But it will begin trading amid questions about its future prospects.The start-up, a sort of equivalent to an online filing cabinet for corporate customers’ data, priced its offering at $14 a share, surpassing expectations and paving the way for it to begin trading on the New York Stock Exchange on Friday. (Its ticker symbol, not surprising, will be “BOX.”)At that price, the company will be valued at $1.7 billion, an amount well below the $2.4 billion valuation sold to investors in a financing round last summer. That has raised concern within Silicon Valley about the highflying valuations that some technology darlings have fetched of late.Analysts and prospective investors have questioned whether the nearly 10-year-old Box can compete against bigger competitors — like Google and Microsoft, as well as Dropbox, a rival that commands a significantly higher $10 billion valuation.“For most companies in this space, making money is very difficult,” said Charles Smulders, a vice president for mobile computing at the research firm Gartner.Yet the company has been banking on a tailwind for enterprise technology providers looking to go public, with peers like Hortonworks and New Relic enjoying strong trading debuts last month.Since its founding in 2005, Box has been a pioneer in the business of online storage and file-sharing services. The pitch is simple: Instead of storing information on hard drives on site, why not maintain documents on huge clusters of computer servers, making it much easier to get access to them anywhere and share them with anyone?That proposition has become significantly more attractive with the rise of mobile devices like smartphones and tablets that can let users pull up their documents in a much simpler way.In a video presentation to investors, Aaron Levie, a Box co-founder and its chief executive, argued that his company was at the forefront of “a once-in-a-generation shift” in storage. It is a message that has drawn clients including General Electric and the drug maker AstraZeneca.Analysts at IDC agreed, arguing recently that the market for file storage and sharing should grow by about 23 percent over the next five years to $2.3 billion. Online file storage by corporate users should grow at a slightly faster pace of nearly 27 percent.And by IDC’s estimates, about half of American companies with more than 1,000 employees had begun using some kind of file-sharing service by the end of 2013.But analysts have warned that simple storing and sharing of data was a commodity. And indeed, the behemoths of the technology landscape — Google, Amazon.com and Microsoft among them — have brought to bear their considerable resources, offering competing products at significantly lower prices.Ultimately, to some analysts, file-sharing will become simply a feature of a bigger suite of products and not a stand-alone business.“There have been significant price drops in this marketplace,” Mr. Smulders said. “I think we are beginning to see a shakeout in the market.”As it has prepared for its public offering, Box has moved toward specialized storage uses, such as digital versions of X-rays for health care providers or sharing marketing documents within a client’s sales team. Mr. Smulders added that Box’s biggest differentiating feature was its document-collaboration services.Box still hasn’t turned a profit. It lost $121.5 million in the nine months that ended Oct. 31, a slight narrowing from the same time in the previous year. One big concern that has dogged the company is how much it spends on marketing, with that expense rising 22 percent during that time period, to over $152 million.Sales, however, jumped 80 percent during that same period, to $153.8 million.Even as the company has contended with a changing competitive landscape, it has also had to deal with stock market forces. Shortly after filing for its I.P.O., it watched as the markets convulsed amid investors’ new skepticism of risky technology companies. That upheaval prompted the start-up’s executives and advisers to slow their I.P.O. plans.Instead, Box took in $150 million in new financing last summer from two investment firms, TPG Growth and Coatue Management, that helped the company remain privately held a little longer.TPG Growth and Coatue built some protection for themselves within that investment, with Box being required to give them more shares in case its I.P.O. ended up being priced below expectations.Furthermore, Coatue agreed to buy up to 10 percent of Thursday’s stock offering, providing a floor for it.But the haircut — or the disconnect between the valuations given by private investors and their public counterparts — may again be a source of worry about the value of tech stocks.Among Box’s peers, Hortonworks went public below the valuation it received in the private markets, though New Relic was priced at about the same amount. New Relic now commands a market capitalization of about $1.5 billion, above its last private financing valuation, though Hortonworks remains a shade below.But Box also tried to satisfy nervous investors by offering shares at a lower valuation.Nine start-up founders recounted the moment they had to decide whether to sell or stay independent — when the money was on the table and the future was unpredictable.