Updated, 7:49 p.m. | The two most-watched chief executives on Wall Street are receiving pay packages for 2014 that are a bit more attractive than the ones they received the year before.Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive of Goldman Sachs, is receiving a $1 million raise, to $24 million, according to a person briefed on the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity.JPMorgan Chase is keeping the compensation of its chief executive, Jamie Dimon, flat at $20 million, according to a regulatory filing, after he helped steer the bank through a tumultuous year. But Mr. Dimon is receiving $7.4 million of his pay in easier-to-access cash after receiving his entire bonus in restricted stock last year.The pay details came just days after both banks announced that their profits were up in 2014.The compensation of big bank chief executives has become a flash point since the financial crisis, with banks facing calls from shareholders to overhaul their pay policies. In response, most banks have moved to pay their executives with more restricted stock, tied to performance, and less cash.For the first time this year, Goldman is giving its top executives a significant portion of their bonuses in restricted stock that will be granted only if the bank’s future performance beats certain benchmarks.In Mr. Blankfein’s case, he will receive $7.33 million in these performance-based stock awards and another $7.33 million in regular restricted stock. He will receive $7.33 million in cash, plus his $2 million salary, a person briefed on the matter said.JPMorgan moved in the opposite direction, granting Mr. Dimon more of his compensation in cash for 2014. His pay included a $1.5 million base salary, $11.1 million in restricted stock and a $7.4 million cash incentive bonus.As chairman of the nation’s largest bank, Mr. Dimon has a pay package that has become a bellwether for compensation in the broader financial industry, at times turning into a jumping-off point for a broader discussion about how banks, grappling with a string of multibillion-dollar settlements, compensate their top executives.The issue gained momentum last year when JPMorgan’s board voted to increase Mr. Dimon’s total compensation by about 74 percent, to $20 million, for 2013 despite the fact that the bank had paid more than $20 billion during the year to settle various legal problems going back to the financial crisis.Mr. Dimon’s total compensation shrank in 2012 after a trading blowup that swelled to approximately $6 billion in losses.The JPMorgan board voted at a meeting this month on Mr. Dimon’s annual compensation for 2014, according to people briefed on the matter.Working out the pay package this month, the people briefed on the matter said, JPMorgan’s board wanted to signal its enduring confidence in Mr. Dimon’s leadership while also taking note of the tough banking landscape. Both revenue and profit declined during the fourth quarter of 2014.Among the directors, the people briefed on the matter said, Mr. Dimon has been bolstered by a widely held view that he took on a crucial role in JPMorgan’s settlements with the federal authorities. He was able to negotiate a $13 billion settlement, for example, in connection with the bank’s sale of mortgage-backed securities in the run-up to the financial crisis.Some board members, the people said, also see the government’s extraction of money from the banking industry as driven more by a desire to take a tough line against Wall Street than any actual problems at the banks.Among the other executives at JPMorgan, Marianne Lake, the chief financial officer; Mary Erdoes, the head of asset management; and Doug Petno, the chief executive of the commercial bank, were the only members of the bank’s operating committee to receive raises this year.At Goldman, the president, Gary D. Cohn, and chief financial officer, Harvey Schwartz, are both being paid $22 million — $2 million less than Mr. Blankfein. The pay packages are split up in the same proportion as Mr. Blankfein’s.A version of this article appears in print on 01/23/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: 2 Wall St. Chiefs to Get a Sweeter Pay Package in 2015.