Mario Draghi has compromised on principles for the sake of effectiveness. Mr. Draghi, the European Central Bank’s president, announced on Thursday a long-expected bond buying program that will be huge from the start and last until eurozone inflation gets back on track. But the eurozone’s version of quantitative easing runs contrary to the principles of a currency union.The markets were impressed by the size — 60 billion euros a month — and the duration of the program — at least until September 2016, and maybe longer. The euro fell to 10-year lows and equity markets rejoiced. Mr. Draghi once again rallied his E.C.B. council colleagues, overcoming their widely aired differences on the opportunity and size of the program.The debate on whether quantitative easing “works” is moot. Mr. Draghi never claimed it could pull the eurozone out of its enduring economic slump. The E.C.B.’s goal is to stop failing at its only mandate: keep the inflation rate around its 2 percent target.The purchase of government bonds, allocated by member states’ shares of the E.C.B.’s capital, will push down bond yields, but the effect will be limited, because they are already at all-time lows. It will keep the downward pressure on the euro exchange rate, which has already fallen 17 percent against the dollar since May. That, in turn, would help bolster inflation, although also in a limited way. Finally, Mr. Draghi noted, there are also fiscal consequences: The program will relax the constraints on national budgets.To mollify the vigorous German opposition to quantitative easing, Mr. Draghi had to accept that potential losses on 80 percent of the additional bond buying be assigned to national central banks. This is highly unlikely to matter in the real world. Outright sovereign default of a euro member is unlikely to happen. But the decision signals the first time that the E.C.B. has accepted that monetary policy could be fragmented. This violates the principle of loss-sharing at the core of the monetary union.Quantitative easing may be an exceptional tool for exceptional times, and an unlimited program without full loss-sharing may be better than a limited one that respected the principle. But a taboo has been broken.Pierre Briançon is the European editor of Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.