Officials at the Securities and Exchange Commission have said they discovered numerous problems when examining private equity firms during a two-year review that ended recently.Now, a specialized group of examiners is set to train its focus on hedge funds and other funds that invest in illiquid products like real estate, timber and energy assets, an S.E.C. official said on Thursday.These new examinations will be more limited in scope than the examinations of private equity firms, taking a “thematic and systematic” approach, said the official, Igor Rozenblit, who leads the agency’s private funds unit. That unit, part of the agency’s office of compliance inspections and examinations, will conduct the new exams.Speaking at an industry event in Manhattan, Mr. Rozenblit said his group would look “beyond buyout” funds to examine “adjacent illiquid asset classes” and “liquid asset classes.” He did not specify what types of illiquid asset classes he meant, but a number of private equity firms manage funds that invest in real estate and similar assets.“We’re going to come up with a thesis, we’re going to pursue the thesis,” Mr. Rozenblit said at the event, Private Equity International’s C.F.O.s and C.O.O.s Forum 2015. “If we find anything, we’re going to communicate it later on.”The S.E.C.’s exams of private equity funds have already yielded results. The agency found problems in more than half of the private equity funds it looked at, including potential violations of law, Andrew J. Bowden, the director of the office of compliance inspections and examinations, said in a speech last May. A particular area of concern for the agency was how private equity firms charge expenses and fees to their investment clients. Mr. Bowden said the contractual agreements with these investors could be so broad as to create “an enormous gray area” that allowed firms to collect payments that investors might not know about.On Thursday, Mr. Rozenblit said he had observed “a lot of positive change in the private equity industry” since the exams. In a recent example, The Wall Street Journal reported on Wednesday that Kohlberg Kravis Roberts had refunded money to some investors after the S.E.C. found it had overcharged them.But Mr. Rozenblit added that not all private equity managers agreed with the S.E.C.’s assessments. He said the agency was “occasionally at loggerheads” with firms.In some cases, he said, a particular practice by a firm might “happen to directly contradict” the agreement with investors. He added that some firms “feel very strongly that whatever fee we’re discussing is allowable.”