DAVOS, Switzerland — The World Economic Forum here is supposed to be a special place where people of differing viewpoints can learn from each other as they figure out solutions to the world’s problems.But the rarefied mountain air has so far not inspired the thought leaders on hand to agree on a cure for Europe’s enduring economic funk.The European Central Bank announced its new stimulus program on Thursday, saying it would purchase nearly $1.5 trillion of bonds in the coming months. But the policy makers and specialists at Davos were divided over the effect of that program — and were far apart on other measures aimed at bolstering growth in Europe.There are essentially three camps at loggerheads.The first, often represented by prominent German politicians and bankers, has little faith in central bank actions. Instead, this camp’s overwhelming emphasis is on policy measures that are referred to as “structural reforms.”These overhauls primarily aim to strip back the regulations that European businesses often face, in the belief that such policies will make the Continent more competitive and, thus, more prosperous. This camp may grudgingly support central bank stimulus in the hope that it will buy time for governments to enact structural overhauls. But people who hold this view are also worried that looser monetary policy may work against structural measures. The European Central Bank’s stimulus gives “a big incentive for governments to do less,” Axel A. Weber, the chairman of UBS and a former head of Germany’s central bank, said on Wednesday on a Davos panel.The second camp in the debate, which right now includes the International Monetary Fund and many top bankers and investors, is the mainstream viewpoint. It supports structural changes but also sees important roles for monetary and fiscal policies.The third camp, promoted in Davos by Lawrence H. Summers, a professor at Harvard and a former United States Treasury secretary, agrees that a range of policies is necessary, but asserts that a heavy emphasis on structural changes could undermine other efforts to generate growth. “A lot of structural reforms are on the supply side, and a lot of the problems are on the demand side,” Mr. Summers said at a panel organized by Bloomberg on Thursday.Those who see a central role for structural overhauls were quick to offer evidence at Davos.They highlighted, for instance, labor costs in Europe. Speaking on the Bloomberg panel, Ray Dalio of the hedge fund Bridgewater Associates asserted that a European worker costs twice as much as an American one, after making adjustments. And those who see a big role for structural reforms say that Spain is an example of a country that has reaped benefits in recent years from carrying out such measures.Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund who was also on the Bloomberg panel, said Spain’s structural reforms were the “most important” recent change in the country. On the same panel, Ana Patricia Botín, chairwoman of Banco Santander, asserted that Spanish auto workers were, in fact, more productive than their German counterparts.Still, speaking about structural overhauls in Davos is much harder than putting them in place. The overhauls often involve policies that will lead to lower incomes for many workers, and layoffs.Ardent supporters of structural overhauls nevertheless point to Germany’s enactment of such measures, over 10 years ago. Those moves, they say, helped cure the country’s economy of inefficiencies. But some German economic specialists caution against applying their country’s track record today. “Some of the structural reforms that, for example, France or Italy have to do, or that Greece has already done, are much, much harder than what we Germans had to do,” Sigmar Gabriel, the German economics minister, said at another Davos panel discussion on Thursday.And Mr. Summers contends that linking structural overhauls with a potentially insufficient monetary policy could deepen Europe’s economic problems and political divisions. “Grudging, gradualist monetary policy and an insistence on austerity has not driven structural reforms,” he said in an interview. “It has spawned spasmodic radical populism, which is now a major threat in a number of European countries.” Specifically, Mr. Summers suggested spending money on infrastructure, training programs and reversing some spending cuts.In an interview, Kenneth Rogoff, a Harvard economics professor, advocated what was perhaps a combination of camps two and three. He said that certain European countries have needed structural overhauls for many years. But right now, monetary policy needs to be more aggressive. And much bigger steps need to be taken to fiscally stimulate the hardest hit European countries, Mr. Rogoff added. Primarily, he said, steps should be taken to significantly lighten the government debt of these countries, with a view to giving space and freedom for governments to spend more.“You want an endgame where Europe integrates, has healthy growth and shared prosperity,” Mr. Rogoff said.Jack Ewing contributed reporting.