The Royal Bank of Canada said on Thursday that it had agreed to buy the City National Corporation, a private and commercial bank based in Los Angeles, for $5.4 billion in cash and stock.The Canadian bank is offering 0.7489 of a common share and $47.25 in cash for every share of City National, or a total of $93.80 a share, 26 percent above City National’s closing stock price on Wednesday. It is the Royal Bank of Canada’s largest acquisition to date.Founded in 1954, City National is known as “Hollywood’s banker,” because of its clients in the entertainment industry. An article in Barron’s in 2013 noted that Frank Sinatra was close friends with the bank’s first chief executive, Al Hart. When Mr. Sinatra’s 19-year-old son was kidnapped in 1963, City National opened its vaults over the weekend to provide the $240,000 in ransom money.In an article in The New York Times on Dec. 13, 1963, the bank would not confirm packaging the ransom money, but an executive told the reporter: “Mr. Sinatra has been a customer of this bank several years and has substantial credit here. If he asked for such an amount, he could get it.”The bank serves wealthy and commercial clients in markets including New York, San Francisco and Orange County, Calif., as well as Los Angeles.“City National’s private banking and wealth management capabilities will enable us to offer a broader product suite to the 340,000 U.S. households served by our U.S. wealth management unit,” David I. McKay, the chief executive of Royal Bank of Canada, said in a statement.The Canadian bank plans to combine its United States wealth management business with City National. It will be led by the chief executive of City National, Russell Goldsmith.  Royal Bank of Canada has 8,000 employees in the United States, including more than 3,000 in New York.Wealth management has been a driver of growth at Royal Bank of Canada. Earnings from the wealth management business rose 22 percent last year from 2013. At a conference last week, Mr. McKay spoke about how the Canadian wealth management business had been focusing on “higher and higher net worth clients” and that the bank was using the same playbook in the United States.“We’re trying to execute that in the U.S.,” he said. “There’s certainly opportunities there.”The deal is expected to close in the fourth quarter of this year.Bank of America Merrill Lynch and Sandler O’Neill served as financial advisers to City National. Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz served as legal adviser.RBC Capital Markets, JPMorgan Chase and the law firms Sullivan & Cromwell and Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt advised the Royal Bank of Canada.A version of this article appears in print on 01/23/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: U.S. Expansion.