Goldman Sachs’s recent acquisitions include apartments in Spain, a mall in Utah and a European ink company ‒ exactly the sorts of investments that many had assumed would be prohibited by the Volcker Rule, DealBook’s Nathaniel Popper reports. “While its competitors have been abandoning the business of making big bets with their own money,” he writes, “Goldman has been quietly coming up with several new ways to put its own money to work in formats that appear to stay on the right side of Volcker.”The investments have rankled some of Goldman’s big clients, which complain privately that the bank is supposed to help its clients buy companies and other assets but instead ends up competing for those assets. Why is this happening? The regulators who were responsible for putting the Volcker Rule into practice have given banks room to continue making purchases with their own money through their merchant banking arms. Other big banks have essentially stopped this activity, but Goldman’s merchant banking business is upsetting some regulators, who worry that such investments do not follow the spirit of the law.It is hard to determine the size of Goldman’s merchant banking operation because the firm is not required by law to break out specific investments. But in some cases, Mr. Popper writes, Goldman’s investments have been made public by its partners or by the companies being acquired ‒ and those cases alone add up to billions of dollars of investments in the last two years. In the second half of 2014, Goldman spent about $800 million with two partners for 144 hotels in Britain, and $200 million with two different partners on the South Towne Center mall in Sandy, Utah, among other big investments.E.C.B. TO BEGIN BOND-BUYING PROGRAM  |  The European Central Bank is expected to announce on Thursday that it will begin buying government bonds as part of a so-called quantitative easing program. The idea of such programs ‒ like those undertaken by the United States Federal Reserve and the Bank of England ‒ is simple in theory: Pump money into the economy, encourage more lending and stimulate growth. But in the eurozone, it’s complicated.Have questions about quantitative easing, euro style? A guide is available here.Will the bond-buying program work? John Authers of The Financial Times is not so sure. “For better results, it might be better to use ‘shock and awe’ to take the market by surprise,” he writes. “Surprise is a key weapon in a central bank’s armory. Rather than hold the markets’ hands, central bankers might be better served by creating a shock.”European stocks were little changed in trading on Thursday after erasing early gains.UBER RAISES MORE FINANCING  |  The popular ride-sharing start-up Uber has closed $1.6 billion in financing from clients of Goldman Sachs’s private wealth arm, just months after the company raised $1.2 billion from big institutions, Mike Isaac and Michael J. de la Merced write in DealBook. Including that investment, the company is valued at roughly $41.2 billion. To date, the company has raised upward of $4 billion.And Uber may not stop there. The company may raise an additional $600 million in stock from hedge funds and strategic overseas investors, according to two people briefed on the matter. With the new cash, Uber has more incentive to go public. The securities sold to Goldman’s clients can be converted into shares in the start-up once it begins trading on a stock exchange, at a discount of 20 percent to 30 percent of the price set in an initial public offering, people briefed on the matter said. Should the company not stage an I.P.O. within four years, however, the interest rate on those securities will rise.ON THE AGENDA  |  Weekly jobless claims are out at 8:30 a.m. The Federal Housing Finance Agency house price index for November is out at 9 a.m. Shareholders of Family Dollar are scheduled to vote on a proposed $8.5 billion acquisition by Dollar Tree. James P. Gorman, the chief executive of Morgan Stanley, is on CNBC at 8:05 a.m.REGULATORS ADDRESS ‘TOO BIG TO FAIL’  |  The Financial Stability Oversight Council on Wednesday discussed ways to improve how so-called too-big-to-fail institutions are singled out for closer supervision, but stopped short of reversing any designations made so far, Mary Williams Walsh writes in DealBook. The proposals included making earlier and fuller disclosures of information and giving companies designated as “systemically important” more opportunities to have their names removed from the list.“It was not clear whether such changes would mollify members of Congress who have criticized the council recently, warning that its actions could harm American competitiveness,” Ms. Williams Walsh writes. In any case, any changes would come too late to help MetLife, the big life insurer that was designated systemically important in December and has since filed a suit in federal court to have the designation rescinded. Without mentioning MetLife or its lawsuit, Mr. Lew indicated that the panel would not back down.  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailKinder Morgan to Buy Oil Pipeline Company From Harold Hamm for $3 Billion  |  The deal for Hiland Partners comes months after Mr. Hamm, an oil tycoon, was ordered to pay roughly $1 billion to his ex-wife, in one of the most expensive divorce settlements in history. DealBook »Apple Acquires Semetric, a Data Analysis Company  |  Apple has acquired Semetric, a British company that analyzes data about music online, in a move that may hint at Apple’s ambitions as it prepares to revamp iTunes and Beats Music, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMES Suzlon Group to Sell German Wind Turbine Business for $1.2 Billion  |  The Indian manufacturer said the sale of a 100 percent stake in Senvion SE is in line with its strategy to reduce its debt and focus on its home market and other areas. DealBook »Dropbox Buys CloudOn, a Microsoft Document Start-Up  |  CloudOn, which allows its users to create Word and Excel documents on their mobile devices, will serve as Dropbox’s outpost in Israel. DealBook »New York Attorney General Adds to Lawsuit Over Barclays Dark Pool  |  In an amended complaint to a previous lawsuit, Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York State attorney general, claimed that Barclays made a false statement in court documents and that it defied subpoenas seeking the testimony of two executives. DealBook »Bankers at Forum Say They Support Regulation, With Some Caveats  |  The top bankers at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, said they backed tougher regulations, but they sounded alarmed about what might happen to global bond prices when central banks begin to wind down their stimulus policies. DealBook »Credit Suisse Previews Effect of Rise in Swiss Franc on Profit  |  The bank, which is based in Zurich, said it had not recorded any “material losses” in its trading since Switzerland abandoned a cap on its currency and that the rapid rise in the franc had not affected its capital ratios. DealBook »N.B.A. Said to Increase Bank Line of Credit  |  The National Basketball Association is said to be increasing its credit line by at least $1 billion on the strength of Steven A. Ballmer’s $2 billion purchase of the Los Angeles Clippers and its new television contracts, Bloomberg News reports, citing unidentified people with direct knowledge of the matter. The credit agreement will be led by JPMorgan Chase and Citigroup, the people said.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Commerzbank Said to Cut About 100 London Jobs  |  Commerzbank of Germany is planning to cut about 100 jobs in London and relocate an additional 340 as it concentrates foreign exchange and interest-rate trading in Frankfurt, where the bank has its headquarters, Bloomberg News reports, citing an internal memo. BLOOMBERG NEWS Goldman Invests in Big Data in Asia  |  Goldman Sachs has invested the bulk of a $56 million round of financing for Antuit, a data analytics start-up in Singapore, in a move that indicates Goldman’s interest in new big data technologies in Asia, The Financial Times reports.  FINANCIAL TIMES K.K.R. to Acquire British Train Travel Booking Website  |  Thetrainline.com had announced plans this month to potentially list its shares in an initial public offering, but it will now be sold to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts for an undisclosed amount. DealBook »K.K.R. to Refund some Investor Fees  |  The decision by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts came after an examination by the Securities and Exchange Commission, which found the firm wrongly charged investors for some expenses and failed to properly notify them of certain fees it collected, The Wall Street Journal reports. WALL STREET JOURNAL Manager Apologizes for Losing Client Money  |  Owen Li, the founder of Canarsie Capital in New York and a former trader at the Galleon Group, wrote in a letter to investors that he was “truly sorry” for losing all but $200,000 of the firm’s capital from the roughly $100 million it ran as of late March, CNBC writes.  CNBC A Kinder, Gentler Investor Activism  |  Douglas L. Braunstein and James C. Woolery have started a fund to persuade companies to do value-enhancing deals. Richard Beales of Reuters Breakingviews questions whether there’s room for permanently well-mannered activism. DealBook »EBay Weighs 2nd Spinoff  |  Facing stiff competition and the declining growth of its auctions business, eBay said it planned to cut 2,400 positions and would explore a sale or initial public offering of eBay Enterprise, the company’s warehouse and logistics unit for third-party eBay sellers, The New York Times writes.  NEW YORK TIMES Bank of Jinzhou Said to Plan Hong Kong I.P.O.  |  Bank of Jinzhou, a lender in northeast China, is said to be planning to seek about $600 million from an initial public offering in Hong Kong, Bloomberg News writes, citing unidentified people with knowledge of the matter.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Venture Capital Outpaces Buyouts in Investment Returns  |  Helped by deals like the Twitter I.P.O., the venture capital industry recorded a 25.9 percent internal rate of return in the 12 months through last June. Buyout funds turned in a 22.4 percent return. DealBook »Shazam at $1 Billion Valuation After Investment  |  Shazam, a smartphone application that can identify songs, says it has raised $30 million in a new funding round. DealBook »Online Tuxedo Rental Start-Up Raises $10 Million  |  The Black Tux, a nearly two-year-old start-up, is drawing inspiration from the hugely popular Rent the Runway as well as attention from investors. DealBook »Battery Ventures Hires Intel Capital Executive  |  The venture capital firm Battery Ventures has hired Dharmesh Thakker, a former Intel Capital managing director, as a general partner. DealBook »SpaceX Is a Throwback to the 1990s  |  Google is investing in Elon Musk’s company, which is planning a broadband network of 4,000 satellites. The pioneering Teledesic tried something similar two decades ago but failed, Robert Cyran of Reuters Breakingviews writes. DealBook »S.&.P. to Pay Nearly $80 Million to Settle Fraud Cases  |  The agreements, reached with the S.E.C. and the attorneys general in New York and Massachusetts, stem from charges that the agency loosened its rating criteria to elevate its financial interests. DealBook »A Theme in Davos: Fear of Financial Instability  |  Unsettling the participants at the World Economic Forum? Russia and Ukraine, cheap oil, volatile currency markets, deflation, terrorism, and even Switzerland. DealBook »Predictions, Pet Peeves and Random Musings From Davos  |  Bankers and other attendees at the World Economic Forum offer their thoughts on regulation, oil prices and quantitative easing by the European Central Bank, among other subjects. DealBook »Amid the Chattering of the Global Elite, a Silent Interlude  |  A mix of breathing instructions, management theory and personal reflection at a panel at the World Economic Forum. DealBook »Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 