By RAVI SOMAIYAJAN. 21, 2015
The news swept the world, applauded as a sign of progress. After 40 years Britain’s Sun newspaper, according to news reports this week, would stop running photographs of topless women on its Page 3.But late Wednesday the paper, which still sells about two million copies a day, posted an image on its Twitter account of what it said was tomorrow’s third page. On it? A topless woman.A text block underneath the picture read: “Further to recent reports in all other media outlets, we would like to clarify that this is Page 3 and this is a picture of Nicole, 22, from Bournemouth.” The paper said it would like to apologize to its readers “on behalf of the print and broadcast journalists who have spent the last two days talking and writing about us.” Its front page, also posted online, included the words “We’ve had a mammary lapse.”Representatives for Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation, The Sun’s parent company, declined to comment late Wednesday, and messages to its British subsidiary, News UK, were not immediately returned.AdvertisementThough the report that Page 3 would end its long tradition of nude photos appeared in another Murdoch paper, The Times of London, The Sun previously declined to comment on the matter. The apparent decision to stop the practice was hailed by critics who had long complained that The Sun exploited women.Dylan Sharpe, a spokesman for the newspaper, posted a message on Twitter on Monday which read: “Page 3 will be in @TheSunNewspaper tomorrow in the same place it’s always been — between Page 2 and Page 4.” He declined, at the time, to comment on any future plans.AdvertisementIn the intervening days the newspaper had run pictures of scantily clad, but still covered, women.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Britain: Tabloid Has ‘Mammary Lapse’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.