By JONATHAN WEISMAN and ASHLEY PARKERJAN. 21, 2015
The president laid the groundwork for middle-class economics during his State of the Union address on Jan. 20.WASHINGTON —  President Obama’s push for a new “middle-class economics” may go nowhere in Congress, but his ambitious array of proposals to raise stagnant incomes and provide more government support for struggling working families will frame his last two years in office and help make the politics of rich and poor a central issue in the campaign to succeed him.With the economy finally on more solid ground, even leading Republicans, on Capitol Hill and on the nascent 2016 presidential campaign front, are tempering complaints about overall economic growth and refocusing on the more intractable problem of income inequality.Mitt Romney, vowing a campaign to “end the scourge of poverty” if he runs for president a third time, has backed raising the minimum wage over the wishes of congressional leaders.Similarly, Jeb Bush’s new “super PAC,” announced with the fanfare of a presidential declaration, proclaimed, “While the last eight years have been pretty good ones for top earners, they’ve been a lost decade for the rest of America.”AdvertisementAt a closed-door retreat last week, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the new majority leader, encouraged the Republican troops to refocus policy on the stagnant middle class.AdvertisementJust acknowledging a wealth gap represents a significant shift in language for Republicans, who have long held that market forces driving overall economic growth will ultimately yield higher incomes without any help from government.Bill de Blasio, New York’s mayor, on Wednesday called middle-class wage stagnation “the dominant issue in our public discourse this year” and into next.“It’s a striking moment when even Mitt Romney is talking about income equality,” Mr. de Blasio said, “and there’s some irony in that.”So far, Republicans have embraced few policies to address the issue, but the Democratic focus has prodded conservative economists into action.“It is going to be a very difficult challenge for conservatives to make the argument that they have better solutions, because these things sound so appealing,” Lanhee J. Chen, Mr. Romney’s top economic adviser in 2012 and now a research fellow at Stanford’s Hoover Institution, said of the president’s proposals for free community college tuition, paid sick leave and middle-class tax cuts financed by higher taxes on the rich.“In the end, we can’t get into a bidding war with the Democrats, but you are seeing more and more conservatives entering this policy conversation,” Mr. Chen said. “Frankly, it’s a positive thing for the party.”After the president’s combative State of the Union address on Tuesday, administration officials and top Republicans tried on Wednesday to find some green shoots in the scorched earth. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew, in a speech at the Brookings Institution, veered into Republican territory when he vowed to pursue “pro-growth business tax reform that protects and strengthens the middle class, lowers rates, simplifies the system, levels the playing field, and eliminates unfair and inefficient loopholes.”AdvertisementRepresentative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, the Ways and Means chairman and perhaps the Republican Party’s leading voice on poverty issues, praised the president’s “gifted speech” on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” and said he was glad Mr. Obama had “dialed down on the partisan class-warfare rhetoric.”Mr. Ryan said accord could be reached on ways to reduce poverty by expanding the earned-income tax credit to childless adults, as he and the president have proposed, and drafting a public works bill aimed at modernizing an aging infrastructure.“I just hope that the tone continues that makes it easier for us to reach common ground,” Mr. Ryan said.But Republicans are divided over whether they need to overhaul their economic policies or merely recalibrate their message.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sean Spicer, communications director for the Republican National Committee, said Republicans needed to do a better job of explaining their policies in an emotional way that shows voters they care about them and understand their life experiences. “It’s not that we want to cut taxes because the math looks better,” he said. “It’s because we want people to make better decisions for themselves and believe they know how to use their money better than the government.”“It’s not just balancing a budget for the sake of balancing a budget,” Mr. Spicer continued. “It’s balancing a budget because right now we’re heaping debt and burden onto the next generation, and that’s not fair to them.”The problem for Republicans, though, is that a debate over wage stagnation and a shrinking middle class plays on Democratic turf, where Democrats can offer up what Mr. Romney once derided as “free stuff.”Representative Chris Van Hollen of Maryland, the ranking Democrat on the Budget Committee, started the bidding this month with an ambitious plan to tax Wall Street financial transactions and raise taxes on the top 1 percent of earners to pay for a “paycheck bonus credit” of $2,000 a year for couples earning less than $200,000. His plan also calls for a tripling of the tax credit for child care and expanding tax incentives for savers.On Wednesday, congressional Democrats reintroduced legislation to block companies based in the United States from shifting their headquarters elsewhere to lower their tax burden. Senator Bernard Sanders, an independent from Vermont, proposed an expansion of Social Security.Advertisement“This plays to the Democratic sweet spot,” said James Pethokoukis, a commentator at the conservative American Enterprise Institute who writes on economic policy. “They can say, ‘Hey, we have a whole set of answers.’ ”Republicans need a serious response, Mr. Pethokoukis said. Traditional conservative economic theory holds that business expansion creates jobs, tightens the labor market and pushes up wages. Targeting any particular income bracket, this thinking goes, is unnecessary and counterproductive.Yet after nearly five years of payroll expansion and 11 million new jobs, real incomes have barely budged for the vast majority of Americans. And so far, the wealth generated by the growing economy has not trickled down. The median weekly wage for full-time workers at the end of 2014 was $796, up from a seasonally adjusted $794 a year before, and actually below the levels in 2009, when the expansion began.“Republicans shouldn’t be afraid to say whatever gains are out there, they’re going to the top 10 percent,” Mr. Pethokoukis said.Only a few Republicans have flirted with the kind of populism Democrats have embraced. Senator David Vitter, a Louisiana conservative, has endorsed being much tougher on the biggest banks, and possibly breaking them up. Dave Camp of Michigan, who retired from the House this year, blazed the trail for Mr. Obama’s bank-tax proposal as part of a larger tax overhaul plan he issued last year as Ways and Means chairman. Republican leaders rejected the proposal.Indeed, most Republican counterproposals have been modest. Mr. Ryan has embraced expanding the earned-income tax credit — effectively a wage subsidy, first championed by conservative economists like Milton Friedman — even though Republicans have grown leery of it since Democrats embraced it during the Clinton administration. On Wednesday, Senator Mike Lee of Utah and Representative Martha Roby of Alabama, both Republicans, reintroduced legislation to expand workers’ choice between paid overtime and comp time, a proposal pitched as an assist to working families but opposed by unions as an attack on the 40-hour workweek.Mr. Chen, the former Romney adviser, said conservative economists had focused on wage subsidies through the tax code and more aggressive worker retraining programs through public-private partnerships and apprenticeships. To counter free community college, such economists have suggested offering incentives to universities to make sure students complete their degrees.But such “reform conservatism” has a long way to go before being accepted by the dominant players in Republican circles.Mr. Obama is not just pursuing “the wrong policies,” Speaker John A. Boehner of Ohio said Wednesday. “They’re the wrong priorities, and growing Washington’s bureaucracy here instead of helping to grow the economy and helping to grow opportunities for middle-class families.”Advertisement“There’s a better way,” he said. “We need to fix our broken tax code, balance our budget, replace the broken health care law with solutions that lower cost and protect jobs.”A version of this news analysis appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Talk of Wealth Gap Prods the G.O.P. to Refocus.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.