By RACHEL ABRAMSJAN. 21, 2015
Procter & Gamble announced a reshuffling of its top ranks on Wednesday in a move that might provide a clue to who will become the next leader of the consumer products giant.David S. Taylor, the group president for global health and grooming, will take over the company’s global beauty unit, effectively giving him control of businesses that generate more than 40 percent of the company’s revenue.Mr. Taylor will replace Deb Henretta, who will move to a newly created role overseeing global online business.Both appointments are effective Feb. 1. The company announced the changes in an internal memo on Wednesday.Advertisement“These leadership changes are another step forward in improving strategies, capabilities and plans on key business priorities where P.&G. needs to win,” Paul Fox, the company’s director of corporate communications, said in an email. “It will continue to make us a simpler, more focused company that is faster growing and creating greater value for consumers and shareholders.”AdvertisementMr. Taylor and Ms. Henretta are among a small pool of contenders to succeed A.G. Lafley, Procter & Gamble’s 67-year-old chief executive. The changes suggest that Ms. Henretta may no longer be under consideration.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It probably takes her out of the running for being C.E.O.,” said Ali Dibadj, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Company. Mr. Dibadj said he thought Mr. Taylor’s expanded role was “another step” toward the chief executive’s office.In his new position, Mr. Taylor, 56, will oversee the largest percentage of the company’s business. He will also be charged with turning around its struggling beauty unit, which has suffered from flat sales growth and has lost market share to competitors like L’Oréal and Unilever.Procter & Gamble’s fabric and home care unit, run by Giovanni Ciserani, made up 32 percent of sales last year, while baby, feminine and family care, led by Martin Riant, accounted for 25 percent.Procter & Gamble, which built an empire out of Tide detergent and other household products, is in the midst of an ambitious corporate restructuring. The company announced plans in August to divest up to 100 brands in an effort to focus on a core group of 70 to 80 brands.News of Mr. Taylor’s promotion was reported earlier by Fortune and The Wall Street Journal.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Executive Shake-Up at Procter & Gamble.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.