By NICOLA CLARK and VANESSA FRIEDMANJAN. 21, 2015
PARIS —  Hoping to reverse a prolonged sales slump at Gucci, its marquee brand, the French luxury group Kering said on Wednesday that it had promoted Alessandro Michele, Gucci’s head of accessories, to creative director.Mr. Michele, 42, replaces his former boss, Frida Giannini, who, along with the chief executive Patrizio di Marco, was asked to leave the Italian fashion house at the end of last year.Though the appointment has been widely rumored within the industry in recent weeks, the choice of Mr. Michele, who is virtually unknown outside of Gucci and the accessories field, represents a gamble for Kering, which is betting that future sales will be driven by the power of the Gucci brand and accessories, as opposed to the drawing power of a star designer.Luca Solca, a luxury analyst at Exane BNP Paribas in London, said Gucci had a lot of potential in the competitive luxury goods market. Leather goods, particularly shoes and handbags, have emerged as one of the fastest-growing categories in luxury.Advertisement“What Gucci needs is to inject the brand with new ideas and create a new buzz around it,” Mr. Solca said. “Handbags and leather goods are going to be very important to bring novelty to the market and to give consumers new reasons to come back to Gucci stores.”AdvertisementIn a statement, Kering said on Wednesday that Mr. Michele would be given total creative responsibility for all of Gucci’s collections and its brand image.Marco Bizzarri, who took over this month as Gucci’s new chief executive, said the selection of Mr. Michele was “based upon the contemporary vision he has articulated for the brand.”Kering is the world’s third-largest luxury group, after LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton of France and Richemont of Switzerland. Besides Gucci, Kering’s brands include Balenciaga, Alexander McQueen and Yves Saint Laurent.While many of Kering’s smaller labels have borne up well against an industrywide slowdown, sales at Gucci, which accounts for nearly a third of the group’s annual revenue, have stalled in recent years.Luxury consumers, particularly in China, have turned away from flashy, logo-emblazoned goods — long Gucci’s cachet — in favor of subtler statements.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Recognizing those trends, as well as rising competition from smaller, more affordable brands like Michael Kors and Tory Burch, Gucci’s previous chief executive, Mr. di Marco, had already begun a strategic push into higher-end luxury, especially accessories like handbags. Leather goods represented almost 60 percent of Gucci sales in its 2013 fiscal year.The appointment of a widely respected accessories designer like Mr. Michele suggests that Mr. di Marco’s successor, Mr. Bizzarri, intends to stick with that strategy.Accessories are one of the largest segments of the luxury market, representing close to one-third of the $250 billion spent on high-end goods globally each year, said Claudia D’Arpizio, a luxury goods specialist with the Bain & Company consulting firm in Milan.AdvertisementIn difficult economic environments, she said, accessories and small leather goods tend to be more resilient than fashion and apparel because of their relatively accessible prices.“Even if they are trading down,” she said of cost-conscious consumers, “they are not exiting the luxury market.”Analysts said Mr. Michele’s appointment signaled a certain internal continuity. But Mr. Michele and the Gucci design team presented an autumn men’s wear show in Milan on Monday that fashion critics said brought a notable aesthetic departure from Ms. Giannini’s work and seemed directed at a younger and more sartorially adventurous consumer.The new men’s wear collection — reportedly prepared under Mr. Michele’s direction in less than a week after Ms. Giannini’s abrupt departure — featured androgynous looks, including ruffled silk blouses, lace and cropped fur jackets.While some analysts have suggested that Gucci might have done better to pick a more established ready-to-wear designer for the top job, others stressed that the brand was wise to play to its strengths.“Gucci is primarily a leather goods brand, and where you need new ideas is leather goods,” Mr. Solca said. “I think that is the area that is becoming far more crowded with new entrants and putting brands like Gucci on their toes.”Nicola Clark reported from Paris, and Vanessa Friedman from New York.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Gucci Accessories Chief Is Named Creative Director.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.