By STANLEY REEDJAN. 21, 2015
PAÚL DA SERRA, Portugal — It was warm and sunny when we started out from Funchal, the harbor town that is the capital of the Madeira archipelago of Portugal, on a recent morning. After a drive of about 45 minutes, we were high in the mountains. Thick fog was streaming across the rugged red and green landscape, and it was cold enough to make us want to put on hats and gloves.The island of Madeira is a rare gem that juts out of the deeps of the Atlantic Ocean about 300 miles from the Moroccan coast. The sea and the winds have carved the volcanic rock into a magic land of pinnacles, islets and coves. Endemic forms of lizards, birds and other animals, as well as plants, have evolved in this splendid isolation.We had come to observe an effort to help ensure the survival of one these creatures, the Macaronesian sparrow hawk, a medium-size raptor found only in Madeira, an autonomous region of Portugal, and the Canary Islands to the south, which belong to Spain.Our guide, Ana Isabel Fagundes, a biologist who runs the local branch of Spea, a Portuguese bird protection group, and her colleagues are betting that by aiding this fierce predator they will also help a wide range of other hard-pressed native flora and fauna and stoke local interest in conservation.AdvertisementThis Galápagos-like place within easy reach of Europe has suffered rough treatment from humans since the first Portuguese settlers came in the early 15th century. These early arrivals burned much of the laurel forest that covered the island of Madeira to clear land for planting sugar cane. Over time exotic animals like rats and mice and ornamental flowering plants and trees were introduced, and they played havoc with the native birds and other species.AdvertisementSo far, Ms. Fagundes’ team has identified only nine nesting pairs of the elusive hawks on Madeira. She attributes this scarcity to habitat loss and, possibly, to persecution by farmers worried that the hawks, which dine exclusively on other birds, will devour their chickens.Along the rough track where we were, workers had been chopping out broom, a weedy shrub that crowds out native plants and is fodder for destructive brush fires.Ms. Fagundes hopes that with the broom removed, the feathery tree heather and the tall, red-leaved blueberries will increase, creating food for the smaller birds like laurel pigeons that are the favored prey of the Macaronesian sparrow hawk. What is good for the hawks will be good for many other native species, she said.Above all the project, costing 1.6 million euros, or $1.9 million, which is mostly funded by the European Union, is intended to help restore stretches of laurel forest, a primeval rain forest habitat of a type that scientists say exists only on Madeira, the Azores and the Canary Islands.Despite the ravages of the past, the laurel forest and associated trees still cover about 20 percent of Madeira, and the island’s stands, usually on steep mountainsides, are said to be the world’s largest and best preserved. The evergreen trees, often festooned with silvery lichen, create cool, damp haunts for the sparrow hawk and many other species.Much of the main island and nearby smaller islands are protected by a nature reserve, but the laurel forest is still threatened by invasive plants and by the forest fires that seem to have become more frequent on Madeira.With little industry left on the island beyond making strong, sweet Madeira wine, tourism has become an important source of employment for the population of about 240,000, and the Madeiran authorities appear to be reluctant to turn down development proposals that promise to create jobs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While most of the big resorts on Madeira have been confined to the coast around Funchal, Ms. Fagundes worries about a plan to build a golf course on a spit on the western extremity of the island that she says is an important bird habitat. For now, development appears to be largely held in check by the continuing hangover from the financial crisis.AdvertisementMs. Fagundes sees reason to be optimistic that much of Madeira’s natural beauty can be saved. As is happening elsewhere in Portugal and around the world, attitudes on Madeira are changing. Ms. Fagundes, 35, said that people her age and younger were more interested in conservation than previous generations.On the second floor of a building in the old town of Funchal, Ms. Fagundes presides over a staff of four youthful scientists and four interns. She said she is warmly received when she goes to schools to talk about the sparrow hawk.“I have been working in Spea for 10 years, and I can see differences in behaviors,” she said. “This generation is much more informed” and willing to volunteer.Madeirans are learning new ways to make use of the natural environment. The traditional activities of fishing, and of growing bananas on steep, terraced mountainsides, now have limited appeal.In the mid-20th century, Madeirans in small boats hunted sperm whales in the bay off Funchal and slaughtered them in gory scenes that are now documented in a small museum. Today, the islanders take enthusiasts whale watching.Bird-watchers come to see the unusual birds that cannot be spotted elsewhere, and other visitors hike through the laurel forests along the levadas narrow canals that carry water from the mountain slopes to agricultural lands and densely populated areas.As we walked in the mountains, Ms. Fagundes said that conservation was slow but rewarding. “It is a small step each time, but yes, we are succeeding.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.