By REUTERSJAN. 21, 2015
TOKYO — The Bank of Japan cut the inflation forecast Wednesday for the next fiscal year and expanded a loan program aimed at increasing lending, acting to deflect criticism that it was not acting aggressively enough to stimulate the economy.As widely expected, the Bank of Japan, the central bank, held off on expanding its big stimulus program and maintained its pledge to increase base money at an annual pace of 80 trillion yen, or $676 billion, by buying government bonds and risk assets.In a review of its long-term estimates, the Bank of Japan cut its forecast for core consumer inflation for the year beginning in April to 1.0 percent from the 1.7 percent projected three months ago.But it slightly raised its inflation forecast for fiscal 2016 to 2.2 percent from 2.1 percent, a sign central bankers are publicly sticking to the view Japan will hit an inflation goal of 2 percent.AdvertisementWith many financial market participants saying the revised inflation forecast means the Bank of Japan is essentially pushing back its goal of hitting   2 percent inflation in the coming fiscal year, Haruhiko Kuroda, the bank’s governor, said the bank expected oil and consumer prices to gradually rebound.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Consumer inflation will slow for the time being due to oil price falls,” Mr. Kuroda said. “On the assumption that oil prices will flatten out at current levels and rise moderately ahead, the effect of the oil price decline will ease. If so, we expect consumer inflation to reach 2 percent in a period centered on fiscal 2015.”AdvertisementThe central bank expanded its “quantitative and qualitative easing” program less than three months ago to prevent oil price falls and a subsequent slowdown in price rises from damping down inflation expectations. The drop in oil prices has kept alive expectations that the central bank will expand that program again soon.The Bank of Japan revised next fiscal year’s economic growth forecast upward to 2.1 percent from 1.5 percent, suggesting that a pickup in growth would raise wages and accelerate inflation. And it extended for a year two loan programs to encourage banks to lend more, expanding one of them by ¥3 trillion.The bank issues a semiannual report with forecasts on the economy and prices in April and October of each year. It reviews the projections at rate reviews in January and July.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.