DAVOS, Switzerland – The sudden plunge in oil prices has been a boon for consumers, and could be a boon for Goldman Sachs, too, according to Gary D. Cohn, the investment bank’s president and chief operating officer.As the price of oil has fallen by more than half over the last six months, American consumers have saved billions on lower gas and heating prices.That extra money in consumers’ wallets was not going into savings accounts, Mr. Cohn said in an interview at the World Economic Forum, but rather toward the purchase of other goods and services.“The American consumer has gotten the largest tax break in the last few years by falling oil prices,” he said. “That’s been a huge windfall.”Mr. Cohn acknowledged that thousands of jobs were being lost in the oil industry, as fracking projects shut down and companies lay off employees in anticipation of sharply lower revenue.But over all, Goldman Sachs has calculated that falling oil prices will push well over a trillion dollars into other industries around the world.“Net net, the world is projected to save $1.6 trillion this year on lower oil prices,” Mr. Cohn said. “That’s more than $1 trillion going into the global economy.”Mr. Cohn also said that Goldman stood to gain from the sudden fluctuations in oil prices.Goldman, already a top adviser on mergers and acquisitions, is positioned to advise on deals this year if the oil industry consolidates. Companies facing sharply lower revenues as a result of the drop in oil prices might need to raise additional debt, which Goldman could also facilitate.And Mr. Cohn predicted that some of the governments that strongly depend on oil exports would need to issue more sovereign debt.Mexico, which exports millions of barrels of oil each year, is facing such a situation, and last week issued billions more in new bonds.“Their budgets may be impacted by this,” Mr. Cohn said of oil exporters. “They may be looking for alternative sources of financing and ways to make their budget work. There’s opportunities in that for us.”