DAVOS, Switzerland – On the heels of data showing that last year was the hottest on earth since record keeping began, business leaders, politicians and scientists at the World Economic Forum redoubled their calls to combat climate change.In panels and private discussions, executives and legislators were comparing notes on the growing economic cost of changing weather patterns, and debating what practical steps could be taken in the near term.At the same time, corporate leaders implored governments to come to a broad agreement at the United Nations Climate Change Conference, which will take place in Paris at the end of the year.“This is the year to make a big climate deal in Paris,” Feike Sijbesma, chief executive of DSM, the big Dutch nutrition and materials company, said in an interview. “We need to push further awareness, we need to put a price on carbon.”At a panel discussion on Friday, world leaders including Christine Lagarde, managing director of the International Monetary Fund, and Ban Ki-moon, secretary general of the United Nations, held a public discussion titled “Tackling Climate, Development and Growth.”Ms. Lagarde sounded the alarm about rising global temperatures. “We are at risk of being grilled, fried and toasted,” she said.Jim Yong Kim, president of the World Bank, was also on the panel and said that between the more visible effects of climate change and the Paris summit, the time was ripe for a new global accord. “This is a really important year,” he said.Paul Kagame, the president of Rwanda, said that the increased dialogue about climate change was a victory in itself.“Everyone is talking about the urgency, the risk,” he said. “This a big step in itself. The next big step is you need to do it.”But time is running out before the effects of climate change become irreversible, the panelists said. “We have to go very quickly,” said Michael Spence, professor of economics at the New York University Stern School of Business. “We have a window of a very small number of years after which we cannot win the battle to mitigate fast enough to meet the safety goals.”Business leaders called on governments to set clear goals so companies are prompted to act.“We do need a price for carbon,” said Paul Polman, chief executive of Unilever, who was also on the panel. “If you don’t price what you value, you don’t get people to react. That’s unfortunately our financial system.”Some of the big companies at the event are already acting independently to minimize their impact on the planet.DSM, for example, is reducing its greenhouse gas emissions, improving efficiency in its factories, and creating products that use less water.“The next generation will look to us and ask if we did all we could?” said Mr. Sijbesma, the DSM chief executive. “And if not, why didn’t we do anything about it.”And Unilever has been a leader in the field, with factories that use 30 percent renewable energy and send no waste to landfills. Unilever has also pushed its suppliers in the developing world to curtail deforestation, which accounts for 15 percent of global emissions each year.Unilever has also stated its ambition to double the size of its business and reduce its carbon footprint at the same time.“We want to grow the business without depleting the resources of the planet,” said Pier Luigi Sigismondi, chief supply chain officer of Unilever.“My concern is we are running out of time,” said Mr. Sigismondi. “The acceleration that I see happening in global warming trends is so fast and so vast. Two or three degrees increase will have devastating effects on humanity, on par with World War II, if not higher.”But Mr. Sigismondi said that even the company’s best efforts would make only a minimal impact unless whole industries and countries made similar changes.“Although we believe it’s a lot, it’s not enough, despite the size of Unilever,” he said. “It’s still a drop on the ocean.”Echoing concerns expressed on the panel, Mr. Sigismondi said that the impact of changing weather patterns was most felt in the developing world. “Climate change is about climate justice as well,” he said. “These changes are impacting the poorest countries in the world disproportionately.”Nicolas Moreau, chief executive of AXA France, the financial group, said the frequency of flash floods and other violent weather was causing his company to pay out more insurance claims. Amid a series of storms in September, Axa was paying out $20 million in claims each weekend.“We are observing an acceleration of these events,” Mr. Moreau said.And though the damage is increasing, it seems to be getting the attention of previously skeptical executives and officials.“Five years ago people ware still on the fence about whether this was a real risk,” Mr. Moreau said. “Now people are taking it more seriously, and accepting that this is a risk they have to confront.”Yet despite the increase discussion about climate change here, the most concrete action to tackle the problem to come out of the World Economic Forum is a pop concert.Al Gore, the former vice president of the United States, and  the singer Pharrell Williams announced a Live Earth concert aimed to galvanize calls for action on climate change. Over a 24-hour period in June, concerts will take place in six cities on different continents, and at a science station in Antarctica.The purpose of the event will be to galvanize public support for a broad climate deal in Paris.“It is absolutely crucial that we build public will for an agreement,” Mr. Gore said. “The purpose is to have a billion voices with one message, to demand climate action now.”But despite the excitement surrounding the concert and the best efforts of business leaders, scientists remain pessimistic.At a sparsely attended news conference in the basement of the Congress Center, where the World Economic Forum is held, new data was presented that once again painted a dire picture of the effects of climate change.“This is a decisive year for humanity,” said Johan Rockström, executive director of the Stockholm Resilience Center. “The global economy itself is disrupting the planetary ecological system.”