Two weeks ago, I walked into a local delicatessen to get a sandwich for lunch. The man behind the counter looked to be in his early 30s, and we struck up a conversation. I asked how he was feeling about the upcoming year, and the one that just passed. It’s amazing what people will tell you if they sense you are genuinely interested.  “I’ll tell you the truth,” he said, “it’s hard. My wife is at home with our two kids. It takes me two weeks working here, nine hours a day, plus a 45-minute commute each way, just to pay my rent for the month. It takes me a third week to cover my car payment and my gas, my utilities and my cellphone bill. I have one week’s salary left over for everything else.  By the end of the month, I’ve got nothing. It never changes. I hate it.”I hate it, too. This guy puts in 45 hours a week of honest, hard work on his feet. He devotes most of his waking life to his job. My guess is that he makes more than minimum wage. So let’s imagine he earns $12 an hour — significantly more than he would earn under most current proposals to raise the minimum wage, including President Obama’s. That comes out to just under $25,000 a year, and considerably less after taxes. The 2014 federal poverty line is $23,850 for a family of four.  More than 45 million Americans live below that line, 14.7 million of them children.  “It’s far more demoralizing to work and be poor than to be unemployed and poor,” Linda Tirado writes in her book, “Hand to Mouth: Living in Bootstrap America,” about her own experiences living in poverty.  “Being poor while working hard is crushing. It’s living in a nightmare where the walls just never stop closing in on you.”In 2013, 10 chief executives of public companies in the United States earned $50 million or more. Twenty others earned more than $30 million and 53 made at least $20 million. Six hedge fund managers earned more than $1 billion in 2013, and and eight more made $500 million or more. By next year, the world’s richest 1 percent are expected to control more than 50 percent of global wealth. The 80 richest billionaires have the same collective wealth as the poorest 3.5 billion people in the world.  The argument about the economic implications of this disparity plays out along predictably ideological lines. We seem permanently polarized. But what if a case could be made in purely human and moral terms based on this simple question: Who do we want to be as a society? And to those who have the most, who do you want to be? Or to put it more bluntly: Are you truly comfortable having vastly more than you or the next generations in your family will ever spend, while those around you barely earn what they need to survive, much less to thrive?   The problem is that getting wealthier often appears to make us more self-serving and less empathetic. The researchers Dacher Keltner and Paul Piff, for example, found that people with luxury cars were far less likely than owners of the lowest price cars to come to a full stop at an intersection, and more likely to race past a pedestrian trying to cross a street. In another study, Professors Keltner and Piff, of the University of California, Berkeley, found that those who were less affluent were more likely than their wealthier counterparts to agree with the statements “I often notice people who need help” and “It’s important to take care of people who are vulnerable.   The two researchers concluded in a study published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, “Upper class individuals were more likely to exhibit unethical decision-making tendencies, take valued goods from others, lie in a negotiation, cheat to increase their chance of winning a prize and endorse unethical behavior at work than were lower class individuals.” Paradoxically, the more wealth people have, the more the more tightly they seem to hold on to it. The wealthiest Americans donate just 1.3 percent of their income to charity, while the poorest Americans donate nearly 3.2 percent.  Over the past 10 years, those earning less than $25,000 have increased their charitable contributions by 16.6 percent, while those earning more than $200,000 have decreased theirs by 4.5 percent. What we need at the most fundamental level is a shift in worldview, grounded in a willingness to see more and exclude less. Instead, too many of us live in willful denial. As Paul Simon put it in the song “The Boxer,” “A man hears what he wants to hear and disregards the rest.”   For the most privileged among us, a wider view requires balancing a sense of accomplishment and entitlement with an equal dose of realism and humility. Warren E. Buffett is a role model. “If you stick me down in the middle of Bangladesh or Peru,” he has said, “you’ll find out how much this talent is going to produce in the wrong kind of soil.”  The family and culture we’re raised in — and the support we receive along the way — may well be the most powerful influence on our lives. The primary predictor of our economic circumstances as adults, for example, is not our I.Q. or how hard we work, but rather our parent’s level of income as we grew up. Privilege begets privilege. But what if the wealthiest and most powerful among us were willing to view themselves not as separate and somehow superior to those at the other end of the economic spectrum, and instead simply as more fortunate — and, therefore, called to ensure fairness for those less fortunate.  Awareness has the power to begin changing the game. Here’s a simple first step for anyone who earns an outsize sum and manages others: Take regular time to talk with your entry-level employees about how they’re doing in their lives.   That’s just being more human. At a more practical level, when you care more for employees, they will care more about the quality of the work they do. Here’s the business case from Ms. Tirado: “Treat us fairly, pay us decently and make it clear that you care about whether we live or die. We’ll kill ourselves for you.”