DAVOS, Switzerland — Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, on Friday firmly backed the European Central Bank’s decision to buy bonds to stimulate the stagnant European economy. “There is a risk of persistently low inflation in Europe, and so additional stimulus was absolutely appropriate,” he said during an interview here at the World Economic Forum. While many in Davos this week have placed themselves on either side of the debate about whether Europe should pursue the bond-buying program, called quantitative easing, or focus more intently on structural reforms within countries to make their economies more flexible, Mr. Carney took a more realistic approach.  “You have to deal with the financial system you have, the economic system you have,” he said. Europe does need to pursue structural reforms, he noted. “But in taking the day-to-day, meeting-by-meeting decision of monetary policy,” he said, “one doesn’t wait for those bigger decisions, or other decisions, to happen; you have to accept what is there on the ground.” As European Union policy makers grapple with the possibility of deflation, Mr. Carney faces a different quandary in Britain, where wages are rising and unemployment is falling: the prospect of raising interest rates with inflation in record-low territory. Data released Wednesday showed for the three months ended in November, average earnings excluding bonuses were up 1.8 percent from a year earlier. Unemployment fell to 5.8 percent, the lowest level in more than six years. But low oil prices pushed inflation down to 0.5 percent in December, a far cry from the central bank’s target of 2 percent and a figure Mr. Carney said could fall even further. He said the bank would factor in the effect of oil on inflation. “It is appropriate to look through those dynamics at a time when wages are growing and prices are having a one-off level shift,” he said. He said the situation in Britain was different from the Continent, which is facing more daunting headwinds. “You don’t have the concerns about a generalized move in prices down,” like in the rest of Europe.  “It’s not an analogous situation in the U.K. whatsoever.”He said he expected inflation to be back to the 2 percent target within two years. “That would be consistent with some modest, limited, gradual increases in interest rates over the course of the next three years,” he said. He acknowledged that such increases -– relative to what was expected a year ago, when the Bank of England was expected to be the first main central bank to raise rates — would be “more limited and more gradual.” Earlier this week, minutes released by the Bank of England disclosed that two members of the Monetary Policy Committee reversed course on their calls to raise interest rates, opting instead to keep the rate at 0.5 percent, where it has been since March 2009.  Although the two argued that the factors influencing inflation were probably temporary, they “noted the risk that low inflation might persist for longer than the temporary factors implied, and concluded that this risk would be increased by an increase in bank rate at the current juncture.”And the wage and unemployment picture may not be as rosy as the headline numbers indicate, economists say. The pace of the fall in the unemployment is slowing. And Mr. Carney said there was still slack in the economy – the difference between the productive capacity of the economy and the actual level of economic output. The bank has indicated that slack is a crucial indicator it considers when weighing interest rate decisions.  “It is diminishing, but there are still elements of slack,” Mr. Carney said. He also said he would like to see further evidence of wage growth. “We expect it to continue, but we’d rather see it continue.” Mr. Carney was typically cryptic about the Swiss National Bank’s surprise move to lift the cap on the Swiss franc, which caused the currency to soar as much as 39 percent at one point. He would not comment on whether he had been alerted ahead of time. “I am in the mutual admiration society of central bankers,” he said, smiling. The move was a wake-up call that central bankers were not as predictable as the market had come to believe, said an executive of a big European bank. But Mr. Carney, who is chided in England for his oft-repeated mantra that rate rises will be “limited and gradual,” seems committed to sticking to script.  “We will take the appropriate steps to get inflation back to target in two years,” he said. “What people should expect is that we will do what’s necessary.”