

Related Links


Bank of England Governor Backs E.C.B. Strategy

DAVOS, Switzerland — Perhaps more than any other financial figure, Mark Carney has the job of ensuring that the world’s largest banks are no longer a great danger to the economies in which they operate.Mr. Carney, who is attending the World Economic Forum here, is governor of the Bank of England. But he is also the chairman of the Financial Stability Board, a powerful group that is made up of financial regulators from around the world. After the financial crisis of 2008, when governments had to bail out their biggest banks, the board agreed on policies that later provided much of the foundation for banking overhauls in individual countries.The board’s goal was not only to make large financial institutions more stable. It also wanted to make it possible for the authorities to wind down large banks in a way that would not create panic across the global financial system – and not require taxpayer money.The hope was that such efforts would end “too big to fail,” the description given to banks that are so large that the government would be forced to bail them out to stop their collapse from imploding the wider economy. And last November, Mr. Carney said that an agreement on a batch of regulations had created  “a watershed in ending too big to fail.” He added, “These agreements will play important roles in enabling globally systemic banks to be resolved without recourse to public subsidy and without disruption to the wider financial system.”But many financial specialists have their doubts. “It’s not quite time to congratulate ourselves,” Anat R. Admati, a professor of finance at Stanford, said in an interview. “It’s an enormous challenge.”Many financial companies are far larger than they were before the crisis, and, in recent months, bank lobbyists have been reasserting their power in the political process.​ Factors like these have stoked worries that the “too big to fail” problem persists. ​“That concern is important,” Mr. Carney said in an interview here, adding that one of the board’s primary goals had been to tackle the unfairness of bailing out banks but not other types of business. “If you make a mistake or things go against you, you bear the consequences of those mistakes, and the taxpayer doesn’t come in behind.”Mr. Carney was quick to say that it would take an actual collapse of a large bank to test whether the new regulations aimed at safely winding down large firms actually work.Even so, he said that measures that bolster a bank’s financial footing, known as capital, would mostly likely make it easier to resolve a failing bank. The board’s policies home in on how a bank finances its operations. Some of that money comes from shareholders and retained profits, which is known as equity. It is the sturdiest part of a bank’s financing, because, unlike debt, it doesn’t need to be paid back. Banks also raise money by issuing longer-term bonds.In winding down a bank, the equity is first in line to absorb losses. The board’s innovation is to then put the bank’s longer-term debt in line to absorb losses. The board hopes that there will be enough debt and equity to absorb all the losses without putting taxpayers on the hook.Some banking specialists have their doubts, though. They contend that if the board wanted to increase banks’ “loss-absorbing capacity,” it could have required that banks simply hold more equity. Why include a less stable funding source like debt, they ask.But Mr. Carney said that making banks maintain even higher levels of equity could increase their costs, and those costs would probably get passed on to the banks’ customers. Raising equity levels, he added, may also reduce the attractiveness of bank shares to the point where there is insufficient demand among investors for the shares.“We do want equity in the business,” he said, “and to have equity in the business, there has to be some prospect of some reasonable return on that equity.”Some bank critics say that this sort of concern about shareholder returns plays into the hands of bankers. They contend that banks could increase their returns on equity by becoming more efficient or reducing their overall size. “Banks already have easier funding than other types of businesses,” Ms. Admati said. “In markets, you should get the return you deserve, based on your value creation.”Skeptics also say the board uses an approach that they say overstates the actual loss-absorbing capacity of a bank. Such critics prefer to use a more conservative measure of capital called the leverage ratio to determine whether a bank has sufficient capacity to avoid losses.  And leverage ratios are still quite low at many large global banks, even after all the overhauls.When asked why the board had not used the leverage ratio as the primary tool to set loss-absorbing capacity, Mr. Carney said: “Having been governor of the only banking system that stood on its own feet in the crisis, I am well aware of the value of the leverage ratio.” He was referring to Canada’s banking system, which he oversaw as the governor of the Bank of Canada, until he left that central bank in 2013.Mr. Carney added that when the board set its goals for capital levels, it surveyed losses over many banking crises and set capital levels far above those losses.The other big question hanging over the board’s response to “too big to fail” is whether the machinery to carefully wind down banks would work in the midst of a full-blown crisis. Much would depend on the will of the authorities. But there would be other potentially complicating factors. Critics, for instance, ask what would happen if many big banks failed at once, not just one or two. Mr. Carney acknowledged that the board’s tools might prove inadequate in such a situation, but he said that they would give the authorities far more options than they had in 2008 – and also help prevent one bank’s problems from becoming dangerously contagious.“By creating the ability to resolve a major bank, we reduce the probability of a systemic crisis as well,” he said, “It’s the prospect of that risk, and the interconnectedness within the system, that helps breed systemic risks.”Mr. Carney said that part of his mission was to make sure the public knew that the authorities had the powers to be tough with large banks when they got into trouble.“It is very important to get across that there are choices,” he said, “so that the public’s expectations of what authorities do in the circumstances are appropriately shaped, so we’re held to account.”