By LANDON THOMAS Jr.OCT. 8, 2015
LIMA, Peru —  As financial leaders gather here this week to assess the health of the world economy, one of the central topics for discussion will be how ready markets are for a crisis in a large developing economy such as China, Turkey or Brazil.At the center of this debate will be the question of whether the International Monetary Fund still has the ability to act effectively if — as some experts fear — emerging markets begin to crumble under the weight of heavy debt.For the better part of five years, the I.M.F., which is sponsoring the weeklong meetings of financiers, government officials and central bankers from around the world, has been bogged down where it does not usually engage in rescue work — developed Europe, in particular Greece.Now, with concerns mounting that the currency devaluation in China will create a sustained flow of money out of emerging markets, the fund must make sure that it is still in a position to fulfill its core function: identifying risks in emerging economies and bailing them out when they run short of cash.AdvertisementDriving these global concerns is the fear that the dollar-based debt in large emerging market economies has risen to unsustainable levels.AdvertisementLast week, the fund became the latest global watchdog to warn of the dangers of an emerging market debt bubble, highlighting in a report published in advance of this week’s meetings that corporate debt levels had soared to $18 trillion from $4 trillion 10 years ago. Citing this debt overhang, the fund has again lowered its outlook for emerging market growth in 2015 to 4 percent — about half the rate at which developing countries were growing earlier this decade.Construction companies in Turkey, real estate developers in China, retail chains in Brazil and steel companies in Malaysia — along with many other fast-growing emerging market companies — have gorged on cheap dollar-based debt in recent years.And the fear is that the financiers of this borrowing binge — global banks, sovereign wealth funds and bond investors based in the United States — will pull their money out en masse, causing currencies to collapse and companies to fail, forcing the I.M.F. to step in.Analysts say the fund has the resources to rescue a few countries if the need arises. But if the flow out of emerging markets is so extreme that more than just a handful of countries fail, the fund will be hard-pressed to rescue them all.This is not a central forecast, of course. And the likelihood that the Federal Reserve may hold off on raising interest rates should take some of the pressure off emerging markets. But with Congress continuing to refuse plans to increase the I.M.F.’s resources, the feeling among many experts is that the fund is overstretched.“All the I.M.F. can do now is to highlight the risks and warn of an upcoming hurricane,” said Stephen Jen, a former I.M.F. economist who manages a hedge fund based in London. “There is not much they can do at this point because we are talking about a change in the tide of capital flows.”The Institute for International Finance, a trade group for global banks, said in a report this week that emerging markets would this year experience their first net outward flow of funds — about $548 billion — since 1988.AdvertisementMr. Jen views the coming emerging market debt debacle as the last of three debt bubbles that have been driven by investors pushing for too much yield in a rock-bottom interest rate environment. First, there was the mortgage crisis in the United States, then the sovereign debt crisis in Europe and now emerging markets.And in each case, he points out, it was global investors unloading their risky assets — be it mortgage-backed securities in the United States, Greek government bonds or the debt paper of the Brazilian oil giant Petrobras — that set off the rout.The I.M.F. has been highlighting these risks in recent months. Over the summer, for example, it published a wide-ranging study that assessed the ability of large economies to handle a situation in which anxious foreign investors headed for the exits by selling their bonds or not renewing credit lines.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Malaysia, South Africa and Turkey were singled out as countries that, because of their reliance on short-term capital flows, should take steps to increase the cash in their foreign currency reserves to prepare for a crisis if and when it came.And in the I.M.F.’s report on corporate debt in emerging markets, Turkey and China were singled out as having experienced the largest increases in debt in recent years.But some worry that the fund’s five-year effort in the eurozone, where in 2013 it had allocated $64 billion of its $90 billion loan book, may have hampered its ability to warn publicly about problems in emerging markets.“The focus has been on Europe,” said Gary N. Kleiman, an independent emerging market analyst based in Washington. “The fund has been complacent in looking at the structural weaknesses in emerging markets.”But other analysts — like Mr. Jen, the hedge fund manager — say that to blame the fund for missing the China slowdown or the rout in emerging market currencies is a bit unfair.The emerging market debt buildup has been more than a decade in the making — the consequence of many years of extra-loose monetary policies by global central banks that resulted in a worldwide glut of dollars.AdvertisementAs the dollar has begun to strengthen over the last year, signaling a halt to the easy money flows into emerging markets, the fund and other economists have — with varying degrees of bluntness — warned of the consequences for the global economy.“The dollar is rallying against everything,” said Raman Srivastava, a senior bond investor at Standish Mellon Asset Management in New York. “And that is very deflationary.”In many emerging markets, the dollar’s strength relative to local currencies is being felt in many ways.In Brazil, the mall operator General Shopping — which has revenue largely in reals — skipped a payment on one of its dollar-denominated bonds last month. And in China, the dollar debts of a spate of real estate developers were downgraded by credit rating agencies because of currency mismatches.Large exporters in Malaysia, bankers there say, are hoarding their dollars as opposed to converting them into wobbly ringgits, the Malaysian currency.And in Turkey, local savers have been switching their deposits to dollars from liras as their currency keeps losing value. The ratio of dollar-to-lira deposits — a telling gauge of the confidence Turks have in their local currency — is approaching 50 percent.This dollar squeeze, some experts believe, is more structural than cyclical, and as companies in emerging markets go bankrupt and their economies stagnate, the United States cannot help but be affected.“We are not growing at 4 percent anymore — we are barely at 2 percent,” said Julian Brigden of Macro Intelligence 2 Partners, an independent research firm based in Vail, Colo. “The U.S. economy really is dependent on the rest of the world for growth.”A version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Gathering to Evaluate Preparedness in Fiscal Crisis.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.