Jennifer Taub is a professor at Vermont Law School. Her book “Other People’s Houses” was published in May by Yale University Press. In the wake of a recent winning streak with Congress in rolling back reform, the banks now seek a fresh victory at the Supreme Court.The much-anticipated Fair Housing Act case, the Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs v. the Inclusive Communities Project, which was argued on Wednesday, does not directly involve banks or even borrowers. It stems from an arcane dispute over the allocation of federal tax credits to low-income housing developments in Dallas. The impact, however, could be much broader.The court’s decision, expected before July, may greatly reduce liability for unfair mortgage financing practices nationwide and limit the ability for the government to combat predatory lending.Aware of the stakes, banking industry groups filed amicus briefs asking the court to reduce lenders’ potential liability under the Fair Housing Act of 1968. The law was intended to address racial segregation. It prohibits discrimination in the rental, sale and financing of dwellings on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin.This Civil Rights era law has been instrumental in holding the largest banks accountable for predatory lending practices that harmed families and helped cause the 2008 financial crisis.In 2011, in what was the largest fair housing settlement in United States history, Bank of America agreed to pay $335 million to settle allegations that its Countrywide Financial unit had discriminated against Hispanic and black borrowers. These allegations included steering them into subprime loans and charging them higher fees and rates compared with white borrowers with similar credit profiles. According to the Justice Department, by November 2014, more than $300 million had been distributed to the victims.The question before the Supreme Court now is whether liability under the Fair Housing Act arises not just from intentional discrimination, but also from unintentional conduct that has a discriminatory effect or “disparate impact.”Advocates consider the disparate impact theory an essential enforcement tool.As Justice Stephen Breyer made clear during oral arguments, recognizing liability under the Fair Housing Act under the disparate impact theory “has been the law of the United States uniformly throughout the United States for 35 years.” The Department of Housing and Urban Development, empowered by Congress to put the law into effect, has also interpreted it to prohibit acts that have a disparate impact.In their briefs, the American Bankers Association and other industry groups have urged the court to limit liability to those cases where intentional discrimination can be proven. They also contend that banks are caught in a double bind. They say that if lenders comply with Dodd-Frank’s “ability to pay” rule or choose to originate only “qualified mortgages,” they will be subject to disparate impact lawsuits.This concern is overblown. Defending against meritless claims is not difficult. If a lender can prove a challenged practice “is necessary to achieve one or more of its substantial, legitimate, nondiscriminatory interests,” a challenger can prevail only by proving there was “another practice that has a less discriminatory effect.”“Ability to repay is a commonsense standard that requires underwriting and documentation,” said Julia Gordon, director of housing finance and policy at the Center for American Progress.She added that if lenders were concerned about neutral lending practices resulting in disparate impact, “the real problem is not reaching people of color.”The so-called double-bind is also misleading. In the run-up to the subprime mortgage crisis, lenders focused on Hispanic and black borrowers, offering them higher-risk, more expensive loans. This reasoning seems to revive the long-discredited narrative that the financial crisis was caused by banks being forced to make unwise loans in order to comply with the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977.It is difficult to predict from oral arguments how the court will rule.Lisa T. McElroy, a professor at the Drexel University Thomas R. Kline School of Law and an expert on the Supreme Court, attended the arguments. She said she was surprised when Justice Antonin Scalia seemed to support the disparate impact theory. Relying on a plain reading of the statute, he questioned the assertion by the Texas solicitor general, Scott Keller,  that the Fair Housing Act was limited to intentional discrimination.Justice Scalia noted that the law had been amended in 1988 to include exceptions to the use of the disparate impact theory. He asked, “why doesn’t that kill your case?”If, he said,  “you look at the whole law and you say, what makes sense? And if you read those ­­ those two provisions together, it seems to be an acknowledgment that there is such a thing as disparate impact.”Even if the court were to rule that disparate impact claims are not recognized under the Fair Housing Act, the government and private parties will have enough intentional housing discrimination claims against lenders and others to keep them busy for a long time, Ms. Gordon notes.