By AARON M. KESSLERJAN. 22, 2015
WASHINGTON —  As sales of electric vehicles languish, automakers are starting to address one of the biggest obstacles to their wider acceptance: the lack of charging stations.On Thursday, BMW and Volkswagen announced a plan to install 100 high-speed charging stations on busy corridors this year on the East and West Coasts, like Interstate 95 between here and Boston. The stations will be part of a fast-growing network run by ChargePoint, the nation’s largest, and will be compatible with nearly all electric vehicles on the road.BMW and VW are taking a cue from Tesla Motors, which has its own network of high-speed chargers in the Northeast corridor and in California, but its proprietary connectors work only with Tesla’s cars.Some analysts, though, warned that even 100 new stations would barely begin to provide the infrastructure needed to give electric vehicles broad acceptance.Advertisement“There are more than 100 gas stations just in Santa Monica,” said Eric Lyman, a senior analyst at TrueCar. “It’s going to be extremely difficult to reach the level of convenience of gasoline, which is a system that’s developed over a century to put stations on nearly every commercial corner.”AdvertisementStill, automakers, facing strict federal mandates to increase fuel efficiency and reduce carbon emissions, have little choice but to press ahead. By 2025, their corporate average fuel economy must be at least 54.5 miles a gallon, well above the current average of 25 miles a gallon.Only about 120,000 vehicles that require a plug-in electric charge were sold in the United States last year, an increase of 20 percent over 2013 but a tiny fraction of the 16.5 million vehicles sold over all.Analysts, and automakers themselves, say the push to install high-speed charging stations is an acknowledgment of a miscalculation made when mass-market electric-powered vehicles were introduced five years ago. Consumers, carmakers figured, would be content with charging their cars at home, at the office and perhaps the local movie theater and would embrace a new class of electrified vehicles. After all, that would be enough for most Americans’ commute, they assumed.But they soon discovered that consumers did not want their cars limited to commuting or short trips — a dynamic known as range anxiety.“What we learned is people want to use their cars beyond a single charge range; they want to take longer trips, to drive like they were always used to driving,” said Robert Healey, head of electric vehicle infrastructure at BMW of North America. “Especially important is they want one car that can be their primary vehicle.”That means easy access to fast, public charging stations that make a road trip in an electric car no different from one in a gas-powered sport utility vehicle.“Drivers want to be on the road, with no fuss, and know that they can stop somewhere for a quick fill-up when they need one,” Mr. Healey said. “That instinct hasn’t changed.”AdvertisementSince high-speed chargers are rare, automakers are pushing ahead with new efforts to fill the gap, hoping that easing range anxiety will be a breakthrough for electric cars’ viability.Pasquale Romano, chief executive of ChargePoint, said for office buildings and “around town” charging, a few hours of being plugged in would be fine. But he said for longer trips, high-speed charging stations were a must.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is the last piece of the puzzle to let people make an electric car be their primary vehicle,” Mr. Romano said. “Otherwise, you’re telling drivers they can’t travel, and that just doesn’t work.”ChargePoint has been aggressively expanding its network and now has more than 20,000 stations around the United States. Only about 120 of those, though, are high-speed versions that charge a car in about 20 minutes. The rest can take several hours.Mr. Lyman, the analyst, said that even though most drivers did not regularly take longer trips, such limitations still gave them pause.“It’s the idea of ‘I can’t do it’ that people fear,” he said. “It’s like third-row seats in S.U.V.s. Most people don’t ever use them, but they like having them there in case they need them.”The partnership among BMW, Volkswagen and ChargePoint aims to place the new high-speed chargers less than 50 miles apart along the Northeast corridor’s Interstate 95 between here and Boston, and will expand the locations from there, including installing stations in larger cities in the region.BMW and Volkswagen are paying to build the stations and will decide on pricing for the electricity. ChargePoint’s business is based on a subscription model; it provides a payment system and customer network for stations that are operated by others. (The company also sells charging equipment.)John O’Dell of the automotive website Edmunds.com said the announcement was “great, but it’s just a start.”“For both battery electric and fuel cell electric vehicles, the refueling structure is critical,” he said.AdvertisementHydrogen fuel cell vehicles received a lift on Thursday as well, as Toyota announced it was joining with the supplier Air Liquide to build 12 hydrogen fuel stations in New York, New Jersey, Massachusetts, Connecticut and Rhode Island.A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Automakers Join to Expand Network of High-Speed Charging Stations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.