AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressDALLAS — Airline stocks soared on Thursday as leaders of United and Southwest gave an upbeat forecast for 2015 that combined strong travel demand and cheaper fuel. The price of jet fuel has dropped by about half since September, lifting airline profits and tamping down fear that global economic weakness could hurt the carriers. Analysts expect all four of the biggest airlines in the United States to post bigger profits this year than in 2014.United Continental Holdings predicted that first-quarter profit margins would be higher than many analysts had expected.Southwest Airlines said it expected its fuel bill for 2015 to be $1.7 billion lower than in 2014. “Our earnings outlook is superb if for no other reason than fuel costs are down dramatically,” Gary C. Kelly, the company’s chief, said.But both companies reported lower fourth-quarter profit than a year earlier because of losses on contracts to protect against sharply higher fuel prices. Those contracts, called hedges, lose value when oil prices fall.Southwest’s net income dropped 10 percent, to $190 million, as it booked $282 million in hedging write-downs. United’s net income plunged 80 percent, to $28 million, because of $433 million in special items, including $225 million in hedging write-downs and $141 million for severance to flight attendants who took early retirement.Analysts expect higher airline profits this year partly because as their hedges expire, the carriers will capture a bigger share of the decline in fuel.Hedging has been practiced by most major airlines in the United States for almost a decade. Despite the hedging losses reported this week by Southwest, United and Delta Air Lines, finance experts say the practice can still be a smart move.“You are buying insurance,” said John Parsons, a member of the finance faculty at M.I.T. “If you buy health insurance and don’t get sick, that doesn’t mean you made a mistake.”With a barrel of oil selling in the $40s, some analysts say airlines should be hedging against future spikes in energy prices.“I would love to see them in the market today,” said Jim Corridore, an analyst for S&P Capital IQ. “With oil at $46 a barrel, they should be hedging as much as they can.”While United’s net income fell, profit excluding one-time items soared 86 percent in the quarter to $1.20 a share. That, however, was slightly short of analysts’ forecast of $1.22 a share, according to FactSet. Revenue in the quarter dipped 0.2 percent to $9.3 billion, matching expectations. Average fares were 1.3 percent higher per mile, and revenue from extra fees like baggage increased 9.7 percent to more than $22 per passenger.Shares of United, the nation’s second-biggest airline company, closed up $3.13, or 4.5 percent, to $72.34 after hitting a 52-week high of $73.20 earlier in the day.Southwest’s profit for the quarter excluding hedging and other one-time costs and gains was a record $404 million, or 59 cents a share. Analysts had expected 55 cents a share. Revenue in the quarter rose 4.5 percent to $4.6 billion, topping analysts’ forecast of $4.59 billion. Labor costs rose 8.3 percent and surpassed fuel as the airline’s biggest single expense in 2014.The airline’s shares rose $3.52, or 8.4 percent, to $45.35 and hit a 52-week high of $45.39 during the session.Advertisement