By STEPHANIE STROMJAN. 22, 2015
Starbucks, the company that turned legions of Americans into coffee cravers, on Thursday reported robust gains in sales and earnings during this past holiday quarter.Sales in stores open at least 13 months increased by 5 percent, somewhat higher than investment analysts had anticipated, and the company also benefited from its acquisition of the stake in Starbucks Japan that it did not own.Foreign exchange rate movements were the only damper on financial performance that the company noted.Sales in the quarter, which ended Dec. 28 and was its first quarter for the 2015 fiscal year, rose 13 percent to $4.8 billion, while earnings rose to $983.1 million, from $540.7 million in the same quarter a year earlier, thanks to the Starbucks Japan purchase.AdvertisementAdjusted for that acquisition, earnings on each share of stock were 80 cents, a 16 percent increase over the same quarter last year. The figures for revenue and earnings per share were records for Starbucks.Howard Schultz discusses Starbucks’ record quarter and how the company is distinguishing itself from competition in China.The company also announced that Kevin Johnson, the retired chief executive of Juniper Networks and a member of the Starbucks board, would become its new president and chief operating officer. Mr. Johnson replaces Troy Alstead, who starting in March will take a yearlong sabbatical from the company, as previously announced.AdvertisementInvestment analysts were closely watching comparable-store sales performance, after five quarters of relatively lackluster traffic. The company used a mix of new products and promotions, including an increased selection of gift cards and a new latte, Chestnut Praline, to attract consumers during the critical holiday season.The company has an ambitious goal to nearly double sales and operating income over the next five years, and to that end, has begun acting on several strategies to make its stores more productive in the afternoons and evenings and increase their convenience to consumers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last fall, it announced it would begin wine and beer sales, previously tested in the Chicago area, in about a quarter of its 12,000 stores, and more of the food being made through its purchase of La Boulange in 2012 is geared toward light lunch and dinner meals.Starbucks earns about 16 percent of its revenue from its mobile payment system, which is regarded as a model by others in the food industry, and it has been testing a new mobile ordering and payment system that it hopes will lift sales and shorten the time customers spend waiting in line.It also is working on a delivery service.A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Sales Jump at Starbucks, at Outset of a Bold Push for Growth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.