By NELSON D. SCHWARTZJAN. 22, 2015
For American investors and tourists especially, the long-awaited move by the European Central Bank on Thursday to help stimulate growth on the Continent is welcome news. For the rest of the American economy, it will not matter so much.Even if the E.C.B.’s effort is ultimately successful and the eurozone emerges from the business equivalent of hibernation — hardly a certainty — that added growth is unlikely to move the American economic needle.A pickup in economic activity in Europe might increase demand for American products. But the stronger dollar undercuts the competitiveness of American exporters, since their goods will become more expensive for European consumers as the euro drops against the dollar.The weaker euro, though, is good news for Americans with plans to visit Europe as the spring and summer travel season arrives, said Ian Shepherdson, chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics. Spending on hotels, meals and taxis will be cheaper since dollars have greater spending power in the 19 countries where the euro is the official currency.Advertisement“This is great for tourists, as Europe is getting cheaper by the day,” Mr. Shepherdson said. “But don’t buy euros now — wait for the trip. It wouldn’t surprise me in the least if the euro was even with the dollar by April.”AdvertisementOn Thursday, the euro dropped by more than 2 percent against the dollar, to just below $1.14. Many analysts say they expect the euro to continue falling, possibly reaching parity with the dollar in the coming months.As for stocks, added liquidity in global markets tends to benefit equity prices broadly, even if the stimulus is not coming from the Federal Reserve this time around. For example, Wall Street rallied in the fall after Japan’s central bank expanded its asset purchasing program in late October.And some of the euros pumped into the economy by the European Central Bank will find their way to Wall Street. On Thursday, traders cheered the announcement by policy makers in Frankfurt, with broad market averages in the United States rising by more than 1.5 percent.“Equity markets like liquidity,” said Michael Hanson, senior economist with Bank of America Merrill Lynch. In fact, he said, new rounds of quantitative easing by foreign central banks have come as the Fed has eased back on its stimulus efforts and is preparing to raise short-term interest rates later this year.“There has been a debate about whether other central banks can substitute for the U.S. in terms of liquidity, and the answer today seems to be yes,” he said. “The combination of the Bank of Japan and the E.C.B. should at least compensate for the Fed, and maybe add more.”As for the broader American economy, most economists said the overall impact of the European Central Bank’s move on these shores is likely to be muted.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That’s because domestic consumer spending, business spending and investment, and federal, state and local government expenditures account for most of the economic output in the United States. Exports, while vital for jobs and corporate profits, account for only a comparatively small share of gross domestic product.For example, in 2013, total, global American exports of $3.2 trillion contributed 13.4 percent to G.D.P. Of that $3.2 trillion, less than a quarter went to the eurozone, according to Commerce Department data. Anything but a dramatic surge in European demand would be felt only slightly in the United States.Advertisement“It’s modestly negative, but rounding-size-error negative in terms of growth, maybe one-tenth of 1 percent,” Mr. Hanson of Bank of America Merrill Lynch said.Some European imports, such as luxury goods, could conceivably fall in price, although discounts for high-end fashion and watches tend to be rarer than for mass-market goods. And some European automakers now produce many their cars in the United States, further reducing any currency benefit for car buyers.Guy Berger, United States economist at RBS, echoed Mr. Hanson’s view that the big picture for the American economy, which has been rosier as of late, is unlikely to be dimmed by any fallout from Europe.He estimates the American economy grew at an annual rate of just over 3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2014, with growth over the course of 2015 coming at just under 3 percent. A large portion of those gains will come from healthier spending by American consumers who are benefiting from the plunge in energy prices.“Nobody’s growth outlook for the U.S. will change after what happened today,” Mr. Berger said. “Whatever drove your forecast before is still there.”A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: It’s Good News, for Some, in the U.S.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.