By MICHAEL CIEPLYJAN. 21, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  Alan J. Hirschfield, an executive who ran two major film studios and saw Columbia Pictures through one of Hollywood’s most colorful and chronicled financial scandals, died on Jan. 15 at his home in Wilson, Wyo. He was 79.His death, after a brief illness, was confirmed by his son Scott.In a varied career that found him by turns making movies, working as an investment banker and overseeing media companies he had helped finance, Mr. Hirschfield became known as a forward thinker who embraced structural change in the entertainment business. But he occasionally overshot.In the early 1980s, as a top executive at 20th Century Fox, Mr. Hirschfield was quick to spot potential in the dawning home video market. But he angered exhibitors by predicting that major movies would soon have only small theatrical releases while being simultaneously sold on videocassettes and shown on cable television. His foresight presaged a digital business model that has only begun to emerge, mostly among smaller films, 30 years later.Perhaps the peak of his fame came in 1982, when Mr. Hirschfield emerged as a principal subject of David McClintick’s book “Indecent Exposure: A True Story of Hollywood and Wall Street.” It was an intricate bicoastal account of boardroom struggles over the ouster of David Begelman, a Columbia production executive who was discovered to have forged checks and to have embezzled about $60,000.AdvertisementMr. Hirschfield, who was Columbia’s president and chief executive at the time, favored firing Mr. Begelman when his misconduct was discovered in 1977. But he relented under pressure from board members who valued Mr. Begelman’s contribution to hit films like “Shampoo” and “Close Encounters of the Third Kind.”AdvertisementEventually, Mr. Begelman was forced out anyway and pleaded guilty to charges of grand theft. But Mr. Hirschfield had by then lost his footing with Columbia’s board and with some powerful Begelman allies, including the film producer Ray Stark and the investment banker Herbert Allen Jr., whose firm owned about 7 percent of what was then called Columbia Pictures Industries. So he, too, was pushed out, in July 1978.Speaking at a news conference after his firing, an unapologetic Mr. Hirschfield — though accused of indecision and leaking information to the press — flatly attributed his ouster to his determination to remove Mr. Begelman.“When a person commits those acts in a public corporation, there is no room for him, no matter how important he is or no matter who he is,” Mr. Hirschfield said, as reported by The Los Angeles Times. (Mr. Begelman received a three-year contract as an independent producer for Columbia. He killed himself in 1995.)Alan James Hirschfield was born in New York on Oct. 10, 1935, to Norman and Betty Hirschfield. Norman Hirschfield held various positions on Wall Street, including bond trader, and was a close friend and business associate of Charles Allen Jr., who founded the investment firm Allen & Company.In 1938, Alan, then 3, moved with his family to Oklahoma City, where his father was involved with natural gas operations and scouted business opportunities for Allen & Company. After graduating from the University of Oklahoma, the younger Mr. Hirschfield received a master’s degree from the Harvard Business School and went to work for the Allen family.When Allen & Company took a financial stake in what became Warner Bros.-Seven Arts, Mr. Hirschfield was named a financial vice president at the studio. In 1973, when the company similarly took a stake in Columbia, Mr. Hirschfield was appointed to that studio’s top posts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After he was fired, he signed on briefly as a consultant to the restructured Warner Communications; he was named vice chairman and chief operating officer of Fox in 1979.In an era when studio executives frequently played musical chairs, Mr. Hirschfield found yet another seat: He was made chief executive of Fox by its principal owner, Marvin Davis, in 1981. He resigned in 1984, making way for Barry Diller, who arrived from Paramount Pictures, and shifted his own attention to banking. By 1991, Mr. Hirschfield was working for the securities firm Wertheim Shroder & Company.AdvertisementSometimes Mr. Hirschfield ran companies in which he and allies had invested. Thus he was named acting chairman of Live Entertainment while on leave from Wertheim. After working in New York and Los Angeles for decades, he set up shop in Jackson, Wyo., where he started the Snake River Grill, worked from an office overlooking the Jackson Hole Ski Resort and served as co-chief executive of the Data Broadcasting Corporation, a provider of financial information.Mr. Hirschfield married Berte Schindelheim, who survives him, in 1962. In their Hollywood years, the Hirschfields were a fixture of Palm Springs society, part of the circle around Frank Sinatra, whose sale of a stake in his record company to Warner was supervised by Mr. Hirschfield.The Hirschfields’ philanthropic interests included the Hirschfield Center for Children in Jackson Hole, as well as educational and environmental institutions and causes.Besides his wife and his son Scott, survivors include a daughter, Laura Hirschfield; another son, Marc; and six grandchildren.Daniel E. Slotnik contributed reporting from New York.
 We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.