By ALEXANDRA JACOBSJAN. 23, 2015
Vince Camuto, a quiet titan of retail and founder of the footwear behemoth Nine West, whose specialty was the midpriced but stylish shoe, died on Wednesday at his home in Greenwich, Conn. He was 78.The cause was prostate cancer, his son Robert said.Working both under and outside the large umbrella of his own conglomerate, the Camuto Group, Mr. Camuto was responsible for more items in the closets of many American women than they probably realized.In recent years he was a business partner of both Tory Burch, the billionaire designer, and Jessica Simpson, the pop star who found a lucrative second career in the apparel business. He also collaborated with Banana Republic and BCBG, among many other companies.His strength lay not in any particular aesthetic, but rather in his sensitivity to the ever-changing tastes of his customers.Advertisement“We would have 100 pairs of shoes in the room,” Ms. Burch said in an interview on Thursday, “and he could tell you which would resonate immediately.”AdvertisementJohn Vincent Camuto was born on June 4, 1936, on the Lower East Side of Manhattan. His mother, the former Louise Zenga, was a seamstress; his father, Luigi Camuto, a Sicilian immigrant, was an artisan who died two years later.He attended Seward Park High School on the Lower East Side, the alma mater of the actor Tony Curtis (whom he was said to resemble), and after a series of odd jobs began working, at age 18, at I. Miller, a division of Delman, first as a shoe repair clerk and then on the sales floor.In the 1960s, mentored by Ted Poland, the founder of the Sudbury Shoe Company, Mr. Camuto worked in Miami, at John Irving, and in Farmington, Me., where he successfully turned around one of Mr. Poland’s factories.In 1969, he was contracted by the Japanese-owned Bank of Sumitomo in New York to design and import private-label shoes, using factories in Brazil that had been idle. He started Nine West in 1978 with a fellow contractor, Jerome Fisher, naming the company after a number on a building that they saw out of a window of their office on 57th Street.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tommy Hilfiger, the designer and a longtime friend and neighbor in Greenwich, called Mr. Camuto a master of making attractive, affordable shoes.“He did it in a different way from Louboutin or Manolo or Jimmy Choo,” Mr. Hilfiger said in an interview on Thursday. “It was his intent to please a lot of women — because, look, not many women can afford a $700 pump for evening, but they could afford $150.”The company grew exponentially, went public in 1993 and was bought by the Jones Apparel Group six years later for almost $900 million. Mr. Camuto went on to develop labels for Dillard’s department stores and then scores of licenses for ready-to-wear, handbags, jewelry, perfume, sunglasses and apparel as well as shoes.Mr. Camuto’s first two marriages, to Anne Cioffi and Kristen Benson, ended in divorce. Besides his son Robert, he is survived by his wife, the former Louise Drevenstam, creative director of the Vince Camuto line and designer for his company Louise et Cie; a daughter, Andrea Camuto; three other sons, John, Christopher and Phillip; a sister, Frances Loprinzi; and one grandson.Robert Camuto recalled tagging along in his youth to a trade show at the Plaza Hotel, when the business was very different. “In the ’70s shoes were basically black and brown,” he said. “I remember my father telling buyers not only to buy pink shoes, but five different kinds of pink shoes.”A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page A17 of the New York edition with the headline: Vince Camuto, 78, Founder of Nine West.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.