AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan MahlerFor years, it was something of a ritual. You had made it through airport security, survived the lengthy delays and even crammed your carry-on into an overhead bin. Then you could settle in, buckle up and reach into the seat-back pocket in front of you. There, pressed up against the motion-sickness bag or the laminated emergency instruction card, you would find the latest edition of SkyMall.It was the National Enquirer of shopping catalogs. Thumbing through its pages — on the tarmac before takeoff or at 35,000 feet — you would find products that seemed too weird to be true: An indoor pet-relief system called “Piddle Place,” a helmet that promised to regrow your hair using lasers, a glass Christmas tree ornament designed to look like a pierogi, a solar-powered cooling hat.But this great American aviation tradition may now be over. SkyMall’s parent company, Xhibit, has filed for bankruptcy protection.The explanation for the company’s demise is simple enough. It used to enjoy the ultimate captive audience: hundreds of millions of travelers who were stuck on an airplane for hours with limited diversions beyond whatever reading material they had brought, a single movie of the airline’s choosing or the company of the passenger sitting next to them.Today’s flying experience is very different, of course. There are smartphones and laptops and iPads and seat-back screens with all sorts of on-demand viewing options. And, most of all, there’s in-flight Wi-Fi. Who needs SkyMall when you can log onto Amazon?“Historically, the SkyMall catalog was the sole in-flight option for potential purchasers of products to review while traveling,” Xhibit’s chief financial officer, Scott Wiley, wrote in a note accompanying the company’s bankruptcy filing. “With the increased use of electronic devices on planes, fewer people browsed the SkyMall in-flight catalog.”It is perhaps a bitter irony that SkyMall was undone by the very same phenomenon — new in-flight technology — that inspired its creation. The catalog was started in 1990 by a 32-year-old accountant named Robert Worsley, now a Republican state senator in Arizona. Mr. Worsley’s initial idea was for passengers to use the so-called Airphones built into the seat backs of many airplanes at the time to order merchandise midflight from SkyMall. Because the products were stored in warehouses near the airports, the passengers’ purchases would be waiting for them at the gate when they arrived. (Take that, Amazon Prime.)As a business model, it was not very practical. Plus, people didn’t really like having yet another thing to lug home from the airport. Mr. Worsley soon shifted to a more traditional approach, selling space in the catalog to — and taking commissions from — manufacturers that shipped the goods themselves. Along the way, he discovered that air travelers preferred unconventional items. Like the iFetch Ball Launcher for Dogs. Or a glass table with a giant sumo wrestler sculpture as its base. Or bacon jam — “For the bacon lover who has everything.” (For the bacon lover who already has the jam, there’s also a bacon pillow.) An especially popular seller, for years now, has been the a garden statue of Bigfoot.“A couple of iterations of the catalog made it clear that people on planes will not buy normal things that they find every day at the mall,” Mr. Worsley said in a phone interview. “They seem to hit on highly unique, I’ve-never-this-seen-before, kind of ‘Wow!’ things. The consumers buy or they don’t buy; I can’t claim any great genius.”With its kitsch appeal, SkyMall also became a kind of cultural reference point, a one-word inside joke that everyone could share. It has been parodied in a book, “SkyMaul,” and website. It was referenced not once but twice on the show “Breaking Bad.” In one instance, a drug dealer demands a list of items from the catalog as his price for cooperating with the government. In another, a D.E.A. agent plants a GPS tracker on a suspect’s car. “Cool, huh?” he says. “Two-eighty-nine, from SkyMall.”Inevitably, cultural critics have probed SkyMall for larger meaning. “I think it was the SnacDaddy chicken-wing tray that may have done it,” Ron Rosenbaum wrote in an essay in Slate several years ago. “Convinced me that there is something to be learned about America from SkyMall culture.”In 2001, Mr. Worsley sold his six-mile-high mall to Gemstar-TV Guide International Inc. for about $47 million. The company has changed hands several times since. It was bought in 2013 by Xhibit, which describes itself as a marketing software and digital advertising company.According to SkyMall’s website, the catalog reaches some 650 million people every year, or nearly 88 percent of all domestic air travelers. Some of the products look a little dubious, like grown-up versions of the ads for “X-Ray Specs” or “Hypno Coins” that once appeared on the back page of comic books. For $74.99, you can buy a doggy DNA test kit that supposedly will identify the breed, or breeds, of your mutt.Part of the odd charm of the catalog comes from the shamelessly exuberant text. “Egyptian royalty is nothing to sneeze at!” reads the copy accompanying the King Tut Tissue Box Cover. These weren’t products you needed, or even really wanted, but that didn’t make it any less fun to browse, all the more so knowing that another passenger might actually be buying one of SkyMall’s tchotchkes.Mr. Worsley learned last week that the bankruptcy filing was imminent. He was saddened, if not surprised, by the news. “I just feel bad that SkyMall hasn’t been able to move along with the times,” he said.Perhaps it’s too late to get that giant fake rock, or that extra-large wine glass that holds up to a full bottle of your favorite merlot. Or perhaps it’s not. Xhibit will be auctioning off its assets in a couple of months. Maybe some young entrepreneur with a plan for a mobile app and who knows what else will enter the bidding.“I’m hopeful that Chapter 11 will shed a lot of the baggage,” Mr. Worsley said. “And that there will be the resurgence of a new and improved and more kind of with-it SkyMall.”Hiroko Tabuchi contributed reporting.Advertisement