By MIKE ISAACJAN. 23, 2015
Snapchat, the photo messaging start-up, is joining with a select group of media companies to offer users original editorial content, according to three people briefed on the matter.The initiative, which will start as a separate section inside Snapchat’s smartphone app, will feature traditional outlets like ESPN, CNN and National Geographic as well as nontraditional media companies like Vice and Yahoo, these people said.In the new section, called Discover, Snapchat users will be able to browse original articles, video or photos that media publishers produce specifically for the app.Snapchat has also courted big consumer brands to advertise on the Discover program, according to these people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. These brands would pay for advertisements to be inserted between the original content produced by the media outlets. Snapchat will split the revenue with the publishers.AdvertisementSnapchat’s founder, Evan Spiegel, is known to be fascinated by the media and is also a fan of Brooklyn-based literary magazines. The company has even explored creating its own content, though those plans are at an early stage.AdvertisementThe initiative represents a new direction for the three-year-old start-up, which rose to popularity as a medium for users to send photos and text messages that disappear soon after they are sent. While the company does not disclose how many people use its service, Snapchat has said in the past that more than 700 million Snapchat messages are sent daily.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A Snapchat spokeswoman declined to comment.But the move may be an even greater change for the handful of publishing companies involved, a group eager to tap into novel forms of media distribution to reach new audiences. Other companies, like BuzzFeed and The Wall Street Journal, have experimented with distributing their articles in messaging apps like Viber, Line and WhatsApp.Snapchat in particular is an attractive avenue for publishers and brands because it is especially popular with younger audiences. More than half of the people who regularly use the app are younger than 25.In October, Snapchat unveiled its first paid advertisement on the platform, a promotion for a movie by Universal Pictures. The new deal with brands and publishers, however, is Snapchat’s first large step toward generating meaningful revenue.News of the new feature was reported earlier by Digiday, an advertising publication.A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Snapchat Plans to Offer Original Media Content.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.