By RACHEL ABRAMSJAN. 23, 2015
Because she has an eczema condition, Michelle Kirn intently reads ingredient labels on baby wipes, soaps and other household items to avoid allergic reactions that she says were caused by a commonly used preservative.Ms. Kirn, 37, says she believes that nerve damage and scarring to her hands stemmed from using wipes that contained the preservative methylisothiazolinone, or MI.Still, when her throat began to swell, she says she did not think to check the label of her new mouthwash, Colgate Total Lasting White.“I thought I was developing allergies to foods,” Ms. Kirn, a consultant in Breinigsville, Pa., said. “I felt like I constantly had a sore throat.”AdvertisementColgate-Palmolive introduced that product in August, and it may be the only popular mouthwash to contain MI, an ingredient added to deter the growth of bacteria. But it can cause rashes and skin irritations in people who are allergic to it. The company chose that preservative, according to Stephanie Clark, a spokeswoman for Colgate, because it worked best for that particular formula.AdvertisementExperts say it’s an unusual additive for a mouthwash, an expansion of the chemical into products occurring at the same time that major consumer products companies — including Kimberly-Clark, Johnson & Johnson and Unilever — have begun removing it from lotions and wipes.“It’s not a preservative that we’ve seen commonly in products that are used anywhere but on the skin,” Dr. Bruce A. Brod, president-elect of the American Contact Dermatitis Society, said. “When people are exposed on a daily basis to MI, we think the rates of sensitization are going up.”Compounding the problem, Dr. Brod said, is a lack of awareness among both patients and doctors. Ms. Kirn said her hands “looked like I had been in a fire” several months after she began using Huggies Simply Clean wipes, but she didn’t discover her allergy to the product until months later.The dermatitis society named MI its “allergen of the year” in 2013, a listing intended to give attention to problematic and often obscure substances. That same year, the Scientific Committee on Consumer Safety, a European advisory group, said that MI should be used only in limited quantities for rinse-off products, like soaps and shampoos, and that “no safe concentrations” existed for leave-on products like lotions.In the United States, MI can be found in Unilever’s Dove shampoo, Beiersdorf’s Nivea moisturizer, some of Johnson & Johnson’s Neutrogena sunscreens and dozens of other personal care items that line drugstore shelves. Between 2007 and 2010, the number of products that used it more than doubled to about 2,400 items, according to an estimate from the dermatitis society.Efforts to reduce the use of MI underscore a broader challenge for consumer product manufacturers, which are under increasing pressure to respond to public concerns about potentially harmful or synthetic chemicals.Often, companies say, there is little if any scientific evidence to prove that a particular ingredient targeted by upset consumers is actually dangerous. Eliminating controversial ingredients can also restrict alternative options.Advertisement“There’s been a loss of some preservatives for reasons that have been questioned by the industry,” Linda Loretz, the chief toxicologist for the Personal Care Products Council, an industry trade group, said. “That has limited the palette of preservatives.”It’s difficult to know just how many people are actually allergic to MI, or what concentrations are safe to use. Some guidelines suggest a very limited quantity, and many companies say their use of MI falls within those guidelines.“Nobody knows what’s the exact safe upper limit,” Dr. Brod said. “But we do know the higher the amount, the higher percentage that’s used, the more people out there that are going to be sensitized.”Dr. Brod and others say that the solution may not be to remove MI entirely, but rather to increase public awareness that some products containing it could cause allergic reactions.“I’d much rather see ‘Treat and deal with contact dermatitis’ than ‘Go back to the dark ages when products didn’t have preservation,’ ” Dr. Brod said. “But everything is a balancing act. You want to have a safe product, but you want to minimize the amount that you’re sensitizing the public to rashes.”Some companies have also turned to MI because of customer criticism of parabens, a more common type of preservative.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There’s no perfect preservative, and I think that’s part of the issue,” Dr. Lindsey Bordone, a dermatologist at Columbia University Medical Center, said.Reformulating products with new ingredients is often complicated, expensive and time-consuming. A limited number of preservatives are approved for use worldwide, and not every ingredient works for every product.“We’re constantly looking for new preservatives,” David A. Mays, the senior director of research and development in the global baby division of Johnson & Johnson, said. “It’s a difficult challenge.”AdvertisementJohnson & Johnson finished removing two potentially harmful chemicals, formaldehyde and 1,4-dioxane, from its baby products by the end of 2013. Figuring out a safer alternative took about two years, Mr. Mays said, and required the company to test more than 100 formulas.“You can’t always replace cake flour with coconut flour just because you want to use coconut flour in your cooking,” he said.Neutrogena makes a variety of different sunscreens for the face. Some have a higher SPF rating; others promote a lightweight feel. But not every type uses MI, which, generally speaking, can help spread oilier lotions on skin.“It’s entirely the formula makeup,” Mr. Mays said of why Johnson & Johnson may use MI in one product but not a similar one.A separate issue, he contended, is that too much reliance on a single preservative can make it less effective over time.“If a bacteria such as E. coli is constantly subjected to the same type of preservative system, it will build up resistance,” Mr. Mays said. “Which means that a preservative system will eventually fail.”Still, Johnson & Johnson has made a commitment not to use MI in new leave-on products, and is “evaluating its use in any new products that rinse off,” Mr. Mays said, adding that it only uses MI when “absolutely necessary.”Unilever, which makes Dove and St. Ives moisturizer, says it began phasing out the use of MI in leave-on products in 2013, and that all new leave-on skin care products sold in the United States are being made without it.AdvertisementWhat about the St. Ives moisturizers containing MI that are still for sale in some drugstores? Those are “likely existing stock” that is still selling through, according to Anita Larsen, a Unilever spokeswoman.Kimberly-Clark, the maker of Ms. Kirn’s Huggies Simply Clean wipes, no longer uses MI in its baby wipes, and will have completely removed it from feminine care wipes by April, according to Bob Brand, a spokesman.“We are very sorry she experienced difficulties,” Mr. Brand said. “The levels of MI previously used in our wipes products were always well within the guidelines recommended by regulatory agencies.”A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: An Unexpected Reaction.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.