By JACK EWINGJAN. 23, 2015
DAVOS, Switzerland — A top official with the European Central Bank on Friday defended its long-awaited economic stimulus program, saying it would be more effective than critics say because it coincides with other favorable developments, like the plunge in oil prices.“The stars are aligned,” Benoît Cœuré, a member of the central bank’s executive board, said during an interview at the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum here. “We now have a situation where the environment is much more positive than a few months, or even a few weeks, ago.”Mr. Cœuré was responding to criticism that the large-scale bond-buying plan announced on Thursday was too late to lift the eurozone out of stagnation. The central bank will buy 60 billion euros, or about $69 billion, a month in government bonds, a form of money-printing intended to push down interest rates and restore the flow of credit to businesses and households.Skeptics have questioned whether the benefits of the so-called quantitative easing measures, which have been relatively successful in the United States, would reach countries like Italy, where most businesses get credit from banks. In the United States, companies usually get credit from the capital markets, by selling corporate bonds, which respond more readily to quantitative easing.AdvertisementUntil recently, Mr. Cœuré said, low interest rates in the eurozone were not being passed on to bank customers, but that is changing.Advertisement“That channel is gradually being unclogged” because banks are healthier, he said, citing recent data from the European Central Bank that shows improvements in conditions for lending. “We can see that easier funding conditions are now being passed to households and companies.”Quantitative easing will also make it easier for lower oil prices to have a positive effect on the eurozone economy, Mr. Cœuré said.The 60 percent drop in oil prices since June, to about $49 a barrel for Brent crude, the international benchmark, has been a double-edged sword for the eurozone. Cheaper oil means that companies and individuals have more money to spend on other things, which is good for growth.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But there is also the risk that cheaper oil will contribute to very low inflation. If people delay purchases because they expected prices to fall further, lower sales would undercut company profits and prompt firms to dismiss workers or cut wages — a vicious circle known as deflation.“The lower oil price had potential to have negative collateral effects,” Mr. Cœuré said. “This has been taken care of yesterday. Now we are left with the positive effect of the low oil price.”There have been tentative signs of improvement in the eurozone economy, though not enough to erase fears of deflation and stagnant growth. Purchasing managers in the 19 countries of the eurozone reported modest improvements in indicators including output, new orders, backlogs and employment, according to a Markit Economics survey released on Friday.Markets continued their rally on Friday, with the yields on eurozone bonds falling, European stocks climbing more than 1.5 percent and the euro falling against the dollar to about $1.12.Mark J. Carney, governor of the Bank of England, said on Friday that the European Central Bank needed to put in place quantitative easing measures to push inflation toward the official target of just below 2 percent.“There is a risk of persistently low inflation in Europe,” Mr. Carney said in a separate interview, “and so additional stimulus was absolutely appropriate.”Peter Eavis contributed reporting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.