By DAVID JOLLYJAN. 23, 2015
FRANKFURT — The eurozone economy appears to have perked up a bit at the start of 2015, an industry survey showed on Friday, just a day after the European Central Bank unveiled a major monetary stimulus program to restore growth and keep deflation at bay.Purchasing managers across the 19-nation currency area reported modest improvements in a broad range of indicators, including output, new orders, backlogs and employment, according to a survey this month by Markit Economics, a data analysis firm.Markit’s composite output index for the eurozone rose to its highest level in five months in January, at 52.2, up from 51.4 in December. A number above 50 signals that the economy is expanding, while a figure below that suggests contraction.Based on the most recent official European Union statistics, the eurozone economy grew only 0.2 percent in the third quarter from the second quarter, for a 0.6 percent annual rate, far behind the 5 percent annual pace in the United States.AdvertisementBut according to Markit, both the manufacturing and services sectors improved in January, though the firm cautioned that “the rates of increase remained weak by historical standards, most notably for new orders in the goods-producing sector.”AdvertisementThe European economy has not yet recovered to its levels before the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008 and the financial crisis that followed. Consumer demand and business investment remain feeble, and governments in the bloc have so far largely resisted suggestions that they increase spending to restore momentum. The unemployment rate has not dipped below 11 percent since early 2012.Manufacturers, at least those that export goods outside the eurozone, may be benefiting from the sharp fall in the value of the euro, which has sunk to 11-year lows against the dollar. The euro, which fell 2 percent on Thursday after the European Central Bank announced its stimulus plan, continued to decline on Friday, falling another 1.4 percent to $1.1202 in afternoon trading.The benchmark Euro Stoxx 50 index of blue-chip eurozone equities was up 1.9 percent after a 1.6 percent gain on Thursday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Thursday, Mario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank, announced a program of so-called quantitative easing, under which the central bank will buy up to 60 billion euros, or $69 billion, a month of bonds. The plan, which has already been used with varying degrees of success by the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan, is meant to flood the financial system with liquidity and restore credit, lifting the economy.Bonds rallied on expectations that the central bank would soon enter the market. Their yields, which move in the opposite direction of the price, continued moving toward record lows. Interest rates on government 10-year bonds declined to just 0.37 percent in Germany, 1.34 percent in Spain and 1.49 percent in Italy.Highlighting a concern addressed by the central bank, Markit noted that lower energy costs were translating into falling input prices for businesses. As a consequence, the prices they charged “fell at the fastest rate since February 2010 as lower costs were passed on to customers.” Falling prices, if they continue, can be a drag on the economy.In Germany, the largest eurozone economy, activity accelerated modestly in January, Markit said. But in France, the second-largest, the picture was worse, with purchasing managers reporting that activity fell for the ninth straight month.Chris Williamson, Markit’s chief economist, said in a statement that while the slight improvement from late 2014 was welcome, “the rate of expansion remains worryingly weak,” indicating growth in gross domestic product of 0.2 percent at a quarterly pace.The eurozone economy remains “both fragile and susceptible to shocks and further setbacks,” Mr. Williamson said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.