Two big insurance companies, PartnerRe and Axis Capital Holdings, agreed to merge on Sunday, creating a new $11 billion player in the specialized field of reinsurance.Such companies, which essentially buy the risks of catastrophe policies sold by traditional insurers, have been looking to consolidate to help compete against new entrants into the industry. Hedge funds have been especially eager to move into reinsurance, putting pressure on the premiums that traditional providers — which also include the likes of Warren E. Buffett‘s Berkshire Hathaway, Munich Re and Swiss Re — have been able to charge.That has prompted reinsurers to merge, looking to gain more scale and cut costs as well as add new product offerings. Within the past three months, both the XL Group and RenaissanceRe struck multibillion-dollar acquisitions in bids to consolidate the industry.Now PartnerRe and Axis, both of which are based in Bermuda, have agreed to merge to create a new reinsurer with a combined market capitalization of nearly $11 billion. Together, the two companies will have more than $7 billion in combined gross premiums written and over $14 billion in capital, and will also have a specialty insurance arm with $2.5 billion in gross premiums.“As a top five global reinsurer with leading positions in a number of specialty lines, we will be strongly positioned to turn the challenges presented by the structural changes in the reinsurance market into opportunities,” Albert A. Benchimol, the chief executive of Axis, said in a statement.Shares in PartnerRe have climbed over 17 percent over the past 12 months, while those in Axis have risen just under 11 percent.Under the terms of the deal —  billed as a so-called merger of equals —  investors in PartnerRe will receive 2.18 shares in the newly combined company for each share that they own, while shareholders in Axis will receive one share of the new firm for each share in the existing reinsurer that they already have.As of Friday’s closing prices, that means PartnerRe shareholders will receive stock consideration worth $107.54, while their counterparts at Axis will receive $49.33 worth of shares.Existing PartnerRe stockholders will own 51.6 percent of the new company, while those in Axis will own 48.4 percent.Mr. Benchimol will become the chief executive of the combined company, while the chairman of PartnerRe, Jean-Paul L. Montupet, will become nonexecutive chairman. Axis’ current chairman, Michael A. Butt, will stay on as chairman emeritus.The new firm will have a 14-member board, with each of the current reinsurers contributing seven of its existing directors.Through the transaction, both companies expect to reap at least $200 million in pretax cost savings in the first 18 months after the deal closes. That is expected in the second half of this year.PartnerRe received advice from Credit Suisse, the law firm Davis Polk & Wardwell and Appleby Global Services Limited. Axis took advice from Goldman Sachs, the law firm Simpson Thacher & Bartlett and Conyers Dill & Pearman.A version of this article appears in print on 01/26/2015, on page B7 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Two Big Reinsurers Merge, In Deal Worth $11 Billion.