AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Mitch Rothschild, chief executive of Vitals, a website that connects patients and doctors, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Were you in leadership roles or doing entrepreneurial things when you were younger?A. Nothing dramatic. I didn’t have much time. My parents sent me to a school that went from 7:30 in the morning until 6 at night. When I wasn’t at school, I played a lot of basketball, and read and wrote a lot.But when I was in college, I tried to start a campground in New York City. I had done a lot of camping and realized there was no campground anywhere in the city, and I sensed a gap in the market. I scoped out a lot of property. One of them we almost bought turned out to be a toxic-waste dump, which was why there was that much open land. We never did that, but we did open a copy center at Queens College. I’ve always been doing stuff like that, always asking, “What can I figure out next?”What were some early influences for you?I’m Jewish, and a lot of my friends’ parents were Holocaust survivors, and I would hear their stories about their incredible resourcefulness to survive. That had a big impact on me, and made me think a lot about resilience and training myself to be able to flex that muscle.Over the years, I’ve done things like going on a business trip with $3 and seeing if I could figure out how to survive on that for a couple of days. I’ve tried not wearing a coat on cold winter days — your body kind of gets acclimated to the temperature. I think you should do something every 90 days to make sure you’re uncomfortable.I also have this theory that people make an implicit decision as to whether they’re going to stay young and curious and interesting and interested, or whether they’re just going to let themselves age. You can tell with most people right away. It’s important to stay young and experience new stuff. I’m taking up juggling now. You’ve got to keep yourself fresh.What about your parents’ influence?I grew up in a Germanic household. My parents taught us the importance of very high standards. When I started the company, I called myself “chief perfectionist.” That didn’t play well with a number of folks, although I liked the concept. I just viscerally reject the concept of mediocrity. I’d say that’s very much built into my DNA. Parents influence you either because you want to be like them or because you want to not be like them.When you graduated from college, did you have a clear idea of what you wanted to do for your career?I wanted to be a film director. I majored in film, and I was the third-best guy in my class.By what measurement?Measured by just me looking at the quality of films that people made, and out of the 20 students, I thought mine was third best. And I figured that if in that little gene pool I was only the third best, the likelihood that I was going to make it in a very tough and unforgiving profession was pretty low. But I knew I always wanted to be involved in the creation of things and the creative process.What about early lessons from managing people?It was a mix of setting high standards and also soliciting a lot of feedback early on from my direct reports, most of whom were older than me and very happy to tell me what I was doing right and wrong.I have always felt that the fact that I’m a boss is just the way it happens to be, and the person who is my subordinate could be my boss in another universe. So I try to not have it be a social or class distinction and have it be just more a reporting and professional distinction.How has your leadership style evolved?I have a certain intensity and a certain set of skills, and I’ve become better at recognizing where somebody can do things better than me. But I’ve also gotten much more blunt. I just don’t have the patience for tiptoeing around an issue. One of the things I’ve learned is that more than 90 percent of personnel problems don’t get better, and that if you’ve got a problem employee, the rehabilitation just so rarely works. So you have to confront it and deal with it.How do you hire? What questions do you ask job candidates?Everybody has their interview “face,” and I try to help them drop it. I usually start out saying, “Give me a tour of your life.” I’ll also ask, “Tell me three things about how you define yourself,” and, “When you’re not at work, what do you do two standard deviations better than anybody else?” I want to know what they’re good at, what they love about it, and get them talking about their passion.I also try to get a sense of whether they’re comfortable with change. Because the only thing a small company can do better than a big company is move quicker. I also ask in interviews what I’m not going to like about the person in 90 days and what they think they’re not going to like about me. I want to know what makes people crazy at work.I also say to them, “If this interview were reversed and I was coming to your house and you were interviewing me because you had 16 different job offers to choose from, what would you be looking for from me?” That helps me understand their aspirations for the job.“What percentage of your life do you control?” is always a winner. It helps me understand how they feel about the world out there. Can you force change to happen, or will change happen to you? As a small company, we have to change the environment, so I want people to say a high number.This interview has been edited and condensed.Advertisement