By VINDU GOELJAN. 24, 2015
When you buy a bottle of Napa Valley cabernet sauvignon, you trust that the bottle is filled with wine actually made from cabernet sauvignon grapes that were grown in the heart of California’s wine country.The strange tale of Jeffry James Hill might make you question that faith.Mr. Hill, 36, was a longtime Napa vineyard manager who worked his way up from agricultural pest control to stake a claim as a maker of $100 wines.In 2012, he set himself up beside some of the most prestigious names in the business when he leased a winery along Napa’s Silverado Trail, a destination for wine aficionados from around the world.A beefy man with the bearing of someone accustomed to working the land, he could hold a busload of tourists spellbound with homespun stories of a vintner’s life. Mr. Hill also had a knack for marketing, getting Hill Wine Company bottles on the United Airlines planes shuttling American athletes to the Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia.AdvertisementAt the same time, he continued to work in the less glamorous side of the industry, buying and selling grapes and bulk wine and managing fields for big wineries and small growers. His commercial clients included famous names like Don Sebastiani & Sons, Del Dotto Vineyards and Trinitas Cellars.AdvertisementIt was all built on quicksand. The fancy winery was more than Mr. Hill could afford, and the expenses of operating the business quickly outpaced his income. He was soon deeply in debt and resorting to deceptions like substituting cheaper merlot and malbec grapes for the much more expensive Napa cabernet sauvignon advertised on the wine labels, according to court documents. Prosecutors say he even engaged in outright theft.Mr. Hill worked in an industry built on romance, expensive land, hard labor and a whole lot of faith, and the accusations against him have shaken the wine-growing region.“The system is only as good as how trustworthy people are,” said Ned Hill, who is not related to Jeff Hill, and who farms for several major wineries in Sonoma County through his company La Prenda Vineyards Management.The federal government forced Mr. Hill to cede control of his business on April 23, and Napa County prosecutors have charged him with two felonies, saying that on two occasions in October 2013 he stole grapes that his crew was harvesting for another winemaker and diverted them to his own winery.This month, he pleaded not guilty to the criminal charges, and a trial is set to begin April 13. If convicted, he faces up to four years and eight months in prison.Hill Wine has filed for bankruptcy and owes more than $8 million to creditors.Mr. Hill and his lawyer declined to discuss any of the claims. But in a brief exchange in the courtroom hallway just before his plea, Mr. Hill said, “The truth will out.”The Napa MystiqueNapa cabernet sauvignon grapes are among the most valuable in the United States. A well-made cabernet from Lake County, which abuts Napa to the north, typically sells for $25 to $30 a bottle, while a bottle of Napa cab of equivalent quality often fetches $100 or more.AdvertisementThat price is based more on consumers’ belief in the superiority of the region’s grapes than in the inherent quality of the liquid in the bottle.Emmanuel Kemiji, who owns Miura Vineyards in Novato, is a master sommelier, a level of wine expertise so difficult to achieve that only 220 people in the world hold the title. In an interview, he said that even top tasters like himself would find it nearly impossible to discern the true geographic origin of a well-made cabernet.“You line up cabernets from Napa and good-quality cabernet from Sonoma and Lake County, and it’s really tough to say where they are from,” Mr. Kemiji said. “A lot of guys would be embarrassed.” (He later tasted Hill’s top-end cabernet and found it green and underripe, but not unusual for the 2011 Napa vintage.)While outright wine fraud is rare, many bottles on wine-store shelves aren’t what they seem because of loopholes in American wine labeling laws, Mr. Kemiji said.Legally, a bottle that says Napa Valley cabernet sauvignon must contain 75 percent wine from Napa cabernet grapes. A further 10 percent must come from Napa, but can be a cheaper grape varietal like syrah or zinfandel. And the remaining 15 percent can be red wine from anywhere else in the state, like Fresno, where cabernet commands one-tenth the price it does in Napa.“There is an incentive to fudge because the price of Napa cabernet is so high,” Mr. Kemiji said.Court filings suggest that Mr. Hill’s actions went considerably beyond fudging.While federal regulators have not yet brought any civil or criminal charges against Mr. Hill, they did present him with a thick dossier of complaints. During a five-hour meeting in April, two agents from the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, the federal agency that oversees the industry, placed a “15-inch stack of Manila folders on the table” and proceeded to lay out 19 allegations of wrongdoing, according to a detailed memo written by the Hill winery’s lawyer at the time, Vincent M. Spohn, that was later filed in bankruptcy court.Among other claims, the agency said Mr. Hill had falsified documents to misrepresent the wine or grapes he was selling, failed to pay liquor taxes, falsely claimed that his wines were organic on labels and in advertising, and lied under oath when he concealed a previous felony conviction for insurance fraud on his application for a wine permit.AdvertisementTom Hogue, a spokesman for the federal alcohol and tobacco tax agency, declined to comment on the case.In October, the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy court to wind down Hill Wine also accused Mr. Hill of “improper and illegal” activities. The trustee, Lois I. Brady, wrote in a complaint that Mr. Hill operated an illegal tasting room and altered official tags recording the weight and type of grapes harvested and sought to “pass off inferior Lake and San Joaquin County wines as premium Napa Valley appellation wine.”She also disclosed that one of Mr. Hill’s biggest victims, the Sebastiani winery, was seeking $3 million from the bankruptcy estate because it had been forced to recall mislabeled wine bought from Mr. Hill. (The winery declined to comment.)Few of those affected have been willing to talk about the collapse of Mr. Hill’s business. Trinitas Cellars received Lake County cabernet misrepresented as Napa cabernet, according to court documents, but, in an email, the winery’s chief executive, Garrett Busch, said only, “Honestly I’ve just gotten through mentally and emotionally putting this behind me and I really don’t feel like discussing it at all.”A Spot for a CelebrationI met Mr. Hill two months before the federal government laid out the accusations that led to the collapse of his winery. I was standing in the lunchtime line at Gott’s Roadside, an iconic burger stand in St. Helena, on the main highway through Napa Valley. Mr. Hill, his wife, Rebecca, and their three young children were right behind me. We struck up a conversation, and I learned that they owned a small winery on the Silverado Trail.With his shaggy brown beard and jovial manner, Mr. Hill didn’t fit the stereotype of a natty winemaker in the most famous wine region in America. He didn’t even have a business card. I was planning to propose to my longtime girlfriend that evening, and I was looking for a friendly, low-key place to celebrate. From his description, Hill Wine seemed perfect.We visited the winery the next afternoon, and the wine club manager brought out bottle after bottle. He told us the story behind each one as he poured tastes and we lounged on a bench on the property’s beautiful grounds overlooking the Napa River. Jeff and Rebecca both stopped by to congratulate us.Swept up in the enchantment, we joined Hill’s wine club and ended up spending more than $400, including about $80 for a bottle of the winery’s just-released flagship, the 2011 Jeff Hill Napa cabernet sauvignon, to help us remember the afternoon.AdvertisementOur enthusiasm was exactly what Napa wineries strive to cultivate. Much of Napa’s price premium stems from savvy marketing, not any objective superiority of the wine, according to industry experts. Although the valley’s vintners pioneered high-end American winemaking decades ago, the rest of the industry has largely caught up. Today, regions like the neighboring Sonoma and Lake counties, the Santa Lucia Highlands in central California, Oregon’s Willamette Valley and Washington’s Walla Walla Valley produce world-class wines that oenophiles say are comparable to many Napa ones.“Most Napa wines to me are way overpriced,” said Tony Westfall, co-founder and chief executive of Invino, an online wine seller based in Sonoma. “A lot of people would say Lake County is just as good as or better terroir than Napa.”To persuade someone to spend $30, $50 or $100 for a bottle of wine, wineries need to not just produce quality juice, but also build an emotional connection with the customer.By all accounts, Jeff Hill was deft at selling the experience. He would frequently meet with visitors, talking to them as if he had known them for years. Visiting military veterans would hear stories about his father, a former Marine, and get free tastings and a discount on wine purchases.His Black Dog line of entry-level wines was meant to appeal to animal lovers. The label featured a sketch of his Labrador retriever, Perro Negro 2, and a pledge to donate 2 percent of the proceeds to the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. (Liquor regulators later said they could find no record of any donations and cited the label as one of Mr. Hill’s deceptions during the meeting in which they demanded he give up his permits.)At the winery itself, he aspired to only the best, planning a bocce court and wood-fired pizza oven. He even wanted to hire Gordon Huether, a local artist known for grand public installations like Napa’s 9/11 memorial, to build a sculpture garden.It all made a great impression.“Jeff is extremely intelligent and hilarious,” wrote one fan, Nicholas Hunt of San Francisco, in a review on Yelp after a visit a year ago. “We asked him silly questions, talked about his dogs and family and ate food that we had brought. It was like a wine-tasting in someone’s amazing house.”Joining the Wine EliteStarting a small winery in Napa is a challenge under the best of circumstances. Land prices are exorbitant, harvests are unpredictable, and building a customer base is a slow, glass-by-glass slog. Capital can be tied up for years as wine ages.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But after years as a hired hand, managing vineyard pests and harvesting grapes, Mr. Hill decided in 2012 to make a go at joining the winemaking gentry.AdvertisementMr. Hill and his wife had filed for personal bankruptcy in 2009 and had little hope of financing his winemaking dreams through banks or other conventional channels. Instead, he turned to his wife’s uncle and aunt, Terry and Nancy Otton, who lent him about $2.2 million. They also helped him borrow $1 million more for the business from Umpqua Bank.From the start, there was trouble. He had enormous expenses. Rent on the property was $33,000 a month, and he had to promise to make $1 million in improvements. (The bankruptcy court trustee would later say Mr. Hill had no “reasonable possibility” of complying with the lease’s “onerous” terms.)He cut corners on vineyard work that he was contracted to perform, according to a civil suit filed by Del Dotto, and failed to invest in basic farming equipment, said Jesus Hernandez, who oversaw day-to-day management of the vineyards that Mr. Hill was farming. Sometimes money was so tight that his vineyard crew would have to buy gas for the vehicles out of their own pockets, Mr. Hernandez said.Over time, grape growers and other creditors started showing up at the winery demanding to be paid, and in some cases, filed court claims. As the unpaid bills mounted, United Parcel Service cut off Hill Wine’s account, leaving it unable to ship wines to its club members, which further crimped its cash flow.According to the memo written by the winery’s lawyer, federal regulators accused Mr. Hill of falsifying the official documents that are supposed to trace the origins of all wine from vineyard to bottle. When delivering grapes to other wineries, the regulators said, he sometimes provided sealed envelopes for truck drivers to give to the customers, presumably so that the drivers wouldn’t see discrepancies between the places they picked up the grapes and the locations the documents said they came from.It all began to unravel in October 2013, according to Mr. Hernandez, an industry veteran who previously managed fields for nearby Schramsberg Vineyards.Mr. Hill’s crew was harvesting grapes from Howell Mountain vineyards owned by Del Dotto when Mr. Hernandez said he received a bewildering text message from one of his truck drivers saying that Mr. Hill had told him to drop several tons of bins of grapes at Hill Wine on the way to Del Dotto.Mr. Hernandez checked with a Del Dotto contact, who told him that no grapes had been sold to Mr. Hill, so there should have been no reason for the delivery.AdvertisementA few days later in the wee hours of Oct. 21, when Mr. Hill’s crew was harvesting grapes from another Del Dotto vineyard in Oakville, Mr. Hill again pulled aside eight bins and sent one of his workers to deliver them to Hill Wine, Mr. Hernandez said.A Del Dotto representative was secretly watching and called the Napa County sheriff, according to Mr. Hernandez and a lawyer for Del Dotto. A deputy interviewed Mr. Hernandez and other witnesses about the episode, and filed the criminal complaint that led to the theft charges now pending against Mr. Hill. In a civil suit filed shortly thereafter, Del Dotto formally accused Hill Wine of stealing the first batch of grapes and sought repayment of nearly $42,000 it had paid for vineyard management services. Tony Ventura, Del Dotto’s attorney, said in an interview that the grapes it claimed were stolen from Howell Mountain were intended for a wine that his client planned to sell for $195 a bottle. “If you’re going to steal, steal the good stuff,” Mr. Ventura said.Over all, the family-owned winery lost more than $300,000 because of the theft, he said, and was working with prosecutors.Mr. Hernandez, who is now working as a vineyard manager at another winery, says he was fired by Mr. Hill after the Del Dotto episode and decided to call the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, commonly called the T.T.B., and tell agents what he knew.Shortly after Mr. Hernandez’s call, T.T.B. investigators arrived at the offices of Hill Wine. They spent weeks combing through computer records and paperwork at the winery, according to two other former employees, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to avoid being drawn into the litigation.When the two T.T.B. agents met with Mr. Hill and the winery’s lawyer, Mr. Spohn, on April 23, they enumerated 19 instances in which they said Mr. Hill had broken the law. At the end of the meeting, they demanded he surrender his operating permits, which he did.A few days later, Hill Wine filed for bankruptcy protection and ultimately ended up in liquidation.The bankruptcy has also ensnared Terry and Nancy Otton, Rebecca Hill’s uncle and aunt.Mr. Otton, a retired investment manager with the Robertson Stephens brokerage firm, who lent the Hills the money to get the business started, is the biggest unpaid creditor in the bankruptcy. Ms. Otton, a trained bookkeeper and owner of her own small winery, briefly handled the winery’s finances.AdvertisementNot only did Mr. Otton lose most of the money he lent, but the bankruptcy trustee managing what is left of the winery’s assets is now suing him and his wife for millions of dollars. The trustee claimed they were co-conspirators and accelerated the decline of the business by collecting $80,000 in consulting fees and charging 20 percent interest on their loans, a rate so high that it is illegal under California’s usury laws.Mr. Otton said in an interview that he had known nothing about Mr. Hill’s supposed deceptions and would not have lent him money had he known of the previous conviction for insurance fraud. (In 2008, Mr. Hill had pleaded no contest to two felony fraud counts for providing false testimony to support another person’s claim against an insurer. Those convictions were reduced to misdemeanors in 2010.)“Jeff was an aggressive young entrepreneur who thought he could do anything,” he said. “When you talked to him about the wine business, you got the feeling that he knew what he was talking about.”Nancy Otton, who had been close to her niece, has had no contact with her since the scandal erupted, Mr. Otton said. Nor has Mr. Hill ever called to apologize or explain any of his actions.“We as a family tried to help him out,” Mr. Otton asserted. “Now I read these claims and lawsuits, and it makes me sick to my stomach.”Did Pliny Have a Point?Fraud is hardly new in the wine world. Two millenniums ago in ancient Rome, Pliny the Elder complained that wine was frequently adulterated.“In the wine business, there’s always been some level of this,” said Rob McMillan, executive vice president and founder of Silicon Valley Bank’s wine division.In September, Italian police seized the equivalent of 220,000 bottles of cheap wine that was accompanied by false documentation that claimed it was premium wine from Montalcino, home of the renowned Brunello wines. Police estimated the cache would have had a retail value of about 5 million euros, or $6.5 million at the time of the bust. A month earlier, a New York judge sentenced Rudy Kurniawan, a Southern California wine collector and seller, to 10 years in prison and ordered him to pay $28.4 million in restitution and forfeit $20 million in property. According to the court, he had for years carried out an elaborate fraud in which he blended lesser wines to mimic rare vintages, put them in old bottles, pasted false labels on them, and sold them to wealthy buyers.AdvertisementEven Fred Franzia, chief executive of Bronco Wine, the company that makes what is known as Two-Buck Chuck, was once caught mislabeling grapes. After he pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit fraud in 1994, he and his company paid $3 million in fines.The Jeff Hill case has reminded the California wine industry of the risks of deception, said Ned Hill, the Sonoma vineyard manager. “Everybody is a lot more careful now about asking questions,” he said. “It’s made people dot their Is and cross their Ts.”Given the scale of Mr. Hill’s purported fraud, those hurt by his actions are wondering why federal authorities have not brought any charges against him or the winery. Bryan Tong, the Napa County prosecutor handling the Del Dotto theft charges, said he had had no contact with federal authorities. Still, liquor regulators are keeping a close eye on the wines touched by Mr. Hill.When Mr. Westfall of Invino, the online wine retailer, bought thousands of bottles of Hill Wine’s pinot noirs and cabernet sauvignons for $5 each at a bankruptcy auction in September, one of the T.T.B. agents on the case quickly contacted him, he said.She told him that three of the cabernet bottlings, claiming to contain grapes from the Stags Leap, Coombsville and Atlas Peak areas of Napa County, were mislabeled and could not legally be sold in the United States without changes. Mr. Westfall said he sold about 1,800 of the questionable bottles overseas, but is still searching for buyers for 7,200 bottles.The T.T.B. raised no objections about the rest of the wines that he had won, including the high-end 2011 Jeff Hill cabernet that my wife and I enjoyed so much that day we visited the winery.Invino now sells that wine for $30, down from its original list price of $96. In his write-up of the cabernet online, Mr. Westfall calls it a “home run” and says, “Our panel had the pleasure of tasting through these wines and we can tell you with absolute certainty that this is by FAR the best deal we have ever been able to secure.”Explaining his exuberance, he recently poured me a taste. It was just as lush and rich as I remembered — and at $30, it was enough of a deal that I bought four more bottles.“What is something worth?” Mr. Westfall said. “Whatever people will pay for it.”A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: In Vino Veritas. In Napa, Deceit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.