
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
JAN. 24, 2015
When some bondholders bought debt in casinos operated by Caesars Entertainment, they didn’t think they were gambling. Instead, they were relying on the guarantees of the parent company that it would stand behind the debt payments even if something went wrong.But after Caesars got into trouble and the company eliminated the guarantee, the investors turned to an obscure, rarely invoked Depression-era law devised to protect bondholders from abusive tactics. And when federal courts agreed with bondholders that the law might have been violated at not just Caesars but also at another troubled company, Education Management Corporation, they turned the sleepy Trust Indenture Act of 1939 into something that is becoming, well, sexy.Companies in financial distress usually ask their debt holders to restructure the terms of the obligations they hold. Reducing the interest rate on the debt or retiring it for less than 100 cents on the dollar, can help a hobbled company return to health.Naturally, debt holders often object to such changes. But many companies win these battles because of a powerful threat: a bankruptcy filing that bondholders would rather avoid.AdvertisementThat’s where the recent restructurings of the two companies enter the picture.Before these restructurings, certain debt issued by units of both Caesars and Education Management was guaranteed by their parent companies. Such guarantees provide an important protection for bondholders concerned about receiving the interest payments and principal they are owed.AdvertisementBut in the face of the restructurings, both companies changed the documents governing the debt, known as indentures, and rescinded those guarantees. The companies, however, didn’t seek the approval of all debt holders before doing so. This upset Marblegate Asset Management, which owns debt in Education Management L.L.C., and MeehanCombs L.P., an investment firm that holds debt in Caesars Entertainment Operating Company.Both investors sued, contending that removing the guarantees left them unable to receive payments they’re owed, a violation of the trust indenture law. Recent rulings from two Federal District Court judges in Manhattan supported the investors’ views.The act was intended to prevent back-room deals that stripped bondholders of their rights, a common practice before the law was written. Trying to ensure that changes to debt issues’ terms were made in the light of day, the law states that debt holders’ rights to receive interest and principal payments “shall not be impaired or affected without the consent of such holder.”But over the decades, few cases have explicitly invoked this aspect of the law. That two recent cases do is noteworthy, Mark Roe, a professor at Harvard Law School, said, and may change the way debt restructurings are handled.“This statutory provision affects all bond issues and has long been dormant in litigation,” Mr. Roe said in an interview last week. “But now we’ve had two recent rulings in a row taking seriously the statute’s prohibition on voting outside of bankruptcy. People doing these restructurings will have to pay attention to it.”In the Education Management case, Judge Katherine Polk Failla, a Federal District Court judge in Manhattan, ruled on Dec. 30 that the questions boiled down to a dispute over the scope of the protections afforded by the Trust Indenture Act.“Is it a broad protection against nonconsensual debt restructurings, or a narrow protection against majority amendment of certain ‘core terms’?” she asked. Her answer: The former interpretation is more persuasive, and “plaintiffs have demonstrated a likelihood of success on the merits.”AdvertisementA spokesman for Education Management declined to comment on the ruling. But Andrew Milgram, Marblegate’s chief investment officer, said the firm had recognized “a unique interaction in law and regulation, which brought the protections of the Trust Indenture Act to bear in the case.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.About two weeks later, Judge Shira A. Scheindlin ruled similarly in the Caesars case. She characterized Caesars’ removal of the parent company guarantee on some of its debt as “an impermissible out-of-court debt restructuring achieved through collective action.” Her ruling means the lawsuit, filed against Caesars last summer, can go forward.Judge Scheindlin’s ruling came in the middle of efforts by Caesars to restructure its $18 billion in debt. The company filed for bankruptcy on Jan. 15; its reorganization plan would cut its debt to around $8 billion and reduce annual interest costs by $1 billion. The amount of debt at issue in the case being heard by Judge Scheindlin is a small fraction of the company’s overall obligations.Stephen Cohen, a spokesman for Caesars, said in a statement: “We respectfully disagree with the court’s ruling, which was based simply on the plaintiffs’ allegations and that we believe is inconsistent with the provisions of the Trust Indenture Act. Given the size of the claims at issue and our strong defenses, we do not expect the ruling to impact the planned reorganization.”In a broader sense, Lewis Lowenfels, an expert in securities law, said, the courts seem to be advancing the tenet that is central to the federal securities laws: Sunlight is the best disinfectant.“One thing we can all agree on is that it’s not normally in the public interest to have somebody behind a curtain pulling the strings on these transactions,” he said. “Proper disclosure is the best solution.”Eli Combs, president of MeehanCombs, said he welcomed the judge’s ruling. “We hope that this will prevent large sophisticated investment firms and the companies backed by them from taking actions to disadvantage average investors,” he said.It may not be a coincidence that private equity firms, accustomed to dictating the terms of their deals, control both of the companies that are accused of making impermissible changes to their debt. Education Management is controlled by Goldman Sachs Partners, Leeds Capital Partners and Providence Capital while Caesars’ majority shareholders are Apollo Global Management and TPG Capital.With the Trust Indenture Act gaining traction, Mr. Roe of Harvard Law School said that amending it to allow for simple votes among bondholders outside of bankruptcy could reduce the likelihood of deals that hurt some investors.“This is a New Deal rule barring votes outside of bankruptcy in the belief that only a judicially supervised bankruptcy can be fair,” he said. “But today’s marketplace operates by deal-making, and institutional bondholders know what they’re doing. The Trust Indenture Act should be updated to the 21st century to permit bond contracts that allow for unconflicted, uncoerced votes of bondholders. If a vote and a recap could save the company from bankruptcy, the vote is beneficial.”A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Obscure Law Is Getting Its Sexy On.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »