By GRAHAM BOWLEY and SYDNEY EMBEROCT. 9, 2015
A Massachusetts federal judge refused Friday to dismiss a lawsuit by three women who say Bill Cosby sexually assaulted them and then later defamed them by allowing his representatives to brand their accounts as fiction.Also on Friday, Mr. Cosby was to answer questions under oath in a separate California civil case brought by a woman, Judy Huth, who says the entertainer forced her to perform a sex act on him when she was 15.In the Massachusetts defamation case, Tamara Green, Therese Serignese and Linda Traitz accuse Mr. Cosby of assaulting them in the 1970s. The women were unable to bring legal charges directly related to the assault accusations because of the statute of limitations.Instead, they filed a defamation complaint, arguing that Mr. Cosby had depicted them as liars when his representatives denied their accusations.AdvertisementMr. Cosby’s lawyers argued that, among other things, his representatives were only speaking in his defense. But the judge in United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts, Mark G. Mastroianni, wrote that Mr. Cosby’s motions to dismiss the case “are denied in their entirety.”Joseph Cammarata, a lawyer for the three women, said the ruling meant he could now pursue the case aggressively and would question Mr. Cosby under oath.Advertisement“This ruling allows my clients the opportunity to continue with the case and restore their good names and reputations,” he said. “He will be deposed at the earliest opportunity.”Andrew Wyatt, a spokesman for Mr. Cosby, declined to comment.Mr. Cosby, who has never been charged with a crime and has denied any wrongdoing, has for months let his lawyers bat back the dozens of accusations of sexual assault leveled against him. His scheduled appearance Friday before lawyers for Ms. Huth represented a return by the entertainer himself to the legal proceedings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Cosby lost a bid this week to stop the case involving Ms. Huth from going forward, though the judge in the case agreed Wednesday that the transcripts of the deposition should be sealed for at least 60 days. Both sides have also been ordered not to talk about Mr. Cosby’s statements until a hearing scheduled for Dec. 22. Mr. Cosby’s appearance at the deposition was to be videotaped, as well as recorded by a court reporter.Accusations against Mr. Cosby have been surfacing since July, when excerpts from a deposition he gave in a separate 2005 case showed him acknowledging, unapologetically, how he had pursued women for sex and obtained powerful sedatives to give them as a party drug.This week, Chloe Goins, a model who says Mr. Cosby drugged and sexually assaulted her at the Playboy Mansion in 2008, filed a lawsuit in federal court in California. Los Angeles police have investigated Ms. Goins’s complaint and their findings are now being reviewed by prosecutors.A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Defamation Suit Against Cosby Will Go Forward in Massachusetts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.