AdvertisementSupported byThe WorkologistBy Rob WalkerAs a job seeker at the vice president or director level, I have noticed that almost every application process includes at least some online component. But in my most recent search, I am starting to wonder about privacy protection. In addition to asking for your address, gender, race, etc., the questions have been more specific. For example, I’ve been asked for my last two residential addresses from the past 10 years. Some require reference contact information before any conversation or interview.I have also seen forms asking whether the applicant has been found to have depression, anxiety or behavioral or medical “disabilities.” Generally, you cannot submit the application without providing all the requested data. I am uncomfortable supplying so much information. What can I do? A.M., CHICAGOThe good news, according to John Sullivan, a professor of management at the College of Business at San Francisco State University, is that most companies are moving away from systems that require applicants to fill out lengthy online forms. The more mixed news, perhaps, is that this is partly because more companies simply rely on what candidates put online themselves. “They’re asking for less,” he says, “but there’s more out there.” Mr. Sullivan, who also advises Fortune 500 companies on human resources and recruiting, noted that on big employment-search boards such as Indeed.com, job hunters generally simply submit a résumé or a LinkedIn profile — either of which will most likely include references or knowledgeable connections that an employer might consult. Moreover, it’s not unusual for companies to scope out your social media or web presence in general.Job seekers who encounter what appear to be overly pushy online forms might be better off looking elsewhere, Mr. Sullivan said. “If a company is that worried about you now,” he says, “they’re going to be that worried about you when you work there.” At a minimum, if you’re concerned about what a potential employer may do with information you provide, check its privacy policy. If you’re not satisfied, move on.Some of the questions you seem to have encountered certainly sound like red flags. The Americans With Disabilities Act effectively prohibits questions about medical conditions before a job offer is made. There are exceptions for small businesses, and details vary by state, but as an example, the website of the New York Labor Department bluntly states: “An employer cannot ask a potential or current employee if they have a disability. That is illegal.” Enemy on the JobOne of my co-workers (I’ll call him Frank) despises me. He averts his gaze when I’m in view, rolls his eyes and shudders when I speak. If he can, he leaves the room when I enter. I’ve worked here almost two years, and he has spoken to me only once, when we were working on a common project. There are only seven people in our group, and I get along well with everyone else. But as you might imagine, this is all quite noticeable. Our manager has had several sessions with Frank to discuss his behavior, but he says there is nothing he can do — he just doesn’t like me. So the manager is stumped, and none of my other co-workers are willing to venture into the mess. I haven’t seen Frank behave this way with anyone else, and he seems to be a very nice guy. I’ve worked in many teams over the years, and there is usually conflict to some degree, but I’ve never seen anything like this. I’d like to build some kind of working relationship with Frank. But how? SEATTLEThe details here seem extreme, but the workplace nemesis is a sadly common figure. And because being the focus of another’s dislike can seem inexplicable, irrational or unfair, Frank and his ilk can be emotionally draining. But this is exactly why getting a little distance from the situation is crucial. Zero in on specific actions by Frank that have concrete repercussions for your ability to do your job. A manager ought to be able to do something about those, and should. But no manager can make the Franks of the world actually like you. So while you’re at it, test your own perspective: In the context of other happy relationships with colleagues and satisfaction with the work itself, does your job depend upon Frank’s attitude changing? Or can you simply treat him with polite professionalism, and treat his demeanor as his problem, not yours? If the situation remains intolerable, maintain that detached perspective and go back to your manager and co-workers. Don’t ask them to solve the problem for you; ask them what they think Frank’s issue with you might be. Encourage them to be honest, and listen carefully to whatever clues they may drop if they give evasive responses. Because it sounds as if there’s some missing information here. The best case is you learn something that you can act on — maybe a misunderstanding that can be cleared up. But the answer may be something beyond your control, or something you didn’t want to hear. If in the end it’s really true that Frank just can’t stand you for no reason whatsoever, it’s hard to see how that will change. So it may be better to focus on how to treat the symptoms of his dislike, rather than searching for a way to miraculously cure it. Send your workplace conundrums to workologist@nytimes.com, including your name and contact information (even if you want it withheld for publication). The Workologist is a guy with well-intentioned opinions, not a professional career adviser. Letters may be edited. Advertisement