Federal prosecutors are seeking to reverse, or at least narrow, a crucial insider trading ruling that overturned the convictions of two hedge fund managers last month, DealBook’s Matthew Goldstein and Ben Protess report. Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, is asking the same three-judge panel that issued the ruling to revisit its decision, according to a filing on Friday. As an alternative, Mr. Bharara’s filing proposes the legal equivalent of a do-over in a process known as en banc.Both requests “could be long shots,” Mr. Goldstein and Mr. Protess write, but the requests may “lay the groundwork for an appeal to the United States Supreme Court.” The outcome is critical for Mr. Bharara, whose office has won more than 80 convictions from his campaign against insider trading on Wall Street. Mr. Bharara’s decision to appeal will also help shape the boundaries of insider trading law for decades to come. The three-judge panel had ruled that the judge who presided over the 2012 trial of Todd Newman and Anthony Chiasson set too low a bar for conviction when instructing jurors.The panel’s ruling has also threatened a number of Mr. Bharara’s other insider trading convictions, including that of Michael Steinberg, a onetime rainmaker at the hedge fund SAC Capital Advisors.MARKETS SHAKE OFF GREEK ELECTION  |  Financial markets on Monday shrugged off the result of Greek parliamentary elections, which handed a decisive victory to the left-wing Syriza party on Sunday, David Jolly and Neil Gough write in The New York Times. Syriza and its outspoken leader, Alexis Tsipras, who had campaigned against the austerity measures imposed on Greece by its international creditors, formed a coalition government on Monday with a right-wing fringe party, Independent Greeks.The Euro Stoxx 50 index was up slightly in late morning trading on Monday, while the FTSE 100 index in London was down 0.4 percent. The euro rose 0.3 percent to $1.1241, after briefly dipping to as low as $1.1098, its lowest levels since 2003. The main stock index in Athens, which initially fell more than 3.5 percent on Monday, recovered somewhat and was down about 1 percent in late morning trading. Major indexes in Tokyo fell about 0.3 percent, and Hong Kong shares rose by a similar amount. Spanish and Italian bond yields fell to near-record lows, below 1.5 percent. Trading in Standard & Poor’s 500 index futures indicated that stocks would be little changed at the opening bell in New York.OBSCURE LAW HAS ITS DAY  |  The recent restructuring of two companies ‒ Caesars Entertainment and Education Management Corporation ‒ has turned an obscure law from the 1930s into something that is becoming sexy, Gretchen Morgenson writes in the Fair Game column. The law, the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, was intended to prevent back-room deals that stripped bondholders of their rights and states that debt holders’ rights to receive interest and principal payments “shall not be impaired or affected without the consent of such holder.” In the face of the restructurings, Caesars and Education Management removed guarantees of the parent company on debt payments.That these two recent cases invoke this aspect of the law may change the way debt restructurings are handled, a professor at Harvard Law School said. “One thing we can all agree on is that it’s not normally in the public interest to have somebody behind a curtain pulling the strings on these transactions,” an expert in securities law said.ON THE AGENDA  |  The Markit flash services purchasing managers’ index comes out at 9:45 a.m. Microsoft announces quarterly earnings after the market closes. Gary D. Cohn, the president and chief operating officer of Goldman Sachs, is on CNBC at 4:10 p.m.LET IT SNOW  |  A major snowstorm is heading toward New York City, and the snowpocalypse-induced hysteria is at its peak. On Sunday, Mayor Bill de Blasio urged people to stay indoors and told New Yorkers to “prepare for something worse than we have seen before.”The snowfall will probably be heaviest Monday night into Tuesday morning, Mr. de Blasio said, adding that up to three feet of snow could fall by the time the storm is over. Schools will be open on Monday but will probably close on Tuesday, Mr. de Blasio said.Hot chocolate, anyone?2 REINSURERS TO MERGE  |  The big insurance companies PartnerRe and Axis Capital Holdings, both based in Bermuda, agreed on Sunday to merge, creating a new reinsurer with a combined market capitalization of nearly $11 billion, DealBook’s Michael J. de la Merced writes. The merger comes as such companies have been looking to consolidate to help compete against new entrants in the industry. Together, PartnerRe and Axis will have more than $7 billion in combined gross premiums written and over $14 billion in capital, and will also have a specialty insurance arm with $2.5 billion in gross premiums.Under the terms of the deal ‒ billed as a so-called merger of equals ‒ investors in PartnerRe will receive 2.18 shares in the newly combined company for each share that they own, while shareholders in Axis will receive one share of the new firm for each share in the existing reinsurer that they already have. Current PartnerRe stockholders will own 51.6 percent of the new company, while those in Axis will own 48.4 percent.  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailAer Lingus Considering Revised Takeover Bid From British Airways Parent  |  The Irish carrier had previously rejected two recent takeover offers from the International Consolidated Airlines Group, which is now offering to pay 2.55 euros a share for the airline, or about $2.86, up from its offer of €2.40 a share in December. DealBook »Expedia Buys Travelocity for $280 Million in Cash  |  The acquisition will furnish Expedia ‒ which already owns Hotels.com, Hotwire and CarRentals.com ‒ with another well-known name in the travel industry. DealBook »Hong Kong Tycoon’s Deal Spree Bodes Well for Banks  |  The year promises to be a good one for investment bankers close to Li Ka-shing, Asia’s richest man, who has started the year on a deal-making tear, Reuters reports.  REUTERS Regulatory Concern Hangs Over Reynolds-Lorillard Deal  |  As Reynolds American and Lorillard head into a shareholder vote on Wednesday about their planned merger, the stock price of Lorillard indicates that investors are worried that the deal will not pass regulatory muster, The Wall Street Journal writes.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Gorman at Morgan Stanley to Receive $4.4 Million Stock Bonus  |  The investment bank will also most likely pay James P. Gorman, its chief executive, a cash bonus and another stock bonus tied to the bank’s future performance, in addition to a $1.5 million salary. DealBook »Hint for Investors in Rise of Cash Bonuses for Wall Street Chiefs  |  With stock gains at the big banks slowing, cash bonuses may seem relatively more appealing to bank bosses. Investors should keep that in mind, Antony Currie of Reuters Breakingviews writes. DealBook »Standard Chartered Steps Up Hunt for Chief  |  Standard Chartered is looking to replace its chief executive, Peter Sands, this year and has hired the executive search firm Egon Zehnder to conduct the search, after calls from some of the bank’s biggest shareholders to accelerate its succession planning, The Financial Times reports.  FINANCIAL TIMES Bloomberg Shakes Up Newsroom Side of His Company  |  After his term as mayor ended, Michael R. Bloomberg has moved quickly to reassert control at the company that he founded and that bears his name, especially its media operation, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMES Tom Freston Is Hired as Adviser at Raine Group  |  With the appointment of Mr. Freston, the merchant banking firm adds to an already deep bench of media advisers. DealBook »Goldman Executive Sees Opportunity in Falling Oil Prices  |  Goldman Sachs has calculated that falling oil prices will push well over a trillion dollars into other industries around the world, said Gary D. Cohn, the investment bank’s president and chief operating officer. DealBook »Apollo Seeks to Raise Fund to Buy Energy Sector Debt  |  Apollo Global Management, seeking to capitalize on the recent collapse in oil prices, is aiming to raise money on an unusually compressed timeline, according to a confidential email. DealBook »Blackstone Is Said to Raise $4.5 Billion for Energy Fund  |  The Blackstone Group vehicle is among several efforts by big private equity firms to find investment bargains among oil and natural gas companies, many of which have been strained by the fall in oil prices. DealBook »Ackman Joins Ranks of Most Successful Hedge Fund Managers  |  After a successful year for his hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management, William A. Ackman has broken into the ranks of the top 20 most successful hedge fund managers ever, The Financial Times reports.  FINANCIAL TIMES London Hedge Fund Founder Sentenced to 13 Years in Prison  |  Magnus Peterson, the founding director of Weavering Capital, was convicted of eight counts, including fraud, forgery, false accounting and fraudulent trading. DealBook »Online Storage Company Box Has Strong Debut  |  Shares in Box, the online file storage company, closed 66 percent higher than its initial public offering price, surpassing the $2.4 billion valuation that it fetched in its most recent private financing round. DealBook »British Start-Up TransferWise Raises $58 Million  |  TransferWise, which uses peer-to-peer technology to allow people to swap currencies without incurring bank transfer fees, raised $58 million in a new round of fund-raising led by Andreessen Horowitz. DealBook »Tech Giants Invest in New Dreams of Grandeur  |  Recent large investments by some of the technology industry’s biggest companies, including Google and Qualcomm, may sound odd, but they point to larger ambitions in moving giant amounts of data, the Bits blog writes.  NEW YORK TIMES BITS Ocwen Reaches Settlement With California Regulator  |  The embattled subprime mortgage servicer Ocwen Financial agreed to pay $2.5 million in penalties and pay for a third-party auditor to ensure that the firm complies with regulators’ requests for information. DealBook »At the Fulcrum of Preventing Another Financial Crisis  |  Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, says the steps that regulators have taken to strengthen the banking system will protect the global economy, but some skeptics remain. DealBook »Bank of England Governor Backs E.C.B. Strategy  |  Mark Carney said he supported the European Central Bank’s decision to buy bonds to stimulate the European economy. At home, he faces a different situation. DealBook »E.C.B.’s Bazooka Is a Water Pistol for Emerging Markets  |  Fading growth and falling prices will overwhelm the stimulus from central banks, Andy Mukherjee of Reuters Breakingviews writes. DealBook »Leaders in Davos Urge Quick Action to Alter the Effects of Climate Change  |  Business and political leaders called on governments to set clear goals so companies are prompted to act before the problems of climate change become irreversible. DealBook »Why a Supreme Court Housing Case Could Have a Broad Impact  |  A ruling may greatly reduce liability for unfair mortgage financing practices nationwide and limit the government’s ability to combat predatory lending, Jennifer Taub, a professor at Vermont Law School, writes in an Another View column. DealBook »Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 