AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelCablevision Systems plans to announce on Monday the start of a low-cost mobile phone service that will use Wi-Fi for connectivity rather than standard cellular networks, the first such service to be introduced by a cable operator.Called Freewheel, the service will offer unlimited data, talking and texting worldwide for $29.95 a month, or $9.95 a month for Cablevision’s Optimum Online customers — a steep discount compared with standard offerings from traditional cellular carriers. Freewheel customers initially must use a specific Motorola Moto G smartphone, which is being sold for $99.95. The service goes on sale next month, and no annual contract is required.The service will not offer a seamless connection for people on the go. Freewheel only works when the device is connected to Wi-Fi. (One exception is for emergency calls, which will be placed regardless of whether Wi-Fi is available.)Cablevision has spent the last eight years building out its Wi-Fi network, which now offers more than 1.1 million hot spots for both indoor and outdoor access in the New York metro region. That period coincided with the introduction of smartphones and an explosion in the use of Wi-Fi rather than cellular connections for mobile activities like browsing the Internet and watching videos. More than half of smartphone browsing now comes via Wi-Fi, with more than 93 percent of tablet browsing occurring that way, according to a recent Adobe Mobile Benchmark report.“The big picture for us is the fundamental transformation in how people use their devices,” said Kristin Dolan, Cablevision’s chief operating officer. “It has been a migration in the past decade from voice to data.”Cablevision said that it was planning a regional marketing campaign to promote the new offering and that it expected its target customers to include people who spent their days in homes and offices with Wi-Fi, were wary of overspending on data, lived in areas with bad cellular service or wanted a low-cost option for their children. While industry analysts have long expected cable operators to roll out Wi-Fi mobile phone service, the Cablevision product is being offered sooner than many of them had predicted. Cablevision chose not to partner with a wireless carrier, like Verizon or AT&T, or build its own wireless network to fill gaps in service when Wi-Fi connections were not available.Craig Moffett, a telecommunications analyst with MoffettNathanson, said in a recent report that he did not expect the start of a Wi-Fi-first wireless offering until 2017 because of the coverage gaps, and that the ripple effects of when such service became widespread would be substantial.“The time is coming when Wi-Fi will shift from being a ‘secondary’ network to being a primary one; instead of thinking of Wi-Fi as an alternative to cellular where Wi-Fi is available, we will instead begin to think of cellular as a backup network only when Wi-Fi is not,” he said. “That shift may sound subtle, but it will usher in a period of profound disruption.”That disruption could spark a new wave of convergence between the wireless and cable industries, leading to more competitive offerings, partnerships and, potentially, mergers.For years, phone carriers like AT&T, Verizon Wireless and T-Mobile USA have explored ways to reduce congestion on their cellular networks. One method involves offloading voice and data traffic onto the high-speed web connections offered by broadband providers like Comcast and Time Warner Cable.T-Mobile, for example, offers a Wi-Fi router that is designed to allow iPhone owners to place phone calls over a Wi-Fi connection. That helps offload some of the traffic that would have gone on T-Mobile’s voice network, but it also compensates for areas where T-Mobile has poor coverage. Brian X. Chen contributed reporting.Advertisement