AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — In her first speech as Federal Reserve chairwoman last March, Janet L. Yellen told the stories of three Chicago residents struggling to recover from the recession to explain why she intended for the Fed to retreat slowly from its stimulus campaign.Almost a year later, the three people highlighted by Ms. Yellen are still struggling, but their fortunes are gradually improving. All are working, though for less money than before the recession.Jermaine Brownlee, 40, has found full-time work building bus seats, although he makes a third less than he did in his old job building houses. “I’m back full time, and I’m grateful that I’m employed,” Mr. Brownlee said in an interview last week. “It’s just that before I had the job I was saying, ‘If I could just have a job. ...’ And now that I have the job, I’m saying, ‘If it could pay me just a little bit more money. ...’ ”As Ms. Yellen and her colleagues convene Tuesday and Wednesday for their first policy meeting of 2015, the stories of the three workers highlight the economy’s progress under the Fed’s patient care, but also the reality that the recovery remains incomplete. The Fed has signaled that it would like to start raising its benchmark interest rate around midyear. Analysts expect the Fed to strengthen that signal Wednesday.The economic expansion has accelerated with each passing year, and the decline in unemployment is outstripping the Fed’s expectations.But the sluggish pace of inflation, and of wage growth, is weighing on those plans. The slow increases in prices and wages, if they continue, would mean that the Fed has yet to accomplish its own goals.In the face of that reality, Fed officials increasingly are emphasizing that raising the benchmark rate above zero for the first time since December 2008 will not be the end of the stimulus campaign. Officials say that they plan to raise rates slowly, as conditions improve, and that rates will remain unusually low for years.The share of the American population that is middle income has been shrinking for several decades. Until fairly recently, that was because more people were entering a higher-income bracket. Now it’s for the opposite reason.“I think it’s important to understand that a decision to raise rates will not constitute the throwing of a switch from easy money conditions to tight,” Dennis P. Lockhart, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, said this month. “I supported, and expect to continue to support, a patient approach, one that is relatively cautious and conservative as regards the pace of normalization of rates.”When Dorine Poole spoke with Ms. Yellen last year, she was working 30 hours a week as an office manager for UrbanPonics, a company created to grow lettuce in an old industrial building. She has two children, cares for her mother and was making $14,000 a year.Then, in June, the company closed — but Ms. Poole did not miss a single day of work. She was hired immediately as a full-time office manager by New Covenant Community Development Corporation, another postrecession start-up formed to encourage small business creation in the North Lawndale neighborhood where she lives.She now makes almost $20,000 a year — closer to the $32,000 she made as an insurance claims processor before the recession.“I caught a great break,” Ms. Poole, 39, said. “It’s a real step up.”Mr. Brownlee also has moved on, and up, from the job he held when he met Ms. Yellen last year. At the time, he was working for a nonprofit agency that offers short-term employment as part of a job-training and rehabilitation program for people convicted of crimes. In June, he completed the program and found work through a temporary agency at Freedman Seating, a Chicago company that makes bus and train seats. A few months later, the company hired him full time.But Mr. Brownlee, like Ms. Poole, is still making less money than he did before the recession. A Chicago native, he moved to Texas in 2001 and found steady construction work around Austin, earning about $12 an hour, plus all the overtime he wanted.He lost that job in 2008 when construction work dried up, and returned to Chicago to be closer to his family. He worked odd jobs, when he could find work at all. In 2013 he was convicted of heroin possession and spent time in jail. Now he earns $8.25 an hour. His fiancée works, too, and, together, they are eking out a living for themselves and his daughter. What would he tell Ms. Yellen if she called again?“I appreciate what she’s done,” Mr. Brownlee said. “And I would just edge them on to continue pushing until we can get where we’re striving to be, that wages are compensatable for the cost of living.”The unemployment rate, which fell to 5.6 percent in December, is approaching its prerecession level of about 5 percent, but there is little evidence employers are competing for workers by raising wages. Average hourly earnings, adjusted for inflation, rose by 1 percent in 2014 — but even that was largely because of the unusual weakness of inflation. Falling oil prices have increased the value of the average paycheck, but it is a windfall, not a sustainable trend.Some Federal Reserve officials have begun to caution that they are not ready to raise interest rates until wage and price inflation strengthens.“I believe the continued very low core inflation and wage growth numbers provide ample justification for patience,” Eric S. Rosengren, president of the Boston Fed, said in a speech this month. “Such patience also provides support to labor markets, boosting the prospects of the many Americans who were adversely impacted by the financial crisis, severe recession and slow recovery.”The story of the third Chicago worker, however, highlights the limits of the Fed’s ability to improve the fortunes of American workers by means of its primary tool: holding down borrowing costs.Ms. Yellen described Vicki Lira, 62, in her speech last March at a convention in Chicago, as “one of many Americans who lost a full-time job in the recession and seem stuck working part time.”Almost a year later, Ms. Lira is still serving food samples two days a week, six hours a day, at the same Mariano’s supermarket in Chicago. She still wishes she had three more workdays each week.The problem: When Ms. Lira lost work in 2007, she owed about $1,200 to the electronics retailer Best Buy and the department store Carson Pirie Scott. Those bills, with interest, now total $3,700. She said she was not making payments on her debt.Ms. Lira said she had been advised that if she worked more hours and earned more money, the companies she owed would seek to garnish her wages. She said she would like to file for bankruptcy, but could not afford a lawyer to help her navigate the process.As a result, when Mariano’s offered her full-time work last summer, she declined. Still, Ms. Lira said she considered herself lucky. She was homeless for three years. Now she lives in public housing.“When I walk home from Mariano’s to catch the Clark Street bus, I see five people homeless in this freezing weather, and it kills me,” Ms. Lira said. “I wish I made enough money to help them.” Advertisement