By THE NEW YORK TIMESJAN. 25, 2015
Here are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week. FED MEETING Don’t expect big changes when the Federal Reserve updates its monetary policy guidance on Wednesday, after its first meeting of 2015. The Fed said in December it would be patient in deciding how soon to start raising its benchmark interest rate. Analysts expect the Fed to use the same wording Wednesday, which would mean that it still does not plan to raise rates before June, at the earliest. —Binyamin AppelbaumBRITISH REGULATORS TESTIFYIn Britain, the top executives of the Financial Conduct Authority testify before the Treasury Select Committee of the House of Commons on Tuesday about their botched leak to the news media concerning an insurance sector investigation that caused some insurance stocks to plummet. The report is out — and it is not pretty — so expect this to be more of a public wrist-slapping. —Jenny AndersonSHELL’S RESULTSShell, Europe’s largest oil company, reports results on Thursday. With Shell being the first of the major oil companies to report results for the last quarter of last year, it will be an early indicator of the damage being done to company earnings by lower oil prices. Shell is an interesting case because Ben van Beurden, who became chief executive last year, quickly began shelving projects and selling poorly performing businesses. Thursday’s results will also show how much Shell’s large liquefied natural gas business has been hurt by lower liquefied natural gas prices. —Stanley Reed FORD REPORTSFord Motor, the nation’s second-largest automaker, reports fourth-quarter earnings on Thursday, capping a year of transition. Overall profits for 2014 are expected to fall short of previous years, largely because of heavy spending on new products such as the F-150 pickup, America’s top-selling vehicle. The company changed at the top, with Mark Fields taking over as chief executive from Alan R. Mulally, who retired after guiding Ford through the industry’s financial crisis without a government bailout. This year, Ford expects further improvements in its troubled European division, where Jim Farley, the company’s longtime marketing chief, is now the top executive. —Bill VlasicAdvertisementFOURTH-QUARTER G.D.P.On Friday, the Commerce Department releases its first estimate of economic growth in the fourth quarter of 2014. The consensus view is that the economy expanded at an annual rate of about 3 percent in October, November and December, down from the blockbuster 5 percent rate in the third quarter, but still a healthy pace.AdvertisementHowever, a big surprise to the upside — or downside — is very possible, depending on one’s view of the economy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bullish experts are looking for a surge in consumer spending amid plunging energy prices. Since consumers are responsible for the lion’s share of gross domestic product, if big savings at the pump encouraged shoppers to open their wallets, 2014 might well have finished on a stronger-than-expected note.More pessimistic experts are focusing on the other side of the energy coin, namely falling business investment as drillers pull back on new projects. In addition, typically volatile military spending by the federal government, which surged in the third quarter, may have come back down in the fourth, putting further pressure on the overall growth rate. —Nelson D. SchwartzEARNINGS REPORTSAmong companies also announcing earnings this week are Microsoft on Monday, Apple and Yahoo on Tuesday, Boeing on Wednesday, and Viacom and Deutsche Bank on Thursday.A version of this article appears in print on January 26, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.