AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.07 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.02 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYElk River, Minn., Independent School District, $93.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Florida Board of Education, $236.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Oregon, Wis., School District, $54.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYLong Beach, Calif., Unified School District, $180 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Pennsylvania, $1 billion of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYUniversity of Illinois, $96.6 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.San Francisco, $289.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAlaska Housing Finance Corporation, $108.7 million of state capital project bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets.East Bay Municipal Utility District, Calif., $70 million of debt securities. Siebert Brandford Shank.Del Valle, Tex., Independent School District, $60.6 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Raymond James. Glendale, Ariz., $104.4 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities. Glendale, Ariz., $114.9 million of water and sewer revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley. Illinois, $286 million of school district general obligation bonds. Robert W. Baird. Katy, Tex., Independent School District, $209.5 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities. Kentucky Property and Building Commission, $385.2 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Long Beach, Calif., Unified School District, $90 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Antelope Valley Community College District, Calif., $87 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Maine, $100 million of Colby College taxable bonds. Barclays Capital.Maricopa County, Ariz., $65 million of school improvement bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Maryland, $333.4 million of MedStar Health debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.New Castle, Del., $125 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities. Palm Beach County, Fla., School Board, $65.2 million of certificates of participation. Morgan Stanley.Pasadena, Tex., Independent School District, $102.6 million of variable rate unlimited tax school building bonds. William Blair.Pocono Mountains Industrial Park Authority, Pa., $75 million of hospital revenue bonds. Bank of America.Rockford, Ill., Public Schools District, $58.3 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Temecula Valley, Calif., Unified School District, $56 million of special tax revenue refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Northwest Independent School District, Tex., $93.3 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Bosc. Utah Transit Authority, $831.6 million of subordinate sales tax revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Advertisement