By STEPHANIE STROMJAN. 21, 2015
Melvin J. Gordon, who ran Tootsie Roll Industries for more than 50 years, died on Wednesday in Boston. He was 95.He served as chief executive until his death, which was announced by the company.Together with his wife, Ellen, Mr. Gordon maintained an iron grip on the company, which is based in Chicago. He expanded its product line, buying up other brands like Charleston Chew, Junior Mints, Sugar Babies, Dubble Bubble and Charms Blow Pops.The company is publicly traded, but the Gordons ran it as if it were privately held, making it difficult for investors to get information. Its quarterly earnings typically were badly scanned copies of PDF files, according to a profile in The Wall Street Journal, and it held no calls with investment analysts to discuss its performance.Its dual-share structure, which gave the Gordons control, frustrated even the most sharp-elbowed investors, many of whom thought the company was worth more in pieces. They also accused the Gordons of using company funds to support an extravagant lifestyle.AdvertisementThe couple earned a total of $7.6 million in 2012 and made lavish use of the company plane to travel between a home in Massachusetts and their Chicago apartment, which Tootsie Roll paid more than $10,000 a month to rent.AdvertisementAccording to lawsuits filed against the Gordons and the company over the years, they established a second class of stock in the 1980s, putting a lock on their control of the company. Each Class B share is worth 10 votes to the common stock’s one vote, and the family reportedly owns more than 80 percent of those shares.Shares in the company climbed almost 8 percent on news of Mr. Gordon’s death, on speculation that Tootsie Roll Industries might be a takeover target.Mr. Gordon was born and raised in Boston and graduated from Harvard in 1941. He then went for military training at Camp Lee, Va., an Army base, where he became an instructor at the quartermaster school and later an editor of Quartermaster Journal. He then joined a women’s hosiery and knitwear company in Manchester, N.H., becoming its chief executive and taking it public.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 1950 he married Ellen Rubin, whose father, William Rubin, was then president of the Sweets Company of America, the maker of Tootsie Rolls and Tootsie Pops.How the company began is a bit of a mystery. According to a company website, Tootsie Roll traces its roots to 1896, when an Austrian immigrant named Leo Hirshfield began making the chewy chocolate treats to which he gave his daughter Clara’s nickname.But according to research by Samira Kawash, the author of “Candy: A Century of Panic and Pleasure” (2013), the candy breakthrough came later, after Leo Hirschfeld (not Hirshfield), an inventor at a company called Stern & Saalberg, was awarded a patent in 1908 for the process that gave Tootsie Rolls their tough texture. Stern & Saalberg began selling candy called Tootsie Rolls that year, according to Ms. Kawash, and began advertising and marketing it the following year. The company later became the Sweets Company of America.More intrigue shrouds the origins of the relationship between the Rubin family and the Sweets Company. The company went public in 1922, the year Mr. Hirschfeld died of a self-inflicted gunshot. According to a company spokesman, Mrs. Gordon’s mother and other Rubin family members bought shares sometime thereafter. By the 1930s, the Rubin family had gained control.Mr. Gordon joined the Sweets Company board in 1952, two years after marrying into the family. A decade later he became chief executive, and a few years later, after moving the business to Chicago, the company changed its name to Tootsie Roll Industries Inc.In 2013, Tootsie Roll Industries had $539.6 million in revenue and earnings of $60.8 million. Through Sept. 30 of last year, the company had $402 million in revenue and profits of $45.3 million.AdvertisementMr. Gordon is survived by his wife, who will take over his role at the company; their four daughters, Virginia L. Gordon, Wendy J. Gordon, Lisa J. Gordon and Karen Gordon Mills, who served as administrator of the Small Business Administration in the Obama administration; and six grandchildren.A version of this article appears in print on January 26, 2015, on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: Melvin J. Gordon, 95, Dogged Tootsie Roll Chief.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.