AdvertisementSupported byBy Raphael MinderMADRID — Spain’s national court said on Friday that one of the main European bottlers of Coca-Cola could proceed with a plan to downsize its Spanish operations, ending a tense legal dispute over a shuttered bottling plant that included street protests, strikes and an attempted boycott of Coke products. In its decision, the court said that the bottler, Coca-Cola Iberian Partners, had acted “in good faith” when it decided to move workers to different plants or jobs in the case of one major bottling factory that was converted into a logistics center.After labor unions successfully challenged the downsizing plan in court, the bottler was forced to rehire dismissed workers. The workers said the company had failed to properly inform them of the changes and had infringed on their right to strike. While Coca-Cola Iberian Partners agreed to take the workers back, it rejected the demand of some that they be given the same tasks they had before the downsizing. The company had said that doing so would be forcing it to bottle Coca-Cola against its will.The ruling was seen as a bellwether for how much leeway multinational companies would have in doing business in individual member states of the 28-nation European Union. The case was also a test for the labor market policy changes introduced by the conservative Popular Party of Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy, who is seeking re-election in December against mostly left-leaning opponents. While Spain has returned to growth, it has continued to struggle with an unemployment rate of over 22 percent. The bottler welcomed the ruling, which found that the company had respected “to the millimeter” the salary conditions and working hours of workers as part of its rehiring offer. Even though unions can appeal the latest court decision, a spokeswoman said the company had the right to proceed with its downsizing, which should ensure that operations return to normal in the coming weeks. The court issued its ruling on Sept. 30, but it was only made public on Friday.Coca-Cola Iberian recently agreed to a three-way merger with two other European bottlers that will create the world’s largest Coke bottler, serving Western Europe with more than 50 bottling plants and about 27,000 employees. (Bottlers often operate separately from, but under license to, the Coca-Cola Company.) But the labor dispute dates to January 2014, well before the merger plan, when Coca-Cola Iberian said it would close factories and lay off about a quarter of its nearly 4,600 workers in Spain. Advertisement