By CARL HULSEOCT. 9, 2015
WASHINGTON —  In a rare move, a bipartisan coalition of House members on Friday gained enough signatures on a petition to force a vote this month on renewing the charter of the Export-Import Bank.Republican and Democratic supporters of the bank, which provides subsidies and loan guarantees to foreign buyers of United States goods, collected 218 signatures — a majority of the House — on what is known as a discharge petition. That requires the House to take up legislation to revive the bank, authorization for which lapsed at the end of June. A floor vote is set for Oct. 26.Discharge petitions are seldom successfully employed because they are viewed by members of the majority party — in this case Republicans — as diluting their power. But more than 40 Republicans signed on, saying that popular job-creating bank legislation was being bottled up by a small minority of House conservatives, many of them the same people who have thrown the House into turmoil over a Republican leadership fight.“I am putting jobs over ideology,” said Representative Stephen Fincher of Tennessee, who led the petition effort for Republicans and has drawn some criticism from conservative activists for doing so.AdvertisementCritics have attacked the bank as corporate welfare, but it continues to have strong support in Congress. Representative Jeb Hensarling, the Texas Republican who is chairman of the Financial Services Committee, is opposed to the bank, and the discharge petition amounts to an end-run around Mr. Hensarling.Advertisement“At a time when our Republican conference is divided, this will divide it even further,” he said in a statement. “Signing a discharge petition — regardless of the issue — gives the Democrats control over our agenda. That’s why they are so eager to sign it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Speaker John A. Boehner has been viewed as friendly to the bank cause, which has strong support from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and other American business interests.The bank also has significant backing in the Senate, though Senator Mitch McConnell is personally opposed to renewing the bank. However, he has also acknowledged that the federal agency has majority support, and he is willing to let the legislation through but most likely only as an amendment to other legislation, like a highway bill.An aide said on Friday that Mr. McConnell would not consume Senate time on a stand-alone bank bill, and he said he doubted lawmakers would give consent to speed it through because it has become a litmus test for conservative activists.The last successful use of a discharge petition was in 2002, when it broke a logjam over campaign finance legislation.A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Bipartisan Coalition Forces New Vote on Ex-Im Bank .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.