Updated, 9:35 a.m. | LONDON — Sunrise Communications, one of the largest telecommunications companies in Switzerland, said on Tuesday that an initial public offering this year could value its recently formed holding company at up to 3.3 billion Swiss francs, or about $3.7 billion.The telecommunications provider, which announced plans for a public offering this month, is expected to price its I.P.O. at 58 francs to 78 francs a share and to begin trading on the SIX Swiss Exchange by Feb. 6.Sunrise is expected to raise 1.35 billion francs in the offering, and it said it would use the proceeds to reduce its debt.“The I.P.O. marks a new chapter in Sunrise’s history and brings exciting opportunities to the company, its clients and its employees,” Libor Voncina, the chief executive of the company, said in a news release.The private equity firm CVC Capital Partners acquired Sunrise in October 2010 from the Danish telecommunications company TDC, paying 3.3 billion francs.The I.P.O. is expected to include up to 23.3 million shares to be issued by Sunrise and 4.3 million existing shares to be sold by CVC, representing up to 57.2 percent of the new holding company’s capital.Sunrise provides mobile, broadband and landline telephone services, and has 3.3 million customers, including about 27 percent of all mobile customers in Switzerland. It is a challenger to Swisscom, which dominates the country’s telecommunications market.Sunrise posted revenue of 2 billion francs for the 12 months ended Sept. 30.The company said that the recent move by Switzerland to remove a cap on its currency should have a “neutral to net positive” impact. Earlier this month, Switzerland abandoned measures intended to hold down the value of the franc to the euro, which has fallen as economic troubles have mounted in Europe.The depreciation of the euro is expected to reduce the company’s refinancing costs as some of its euro-denominated debt is hedged, the company said. Also, Sunrise should benefit as its revenue is in francs.Deutsche Bank and UBS are acting as joint global coordinators on the offering. A version of this article appears in print on 01/28/2015, on page B7 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Public Debut.