HONG KONG — The multinational law firm Dentons announced on Tuesday that it would merge with the Dacheng Law Offices of China, creating a firm with the world’s largest number of lawyers.The new firm, to be branded Dacheng Dentons, will have more than 6,500 lawyers in more than 50 countries, overtaking Baker & McKenzie, with nearly 4,300 lawyers, as the world’s biggest.The merger comes amid a global wave of consolidation in the legal industry. At the same time, China’s growing economic heft and the increasing number of deals being made overseas by its companies have created huge demand for legal services, both at home and abroad.“It’s no longer Beijing and Shanghai that form the core of the economic engine — it’s dozens of cities across China that have experienced dramatic growth,” Elliott Portnoy, chief executive of Dentons and of the newly combined firm, said in an interview.Foreign law firms and lawyers are forbidden from practicing domestically in China and can give advice on overseas law only. In matters of Chinese law, they must retain local Chinese firms, for example to work on regulatory permissions for a corporate takeover in China or to represent a foreign client in a domestic court case.As a result, most foreign law firms keep only a small number of foreign lawyers in China and open offices in only the biggest cities. Dentons, for instance, has about 45 lawyers across Asia, out of its total of 2,600 lawyers globally, with more in the United States than in any other country. Dacheng has more than 4,000 lawyers, almost all of them in China.Because of these restrictions on foreign firms, profitability can be a challenge in China.Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson, a firm founded in New York with offices around the world, said this month that it was effectively pulling out of Asia. The firm decided to close down its unprofitable offices in Hong Kong and Shanghai after failing to win sufficient local business from the big Wall Street banks it works with in other markets, The American Lawyer magazine reported.Dentons is betting that the scale of its newly combined operations and the penetration into China of Dacheng, which has more than 40 offices across the mainland, will help it win new work from foreign companies doing business in China, and especially from fast-growing Chinese companies seeking to expand overseas.“The personal relationships they have with the C.E.O.s of private companies and big, state-owned enterprises is obviously something that creates a tremendous opportunity for us, with all that work that is now coming out into the West,” said Joe Andrew, the chairman of Dentons.Recently released figures illustrate this trend. Foreign direct investment in China slowed last year, rising 1.7 percent, to $119.6 billion, from 2013, according to data released this month by the Ministry of Commerce. By contrast, outward investment from China surged 14.1 percent, to $102.9 billion.Deal making in China continues to surge. Mergers and acquisitions reached a record high of $407 billion last year, up 55 percent from 2013, according to a survey released on Tuesday by PricewaterhouseCoopers. Those transactions represent a huge opportunity for lawyers, who advise on how to structure deals, draw up takeover agreements and argue their client’s cases before antitrust and other regulators, both in China and overseas.Dacheng and Dentons have grown to their current size through a number of mergers with other firms, and the challenge now will be to integrate two companies with very different cultures. Like a number of other large law firms, the partnership will be structured as a Swiss verein, which allows for the companies to maintain separate profit pools. But Mr. Andrew said the new venture would be more integrated than most, with a unified compensation system across its network of partnerships.A version of this article appears in print on 01/28/2015, on page B7 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Global Giant.