By BROOKS BARNESJAN. 26, 2015
PARK CITY, Utah —  Distributors are snapping up Sundance movies with a fervor not seen in years, a reflection of the quality of this year’s lineup and the improving economics — fueled by video on demand — of independent film.The steady embrace of tiny films by Oscar voters may also be making financiers more bullish on the independent marketplace. “The floor has absolutely gotten higher with a multitude of new buyers and the overall strength of the films,” said Lia Buman, president of acquisitions for Focus Features.Bids for “Me and Earl and the Dying Girl,” a witty coming-of-age story from a director primarily known for television, Alfonso Gomez-Rejon, reached $12 million in the hours after its Sunday premiere, according to two people with knowledge of the offers, speaking on the condition of anonymity because the auction was private.In the end, Fox Searchlight, negotiating on a separate track, made an unusually structured deal for part ownership of the film, paying in the “mid-seven-figure” range, these people said. The agreement gives Searchlight a large “back end,” the industry term for eventual profits. “Earl” is reminiscent of “The Fault in Our Stars,” which was a smash hit for 20th Century Fox last year.The intensity of the “Earl” bidding pushed the film toward a new Sundance record. Most agents still consider Searchlight’s 2006 purchase of “Little Miss Sunshine” for $12.3 million, after adjusting for inflation, the festival’s high-water mark.AdvertisementAt least six distributors chased “Dope,” another offbeat high school tale, directed by Rick Famuyiwa and produced by Forest Whitaker. It sold to Open Road Films and Sony for $7 million, with a guarantee of millions of dollars in advertising.AdvertisementSelling for $3 million apiece were “The Bronze,” a crude comedy about a fading Olympic gymnast in a small town, and “The D Train,” starring Jack Black as the needy head of a high school reunion committee. The Orchard, a relatively new buyer, on Monday paid about $4 million for “The Overnight,” another R-rated comedy.While Sundance is nothing close to the buying free-for-all that it was at its peak a decade ago — at least so far — this year’s strong bidding signals a counterintuitive return to health for independent film.Based on box office totals, the financial state of specialty film still looks bleak. The vast majority of movies bought at Sundance last year failed to crack the $1 million mark at the domestic box office. But digital downloads and video-on-demand sales have now grown to a degree that distributors are more willing to write checks.Digital sales “are definitely driving a lot of the confidence,” said Jeff Deutchman, vice president for acquisitions at Alchemy, a distributor that bought the festival’s “Strangerland,” a drama starring Nicole Kidman and Joseph Fiennes, for upward of $1 million over the weekend.The problem, at least in terms of assessing the health of independent film, is that digital sales are not publicly reported. “No one is able to glimpse the full picture because of the lack of transparency,” Mr. Deutchman said.The art house market has spent roughly six years trying to regroup after the collapse of the DVD business and the shuttering of specialty divisions by the major studios. Distributors over the last couple of years have continued to show caution, with deals coming in days or weeks after festival premieres instead of hours.Other films changing hands since Sundance began on Thursday include “The Diary of a Teenage Girl,” which follows a girl in 1970s San Francisco and shows signs of turning into a critical darling. At least eight smaller films have also sold including “The End of the Tour,” which stars Jason Segel as the novelist David Foster Wallace. Four other movies were plucked from the lineup before the festival even began, including Noah Baumbach’s “Mistress America,” which Searchlight snapped up for $6.5 million.And several films with solid commercial prospects have yet to make their festival debuts, including “Zipper,” about a rising political star entangled by scandal.A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Pace of Deals Picks Up at Sundance Festival.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.