
Frequent Flier By                     
DENISE COLELLA

JAN. 26, 2015
I’M lucky enough to have a lot of friends all around the world, which makes business travel kind of fun. I’ve been flying my entire career, and now as chief executive of Maxifier, an advertising technology company, I’m traveling as much as ever.I’m very fortunate because at least twice a year I have the opportunity to bring my children with me when I travel for work. My husband and I really want them to learn about the world. My daughter is 7 and my son is 3, and they are great travelers.I have to laugh since I used to be one of those people who would get a little disgruntled when someone would sit near me with a couple of little ones, and I definitely get a few stares when I board the plane with my children.So now I feel really badly about the times I may have given a parent traveling with their children one of those disgruntled looks. I’m lucky because my son and daughter keep themselves entertained, and they are polite, so it all works out. I’ve even had fellow passengers tell me at the end of flight how quiet my children were.AdvertisementMy daughter even understands security routines. I’ll never forget my daughter trying to explain to one of the security guys that he needed to check something. On longer flights we’ll get upgraded, which is great, but because of those upgrades my daughter does not understand why coach seats don’t lie flat. She thinks they’re broken. And she can’t fathom why she won’t get a free ice cream sundae in coach, either.AdvertisementI don’t have a lot of mishaps when flying. But that doesn’t mean I haven’t had the occasional humiliating experience.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.About three months after my son was born, I had to head off to London for the first day of my new job as chief revenue officer of Maxifier. I was not in the best shape and I wasn’t even dressed well: It was Halloween and I wanted to take my daughter out trick-or-treating, so I took the last flight out of New York. I was wearing yoga pants, Halloween socks and a T-shirt with a witch on it. My hair was kind of matted. I didn’t shower. I am not a vain person and am not high-maintenance, but when I tell you I looked ridiculous, please understand — I really did.I sat down in my seat, looked over and saw a high school classmate whom I hadn’t seen in 20 years. I was hoping he didn’t remember me. But I felt a tap on my shoulder and heard the words, “Denise, is that you?” I wanted to say no, but I didn’t.I was ecstatic when a woman took the seat between us. She asked me if I wanted to change seats. I politely declined. I didn’t even get up out of my seat to use the restroom because I didn’t want to try to shimmy past him. I even took an over-the-counter pain-and-sleep aid so we could stop chatting. I realized I probably drooled in my sleep the rest of the flight. It was horrible.We did wind up taking the train together into London, and I looked even worse for the wear standing up. I never ran into him again. And I’m O.K. with that.As told to Joan Raymond. Email: joan.raymond@nytimes.com Q. How often do you fly for business?A. Easily three to four times a month, mostly international.Q. What’s your least favorite airport?A. Newark. It’s the last thing standing between me and seeing my family after a business trip. And the processes there are very slow.Q. Of all the places you’ve been, what’s the best?A. Tokyo. I lived there for eight years, and the vibe is amazing. The food is great, too.Q. What’s your secret airport vice?A. Airport spas and massage chairs. I like the 10 minutes of sanity before a 13-hour flight.A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Not Dressed to Impress, and Running Into a High School Classmate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »