By CLIFFORD KRAUSSJAN. 26, 2015
HOUSTON — The British oil giant BP announced on Monday that it was freezing the wages of its 80,000 workers, another sign that oil companies are being forced to cut back in the face of collapsing oil prices.With prices falling by more than 50 percent since June, companies like Halliburton and Schlumberger have announced thousands of job cuts. In January, BP said it would probably cut 300 jobs in the North Sea, where exploration and production are expensive.“BP has today informed staff that we intend to freeze base pay across the company (with a few exceptions),” the company said in a statement. “Together with the work we are doing to simplify and increase efficiency throughout BP, we see this as a prudent response to the currently challenging market environment in which BP operates.”Even before oil prices began falling, BP had been paring back on operations in a reorganization to enable the company to meet financial and legal obligations arising from the 2010 Deepwater Horizon rig explosion that left 11 workers dead and spilled oil across the Gulf of Mexico. It has sold more than $40 billion in assets.Roughly one in four BP workers is employed in the United States. BP remains a leader in the industry across the country, especially in Alaska and the Gulf of Mexico.AdvertisementMost industry analysts expect many more jobs to be lost as companies increasingly decommission rigs. The rig count in the United States fell by 49 last week to 1,317, raising the number of shutdowns to 165 in January. Oil executives say they believe the rig count will probably decline by at least another 400 in the coming months. The number of direct and indirect jobs per rig is about 100.AdvertisementAbout a million U.S. workers are employed in the oil industry, a number that has risen by roughly 150,000 in recent years as domestic oil and gas production swelled with a frenzy of drilling in shale fields.Most oil experts say there is no sign that oil prices will recover significantly until the second half of the year at the earliest, because production in the United States, Iraq and several other countries continues to rise. Production is expected to begin declining in the second half of the year as production in older wells dwindles and fewer new wells are drilled.In an internal memo, BP’s chief, Robert W. Dudley, said, “Each business and function will have its own specific responses which will contribute to a revised and rebased 2015 group plan aimed at quickly transitioning ourselves to a $50-per-barrel world.”A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: BP Freezes Workers’ Wages as Oil Prices Sink.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.