By STEPHANIE STROMJAN. 26, 2015
Post Holdings, maker of classic cereals like Grape-Nuts, Honeycomb and Post Raisin Bran, said on Monday that was spending $1.15 billion to buy MOM Brands, the family-owned maker of Malt-O-Meal.Investment analysts have bet that Post would reduce its ready-to-eat cereal business, which has struggled over the last several years as consumers have turned to yogurt for breakfast or moved to fast-food restaurants that have expanded their breakfast offerings.Post took a $295 million noncash adjustment in the quarter ended Sept. 30, the bulk of which represented the write-down of the “good will” of its cereal brands, according to analysts.And since it was spun off from Ralcorp in 2012, Post has gone on a buying spree, snapping up businesses as varied as pasta and peanut butter, with the goal of reducing its dependence on cereal. Last April, it paid $2.45 billion for Michael Foods, an egg and dairy business primarily dedicated to commercial customers.AdvertisementPost has worked to increase its products rich in protein to appeal to more health-conscious consumers and adherents of the Paleo diet, buying PowerBar and Musashi, along with Dymatize, as well as the American Blanching Company, a peanut butter maker.AdvertisementThe company reached six deals totaling $3.7 billion in 2014, but investors have had a mixed reaction to the strategy, in part because Post has taken on debt to finance its shopping spree. The deal is expected to close in the third quarter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MOM will give Post a portfolio of cereals aimed not only at budget-conscious consumers, but also those interested in foods free of additives and preservatives. It sells some of its cereals for an everyday price of $2 and has introduced new brands like Mom’s Best, which avoids preservatives, high-fructose corn syrup and other additives that consumers increasingly are trying to avoid.One new brand, Three Sisters, is sold exclusively in Whole Foods, a new distribution channel for MOM.Thanks to such strategies, MOM surpassed Post a couple of years ago to become the third-largest seller of cereals after Kellogg and General Mills.On Monday, Post released preliminary unaudited financial information, saying it expects revenue of $1.1 billion in the quarter that ended Dec. 31 and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization of $126 million or more.A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Post Holdings Buying MOM Brands for $1.15 Billion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.