
On the Road By                     
 JOE SHARKEY
 
JAN. 26, 2015
WE might get a little more knee room in coach, now that the familiar SkyMall catalog is disappearing from that thick stash of printed material the airlines cram into seat-back pockets.O.K., so we’ll only gain maybe a quarter-inch more space, but at least they won’t charge us a fee for the minimally extra comfort. (I hope.)As you perhaps have heard, Xhibit, publisher of those SkyMall catalogs full of weird and often wonderful products that you didn’t imagine you needed till you thumbed through a catalog at 37,000 feet, has filed for bankruptcy protection. The company, which says it gets “substantially all” of its revenue from SkyMall, said that its retail catalog business had been suspended.For the time being at least, you needn’t worry about whether you can still buy SkyMall’s top-selling products, like the grill spatula with an LED light for nighttime barbecuing ($24.95); the self-cleaning robotic cat-litter box ($339.99); the “Bigfoot Garden Yeti” statue ($99.95 to $2,250, depending on how big you want it); the “Men’s Padded Butt Enhancer” ($35 for jockeys, $2 extra for enhanced boxers). Yes, while you may not find the catalog in your seat-back pocket, SkyMall is still, for now, accepting orders. “There are changes in the air, but we’re still here!” SkyMall proclaims gamely on its online order site.AdvertisementThere are indeed changes in the air. In its bankruptcy announcement, Xhibit noted that as more travelers carried personal electronic devices, and with rapidly growing Wi-Fi availability on airplanes, “fewer people browsed the SkyMall in-flight catalog.” The company also cited the “rapidly evolving and intensely competitive” direct marketing and online retail business.AdvertisementThere were lesser-known problems faced by SkyMall last year as losses mounted. In the fourth quarter, a period when the company said it usually books “a disproportionate amount of our retail sales,” two major airlines, Delta and Southwest, gave the company notice that they were dropping the catalogs — Delta effective last month and Southwest effective April 1.One underlying factor is that airlines, which are swimming in many billions in so-called ancillary revenue from onboard fees, sales and commissions, are themselves aggressively selling products.With rapidly growing mobile connectivity on board, airlines can efficiently market directly to passengers, including through mileage-points offers and direct sales from their own online catalogs. Merchandise, travel packages, theater and concert tickets, even restaurant reservations, all are being sold directly by many airlines in flight, and that revenue potential is growing. Airline executives have been asking, Who needs SkyMall siphoning off sales?Not that the physical seat-back environment is a marketing dinosaur. Passengers still reliably reach for the airline in-flight magazine at some point during a flight. In fact, American Airlines this month revamped its American Way in-flight magazine in a new partnership with Ink Global, a travel media company that publishes more than 40 branded magazines, including magazines for United Airlines, easyJet, Iberia, Norwegian Air, the Eurostar train and the corporate jet market. It also develops integrated online and mobile apps for readers and advertisers.“We print over 700,000 magazines each issue,” Marisa Beazel, the vice president for publishing at Ink, said of the redesigned American Way, a monthly publication tucked into seat pockets on all American flights, now including those of US Airways, which it acquired in a merger. The last issue of US Airways Magazine was published in December.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.High-end advertisers increasingly demand high-quality print display when they buy space, and the American Way redesign addresses that, Ms. Beazel said. “We’ve upgraded the paper stock,” she said, adding, “In-flight media is attracting some of the most affluent audiences in the world, and because of that and our global footprint we’re able to attract new types of international advertisers.”The January issue of the new American Way has lots of high-end ads — for travel destinations, fancy watches, luxury condos, top-shelf rums, expensive cigars and apparel — but there is also a smattering of the more familiar lower-end in-flight magazine advertisers like online dating sites and men’s hair restoration products and services. There is more space for editorial features, though in general they will be “shorter and easier to consume” for a domestic and growing international readership, said Fernand J. Fernandez, the airline’s vice president for global marketing.The magazine’s website has also been redesigned for smoother integration between the print product that people peruse on a plane and “the digital imprint that Ink is building out for us,” Mr. Fernandez said. Ms. Beazel added, citing the global advertising network associated with an array of in-flight magazines, “there is a lot of opportunities for engagement on a larger scale than just reading the magazine.”Still, with all the fancy, digitally integrated reach to link high-end advertisers with affluent condo buyers and fancy rum drinkers, many fliers are still going to miss that quirky SkyMall catalog when they get bored with their technology and reach into the seat-back pocket for something to peruse on paper.AdvertisementLast week, with SkyMall’s apparent demise, my favorite comment on the news came from a woman who declared on Twitter, “And I really needed that gnome.”Email: jsharkey@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: SkyMall Stumbles as Airlines Hone Their Sales Pitches.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »