By ADAM LIPTAKJAN. 26, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The Supreme Court on Monday ruled that a chemical company may be able to cut the health benefits of its retired workers, unanimously reversing an appeals court ruling that said the benefits had vested for life.“Courts should not construe ambiguous writings to create lifetime promises,” Justice Clarence Thomas wrote for the court, adding that “retiree health care benefits are not a form of deferred compensation.”The Supreme Court returned the case to the appeals court, telling it to use ordinary principles of contract interpretation to determine whether the collective bargaining agreement at issue had granted free lifetime health care.The appeals court erred, Justice Thomas wrote, “by placing a thumb on the scale in favor of vested retiree benefits in all collective bargaining agreements.”AdvertisementThe case concerned a union contract at the Point Pleasant Polyester Plant in Apple Grove, W.Va. Like many other collective bargaining agreements, it did not directly say whether health benefits for retirees would vest for life.AdvertisementM&G Polymers USA bought the plant in 2000. A few years later, it announced that it would require retirees to contribute to the cost of their health care benefits. Several retirees sued, saying they had been promised free health care for life.When the case, M&G Polymers USA v. Tackett, No. 13-1010, was argued at the Supreme Court in November, several justices seemed puzzled that the contract had not nailed down such an important point.“Both sides knew it was left unaddressed, so, you know, whoever loses deserves to lose for casting this upon us when it could have been said very clearly in the contract,” Justice Antonin Scalia said. “Such an important feature. So I hope we’ll get it right, but, you know, I can’t feel bad about it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The appeals court, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, ruled for the retirees in 2013, relying on its own 1983 decision, which put a thumb on the scale in favor of vesting.Justice Thomas’s opinion was an extended critique of that decision, which he said had been applied “indiscriminately across industries,” mentioning automobiles, electronics and steel.He seemed to suggest that the retirees from the chemical plant were now likely to lose when the case got back to the appeals court. “When a contract is silent as to the duration of retiree benefits,” he wrote, “a court may not infer that the parties intended those benefits to vest for life.”In a concurrence, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg made the case that the retirees could prevail under the new, stricter standard.“No rule requires ‘clear and express’ language in order to show that parties intended health care benefits to vest,” she wrote.She urged the appeals court to consider other factors. One signal that the health benefits had vested, she said, was that the retirees had vested pensions. The contract tied health benefits to those “receiving a monthly pension,” she said.AdvertisementJustices Stephen G. Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan joined Justice Ginsburg’s concurrence.A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Supreme Court Rules Against Retirees in Union Health Benefits Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.