By RACHEL ABRAMSJAN. 26, 2015
Barbie and other traditional toys are having a much tougher time supporting their elderly parent Mattel, a toymaker significantly weakened by stiff competition from small upstarts and by digital distractions aimed at children.On Monday, the company reported that toy sales during last month’s crucial holiday shopping season plummeted, apparently one of the reasons the company also announced a management shake-up. Bryan G. Stockton, who worked for Mattel for more than 14 years and was chief executive for the last three, resigned over the weekend.“The board recognizes that the company is not meeting our own expectations and those of our shareholders, and we felt that now is the right time to make a leadership change,” said Alex Clark, a spokesman for Mattel.Christopher A. Sinclair, 64, has stepped in as interim chief executive, the company said. Mr. Sinclair has served on Mattel’s board since 1996.AdvertisementFor decades, American consumers associated the names Mattel and Hasbro with play time. But in recent years, those companies have largely failed to stay on top of evolving trends and tastes. In the face of an onslaught of digital products, traditional manufacturers have lost ground to smaller, more nimble competitors that adapt quickly to the latest trend. Toy sales rose 4 percent last year over the previous one, according to the NPD Group, a market research firm, but analysts said that growth had not benefited Mattel or Hasbro.Advertisement“The toy industry is essentially a 19th-century industry desperately trying to break into the 21st,” said Richard Gottlieb, the founder of Global Toy Experts, a consulting agency.Last year, the lists of top holiday toys at major retailers like Walmart, Toys “R” Us and Target provided further evidence of some companies’ decline, said Gerrick Johnson, an analyst with BMO Capital Markets.While Mattel’s doll of Elsa from the film “Frozen” was high on the season’s list, and Hasbro found success with products like the FurReal Friends Get Up and GoGo My Walkin’ Pup Pet, both companies lost footing on this type of list, Mr. Johnson said.Over all, Mattel had three items among the 10 best-selling toys of last year, and Hasbro had none, according to the NPD Group.At the same time, the smaller toy companies behind popular items like Spin Master’s Zoomer Dino and Jakks Pacific’s Snow Glow Elsa doll climbed last year’s lists of top toys.“They’ve been quicker to jump on the trends that are hot right now,” Mr. Johnson said. “The private toy companies, at this point in time, are doing a better job at product development.”With its official fourth-quarter earnings due out on Friday, Mattel on Monday released gloomy preliminary financial results for that quarter. Net income dropped sharply in the last three months of the year, to $149.9 million, from $369.2 million in the same period in 2013. Worldwide net sales fell 7 percent in 2014 as a whole.AdvertisementThe company also reported earnings of 44 cents a share, well below analysts’ average forecast of 92 cents, according to data from Thomson Reuters.“I think that most people are shocked but not surprised,” said Jim Silver, the editor in chief of TTPM, a toy review website, of Mr. Stockton’s departure. “The bottom line is, the numbers have not been good.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hasbro’s earnings per share have been roughly flat in recent years, although it has yet to release its fourth-quarter results.Still, a few toys made by Hasbro and Mattel disappeared quickly from the shelves. Over the holidays, Hasbro’s Get Up and GoGo My Walkin’ Pup Pet, an electronic puppy that wags its tail and barks, and its Transformers action figures were among the most popular items. Mattel found success with fashion dolls and play sets derived from Disney’s “Frozen,” the 2013 animated film with an intense appeal to children.But while one or two blockbuster hits might be enough for a small toy company, that cannot sustain a global manufacturer.“The added challenge that Mattel and Hasbro have is that they’re much bigger,” Mr. Johnson said. “They have to find a portfolio of products.”For many years, one of Mattel’s core toys, Barbie, who turns 56 this year, has faded in relevance for many girls even as Mattel has issued new models of the doll, carrying a briefcase or driving the latest roadster.Mattel’s portfolio of products also includes the Hot Wheels, American Girl and Fisher-Price brands, but sales of all but the American Girl products fell in 2013, according to the company’s most recent annual report.Robotic pets like Spin Master’s Zoomer Dino, DigiBirds and Little Live Pets were popular last year, along with Activision video games like Skylanders, Apple products and LeapTV, a gaming system from LeapFrog Enterprises, an educational toy company that focuses on digital products.AdvertisementMattel has begun refocusing on getting some of that audience back. The company brought back Richard Dickson, a branding expert who had helped get the Barbie brand back on its feet several years ago. Mr. Dickson rejoined Mattel in May after most recently serving as the president and chief executive of branded businesses at the Jones Group, and his responsibilities at Mattel were expanded this month. Tim Kilpin, another top executive, also saw his role expanded to president, chief commercial officer, and the promotions have given rise to speculation that either executive could succeed Mr. Stockton.Mr. Clark, the Mattel spokesman, said the company had “just begun” searching for a new chief executive.Mr. Johnson of BMO Capital Markets said, “I think it’s probably a 50-50 shot that it’s somebody from the outside.” He added, “If it’s internal, it’s one of those two.”In a statement, Mr. Sinclair, the interim chief executive, said, “We will be working during the coming months to revitalize the business and to identify the right leadership for Mattel as it enters its next phase of growth and value creation.”Shares of Mattel fell 5 percent on Monday to close at $26.64. Mr. Johnson, who had predicted that Mattel would report earnings of 60 cents a share, said he thought that investors might already have been building poor performance into the stock price.“Based on the performance and the lack of compelling product over the last two years, it’s not a surprise that they’ve made the change that they’ve made,” Mr. Johnson said. “I think with this announcement, it kind of clears the decks. It’s like, ‘O.K., here’s the bad news, the bad news is out.’ ”A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Shake-Up at Mattel as Barbie Loses Her Appeal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.