By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINSEPT. 30, 2015
Housing advocates have attracted a prominent ally in their push to change the federal government’s policy of selling distressed mortgages at a discount to private equity firms and hedge funds.Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, joined other lawmakers, advocates and community activists on Wednesday in a Washington rally to oppose the loan sale program.The senator called on the Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Federal Housing Fianance Agency, the overseer of Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, to make it easier for nonprofit organizations to bid for the bundles of distressed mortgages put up for auction.The sale of distressed mortgages by HUD and the government-sponsored mortgage finance firms has been drawing growing criticism from housing advocates and lawyers in recent months. The critics are concerned that private buyers of distressed mortgages are moving too quickly to put borrowers into foreclosure instead of modifying the loan terms as housing officials had hoped.AdvertisementThe investors are buying loans at a discount, often as much as 30 percent.In a statement, Ms. Warren accused HUD and the F.H.F.A of “lining up with the Wall Street speculators.”
            Lone Star Funds and its affiliated entities, including Caliber Home Loans, have foreclosed on at least 1,500 houses sold by a federal housing agency. The houses were part of an overall pool of 17,000 distressed mortgages the private equity firm purchased in June 2014 at a Department of Housing and Urban Development auction. Most of the completed foreclosures have taken place in the last five months, according to an analysis of home addresses by RealtyTrac.        The mortgages held in a private equity portfolio that went through foreclosureThe size of the circles equalsthis many mortgages:36101Ohio:157Illinois:98NewYork:76California:61Florida:243The highest concentration of completed foreclosures has been in Florida, several Midwestern states, a handful of states in the Northeast and California.The size of the circles equalsthis many mortgages:36101The mortgages held in a private equity portfolio that went through foreclosureOhio:157NewYork:76Illinois:98California:61Florida:243The highest concentration of completed foreclosures has been in Florida, several Midwestern states, a handful of states in the Northeast and California.The size of the circles equalsthis many mortgages:36101The mortgages held in a private equity portfolio that went through foreclosureOhio:157New York:76Illinois:98California:61Florida:243The highest concentration of completed foreclosures has been in Florida, several Midwestern states, a handful of states in the Northeast and California.SEPT. 28, 2015
“Wall Street is interested in profits, not in working out a way for people to stay in their homes,” she said.AdvertisementOne of the biggest buyers of distressed mortgages is Lone Star Funds, a $60 billion private equity firm based in Dallas. The firm, which is also buying soured mortgages directly from banks, has raised billions of dollars from investors, including public pensions, to invest in distressed home loans.The private equity firm’s practices in dealing with delinquent borrowers was the subject of a front-page article in The New York Times this week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The housing advocates said that in addition to the rally with elected officials, they intended to protest outside Lone Star’s offices in Washington.HUD officials said on Wednesday that they had a meeting with a group of community-based leaders on foreclosure issues.“We will continue to explore all responsible options to avoid unnecessary foreclosures while keeping F.H.A. healthy and available for future generations of homeowners,” Edward L. Golding, HUD’s principal deputy assistant secretary for the office of housing, said in a statement, referring to the Federal Housing Administration.A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Senator Joins in Protest of Distressed Loan Sales.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.