AdvertisementSupported byPolitical EconomyBy Hugo Dixon | ReutersThe resounding election victory of the leftist party Syriza has pushed Greece closer to quitting the eurozone. But such a departure is still not the most probable outcome, because the party should be able to cut a deal with Greece’s European creditors to avoid default, provided both sides are rational.After all, a large majority of the Greeks want to stay in the eurozine. They rightly fear that quitting it might lead to a downward spiral, in which impoverishment and political strife fuel each other. Meanwhile, no head of government in the other euro countries wants Greece to leave.The good news is that the victory speech by Syriza’s leader, Alexis Tsipras, was reasonably conciliatory. The bad news is that Mr. Tsipras has chosen the Independent Greeks, a right-wing antibailout party, as his partner.His priority should be to ask for an extension of the bailout program, which runs out at the end of next month. If he does that, the European Central Bank will continue to provide liquidity to Greece’s banks. That’s important because deposits have been fleeing the banking system in the past week.For their part, the other eurozone countries should agree to extend the program for several months if Mr. Tsipras asks nicely, so that there can be a proper discussion of a new deal. It would not be right to bring the banking system crashing down on a newly elected leader’s head.The other leaders should also accept Mr. Tsipras’s request for a high-level meeting to discuss his plans, rather than force him to deal immediately with the officials from the so-called troika of bailout lenders: the European Commission, the E.C.B. and the International Monetary Fund. The troika will have to be involved eventually, but it would be a red rag to a bull to insist on its being involved prominently from the start, given how hated it is in Greece.Such an approach should, though, be conditional on Mr. Tsipras not doing anything inflammatory before the leaders meet. He should not, for example, try to create a fait accompli by pushing through an increase in the minimum wage and pensions, or rehiring fired civil servants. Such things should be left to the negotiation.It is also important that once in office, Syriza avoid the fiery rhetoric it used during the campaign. Yanis Varoufakis, who is expected to become finance minister, needs to watch his tongue. He was recently quoted by a French newspaper as saying words to the effect that Jean-Claude Trichet, the former head of the E.C.B., would burn in hell. This is not the way to win friends and influence people.Beyond that, there is the making of a deal on the long-term debt. Syriza is now indicating that it will not ask for a haircut but will instead propose linking its debt servicing to the speed with which the Greek economy grows. The European countries, meanwhile, are suggesting they could extend the amount of time Athens has to repay its loans.The snag is that long-term debt relief is not the only issue. The state will run out of cash in March, when a big dollop of I.M.F. money comes due. The best solution would be to let the government sell some more treasury bills to the country’s banks, provided it commits itself to serious negotiations.That will not, however, solve the medium-term liquidity problem that comes to a head in June, when a series of bonds owned by the E.C.B. need to be repaid. It is hard to see how Athens can avoid default then without borrowing more money from the eurozone countries, and they won’t agree to that unless Syriza commits to overhaul the economy and fill a hole in this year’s budget.Syriza has promised to crack down on the oligarchs who have a stranglehold on swaths of the economy, as well as to pursue tax evasion. If Mr. Tsipras shows he means business in this area, he will find some favor with other European leaders. The problem is that he will get their hackles up if he insists on unwinding changes to the labor market — one of the few areas where there has been good progress in recent years.Equally problematic will be how to close the gap in this year’s budget. The outgoing government wasn’t able to agree with its creditors on this. Syriza will face an even tougher task, because tax receipts dropped off as the election drew near. Mr. Tsipras has been elected on a mandate to increase public spending, not cut it.Yet even here there could be scope for compromise. If Mr. Tsipras shows good will in other areas, the Europeans could make a one-time grant this year to deal with extreme poverty. And, for future years, they could agree that Greece wouldn’t have to run quite such a big budget surplus as currently planned.So there might be a way of cutting a deal. The hitch is that doing so would involve a huge somersault — what Greeks call a kolotoumba. Many of Mr. Tsipras’s backers would then accuse him of betraying their cause. It is still far from clear whether he is prepared to suffer that.But if the Syriza leader is not prepared to compromise, Greece will default and will have to impose capital controls to stop the banks from collapsing. If the people then forced the government to backtrack, there would be one final chance to stay in the euro. Otherwise, the drachma would beckon. Hugo Dixon is editor at large of Reuters News. Advertisement