Mayra Rodríguez Valladares is managing principal at MRV Associates, a capital markets and financial regulatory consulting and training firm in New York. On Twitter, she is @MRVAssociates.The Basel Committee for Banking Supervision made public last Friday its list of priorities for the coming year, a document that is essential reading for banks and anyone else trying to determine what direction bank regulation around the world may take. The committee includes representatives of 28 countries, including the United States, who will use the committee’s guidelines to write up their own standards.A major focus for the committee this year is restricting large banks’ use of internal models for credit, market and operational risks to measure their assets’ risks. Those models determine how much capital the banks need to sustain unexpected losses. Because banks are not required to disclose the details of how they calculate risk-weighted asset ratios, there is no way for investors, bank analysts or the media to accurately compare banks’ risks. The Basel committee is seeking to make the risk-weighted asset ratios comparable. That would help the market to discipline banks by selling bank bonds or shares if it does not like the level of risk the banks are taking. One option for the Basel committee to consider is restricting the flexibility that banks have in calculating their own regulatory capital. The committee may also demand that the banks be transparent about their risk measurements. Presently, investors in bank securities and counterparties to banks’ derivatives conduct their transactions on faith, not on trustworthy ratios that can help them assess banks’ true credit quality.The committee is also finally questioning the banks’ politically influenced practice of determining the probability of default of their home country’s sovereign bonds at zero, no matter what the rating agencies or market signals like credit spreads say. If the Basel committee recommends changing that practice, banks investing in home sovereign bonds that are not investment grade will have to raise equity, increase their retained earnings or jettison risky assets to comply with Basel’s minimum capital requirements. That would have a negative impact on banks in Russia and some  European countries, including Greece, where the credit quality of sovereign bonds has been deteriorating. Banks in the United States that invested in United States Treasuries would not be hurt, though, because yields and ratings imply practically a zero chance of default for United States debt.The committee has also set an ambitious goal for itself. Now that it has finalized all capital rules and other new buffers under its latest set of reform measures known as Basel III, it has to analyze how these rules interact with each other and how they work to make banks safer.  Basel III includes rules in a variety of areas, including limits on large credit exposure and the forthcoming requirements on loss­-absorbing capacity for globally systemically important banks. Additionally, stress tests have played an increasingly important role in the United States and many countries in Europe. The committee said it would “further assess the potential interactions among these metrics, including the extent to which the various measures bind across different banks and drive bank behavior.”The Basel committee’s agenda will challenge banks’ information technology systems and give more responsibility to technology employees, compliance officers and auditors. Many large banks continue to struggle with collecting high-quality data, pulling together risk exposures and identifying counterparty concentrations accurately and rapidly. The Basel committee is right to worry that “as the memories of the crisis fade over time, there is a danger that the enhancement of banks’ capabilities in these areas may receive a slower-track treatment.’  Banks’ technology systems, data and reporting processes require significant investment both financially and in personnel. Unfortunately, because technology employees are not generating revenues like traders or lending officers, they are all too often derided with the shortsighted moniker of “cost center” and not given the necessary resources. And often, these professionals do not receive levels of pay that would give them an incentive to better perform their essential functions. Despite attempts by some American lawmakers to paint the Basel Committee as some distant, foreign body whose regulatory agenda should not apply to banks in the United States, nothing could be further from the truth. After the German bank Herstatt failed in 1974, negatively affecting the foreign exchange portfolios of United States banks, American bank regulators were among the first to recognize how globally interconnected banks had become and encouraged British and Japanese regulators to create international uniform capital standards. The Basel committee’s goal continues to be to curtail bank regulatory arbitrage, that is, banks moving their activities to countries with weaker capital rules.  But unlike politicians, the Basel committee does not have to divide its time among different issues of interest to voters. It can focus on trying to improve banks’ capital and risk management globally. This focus long preceded lawmakers currently in office and will long outlive them. 