Marissa Mayer, the chief executive of Yahoo, said on Tuesday that the Internet company would spin off its 15.4 percent stake in Alibaba, China’s leading e-commerce company, into a separate company, Vindu Goel and Michael J. de la Merced report in The New York Times. Shareholders will directly reap all the remaining profit from Yahoo’s investment, which cost almost nothing a decade ago but is now worth about $39.5 billion. The Alibaba stake alone now makes up nearly 85 percent of Yahoo’s market value. Shares of Yahoo rose about 7 percent in after-hours trading after disclosure of the plan.How will the spinoff work? The company will put its 15.4 percent stake in Alibaba into a separate company. “Spinco” will own Alibaba shares, “as well as a legacy, ancillary Yahoo business,” according to a news release on Tuesday. Yahoo will then give the shares in that Spinco to its investors in proportion to the size of their holdings. Because the transaction involves only stock, the spinoff is considered tax-free to Yahoo.Matt Levine of Bloomberg View writes: “Spinco is an utterly pointless beast. It is a one-stock mutual fund. Wouldn’t you rather have the stock? Yes, you would rather have the stock. Alibaba, similarly, would rather get rid of Spinco ‒ a weird alternative vehicle confusing its investors and fragmenting its liquidity ‒ especially if it can do so at a discount. So everyone will be better off when Alibaba buys Spinco. So you’d expect that to happen, as soon as it can.”DUPONT FIGHT COULD DEFINE INVESTOR ACTIVISM  |  Shareholder activism seems unstoppable these days, but Nelson Peltz’s bid to replace four directors at DuPont “may just be where corporate America finally draws the line and tries to stem the activist tide,” Steven Davidoff Solomon writes in the Deal Professor column. Mr. Peltz’s hedge fund, Trian Fund Management, is pushing for DuPont to improve its performance. But unlike other targets of shareholder activism, DuPont is a well-performing company that “should be receiving credit for its actions, not pressure from activists.”By refusing to give in to all of Trian’s demands, “DuPont is setting up a clash of civilizations, a battle that could perhaps define shareholder activism, setting limits on who controls corporate America,” Mr. Davidoff Solomon writes. “The underlying struggle is over who knows what is best for America: competent boards that perform well or hedge funds that are looking for the quick payoff. If DuPont goes down, then the rest of corporate America is fair game for hedge fund tinkering.”CORPORATIONS BEND UNDER U.S. STRENGTHS  |  Consumers may be cashing in on lower oil prices, rock-bottom interest rates and a strong dollar. But these same trends are hurting big American companies with business abroad, Landon Thomas Jr. writes in DealBook. Such companies, including Procter & Gamble and Caterpillar, which export many of their products overseas, are blaming the weak global economy and a too-strong dollar for their disappointing earnings. Stocks fell across the board on Tuesday.“Analysts say that the roster of American companies that will see a weaker bottom line this year is rapidly growing and it will include major oil companies, hurt by lower oil prices, and commercial banks that are experiencing squeezed margins from lower interest rates,” Mr. Thomas writes. Economists also say that while the United States is not an export-driven economy, many of its biggest companies rely heavily on outside markets and will inevitably be hurt by a stronger dollar and global stagnation.“The disconnect between how American consumers and multinationals are doing was underscored on Tuesday by a report that consumer confidence was at its highest level since 2007, driven by lower gas prices and a vastly improved employment outlook,” Mr. Thomas adds. “Nevertheless, bond investors warn that this sentiment could change quickly if large companies, hurt by lower oil prices and a stronger dollar, have to start laying off employees to compensate for shrinking margins.”ON THE AGENDA  |  The Federal Reserve’s policy-making committee makes an announcement at 2 p.m. after concluding its two-day meeting. William H. Gross, the bond fund manager, is on CNBC at 2:10 p.m. Facebook reports fourth-quarter results after the market closes.THIEVES MAKE OFF WITH WELLS FARGO GOLD  |  Three masked robbers crashed a stolen sport utility vehicle into the entrance of Wells Fargo’s corporate museum in San Francisco’s financial district on Tuesday, then held a security guard at gunpoint and made off with gold nuggets from a display case, the San Francisco police said. Police are investigating the robbery at the Wells Fargo History Museum, which is on the street level of the bank’s corporate headquarters.While the police say their preliminary estimates of the nuggets’ value is about $10,000, the gold has sentimental value to the bank, which takes its history seriously. The police say the nuggets date to the early days of Wells Fargo, which was founded during the gold rush of the 19th century. But the biggest cost of the robbery might have been the damage to the entrance. The police said early estimates of the damage were more than $200,000.  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailCanary Wharf Owner’s Largest Shareholders Back Acquisition Bid  |  The support means that Qatar’s sovereign wealth fund and Brookfield Property Partners are likely to succeed in their $3.9 billion bid for Songbird Estates, which owns Canary Wharf, the sprawling office and retail complex that is home to much of London’s investment banking sector. DealBook »Native American Tribe Buys Stake in Rock Festival Producer Danny Wimmer  |  Danny Wimmer Presents, which produces music festivals like Rock on the Range, is selling a stake in itself to the United Auburn Indian Community Development Corporation. DealBook »Lattice Semiconductor to Buy Silicon Image  |  Lattice Semiconductor is paying $600 million in cash, a price that is 23.7 percent above Silicon Image’s closing price on Monday. DealBook »Tim Hortons Starts Jobs Cuts After Burger King Takeover  |  Tim Hortons, a Canadian chain of coffee-and-doughnut shops, is cutting staff at its regional offices and corporate headquarters less than two months after the company’s shareholders approved the roughly $11 billion takeover by Burger King, Bloomberg News writes.  BLOOMBERG NEWSIsrael Puts Uzi Developer Up for Sale  |  Israel’s Government Companies Authority said it expected the sale of Israel Military Industries to be completed by 2016, with the arms manufacturer estimated to fetch more than $500 million, Bloomberg News writes.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Aer Lingus Deal Could Spur Airline Consolidation in Europe  |  As Aer Lingus, Ireland’s flagship carrier, recommended its sale to the parent of British Airways, analysts raised hopes for other mergers in a fragmented market, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMESMarriott to Buy Delta Hotels and Resorts  |  Marriott International said on Tuesday that it had reached a deal to buy Canada’s Delta Hotels and Resorts for about $135 million, The Wall Street Journal writes.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Prosper Buys a Surgical Procedures Lender  |  The deal for American HealthCare Lending is part of Prosper’s push to expand its offerings as it continues a multiyear turnaround effort. DealBook »Alibaba Creates a Consumer Credit Rating Service  |  Sesame Credit Management will use data on online spending habits in an effort to make credit more available to millions of consumers across China. DealBook »Deutsche Bank’s Plans Falter as Trading Lags  |  “The global investment bank Anshu Jain pledged to build has probably become Deutsche Bank’s weakest business ‒ and investor pressure is mounting on him to cut it back,” Bloomberg News writes.  BLOOMBERG NEWS JPMorgan Reaped Up to $300 Million Gain on Swiss Franc Turmoil  |  JPMorgan Chase is one of the few banks to profit after the Swiss central bank roiled markets by abolishing its cap on the franc, Bloomberg News writes. Citigroup, Deutsche Bank and Barclays are said to have suffered about $400 million in cumulative trading losses, according to people with knowledge of the matter.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Sumitomo Mitsui Posts Gain for Quarter  |  Gains in bond trading and overseas lending helped Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group of Japan report a 1.8 percent increase in third-quarter earnings, Bloomberg News reports.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Bain Capital to Buy Parts Maker TI Automotive  |  Over the years, Bain Capital has made a number of investments in the auto parts sector, which has proved a fertile ground for deal-making. DealBook »Takeover Talks Halt for Australia’s Bradken  |  The Australian mining products maker Bradken said that Bain Capital and Pacific Equity Partners had pulled a $730 million takeover proposal because of volatility in the commodities sector, sending the company’s shares down by a third, Reuters writes.  REUTERS Private Equity Wins Big at TARP Auctions  |  A government program to rid itself of investments in small banks, which were part of the government’s Troubled Asset Relief Program, has proved to be a boon to hedge funds, private equity firms and other private investors, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing a new watchdog report.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Informatica Contacts Potential Buyers  |  Exploring its sale options could ease the pressure that Informatica, a data software company, could face from investors, including Elliott Management. Elliott revealed on Monday that it owned about 8 percent of Informatica and sees it as “significantly undervalued,” The Wall Street Journal reports.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Bridgewater Fund Rises During First Half of January  |  Ray Dalio’s $160 billion Bridgewater Associates hedge fund is said to have gained 4.5 percent this month through Jan. 16 in Pure Alpha II, one of its hedge funds, at a time when volatile currency fluctuations brought declines and closings for some peers, Bloomberg News writes, citing an unidentified person familiar with the matter.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Blackstone Said to Consider I.P.O. for British Resort Operator  |  The Blackstone Group is said to be starting a process to either sell or begin an initial public offering for the British resort operator Center Parcs, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter. Center Parcs could be valued at up to $3.75 billion in an I.P.O. or sale, some of the people said.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Lyft in Talks for More Financing  |  Lyft, the popular ride-hailing start-up, is in talks to raise another big round of venture financing, according to two people familiar with the negotiations, potentially adding hundreds of millions of dollars to the $330 million it has already raised, the Bits blog reports.  NEW YORK TIMES BITSSingapore Central Bank Eases Currency Policy  |  Singapore’s central bank eased its monetary policy on Wednesday, becoming the latest central bank to use policy tools to help shore up growth against a backdrop of global economic turbulence, The New York Times writes.  NEW YORK TIMES S.E.C. Faces Challenges Over the Constitutionality of Some of Its Court Proceedings  |  Some say the Securities and Exchange Commission’s push to bring more cases before its administrative law judges rather than federal district court is unconstitutional, Peter J. Henning writes in White Collar Watch. DealBook »Gains From Economic Recovery Still Limited to Top One Percent  |  In 2013, the concentration of income among the richest Americans remained at levels last seen nearly a century ago, Justin Wolfers writes on The Upshot.  NEW YORK TIMES UPSHOT New Greek Debt Deal Will Require More Brinkmanship  |  The markets are relaxed that the anti-bailout Syriza government can cut a new deal with creditors. But pressure points lie ahead, Neil Unmack of Reuters Breakingviews writes. DealBook »Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 