By CLIFFORD KRAUSSJAN. 27, 2015
As the price of crude oil fluctuates, why some countries are faring much better than others.HOUSTON —  For 123 consecutive days, the AAA motor club reported a daily drop in national gasoline prices, bringing hundreds of dollars of savings to almost every American family. But that streak has now come to an end.On Tuesday, the average price for a gallon of regular gasoline rose a fraction of a penny, to $2.04. That’s still 27 cents lower than it was a month ago, and $1.25 lower than a year ago, the product of a more than 50 percent drop in oil prices since June.The slight daily increase is not necessarily a sign of a trend toward higher prices at the pump, energy experts said. More likely, it is the product of some partial and temporary refinery shutdowns in Ohio, Texas and Louisiana that are raising prices in the country’s midsection.Also, it is normal at the end of January and beginning of February for gasoline prices to begin to rise as refineries begin their seasonal maintenance operations to prepare for processing more expensive spring and summer blends.Prices at the pump remain below $2 a gallon for regular in more than half the states, and only in Hawaii do drivers pay more than $3 a gallon. Gasoline prices might drop a few pennies again the next few days if the snowstorm in the Northeast significantly interrupts road transportation and curbs gasoline demand, energy experts said.Advertisement“While gasoline prices are likely to increase this spring due to seasonal demand and maintenance,” Michael Green, a spokesman for AAA, wrote in a weekly commentary, “barring any significant increase in the global price of crude, AAA expects the national average to remain below $3 per gallon during 2015.”AdvertisementThe Energy Department has predicted that the average American household will save $750 this year because of lower gasoline prices. Many families will also save hundreds of dollars more from lower heating oil bills.Oil prices recovered by more than 2 percent on Tuesday — with the international Brent benchmark rising above $49 again — after the secretary general of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, Abdullah al-Badri, suggested that oil prices may have bottomed and could eventually rebound to $200 if there is not sufficient global investment in oil fields. Saudi Aramco, the Saudi national oil company, indicated this week that it would delay making some oil and gas field investments.But energy experts say there is little reason to think oil prices will snap back any time soon, unless there is a complete security breakdown in Iraq. Production is growing in the United States, Canada, Iraq and several other countries even though companies are announcing sharp cuts in investment and decommissioning rigs at an accelerating rate. Under Saudi Arabia’s leadership, OPEC has decided not to cut output.The International Energy Agency, based in Paris, estimates that in 2015, global oil investment will fall by 15 percent, or by about $100 billion. Still, several major offshore projects are just beginning to produce and add to the global glut, with supplies now estimated at roughly 1.5 million barrels a day in excess of demand.Companies that are dropping rigs and not drilling new wells are still completing wells that have already been drilled. And there is little incentive for companies to cap more than a few antiquated wells already producing.Production growth in the United States is not expected to begin reversing until the second half of the year, at the earliest.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Carrizo Oil and Gas, an aggressive exploration and production company based in Houston, announced on Tuesday that it would cut its drilling budget by 35 percent this year but still produce more oil. The company’s new wells are becoming more productive because of technological improvements, and service costs are falling with the price of crude.Chip Johnson, the company’s chief executive, told analysts that the company had achieved roughly 12 percent cost savings in the Eagle Ford shale field in South Texas since late last year, and expected around a 20 percent cost savings by year end.“If commodity prices stay at depressed levels,” he said, “we would expect service costs to decline further.”A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: After Steadily Falling, Price for Gas Notches an Increase.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.