By JACK EWINGJAN. 27, 2015
FRANKFURT — Siemens, the German engineering and electronics company, said on Tuesday that profit fell 25 percent in its first quarter as sales to the energy industry slumped, a sign of falling fuel prices’ having repercussions beyond the main oil-producing countries.Profit fell to 1.1 billion euros, or about $1.23 billion in the last three months of 2014, Siemens said. In the division that provides equipment and services to the oil, electricity and gas industries, profit fell 39 percent to €325 million as customers cut back on investment in new production capacity.The company said it may have to cut jobs as it seeks to reduce costs by €1 billion. Two executives in charge of poor-performing divisions will leave, including the head of the power and gas division, Siemens said.“We didn’t adequately recognize the signs of the times, such as rising price pressure and overcapacities,” Joe Kaeser, the chief executive of Siemens, said at a news conference in Munich before the company’s annual meeting for shareholders.AdvertisementBut Mr. Kaeser said that he expected demand for oil to continue to rise over the long term, and he defended the company’s $7.6 billion acquisition of Dresser-Rand, an American company that provides services to the oil and gas industries.Advertisement“The growth trend, the demand, is still intact,” he said. Mr. Kaeser reiterated that Siemens still expects profit for the full year to increase 15 percent.The acquisition of Dresser-Rand, announced in September just before oil prices started a sharp decline, will close in the summer, he said.Other Siemens divisions, like those that supply chemical and automobile producers, will benefit from lower oil prices, he said. “Companies in these sectors will have more funds available for additional capital expenditures, which will likewise benefit us,” he said.Siemens, based in Munich, is often seen as an indicator of the state of the German economy. The company exemplifies the country’s focus on industrial exports, which have allowed Germany to largely escape the stagnation affecting the rest of Europe.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Siemens supplies equipment for factories, power plants, and gas and oil fields to companies around the world. This makes it less susceptible to problems in Europe, but sensitive to global economic trends, like the plunge in oil prices in the second half of 2014 or turmoil in markets like Russia and the Middle East.Siemens said on Tuesday that Roland Fischer, head of the power and gas unit, would leave “at his own request.” Lisa Davis, the member of the Siemens management board who oversees that business, will manage it until Mr. Fischer’s replacement is appointed.Hermann Requardt, the member of the Siemens management board for the unit that makes X-ray machines and other scanners, will leave the company by “mutual consent,” Siemens said. His responsibilities will be taken by Siegfried Russwurm, the management board member responsible for human resources.Profit in the company’s health care division, which competes with General Electric to sell equipment like CT scanners to hospitals, fell 13 percent in the quarter to €413 million, Siemens said.AdvertisementSiemens said the drop in overall profit was also linked to a higher tax bill, increased spending on research and development, and losses from derivatives the company bought to hedge against changes in interest rates.Sales in the quarter rose 5 percent to €17.4 billion, Siemens said, but new orders fell 11 percent to €18 billion. Mr. Kaeser said the decline was a result of fewer very large orders compared to the same quarter a year earlier, like a €1.6 billion order a year ago to build a subway system in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.Siemens will meet with employee representatives in Germany in the coming week to discuss possible job cuts, Mr. Kaeser said.In a sign that lower oil prices may also cut demand for alternative energy sources, Siemens said that orders in its wind power and renewable energy division fell 44 percent to €1.3 billion. Orders fell sharply in Germany and the United States, it said.A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Fall in Energy Sector Sales Depresses Siemens Profit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.