The Blackstone Group, the biggest alternative investment firm, which typically relies on pension funds and other institutions to amass capital for deals, has begun an effort to raise more of that capital from individuals.Blackstone executives said on Thursday that the firm had raised about $700 million from wealthy individuals for a new fund intended expressly to tap this class of investors. The fund, managed by a new entity called Blackstone Total Alternatives Solution Advisors, will invest in areas like private equity and real estate, which form the core of Blackstone’s investing business.The effort is one of several among big private equity firms to attract capital from individuals. The Carlyle Group, a Blackstone rival based in Washington, recently established a way for individual investors to gain direct access to a selection of its private equity funds. Carlyle and another firm, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, have also been working with outside firms to give individuals mediated access to their core funds.With many public pension funds already invested in private equity, buyout titans view wealthy individuals as a new and largely untapped source of capital. Private equity firms — especially the biggest ones — want to gather more capital because it lets them earn more in management fees, which provide a more predictable stream of income than the profit earned on buyouts and other investments.The new Blackstone fund is open only to so-called qualified purchasers, or those who own at least $5 million in investable assets. They are required to commit at least $250,000, Laurence A. Tosi, Blackstone’s chief financial officer, told reporters on Thursday.The fund will be similar in certain ways to Blackstone’s other funds. Investors will be charged management fees and a slice of profit, known as carried interest, according to a regulatory filing in June. But the fund is expected to hold investments for three years, a slightly shorter time frame than is typical in the private equity business.Hamilton E. James, Blackstone’s president, said the fund was “wildly oversubscribed.” Mr. James, who is known as Tony, added that it was the first product of its kind.“It could be a big thing for us going forward,” he said.By WILLIAM ALDENSeeing individual investors as untapped sources of capital, private equity firms are seeking to attract checks in the tens of thousands of dollars rather than in the hundreds of millions.