
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT COLE

OCT. 9, 2015
SABMiller’s promise to find $550 million in new cost savings by 2020 is paltry in the context of the huge takeover approach from Anheuser-Busch InBev. SAB might have more powerful defenses in its locker. It had better, if it wants to stay independent from the Budweiser brewer.The promised savings are better than nothing. Coupled with previous commitments, the new initiatives put the company on track to reduce overhead by $1.55 billion between 2009 and 2020. The latest tranche comes out of an addressable cost base of $10 billion, the company said.The modest commitment also serves as an implicit signal to its suitor, which has a big reputation for parsimony. The SABMiller board seems to be challenging the bidder to say how it can do better. SABMiller said on Friday that it was making margins of 38 percent on earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amorization, or Ebitda, in its top 20 countries. That is an impressive number, even if some important details were missing.The promise is paltry, however, because it is hard to see how it supports SABMiller’s stated wish to keep out of the clutches of the Budweiser brewer. SABMiller’s share price before the Anheuser-Busch InBev bid news became public may have reflected investor confidence that past success in cost cutting would be followed by future efficiency gains. In that case, shareholders have every reason to grab the bid premium that, on Reuters Breakingviews calculations, comes out at 37 percent over the undisturbed price.AdvertisementBesides, the core of the value argument between the SABMiller and Anheuser-Busch InBev boards concerns top-line growth rather than cost synergy benefits. This is a deal that will be made, probably, if the two sides can agree on how much SAB’s business in emerging markets, notably Africa, is worth.Still, if there is no agreement on that, SABMiller’s shareholders may require better reasons to back their management. Time is short, too. If there is no deal, British takeover rules require Anheuser-Busch InBev either to make an offer directly to SABMiller shareholders or to go away for at least six months by next Wednesday.AdvertisementSABMIller’s relatively low balance-sheet debt gives it some financial firepower. The case for the defense, however, is not yet made.Robert Cole is assistant editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »