On Monday, Antonio Weiss, the 48-year-old former global head of investment banking at Lazard, took up his new position as counselor to Jacob J. Lew, the Treasury secretary. In a note to his friends and Lazard colleagues, Mr. Weiss explained that he will be advising Mr. Lew on financial markets, regulatory reform, job creation and on “fostering broad-based” economic growth. It sounds like a full plate, and a job worth giving up his high-powered career at Lazard to take. “I am fortunate to have a chance to serve my country,” he wrote.What he will not be is under secretary of the Treasury for domestic finance, thanks to weeks of political grandstanding by Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, in a misguided populist crusade that nearly deprived the nation of the services of a man who will no doubt prove to be a valuable public servant. Her drive to derail his nomination highlights a lingering animosity toward bankers that risks becoming counterproductive.It also tended to paint everyone on Wall Street with the same broad brush of nefarious behavior. The truth, of course, is much more nuanced, as Ms. Warren well knows. Some Wall Street types serving in government want to protect their friends and the status quo; others, like Mr. Weiss, want to actually try to reform the bad behavior they have been seeing for years.But Ms. Warren could not help herself. She raised the call to man the anti-Wall Street barricades as soon as President Obama nominated Mr. Weiss in November for the Treasury post, which required Senate confirmation. She managed to rope into her crusade several usually right-thinking colleagues, including the senators Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Al Franken of Minnesota. Her argument against Mr. Weiss, whom she never met, boiled down to the fact that he had the audacity to work on Wall Street and that Wall Street already controls too much of what happens in Washington. “Enough is enough,” she said repeatedly.  But Ms. Warren chose the wrong battle. Not only is Mr. Weiss a bona fide progressive thinker, he is supremely qualified for the under secretary role and, frankly, is the kind of person that one marvels is willing to serve in government at all, given the huge sums of money he can continue to make in the private sector. (Full disclosure: Mr. Weiss worked briefly for me at Lazard more than 20 years ago.) Mr. Weiss is also no fool. Rather than continue to be berated publicly by Ms. Warren and to continue to fight an uphill battle for Senate confirmation, he withdrew from consideration on Jan. 12 in a compromise that allows him to take the advisory role, a job that requires no Senate confirmation, and affords him many of the same responsibilities as the under secretary position and perhaps even better access to the levers of powers. So Ms. Warren gets to claim a victory and Mr. Weiss still gets to work at the Treasury Department, but it is fair to ask what has been lost in the internecine skirmish. About the same time that word began to leak that Mr. Weiss had given up his fight, a group of high-powered Wall Street executives was gathered together by Reuters in Times Square to share their predictions for 2015. The panel included Roger C. Altman, the founder of Evercore, the boutique investment bank; Ruth Porat, the chief financial officer of Morgan Stanley; Robert E. Diamond Jr., the former chief executive of Barclays; and Eric Cantor, the former House majority leader who was just weeks into his new job as a managing director at Moelis & Company, another boutique investment bank. Not surprisingly, Rob Cox, the senior Reuters editor serving as moderator, asked the participants what they thought about Mr. Weiss’s decision. “Is financial competence now a complete disqualifier for public service?” Mr. Cox asked, to considerable laughter from the audience.
Mr. Altman, a former Treasury official in both the Carter and Clinton administrations, tried to provide a little historical perspective about the vitriol toward Wall Street that seems so prevalent. “At the moment, the enmity, which so much of the American public feels toward the financial sector, remains deep and fresh,” he said. “And that’s just the way it is right now.”“I think a lot of us wish it weren’t quite as deep and fresh as it is, but it is that way,” he continued, and “when some of our successors are sitting here in 25 years or 50 years, they will say, ‘Well, sure, it took a lot more than six years to get over the events of 2008, because that was the worst financial crisis this country ever saw since 1932 and 1933.’ So I’m not sure it’s all that surprising. It’s just a bit unfortunate.” He said he was not worried it was going to “ruin our country,” but he did seem eager that the negative sentiments be overcome.Mr. Cantor, who suffered a stunning political defeat in November but managed to move quickly through the revolving door to Wall Street, said he agreed with Mr. Altman that the anger would dissipate eventually. “It’s particularly severe right now,” he said, and it had “amplified the sort of populist notion that tends to now disqualify somebody that is talented and whose talents are needed to help us resolve some of these problems in Washington.” He lamented that the extremes on both the left and the right that have made it difficult for people like Mr. Weiss to be confirmed. “Whereas most of the country is really in the middle,” he said. “Most of the country wants to go about — if they’re businesspeople — they want to go about their business, they want to invest their money. Families, wage earners, which is most of the country — 90 percent of wage earners work for someone else — they want to see some progress on all these issues that we talked about.”For his part, Mr. Diamond, the first American chief executive of Barclays, who built its investment banking business but was forced out because of the bank’s participation in a scheme to manipulate global interest rate benchmarks, said he found it somewhat surprising that the anger directed toward banks and bankers continues to linger. “And here’s the part that I find I think hardest for those in the banking industry,” he said. “It’s kind of nondiscriminatory.” Regarding Mr. Weiss, who he said he did not know, Mr. Diamond said, “They didn’t treat him as an individual in his career and his knowledge and his background. It’s a ‘bank’ and ‘a banker.’ And we’re going to have to go through it, I agree with that as well, and we will. But I do think it’s a lesson to us, and we have to learn from it. But I think the anger against banks and bankers is deeper and was less discriminatory in terms of which institutions managed themselves well, which managed themselves poorly, which people did a great job, which people didn’t. And we will see through this and I look forward to it, but it’s going to take some more time.”Mr. Diamond is right. The anger directed toward banks and bankers is deep and is not going away anytime soon. Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, told me recently he thought it might take as long as a generation to dissipate. But to continue to vilify all bankers seven years after the onset of the crisis — as Ms. Warren did to Mr. Weiss — is utterly counterproductive to the way America really works. It is far better to have Mr. Weiss, who understands Wall Street and is a progressive thinker, in a position to curtail the kind of bad behavior that leads to financial crises than have Ms. Warren and her allies prevent him from serving. That may be the best thing to come out of this embarrassing episode.