AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelShowtime is crossing the border.The premium cable network plans to announce on Thursday that it has struck a deal with the Toronto-based Bell Media to bring the Showtime brand to Canada. The deal represents the first time Showtime’s programming will be distributed and marketed under the Showtime umbrella outside the United States.Under the agreement, Bell Media will feature Showtime programming during a special branded Sunday evening block on its traditional pay-television service, called the Movie Network. Its programming also will appear as part of a Showtime collection on CraveTV, Bell Media’s streaming service.The deal includes current and past Showtime series, like the award-winning new show “The Affair” as well as “Ray Donovan” and “Penny Dreadful.” The hit drama “Homeland,” which stars Claire Danes, is not included in the deal because the network does not own the rights to distribute the program outside the United States. (“Homeland” is distributed by 20th Century Fox.) But Canadian viewers will still be able to watch it on CraveTV as part of separate licensing agreements.Showtime, owned by CBS, has licensed its programming around the globe, but its brand had not been shown prominently. The new deal is an initial step in a broader international expansion for Showtime, with executives calling the agreement a template for how they plan to raise the network’s global profile.“Our shows are everywhere, but our brand is not,” said David Nevins, president of Showtime Networks. “Now, it is about the Showtime brand.”Both traditional and streaming companies are rushing to expand their international footprint. HBO, for instance, operates networks in over 60 countries. And Netflix said last week that it would accelerate its global expansion to operate in 200 countries by the end of 2016, up from 50 now. Showtime said critical acclaim and awards for its series, along with a push to fully own the bulk of its programming, were the driving forces behind the deal with Bell Media and others to come.Advertisement