The Blackstone Group reported lower fourth-quarter earnings on Thursday that, despite a decline in its credit business and less robust returns on real estate, exceeded analysts’ expectations.Blackstone, the largest alternative investment firm, said its economic net income — a nonstandard measure of profit that includes unrealized investment gains or losses — declined 6 percent compared with the same period a year earlier, to $1.4 billion. The results amounted to $1.25 a share, exceeding the average forecast of 92 cents a share among analysts questioned by Thomson Reuters.While Blackstone said economic net income from private equity nearly doubled, the firm reported declines in its real estate business, which is its biggest segment, and its credit business, which it said was hampered by a challenging market in the fourth quarter. It also reported a decline in its hedge fund business.Blackstone said its economic net income in real estate fell 38 percent compared with the same period a year earlier, to $577.4 million, as the segment’s revenue declined. While Blackstone did not offer a reason for the decline, the results contrasted with the unit’s strong performance in the fourth quarter of 2013, when it reaped a handsome return from the initial public offering of the hotel operator Hilton Worldwide Holdings.In credit, where economic net income fell 57 percent, to $45.5 million, Blackstone said certain funds were hurt by a deteriorating market for low-rated debt.Still, Blackstone is making new credit investments. Among other initiatives, the firm said it raised capital for a new fund to buy the debt of energy companies that have been strained by the recent collapse in oil prices.Private equity was the exception among Blackstone’s investment businesses, reporting a 95 percent gain in economic net income, to $702.3 million. Blackstone said it had raised $6 billion of new private equity capital in the quarter, including for its second fund dedicated to investments in the energy sector.As it aims to profit on the oil price rout, Blackstone has about $10 billion of capital, known as dry powder, that can be deployed for such investments, Hamilton E. James, the firm’s president, told reporters. He said Blackstone’s deal makers were busy reviewing possible investments in companies that have struggled to cope with the sharp movement in oil prices.“Our people are scrambling and trying to come up for air,” Mr. James said. “We’re very busy looking at these specific deals.”The turmoil in the energy sector has cut both ways for private equity investors. While some companies backed by private equity have suffered losses, a number of private equity firms are now jumping deeper into the sector. Apollo Global Management, for example, is seeking to finance a fund to buy the debt of troubled energy companies.“There are some significantly mispriced assets out there,” Mr. James said.While Blackstone’s economic net income declined in the fourth quarter, a separate measure of the cash generated by the firm increased, reflecting Blackstone’s ability to generate a tangible profit from its investments. This measure, distributable earnings, rose 38 percent, to $1.1 billion.Blackstone grew even larger in the quarter, as fresh capital brought its assets under management to $290.4 billion, 9 percent higher than a year earlier.Like other private equity firms, Blackstone prefers to use nonstandard metrics to report results. According to generally accepted accounting principles, Blackstone’s net income fell 11 percent compared with the fourth quarter of 2013, to $551.5 million.“Looking forward, we see continued momentum across all of our businesses as the environment for both investing opportunistically and harvesting more seasoned assets remains attractive,” Stephen A. Schwarzman, the company’s chief executive, said in a statement.