After Yahoo completes the spinoff of its $39 billion stake in the Alibaba Group, the Silicon Valley stalwart may not have much time to turn its core Internet businesses around, DealBook’s Michael J. de la Merced reports. When the spinoff is done, investors and analysts say, Yahoo could become a takeover target.Yahoo has undergone a turnaround under the two-and-a-half-year tenure of Marissa Mayer, its chief executive, which some analysts say has made it a more focused company. But others warn that Yahoo still has more work to do, potentially deterring would-be buyers. Although spinning off Alibaba is a step investors have demanded for years, the decision also has deal makers talking about potential moves that extend beyond Yahoo itself, Mr. de la Merced writes. Even the company that Yahoo is creating to hold the Alibaba shares could eventually become a takeover target, with Alibaba the logical buyer.Yahoo is less likely to pursue huge deals of its own, partly because it does not have the enormous war chests of its rivals. And ultimately, it may be an attractive acquisition. Without its Alibaba stake, Yahoo is expected to have a market value of under $10 billion, a digestible amount for a private equity firm or another Internet company. One possibility may be SoftBank of Japan, which is already tied to Yahoo through the American company’s 35 percent stake in Yahoo Japan, a business the Japanese telecommunications conglomerate controls. DEUTSCHE BANK SWINGS TO PROFIT  |  Deutsche Bank said on Thursday that its profit in the fourth quarter rose to 441 million euros, or about $500 million, from a loss of €1.4 billion in the period a year earlier, as revenue in the investment banking increased, Jack Ewing reports in DealBook. The quarterly net profit, which also reflected a lower tax bill, was better than the loss analysts had expected for the quarter. Revenue in the quarter rose 19 percent, to €7.8 billion. For the full year, Deutsche Bank reported net profit of €1.7 billion, up from €681 million in 2013.Deutsche Bank has been struggling with a combination of stricter government regulation, low interest rates and legal costs stemming from accusations of past misconduct. The profit for 2014, while better than the year before, amounted to a pretax return on equity of 5 percent, far from the ratio of 25 percent that Deutsche Bank and many other large banks aimed for before the financial crisis that began in 2008, Mr. Ewing writes.MCDONALD’S REPLACES ITS CHIEF  |  McDonald’s announced on Wednesday that its president and chief executive, Don Thompson, would step down, effective March 1, just days after the fast-food restaurant chain posted one of its worst financial performances in years, Hiroko Tabuchi reports in The New York Times. He will be succeeded by Steve Easterbrook, the chain’s chief branding officer, who will also take over Mr. Thompson’s seat on the McDonald’s board, McDonald’s said in a statement.The announcement comes after McDonald’s reported a steep decline in sales and earnings last week, as competition and evolving consumer tastes continue to take a toll on the restaurant brand. There has even been talk of shareholder activism, as Steven Davidoff Solomon noted in a Deal Professor column this month. But, Mr. Davidoff Solomon added, the more Wall Street expects McDonald’s to be like Shake Shack, the hip hamburger purveyor, “the more off the mark it is likely to be. Instead of trying to transform McDonald’s, perhaps Wall Street should take a harder look at its premium burger fetish.”ON THE AGENDA  |  Weekly jobless claims are out at 8:30 a.m. The pending home sales index comes out at 10 a.m. Joseph C. Tsai, the executive vice chairman of Alibaba, is on CNBC at 9 a.m. Shake Shack is expected to price its initial public offering. Alibaba and Time Warner Cable report quarterly earnings before the market opens. Google and Amazon report fourth-quarter earnings after the market closes. This is the last DealBook newsletter for Tim Hilchey, the incredible copy editor, who is retiring. LESSONS FROM HOUSING FINANCE  |  Rent-to-own schemes, which allow a person to rent a home and pay for an option to buy it at a predetermined price at a later date, largely exploit consumers’ lack of financial savvy, Jesse Eisinger writes in his column, The Trade. Although such business “appears to be a small, grubby niche of finance,” he adds, “there are some important lessons to be drawn.”The first lesson is that someone should look out for renters in markets where people might take advantage of them, a responsibility that falls to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which Congress is now trying to gut, Mr. Eisinger writes. That brings us to another lesson. Many contend that the government needs to have a much-reduced role, saying the market can deliver more mortgages more efficiently to more people.Melvin L. Watt, who heads the Federal Housing Finance Agency, seems to hold a lonely position in the other camp. “He is pushing Fannie and Freddie to expand credit, widening the types of mortgages they will back from the private sector,” Mr. Eisinger writes. “In doing so, he is reversing direction from his predecessor, Edward J. DeMarco. Mr. Watt is staking out the position that the government can be a responsible steward for most of the housing market.”  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailCommScope to Buy TE Connectivity Unit for $3 Billion  |  The deal by CommScope, which makes networking equipment for wireless operators, is a bet on consumers’ continuing hunger for communicating over data networks. DealBook »Shareholders Approve Reynolds-Lorillard Deal  |  Shareholders of Reynolds American, the maker of Camel cigarettes, approved its $25 billion acquisition of Lorillard, a deal that would combine the second- and third-biggest cigarette companies in the United States, Reuters writes.  REUTERS London Stock Exchange Said to Plan Sale of Russell Investments  |  The London Stock Exchange is said to be planning to put Russell Investments up for sale in mid-February and hopes to receive $1.4 billion for the unit, Reuters writes, citing unidentified sources. The L.S.E. bought Russell Investments, the owner of the Russell 2000 stock market index, last year for $2.7 billion in cash.  REUTERS BATS Agrees to Buy Hotspot Trading Venue  |  The stock exchange operator BATS Global Markets agreed on Wednesday to buy the trading venue Hotspot FX for $365 million in cash from KCG, The Wall Street Journal reports. Both parties will share tax benefits, which could result in up to $70 million in further payments to KCG.  WALL STREET JOURNAL Lloyds Bank Chief Seen as Favored to Lead Standard Chartered  |  António Horta-Osório, the chief executive of the Lloyds Banking Group, is among Standard Chartered shareholders’ preferred candidates to replace Peter Sands at the bank, Bloomberg News writes, citing unidentified people with knowledge of the matter. Antonio Simoes, the chief executive of HSBC’s British bank, is also seen as a potential replacement.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Profit at Nomura Surges  |  The Japanese investment bank Nomura said on Thursday that its net income for the period that ended Dec. 31 rose 45 percent, to 70 billion yen, or about $595 million, from 48.3 billion yen in the same period a year earlier, Bloomberg News writes.  BLOOMBERG NEWS Judge Says Bankruptcy of Caesars Unit Can Proceed in Chicago  |  The ruling by a federal bankruptcy judge in Delaware is an incremental but important victory for the casino company and its private equity backers. DealBook »TPG Sues Former Spokesman  |  The private equity firm TPG Capital has sued its former spokesman, Adam Levine, contending that he took confidential documents and distributed them to The New York Times and other media after being denied a promotion to a partnership position, Reuters writes.  REUTERS Buffett’s Sister Donates $100 Million to Northwestern  |  The donation from Roberta Buffett Elliott, the sister of Warren E. Buffett, is the single biggest gift in the university’s history, Bloomberg News reports.  BLOOMBERG NEWSShake Shack Pumps Up I.P.O. to $95 Million  |  At the high end of its newly expanded range, the company will raise $95 million ‒ and more than $109 million if underwriters exercise an option to sell more shares. DealBook »Elis of France Expects to Raise $790 Million in I.P.O.  |  Elis, a French provider of rental uniforms and linens, expects to price its February offering on Euronext at €12 to €19 a share. DealBook »Coinbase, a Bitcoin Exchange, Is Operating Without Licenses So Far  |  Coinbase said this week that it had opened as the first regulated Bitcoin exchange in several states, but it does not have licenses in New York or California. DealBook »Uber’s Business Model Could Change Your Work  |  “Uber, and more broadly the app-driven labor market it represents, is at the center of what could be a sea change in work, and in how people think about their jobs,” Farhad Manjoo writes in the State of the Art column.  NEW YORK TIMES Fed Won’t Raise Rates Before June, at Earliest  |  The Federal Reserve gave its most upbeat economic assessment since the recession, though it did say inflation remains sluggish, The New York Times reports.  NEW YORK TIMES Signs for Hope in Basel’s Bank Regulation Agenda  |  The Basel Committee for Banking Supervision has made public its priorities for the coming year, and one is restricting large banks’ use of internal models for measuring their assets’ risks, Mayra Rodríguez Valladares writes in an Another View column. DealBook »Silk Road Suspect Used Mulitple Aliases  |  A federal agent testified on Wednesday that Ross W. Ulbricht had ordered nine counterfeit drivers’ licenses under multiple aliases months before he was arrested on charges he operated Silk Road, the online marketplace for illegal drugs, The Financial Times reports.  FINANCIAL TIMES Central Bankers Ramp Up Currency Battle  |  A surprise move by Singapore on Wednesday to ease monetary policy is “the latest sign of the pressure on policy makers at a time of falling commodity prices, declining inflation and softening growth expectations,” The Wall Street Journal writes.  WALL STREET JOURNAL A Way to Hasten Bank Reform in Greece  |  Before Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras gets any eurozone deal on Greece’s public debt, he could make good on his promise of a permanent mortgage moratorium, George Hay and Neil Unmack of Reuters Breakingviews write. DealBook »Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 