Updated, 7:48 p.m. | Deutsche Bank, the largest German bank, said on Thursday that it returned to profit in the fourth quarter of 2014, as revenue in the investment banking unit rose and the bank set aside less money to cover legal problems.Shares of Deutsche Bank rose 2.5 percent after it reported a fourth-quarter net profit of 441 million euros (about $500 million), after a loss of €1.4 billion in the period a year earlier. Analysts polled by Reuters had forecast a loss for the latest quarter.Although the earnings were better than expected, Deutsche Bank managers acknowledged they were still far from meeting their goals.“We have not delivered to investors the return which they rightfully expect,” Anshu Jain, the bank’s co-chief executive, said during a conference call with journalists.One of the last European banks that is still a major presence on Wall Street, Deutsche Bank has been struggling with a combination of stricter government regulation, low interest rates and legal costs stemming from accusations of past misconduct.The profit for 2014, while better than the year before, amounted to a pretax return on equity of 5 percent — well behind the ratio of 25 percent that Deutsche Bank and many other large banks aimed for before the financial crisis that began in 2008. Return on equity is a common measure of bank profitability.Revenue in the quarter rose 19 percent, to €7.8 billion, Deutsche Bank said, in part because of increased uncertainty in global financial markets, which prompted clients to do more trading and generated fees for the bank.For the full year, Deutsche Bank reported net profit of €1.7 billion, compared with a profit of €681 million in 2013.Under pressure from regulators as well as shareholders, Deutsche Bank has been trying to increase the proportion of its own money that it uses to do business, as opposed to borrowed money. Nevertheless, the bank’s common equity Tier 1 ratio, a measure of its ability to absorb losses, fell to 11.7 percent at the end of 2014, compared with 12.7 percent a year earlier.Deutsche Bank, however, said it had increased its leverage ratio, often considered the best measure of a bank’s ability to withstand a crisis, to 3.5 percent at the end of 2014 from 2.4 percent a year earlier. The minimum leverage ratio in Europe is 3 percent. Regulators are expected to raise the minimum further in years to come.“In 2014, Deutsche Bank became a stronger, safer and better balanced bank,” Mr. Jain said in a video statement.The bank said its costs from fines or legal fees fell €1 billion in the fourth quarter, but it cautioned that “a number of major litigation cases have yet to be settled.” Deutsche Bank is among a group of banks under investigation on suspicion that employees manipulated benchmark interest rates used to set rates on mortgages and many other loans. It also faces inquiries into foreign exchange trading and lawsuits related to sales of securities in the United States and transactions with countries under international sanctions.“We’re doing everything we can to bring legal disputes to a conclusion,” Jürgen Fitschen, the other co-chief executive, said during the conference call with reporters. But he said it was impossible to predict when cases would be resolved and how much they would cost.The bank also cut the amount of money it set aside for problem loans to €369 million, from €725 million.Deutsche Bank executives deflected questions about whether the bank was likely to cut jobs or separate its investment banking business from the retail banking business in Germany, as some news outlets have reported. The managers said they would announce the results of a comprehensive review of bank strategy during the second quarter.Stefan Krause, the chief financial officer, said Deutsche Bank was continuing to integrate Postbank, which was acquired in 2010 and has a network of branches in German post offices.Mr. Jain acknowledged that Deutsche Bank experienced losses from currency trading on Jan. 15, when the Swiss National Bank abandoned attempts to cap the value of the Swiss franc against the euro. Mr. Jain did not say how big the losses were, but he said the bank would still make a profit in foreign exchange trading during January.He called the nearly 20 percent rise in the franc, which took place minutes after the Swiss central bank’s announcement that it was removing the cap, “the most severe we have seen in more than a generation.”A version of this article appears in print on 01/30/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Deutsche Bank Posts a Profit, Upending Analystsu2019 Predictions of a Loss.