AdvertisementSupported byBy Stanley ReedLONDON — Chevron and BP said on Wednesday that they would work together to explore, appraise and, possibly, develop 24 offshore leases in a deepwater part of the Gulf of Mexico known as the lower tertiary.Also known as the Paleogene, the geological zone has in recent years been considered a new frontier. But because it is deeper under the seabed than previously worked areas, the oil there tends to be hotter and under more pressure and thus more difficult and costly to bring to market.BP also said it would sell to Chevron large stakes in two key discoveries, called Tiber and Gila, in the area. In what seems to be a major concession by BP, Chevron will operate these fields along with an exploration area called Gibson.ConocoPhillips also has large stakes in the oil fields falling under the joint venture, which is in a region of the northwestern Gulf of Mexico about 180 miles south of the United States coast.The new arrangement between Chevron and BP, analysts said, highlighted the pressure on the companies to hold down spending and share risk as oil prices have fallen about 60 percent since June.“The industry will have to hunker down,” said Fadel Gheit, an analyst in New York with Oppenheimer & Company.Mr. Gheit said the decision by BP to let Chevron operate or manage Tiber and Gila reflected fallout from the 2010 Deepwater Horizon blowout that killed 11 people and spilled millions of barrels of oil in the gulf. BP has sold assets worldwide to raise money to pay for damage from the spill and its production in the Gulf of Mexico has dropped."BP is significantly more experienced than Chevron in the Gulf of Mexico,” Mr. Gheit said. But BP “wants to keep a low profile” to put “the oil spill behind them,” he said.Chevron has been picking up momentum in the Gulf of Mexico. Late last year, the company began production at another pair of deepwater fields, Jack and St. Malo, which were jointly developed to hold down costs.At 35,000 feet, the exploration well that discovered Tiber in 2009 was one of the deepest ever drilled. BP has never given estimates for the reserves. Its straitened financial circumstances had raised questions about if and when it would be developed.As with Jack and St. Malo, the oil companies in the new venture hope eventually to use a joint facility to process the oil from these fields, which are relatively close together, Chevron said in a statement. The company also said it planned to work with its partners “to realize cost savings and optimize the use of human resources.”BP plans to sell about half of its stake in Tiber and Gila to Chevron for an undisclosed price. BP said all three companies would have similar working interests in any future centralized processing facility.In a statement, Richard Morrison, president of BP’s Gulf of Mexico business, said that letting Chevron operate the new fields would allow BP to “increase our focus on maximizing production” from other fields.Advertisement