By DANNY HAKIMJAN. 28, 2015
WARSAW — Piotr Szczepaniak, an apartment manager here, had just finished work, checking faucets and making sure rents were paid. After making himself a coffee, he logged on to a Polish social network and noticed that someone had posted the current exchange rate of the Swiss franc.“I was frozen,” he said, seeing that the franc’s value had soared that day. Like hundreds of thousands of other Eastern Europeans, Mr. Szczepaniak, 46, is paying off a mortgage he took out in francs, instead of his local currency, the zloty.In an instant, his monthly payment rose by more than 20 percent when Switzerland’s central bank unexpectedly removed a cap on its currency.Central bankers are increasingly viewed as wizards capable of rescuing countries from the doldrums by printing money to manage interest rates and control currencies. But the monetary magic is unleashing unintended consequences on the global economy, financial markets and ordinary people.AdvertisementThe action by the Swiss central bank, which came in mid-January, was one of the biggest surprises. The Swiss National Bank decided it would be hard-pressed to keep the franc tied to the euro when the European Central Bank began a major round of stimulus.AdvertisementThe move set off shock waves in financial markets and a one-day 23 percent spike in the franc’s value against the euro.The fallout has been far-reaching. Some hedge funds, like one run by the Fortress Investment Group, took steep losses; the IG Group, a publicly traded British brokerage firm and financial trading company, issued a profit warning. Swiss exporters howled, and the chief executive of the watchmaker Swatch Group called it a “tsunami.”Many of the worst hit are average Europeans who took out loans in Swiss francs, often from foreign-owned banks, to take advantage of the far lower interest rates being offered.Poland has nearly $40 billion in loans denominated in francs, according to European Central Bank data. The borrowing, which accounts for nearly 8 percent of the country’s gross domestic product, has left Poland weighing its options. On Wednesday, the Polish government urged banks to convert franc loans to zloty at market rates.Poland is hardly the only country in this predicament. Austria has about $41 billion worth of such loans, close to 10 percent of its economic output. Other ordinary borrowers, from France to Croatia, have also felt the sting.“With hindsight, it’s easy to say the foreign banks are guilty of pushing these mortgages and not informing customers of the risks,” said Nicholas Spiro, managing director of Spiro Sovereign Strategy in London, who also blamed “insufficient regulation.” Poland’s troubles, which come during an election year, are “political dynamite,” he added.Before the financial crisis gripped Europe, banks heavily marketed loans in Swiss francs, which were available at interest rates a third as high as for loans in Polish zlotys, or even lower. In Poland, there were 562,487 home loans in francs in 2013, representing almost a third of the total number of mortgages, according to the Polish Financial Supervision Authority.AdvertisementPoland is a country that is still getting used to the idea of mortgages. Many Poles who took out loans were the first in their family to do so.“It was quite a shock for my parents,” said Rafal Jackowski, 39, a marketing executive who took out a loan in francs for an apartment in Krakow in 2004.“They said, ‘My God, you can pay that much?'” he said, adding, “We were not used to spending money that we don’t have.”But borrowers unknowingly became amateur currency traders in a fast-moving game that has affected many professionals.Mr. Szczepaniak, married and the father of a 13-year-old boy, recently joined a Facebook support group whose name translates to “Tricked Into Francs,” where he exchanges stories with other Poles.“They are terrified, they are scared, and they pray that the government does something,” he said. On a recent morning, his son, Krzysztof, was watching the Disney Channel dubbed into Polish while Mr. Szczepaniak showed a chart of the movement of the franc against the zloty since he took out his loan in 2003.“It didn’t seem scary at the time,” he said. “Both the Polish and Swiss economy were very stable, and the foreign exchange rates were predictable.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since then, the franc’s relative value has increased more than 40 percent.In many ways, he is lucky. He took out his mortgage relatively early in the cycle. He said he got a 4.65 percent loan in francs, versus the 10 to 12 percent he would have paid in zlotys at the time. He can afford the increase, which amounts to $70 a month.Others are in far deeper trouble.Katarzyna Szczerbowska, a 43-year-old writer, said she was advised by a financial consultant when she bought a two-story apartment in 2008.Advertisement“The adviser said Swiss francs were the best option because the interest rates were lower and the currency rates were stable,” she said.“Everybody around me advised me to take a mortgage in Swiss francs,” she added. “Everybody else was doing the same thing.”She says she is now so far behind on her payments, and feels so trapped by her accumulating debts, that she has contemplated suicide.She learned on Facebook of the Swiss central bank’s action the morning it happened. She immediately began calling her bank and kept calling all day, but could not get through.Over the last five years, her payments have doubled to about $2,000 a month. A few months ago, her boyfriend — the father of her 20-year-old daughter — went abroad to help cover the added costs by getting a job in a factory.When she first took out her loan, the United States was already in the grip of a financial crisis, but its impact on Europe was still not clear.“Everybody kept saying that the crisis in the States was very local — nobody knew why — but it was the U.S. that had problems,” Ms. Szczerbowska said. “People had to be idiots to think the crisis wouldn’t spread. Unfortunately, I was the idiot.”Because Poland also had a housing bubble that collapsed during the crisis, many who borrowed in francs are now underwater.AdvertisementLeszek Wolany bought a small house in Warsaw in 2006. He took out his loan in francs because of the favorable interest rates, and for years, it seemed as if he got a better deal. But things turned around, and his monthly payments have increased more than $100 in the recent run-up.“I can’t sell the house now,” said Mr. Wolany, a 30-year-old father of one who works in advertising. “The loan is bigger than the house is worth.”Last year, Hungary, facing a similar problem, forced banks to convert home loans denominated in francs to Hungarian forints at below-market rates. The country was criticized for the policy, which chilled the banking sector.Poland, regarded as the model for Eastern European economic stewardship, had considered a similar path. The country’s prime minister, Ewa Kopacz, said on Monday that she would side with the people over the banks.By Wednesday, Polish officials rejected the Hungarian approach. Mateusz Szczurek, the finance minister, said. “It isn’t the role of the government to be removing all possible risks people face.”Mateusz Zurawik contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Feeling the Franc’s Weight.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.