By CLIFFORD KRAUSSJAN. 28, 2015
As the price of crude oil fluctuates, why some countries are faring much better than others.HOUSTON — In the biggest retrenchment in the United States as oil prices fall, Sasol has delayed an expansive $14 billion project in southwestern Louisiana to make diesel out of natural gas.The project, which had not yet been approved by the company, was to create at least 1,200 permanent jobs and 7,000 construction jobs, and begin production in 2018. But with the price of oil down by more than 50 percent since June, the highly speculative, and expensive, project was economically impractical. The announcement was the most extreme example of how oil companies are delaying, or canceling outright, some of their more ambitious projects as the price of oil plunges.Total, the French oil giant, has announced a 10 percent reduction in capital investments, including in American shale fields. And Hess has said it will halve the number of rigs it deploys in the North Dakota Bakken shale field, where oil is more expensive to extract than in traditional wells.“The shock of the price collapse has worn off, and the budget-cutting knives are out,” said Daniel Yergin, an energy historian. “People are going through a process of real re-examination, reflecting what they see as the new tougher reality of prices.”AdvertisementWorldwide, investments in petroleum projects will be cut an estimated $100 billion, or 15 percent, this year, according to the International Energy Agency, which is based in Paris.AdvertisementThe Sasol project depended on two dynamics in the energy markets: oil prices remaining high and natural gas prices staying low, because the conversion process for producing diesel is expensive and highly complex. Now any diesel produced by the plant would almost surely cost more than diesel produced by conventional refiners.In a short statement, Sasol, a South African company known for its boldness, said it had not decided to terminate the project indefinitely. But it added, “As a result of the ongoing capital investment reprioritization exercise, Sasol has decided to delay the final investment decision.” The announcement said the decision was part of “a comprehensive plan to conserve cash in response to lower international oil prices.”No sign suggests the price of oil will snap back soon with the global market oversaturated by nearly two million barrels a day. On Wednesday, global oil benchmark prices swooned again, falling between 2 percent and 4 percent, after the Energy Department reported record domestic stockpiles of crude.The steep drop was reflected in the quarterly earnings reported Wednesday by Hess, the first major oil company to report results this season. With revenues dropping in the fourth quarter by 19 percent to $2.53 billion, the company posted a net loss of $8 million compared with a profit of $1.93 billion a year ago (which included after tax gains from asset sales of $1.34 billion).“Our whole focus here is to maintain our financial strength and flexibility while still preserving our long-term growth options,” John B. Hess, the chief executive, said in a conference call with analysts. “But we do believe, with the decrease in investment programs for the industry and the consequent leveling out of production growth, oil prices will recover starting next year.”Cenovus Energy, a major independent Canadian producer, announced it was slashing its 2015 investment budget by roughly 15 percent, or more than $560 million, by suspending most of its conventional drilling in Saskatchewan and south Alberta.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And Weatherford International, a large oil services company, announced it was eliminating its chief operating officer position to flatten its management structure and cut costs.But the Sasol move is the single largest investment cut or delay in the recent downturn, at least in the United States.AdvertisementHaving already built smaller plants in Qatar and South Africa, Sasol had intended for its new plant in Westlake, La., to produce 96,000 barrels of fuel a day using the “gas-to-liquids” technology, known as G.T.L., conceived by German scientists in the 1920s to produce liquid fuels without using oil. Only a handful of gas-to-liquids plants operate commercially globally, in Malaysia, South Africa and Qatar.“In order for the G.T.L. technology to pay, it has to use inexpensive natural gas and sell into a high-priced market, the $100-a-barrel oil market we have grown accustomed to the last few years,” said Don Hertzmark, an international energy consultant who has worked on gas-to-liquids and other global natural gas projects for three decades. “That cost advantage has collapsed, taking with it the profit potential for G.T.L. in the United States at least for now.”The gas-to-liquids technology has a mixed record at best. The largest plant in operation, Royal Dutch Shell’s Pearl plant, north of Doha, Qatar, cost the leviathan sum of $19 billion, more than three times its original projected cost, and was plagued with unexpected maintenance problems.BP and ConocoPhillips built and briefly operated demonstration plants in Alaska and Oklahoma, but stopped short of full development of the technology. Exxon Mobil and ConocoPhillips announced plans to build giant plants in Qatar, but backed out, putting their capital instead into terminals to export liquefied natural gas.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Oil Company Delays Huge Louisiana Project as Prices Slide.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.