By HIROKO TABUCHIJAN. 28, 2015
When Ikea burst onto the American retail scene in 1985, it was a trailblazer. Ikea, the Swedish retailer, had mastered a clean, simple aesthetic long before Apple opened its sleek stores. It figured out how shoppers would flock to buy hip, if not very durable, products at low prices, long before H&M or Zara made that their business model.Then came the Internet, but Ikea largely missed the memo to shift to an online mode, its executives acknowledged on Wednesday as the company reported slower earnings growth for its latest fiscal year.Ikea, the world’s largest seller of furniture, now finds itself playing catch-up to more web-savvy rivals, racing to put more of its Lack coffee tables and Billy shelving online.“We weren’t one of the early adapters. But we’ve matured in our thinking about it,” Peter Agnefjall, Ikea’s chief executive, said by phone. “We realized this is not a trend, it’s a megashift.”AdvertisementIkea, which operates 315 stores in 27 countries, said on Wednesday that net profit for its fiscal year through August rose 0.4 percent from the previous year to 3.33 billion euros ($3.76 billion), far slower than the 3 percent growth the retailer logged last year, and its 8 percent growth in 2012.AdvertisementSales grew 5.9 percent from the previous year to €29.3 billion ($33.2 billion), Ikea said. But that rise was offset by the costs of higher wages for its employees, new employee programs and price reductions.In the United States, where Ikea operates 40 stores, comparable store sales grew 4.2 percent last year, slowing from growth of almost 7 percent in 2013 and 8 percent in 2012. Privately owned Ikea only reports annual earnings.Peter L. Tourtellot, managing director at the turnaround firm Anderson Bauman Tourtellot, said Ikea had squandered big opportunities online and could face difficulties catching up.Online furniture sales are expected to grow to more than $14.2 billion by 2019 from about $10 billion in 2014, according to projections by the market research company IBISWorld. “They should have been on the Internet years ago. They could have built up a sizable business by now,” Mr. Tourtellot said. “It was shortsightedness. They got wrapped up in their own success.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Founded in Sweden more than seven decades ago by Ingvar Kamprad, when he was 17, Ikea opened its first American store outside Pennsylvania in 1985 to huge crowds. It persuaded customers to assemble furniture themselves in return for considerably cheaper prices than was typical.The retailer largely shunned e-commerce and even deliveries, saying it was doing more than enough business at its sprawling supercenters. It continued to make its annual catalog, rather than the web, its marketing centerpiece.But Ikea was slow to realize that shoppers were heading online not just to research or compare prices, but to buy. Ikea was also slow to notice that more consumers, increasingly pressed for time, were opting to pay more to have their furniture delivered or assembled at home.A flurry of other furniture retailers have built up significant footprints online. The Williams-Sonoma brands Pottery Barn and West Elm, with Wayfair and Overstock.com, now dominate on the web with a combined 42 percent of all online furniture sales, according to IBISWorld. Home Depot and Lowe’s have also invested heavily in e-commerce and increased their online sales.AdvertisementNow, Ikea is racing to increase its web offerings, selling online in about half of the 27 countries where it operates. It began its online push in the United States about four years ago, and some 70 percent of Ikea’s 9,500 products are now available online, the retailer said. E-commerce sales jumped 35 percent last year from a year earlier.Ikea eventually hopes to offer as much as 90 percent of its products online. It is also investing more in its shipment services, and made 40 percent more home deliveries in the United States last year, the retailer said.Mr. Agnefjall said the company now had a better appreciation for how the web can even help drive sales at Ikea’s brick-and-mortar locations.“What’s happening is that people research on their mobile devices, come to the Ikea store, sit on the sofa, then place their order on the device,” Mr. Agnefjall said. “Technology is a driver that we just didn’t see a couple of years ago.”A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: As Profit Slows, Ikea Notes Need to Move Online.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.