By CHAD BRAYOCT. 9, 2015
LONDON — Standard Chartered, the British-based, Asian-focused bank, said on Friday that it planned to reduce senior staff positions by 25 percent while cutting costs and reshaping the company under its new chief executive, William T. Winters.The reduction in management is part of a plan announced by the bank in July to streamline its business, realign its management and cut costs by $1.8 billion by the end of 2017.Mr. Winters, the former head of JPMorgan Chase’s investment bank, was brought in this year to succeed Peter Sands, the bank’s longtime chief executive, and turn around Standard Chartered, which generates most of its earnings in Asia.The staff cuts were announced in an internal memorandum on Friday.“Bill’s note to staff is an update on what we said we were going to do,”Standard Chartered said in a separate statement on Friday. “In it, he has made it clear that kick-starting performance is a priority, and we are not standing still.”AdvertisementThe company added: “On head count, we said previously (when we announced the management team and organizational changes in July) that there would be further personnel changes to come as we simplify our organizational structure. We have already acted to reduce management layers and as a result will have up to 25 percent fewer senior staff.”AdvertisementStandard Chartered’s shares rose 5 percent to 787.60 pence, or about $12, in afternoon trading in London.The bank is expected to cut roughly 1,000 management positions out of about 4,000, a person familiar with the lender’s plans said Friday. The employees losing their jobs are expected to be notified by the end of November.Standard Chartered has been hit hard by a slowdown in emerging markets, as well as by impairments for bad loans and “challenging” trading conditions in some business lines in recent quarters, including currency hedging products.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the first half of the year, the bank’s profit declined 37 percent as its results were hit by currency fluctuations, exits from several businesses and lower valuations on loans. The bank also said when it announced its results in August that it was cutting its dividend to bolster capital.Mr. Winters became chief executive in June as part of a broad shake-up of leadership that will also lead to the departure of John W. Peace, the chairman of Standard Chartered, next year.On a conference call with reporters in August, Mr. Winters said the bank was facing “real challenges” and had a legacy of focusing “on growth over risk discipline and returns.”“We have also been too slow to take hard decisions, whether those are on costs, people or strategy,” he said at the time.As part of its overhaul, Mr. Winters previously said the bank would streamline its business to three main divisions — corporate and investment banking, commercial and private banking, and retail banking — and that the management team would report directly to him.Standard Chartered plans to cut $1.8 billion in costs over the next three years, including $400 million in savings this year. The lender said in August that it had reduced its work force by 5 percent, or about 5,000 jobs, since the end of 2014.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.