By BEN SISARIOJAN. 28, 2015
A.E.G. Live, the second-largest concert company in the world, has hired Gary Gersh, a seasoned music executive, as its president of global talent, the company announced on Wednesday.Mr. Gersh is known as a manager of top rock acts like Soundgarden and a former record company chief whose experience includes signing Nirvana to the Geffen label. His appointment significantly strengthens the ranks of A.E.G., whose two top executives departed after an aborted effort to sell the company in 2012.At A.E.G., Mr. Gersh, 59, will help manage relationships with artists and their representatives, a key role for a business that bids on top acts for tours, festivals and other engagements.“The people here are in a very aggressive building mode,” Mr. Gersh said in an interview. “I like to build tremendously, and I felt like I could offer something to the great team that’s already here.”AdvertisementA.E.G., whose full name is the Anschutz Entertainment Group, has a range of sports and entertainment assets like the Staples Center in Los Angeles and the annual Coachella music and arts festival. In the concert business, A.E.G. competes with the much larger Live Nation Entertainment.A.E.G. is controlled by the billionaire investor Philip F. Anschutz, who put the company up for sale in September 2012 but then took it off the block six months later, apparently disappointed with the offers. At the same time, Timothy J. Leiweke, A.E.G.’s longtime chief executive, stepped down, and later in 2013 Randy Phillips, the head of A.E.G. Live, the concert division, also left. The concert industry has largely been awaiting A.E.G.’s next big step since then.AdvertisementMr. Gersh said that he decided to join A.E.G. after winding down his own career as an artist manager. While at A.E.G. he will retain only two management clients: Tears for Fears, which is preparing to release a new album, and Party Baby, a band featuring Mr. Gersh’s son, Noah.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.