By EMILY STEELJAN. 28, 2015
A giant crop circle appeared in fields around Phoenix this week, the first in a series of strange desert sightings expected in Arizona in the days leading up to Sunday’s Super Bowl.The extraterrestrial-like cultivation is not a signal from aliens who have taken a sudden interest in football. The stunts are the work of Pepsi, which is trying to make a giant splash with a multifaceted, monthslong Super Bowl campaign that culminates on Sunday with a 30-second game-day spot and its sponsorship of Katy Perry’s halftime show.“If you want to be part of pop culture, then you have to be part of the biggest event in the country,” said Simon Lowden, Pepsi’s chief marketing officer for North American beverages. “If you want to be part of the conversation, you have to be there in as big a way as possible.”The strategy illustrates the extremes that marketers are going to in an attempt to get the biggest payoff from the $4.5 million they spend for 30 seconds of commercial time during the big game.AdvertisementThe spotlight used to be solely on those ads. But the web has transformed the marketing game plan: Advertisers now increasingly extend the process, trying to build viewership for the commercials in stages, by posting the spots and teasers for them online before the game, as well as creating social media campaigns around them.AdvertisementOver the years, Super Bowl marketing has evolved into a year-round exercise, especially for the biggest spenders, like Anheuser-Busch and PepsiCo, which owns Pepsi and Doritos, which also advertises during the game. PepsiCo ranks among the top three Super Bowl advertisers based on spending from 2010 to 2014, paying $76.6 million on network advertising alone in the last five years, according to WPP’s Kantar Media.“It used to be that the whole thing lived and died based on what happened on game day on the TV in the living room,” said Allen Adamson, chairman of the North American region of Landor Associates, a brand consulting firm. “Now, it is, How do you manage up to the top of the mountain and how do you manage it down?”NBC, which is televising the game, said on Wednesday that it had sold out advertising time for the broadcast. Spots started at a record $4.5 million for 30 seconds of commercial time. The broadcaster said that it had sold slightly more than 70 total commercial units, with 15 first-time Super Bowl advertisers buying spots.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pepsi, which is sponsoring the Super Bowl halftime show for the third time in a row this year, starts planning its marketing blitz soon after the clock runs out on the previous year’s game. The idea this year was to try to bring the excitement surrounding the show to different places across the country, staging events to create material for commercials as well as for people to share their experiences on social media.The brand’s efforts included more than 40 promotional activities, starting on Thanksgiving Day with a spot that featured a Pepsi-sponsored concert for military veterans featuring the country music star Blake Shelton.Other promotions included a partnership with Comedy Central for a web series with Craig Robinson and his band The Nasty Delicious, as well as a concert in Rochester this month featuring the Norwegian musicians Nico and Vinz. The concert was the result of a “Hype Your Hometown” contest in which people could win tickets to go on the field for the halftime show, or for a concert in their hometown.This week, the brand is staging various “strange occurrences” in attempts to build anticipation for the commercial that leads directly into Ms. Perry’s performance. It is drawing inspiration from the desert lore of mysterious sightings, in the same way that Pepsi found inspiration last year in the Super Bowl’s host city with a spot that transformed the New York City skyline into various musical instruments.The crop circle, 360 feet in diameter and decorated as a Pepsi logo, appears in a field in Glendale, Ariz., about half a mile away from the University of Phoenix Stadium, where the game will be played. People who fly into the Phoenix airport will be able to see the circle.The circle is the first of several stunts Pepsi has planned. It is also releasing a teaser spot that shows a Pepsi vending machine and delivery truck beaming into the sky. The hope is that those efforts, along with the halftime show — which in recent years has drawn more viewers than the actual game — will help the marketer stand out from the pack of advertisers and build anticipation for its campaign.Advertisement“We just want to create an out-of-this-world experience,” said Mr. Lowden, of Pepsi.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Pepsi’s Super Bowl Ad Blitz Starts a Conversation Early.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.