The Occupy Wall Street protesters are long gone from Lower Manhattan. But on Friday morning, fanatics of a different sort mobbed a block of Broad Street outside the New York Stock Exchange.Hundreds of New Yorkers lined up for free hamburgers served out of a truck by Shake Shack, the local burger joint turned international chain, whose stock was making its debut on the Big Board. The line of hungry bargain-hunters, which spanned the entire block and doubled back, and which raised more than a few eyebrows among the financial types working nearby, punctuated the company’s triumphant arrival on Wall Street.“It’s like a bread line in the Depression,” said Michael Lehtman, 37, who was out on a stroll with his colleagues from a broker-dealer that they declined to identify. “We’re debating whether to stand in line,” said Sharad Kumar, 26, one of the colleagues, who snapped a picture on his iPhone.Mr. Lehtman corrected him. “We’re laughing at them,” he said.Amusing as the spectacle might have been, Shake Shack had reason to celebrate. Its shares opened at $47 each, more than double their price in the initial public offering Thursday evening, and rose slightly to trade at just less than $50. The deal created a windfall for Danny Meyer, the restaurateur who founded the chain, and for its backers.Mr. Meyer rang the opening bell and held court on the stock exchange floor Friday morning, accompanied by Randy Garutti, the chief executive. Also in attendance were a private equity backer, Jonathan D. Sokoloff, who sits on the Shake Shack board, and Jeff Flug, another board member, who is president of Mr. Meyer’s Union Square Hospitality Group.The exchange was decked out for the occasion, with green line drawings of burgers, hot dogs and shakes. Company insiders received a custom version of the buzzers that notify customers when their order is ready; in this case, the devices buzzed when the stock started trading, under the ticker symbol SHAK, about 40 minutes after the market opened.A number of fast-casual restaurants have tapped the public markets recently, including Zoe’s Kitchen, but Shake Shack stands out because of its devoted following among the denizens of Wall Street.The Shake Shack near Goldman Sachs, a popular lunch haunt among the finance crowd, was packed on Friday even before the noon rush. Isis Smith, a 22-year-old line cook, who was wearing a pin and wristband with the Shake Shack ticker symbol, said she was receiving a lot of orders of 10 burgers or more. One order, she said, included 17 double hamburgers and 15 milkshakes.“We are part of the stock market now, which makes it very popular,” Ms. Smith said, estimating the wait was about 30 minutes. “A lot of people who are into the stock market are in this area.”A large number of Goldmanites, whose firm helped underwrite the stock offering, waited in line, though none would speak on the record. One fixed-income salesman from the Royal Bank of Canada said he was getting an order of four burgers and four hot dogs for his desk. Sean O’Connor, 23, who works in compliance at Scotiabank, said this was his first time at Shake Shack. A friend had told him about the I.P.O., he said, and he figured he’d see what the fuss was about.“It’s the perfect time to go,” Mr. O’Connor said.But not everyone saw the day as a special occasion. “We’re having a simple meal,” said a Merrill Lynch wealth manager, who waited in line with some colleagues. “We’ve been coming here since it opened.”