Jeff Sovern is a professor of law at St. John’s University School of Law and co-coordinator of the Consumer Law and Policy Blog.Constitutional rights are the most fundamental rights Americans enjoy. So you might think it would be hard to get people to give them up. But every day, people unknowingly surrender their constitutional rights, including a right mentioned in the Declaration of Independence. And if bank lawyers have their way, Americans will continue relinquishing such rights without even realizing it.If you have a credit card or a checking account or use prepaid cards, there’s a good chance you have waived your constitutional rights. And if you have a cellphone from Verizon Wireless, AT&T Mobility or Sprint, or an account with Skype, you definitely have, whether you know it or not.That’s because companies use form contracts to strip consumers of constitutional rights. Many companies don’t like being sued in court when they misbehave. (Who does?) Consequently, their contracts say that consumers can’t sue them in court, despite the Constitution’s right to due process — or have a jury trial — referred to in both the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence. Instead, the contracts say consumers can bring claims in arbitration.Arbitration offers several advantages to businesses. Businesses can specify in the contract that disputes will be heard by their favorite arbitration provider. For example, many credit card contracts used to say disputes would be heard by the National Arbitration Forum. Perhaps that’s because the forum  ruled for the companies against consumers 94 percent of the time. The forum might still be hearing disputes if the Minnesota attorney general’s office had not put it out of the consumer arbitration business, charging that while claiming to be impartial, the forum heard about 100,000 disputes filed by law firms with which it had ties.Companies also like arbitration because it lets them avoid class-action lawsuits. Because many consumer claims are for small amounts, consumers must bring them as class actions — so they can share the cost of litigation with numerous other consumers — or not at all. By outlawing class-action suits, arbitration clauses insulate businesses from being sued for small claims.Consumer advocates and industry lawyers  disagree about whether businesses should be able to put arbitration clauses in their form contracts. But everyone agrees that if consumers have not agreed to arbitrate, they have a right to sue in court. Even the Supreme Court, which has forcefully upheld contracts obliging consumers to arbitrate, says that arbitration is a matter of consent rather than coercion.That brings us to the consumers who are giving away their constitutional rights without being aware of it. My colleagues — Elayne Greenberg, Paul Kirgis and Yuxiang Liu — and I, with the aid of a grant from the American Association for Justice Robert L. Habush Endowment, surveyed 668 consumers to find out whether they realized what they were doing when they agreed to arbitration clauses.First, we showed them a standard credit card contract. The contract said in bold print that consumers should read the arbitration clause carefully. The arbitration clause appeared in bold print and italics, with crucial parts in capital letters. It was also easier to understand and much shorter than the average credit card arbitration clause. Then we asked the consumers, who reflected the country’s population at large, questions about arbitration.We found that almost none of the consumers understood the arbitration clause. Many thought the clause did not take away their rights. Thus, nearly half thought that a clause that said they couldn’t sue in court didn’t say that at all, while only 14 percent realized that it blocked them from suing. Similarly, 48 percent thought that they could be part of a class-action suit under a contract that said they couldn’t be. Just 12 percent recognized that the contract barred them from bringing a class-action suit.Many respondents also thought that, as one put it, “a whimsy little contract” couldn’t do things the Supreme Court has said that it can, in fact, do. Another wrote, “It is your right as an American to have a trial by a jury of your peers.“ In other words, our survey suggests that consumers are surrendering fundamental rights without knowing it because they cannot comprehend the contracts that strip them of those rights and do not realize that courts will uphold the contracts. Congress has given the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau the power to block financial companies from taking those rights away, and the agency is studying the issue. The agency would do well to decide that companies can’t take advantage of these bewildering contracts.