By JAD MOUAWADOCT. 9, 2015
Federal authorities detailed new rail-track standards on Friday after finding that a broken rail caused an oil train to derail this year in West Virginia.The finding highlighted a main cause of oil train accidents, according to the Federal Railroad Administration, which concluded an eight-month investigation into the derailment of a CSX train near Mount Carbon.Several weeks before the February accident, rail inspectors for CSX detected internal rail flaws on two separate occasions but did not take action in either case, according to the investigation.Federal regulators have stepped up their oversight of the railroad industry during a surge in the transportation of crude oil by train in recent years, which has also brought multiple accidents and spills.AdvertisementAuthorities have established new rules to build more robust tank cars for crude oil, imposed lower speed limits and mandated the use of electronically controlled brakes, which can stop trains faster over shorter distances. But the investigation into the West Virginia derailment underscored an aspect that had not yet attracted broad attention. Broken tracks account for about a third of all railroad accidents.AdvertisementAs a result of its findings, the railroad agency will issue a safety advisory requesting that railroads conduct closer and more detailed inspections, and adopt stronger training for operators of rail inspection vehicles.In addition, the agency plans to use its rule-making authority to draft new rail-wear standards that would require railroads to slow down trains or replace a rail that poses a safety risk.In West Virginia, 20 of the 27 tank cars that derailed were breached and spilled more than 378,000 gallons of oil. A fire burned for four days and forced the evacuation of about 1,100 residents. CSX and the contractor that performed the inspection, Sperry Rail Services, were each fined $25,000, the maximum civil penalty for such a violation.“What this broken rail incident shows us is that we need to insert ourselves and put some pretty high standards in place. It’s important to remind folks that the rail and track issues are important too,” said Sarah Feinberg, the agency’s acting administrator. “We have a zero-tolerance policy on crude routes, because the stakes are so high for the communities that live along those tracks.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Railroads own their tracks and are responsible for their maintenance and regular inspection. Ms. Feinberg said the agency had asked the railroad industry and other stakeholders in 2012 to come up with recommendations about setting new standards to address track safety but had failed to reach a consensus on the issue.Since then, Ms. Feinberg said she had repeatedly made the case that track safety was an issue that needed to be addressed.“You cannot contract away your safety responsibilities,” she said. “Railroads are accountable for their tracks. Anyone in industry saying they are surprised by this hasn’t been paying attention.”The railroad agency said that CSX had agreed to set up a new system within 180 days in which rail inspectors would be able to review data from past inspections in real time as they review their tracks so they can better identify areas where conditions may have worsened.AdvertisementAccording to the agency investigation, Sperry Rail Service conducted internal rail inspections required by law twice before the accident — on Dec. 17, 2014, and Jan. 12, 2015. Both times, the inspections revealed internal rail flaws at the derailment site.But in each case, the operator did not take action, or get out of his inspection vehicle, in the mistaken belief that the defects were caused by surface conditions on the rail. The law requires inspectors to exit their inspection vehicles and verify the indication with an on-the-ground, hand-held ultrasonic instrument.The agency said its investigation disclosed that the rail was near CSX’s acceptable wear limit.In response, CSX said Friday that it had the lowest rate of mainline derailments caused by track defects. The company said that it would begin “run-over-run comparisons” of current inspection results of a track section with previous inspections “to increase the likelihood that defects will be identified before they become safety-critical.”“CSX has fully complied with all regulations pertaining to crude oil transportation and other aspects of rail safety,” CSX said in a statement. “In addition, we are committed to continuously improving our ability to detect and correct rail defects before they can cause an incident.”A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Federal Railroad Agency Sets Out New Safety Standards for Tracks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.