AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiHonda Motor is investigating a possible sixth death linked to Takata airbags that can rupture, the automaker and lawyers said on Thursday, as a new estimate put the number of those injured by the defective airbags as high as 64.According to the Harris County, Tex., Sheriff’s Office, Carlos Solis, 35, died on Jan. 18 after his 2002 Honda Accord struck another vehicle at the entrance to a parking lot in Houston. The driver’s airbag deployed and a piece of metal struck Mr. Solis in the neck, the sheriff’s report said. Mr. Solis, a father of two, was found at the scene with no signs of life and was later declared dead. An 11-year-old passenger, identified as his cousin, was not injured. In a statement, Honda said that it had alerted federal regulators, but added that it was too early to conclude the airbag was responsible. “We are currently working with representatives of the driver’s family to gain the access necessary to conduct a comprehensive investigation,” Honda said. A lawyer for the Solis family, Rob Ammons, said he expected to inspect the car with Honda and Takata officials in the next few days. “There’s blood all over the inside of the vehicle in a very small impact crash,” he said. Photos and videos of the accident posted online by The Montgomery County Police Reporter and verified by Mr. Ammons show what appears to be Mr. Solis’s Accord, with damage limited to the bumper area.If confirmed, Mr. Solis’s death would be the sixth linked to airbags made by Takata, which can rupture because of inflaters that overpressurize, propelling hot metal fragments into the vehicle cabin. In the United States, Honda and nine other automakers have recalled over 18 million vehicles because of the defect since 2009. This list of affected vehicles was compiled from information automakers provided to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.Former Takata employees have said that the manufacturer was aware of the defect as early as 2004. Mr. Solis’s death raises concerns that automakers are not moving quickly enough to replace the defective airbags. Mr. Solis purchased his used 2002 Accord last April, but had yet to receive a recall notice, Honda and Mr. Ammons said. United States law does not require used vehicles that have been recalled for safety issues to be fixed before they are sold.A Honda spokesman, Chris Martin, said that multiple notices had been sent to previous owners of the car, which was first recalled in 2011. But the vehicle was never brought in for fixes, he said.The same car was recalled again as part of a regional action by Honda last June. It covered cars in areas with high humidity, including Texas, because moisture is thought to play a role in the defect. Honda has said that it faced a shortage of replacement airbags and that it would send out recall notices only as parts became available. Honda’s announcement came after Senator Bill Nelson, Democrat of Florida, said that documents Takata provided to the Senate showed that 64 injuries were reportedly caused by defective Takata airbags. The New York Times reported in September that federal regulators had received 37 complaints of injuries from Takata airbags that may have ruptured.In a statement late Thursday, Jared Levy, a Takata spokesman, said the airbag maker was working with Honda to verify details of Mr. Solis’s death. “The incident cited involved a vehicle that had been previously recalled, and we are working in close collaboration with Honda to determine the facts and circumstances surrounding the vehicle’s status at the time of the incident,” Mr. Levy said in a statement. “Our heartfelt condolences go out to the driver’s family,” he said. “Takata’s No. 1 priority is the safety of the driving public.”Rachel Abrams contributed reporting.Advertisement