By CLIFFORD KRAUSS and STANLEY REEDJAN. 29, 2015
HOUSTON —  After years of making record profits as oil prices soared, America’s oil giants are beginning to lose money.For the first time since the 2008 financial crisis, ConocoPhillips, the nation’s third-largest oil and gas producer, reported on Thursday that it had lost money — $39 million in the fourth quarter in contrast to a profit of $2.5 billion the year before. And Occidental Petroleum, another large producer in United States shale fields and the Middle East, said it lost $3.4 billion in the quarter, in contrast to a $1.6 billion gain in the same quarter in 2013.The primary reason for the fall in the earnings has been the collapse in oil prices since June by more than 50 percent. That decline, which extends to natural gas as well, has only accelerated in January, leading energy experts to expect even worse results for the current quarter.With little prospect that oil prices will rebound this year to anywhere close to the $100 a barrel executives have been accustomed to in recent years, oil companies are struggling to preserve their dividends and decide which employees are vital to keep and which are expendable.AdvertisementExecutives are huddling with their geologists to determine which oil and gas fields are still economical to drill, while they renegotiate the prices of services offered by drilling companies like Halliburton and Weatherford International.AdvertisementAt the same time, oil experts say companies with plenty of money to spare, like Exxon Mobil, are looking to buy properties from companies that have been financially strained by the sudden price breakdown, which few in the industry predicted.“We are responding decisively to a weak price outlook in 2015,” Ryan Lance, ConocoPhillips’s chief executive, said in a company statement. “In this environment our priorities are to protect our dividend and base production, stay on track for cash flow neutrality in 2017, and preserve future opportunities.”Companies that have been spared, at least partly, are those that have different sources of income like refineries, which can benefit from low prices for the oil they process as long as gasoline and diesel demand remain intact.As the price of crude oil fluctuates, why some countries are faring much better than others.Royal Dutch Shell, Europe’s largest oil company, said on Thursday that earnings in the fourth quarter actually rose because of the improved performance of its marketing and refining businesses. The earnings on those businesses rose by about $1 billion, or 178 percent, to $1.56 billion.Over all, Shell said that earnings excluding one-time items and inventory changes rose about 12 percent, to $3.3 billion, from $2.9 billion in the fourth quarter of 2013.Valero Energy, the largest American independent refiner, reported on Thursday that it earned a quarterly profit of $1.16 billion, compared with $1.29 billion a year earlier, with higher profit margins offsetting lower petroleum prices. Phillips 66, which was spun off from ConocoPhillips three years ago, reported a quarterly profit of $1.15 billion in the fourth quarter, up from $826 million last year.The relatively good refinery results suggest that Exxon Mobil and Chevron, the largest American oil companies with big refinery businesses, should be at least partly sheltered when they report their earnings in the coming days.AdvertisementBut the Shell results included some troubling signs for all the oil majors, including a slowdown in the replacement rate of oil and gas reserves. Shell said the lower commodity prices contributed to a 30 percent decline in exploration and production earnings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company also said it would reduce spending on projects by $15 billion over the next three years, reflecting uncertainty over where oil prices will settle.Nevertheless, Shell said capital spending in 2015 would most likely be similar to the $35 billion spent in 2014.Ben van Beurden, Shell’s chief executive, said that at this stage, “It is very important not to get into a slash and burn mentality.” He also said Shell continued to plan on the assumption of a long-term price in the $70 to $90 a barrel range. He said the industry needed prices to be higher than today’s sub-$50 level so it could make the necessary investments for the future.Some analysts were disappointed that Shell did not make deep cuts in capital spending, but others applauded Shell for not being stampeded. “What we like is that Shell is not overreacting with respect to the oil price,” wrote analysts at Bernstein Research in London in a note to clients on Thursday. “Implied in that is that prices will recover.”After reviewing its plans, Shell deferred some projects and canceled others. Among the plans it dropped were a petrochemical plant in Qatar and a liquefied natural gas project called Arrow in Australia.Though Shell is trying to restrain capital spending, it is still intent on drilling for oil in Alaska. Mr. van Beurden said the company hoped to drill this summer in the Chukchi Sea, if the company receives the necessary permits and overcomes legal challenges. Shell’s plans to drill in Alaska were delayed after a series of accidents and other problems in 2013 and after a United States court ruling a year ago said that the Interior Department had awarded offshore leases in the Chukchi Sea to Shell and other companies in 2008 without fully considering the environmental risks.Most other oil companies are slashing their investments.ConocoPhillips, which announced in December that it would cut 2015 spending 20 percent, on Thursday shaved $2 billion more from its budget — reducing it to $11.5 billion from $13.5 billion. The company said it planned to defer exploration in the United States, but it still expected to achieve 2 percent to 3 percent production growth in 2015 from its continuing operations, excluding Libya, where political unrest is affecting production and exports.Occidental said it would reduce its exploration and production budget 33 percent, to $5.8 billion from the $8.7 billion spent in 2014. It will cut its activities in Bahrain, Canada’s oil sands and North Dakota’s Bakken shale field while focusing on more economically productive assets like the Permian basin of West Texas.Advertisement“Although we have a large inventory of opportunities as well as the financial capacity to spend more capital, we think it is imprudent to accelerate some of these opportunities in the current low product price environment,” said Stephen I. Chazen, Occidental’s chief executive, in a company statement that accompanied the earnings report. “We are focused on reducing our costs.”Oil prices slid further on Thursday, with the American oil benchmark dropping below $44 before rebounding.The turmoil in the energy industry has also attracted the attention of some big private equity firms, like the Blackstone Group and Apollo Global Management, which are raising new funds and plan to invest billions of dollars in troubled oil and gas companies.“Our people are scrambling and trying to come up for air” as they review opportunities to profit in the industry, Hamilton E. James, Blackstone’s president, said on a conference call with reporters on Thursday.A picture in some editions on Friday with an article about earnings at ConocoPhillips and Occidental Petroleum was published in error. The photograph showed pumps near Long Beach, Calif., that are owned by the California Resources Corporation, not by Occidental Petroleum.Clifford Krauss reported from Houston and Stanley Reed from London.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: 2 Oil Giants Post Losses, Reflecting Price Plunge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.