By JACK EWINGJAN. 29, 2015
FRANKFURT — As central banks have injected cash into their nations’ economies, a question has raged over whether they have helped average people or simply made the rich even richer.The question, part of a larger debate over the causes of economic inequality around the world, rises anew now that the European Central Bank plans to start a similar program in the eurozone. The purpose will be defeated, though, if the policy only widens the eurozone’s gulfs.So-called quantitative easing, announced last week by the European Central Bank’s president, Mario Draghi, carries a risk of helping only a privileged few, like those whose stocks have been rising in recent days. If it works as intended, though, it should benefit the eurozone’s 18.4 million jobless people after the bank switches on the money pumps in March.The question of who benefits is particularly pertinent at a time when European solidarity is under severe strain. Greeks have just elected a prime minister who wants to cast off the fiscal shackles imposed by fellow eurozone members.AdvertisementGermans are grumpy that the European Central Bank chose to adopt quantitative easing over their objections. Populist parties from Helsinki to Madrid are feeding on the resentments generated by seven years of economic crisis.AdvertisementOfficial economic data due Friday is expected to underscore the region’s problems. Unemployment in the eurozone will remain stuck at 11.5 percent, according to analyst estimates. Inflation is forecast to fall to minus 0.5 percent, reinforcing fears that the region is being pulled into a downward price spiral — deflation — that would discourage hiring and growth.There is little doubt that some people, countries and industries will cash in more than others. The winners include commercial banks that hold a lot of government bonds and will be able to sell them for higher prices.Another beneficiary will be exporters in Germany and elsewhere in the eurozone, whose goods have become more attractively priced around the world because of a decline in the value of the euro prompted by central bank policy. Investors have been selling euros because they can find better interest rates elsewhere.And people who own eurozone stocks are already reaping the rewards, as market indexes have soared since Mr. Draghi’s announcement.The losers could include insurance companies, which will have even more trouble earning a low-risk return on the money they keep on hand to pay policyholders. And people who keep their savings in the bank — as many Europeans do — will see few gains as Mr. Draghi and company keep interest rates at low or even negative levels.And then there are unpredictable chain reactions that quantitative easing could set off.Nobody forecast, for example, that imminent quantitative easing by the European Central Bank and the plunging euro would prompt the Swiss National Bank to abandon efforts to hold down the value of the franc, with grave repercussions for homeowners in Poland who hold mortgages in francs.Another European country that is not in the eurozone and is scrambling to respond to the euro’s plunge is Denmark, whose central bank on Thursday edged interest rates further into negative territory, for the second time in 10 days, trying to keep the krone from rising.AdvertisementBut proponents of Mr. Draghi’s quantitative easing argue that, whatever the potential downside, the most important thing is to do something to prevent an even more severe economic crisis that would hit poor people the hardest.For Mr. Draghi the only objective — officially, at least — is to push inflation back up toward the central bank’s target of just below 2 percent. Inflation that is too low — or worse, outright deflation — undercuts corporate profits, forces down wages and leads to higher unemployment.The stimulus of pumping money into the economy is supposed to automatically raise inflation, although the strategy has not worked in the United States very well because the stronger dollar has lowered the price of oil and other imported goods.The only relevant criterion “is the mandate of the E.C.B. to achieve an inflation target of close to 2 percent,” said Guntram B. Wolff, the director of Bruegel, a research organization in Brussels.Germany, for all its criticism of quantitative easing, stands to be one of the big beneficiaries. But not all Germans will share in the bonanza.For example, the German benchmark DAX index has hit highs since Mr. Draghi’s announcement. Analysts at DZ Bank in Frankfurt forecast that the index would climb even higher.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That is great for Germans who own shares or stock mutual funds. But only about 14 percent do. That is in stark contrast to the United States, where about half of all families own stocks directly or indirectly and have profited from the market-stoking effects of the Federal Reserve’s quantitative easing.Germany might also be benefiting disproportionately from the recent decline of the euro against the dollar. If Germany were not part of the eurozone, its currency would probably be doing what the Swiss franc is doing — rising to its highest levels since 2011, as investors look for a haven from global uncertainty. The strong franc is already creating problems for Switzerland’s tourism industry, as well as its watchmakers and other exporters.But German companies are not the only ones that could enjoy a quantitative easing bonus. Italian and French exporters will benefit even more from a weak euro than German companies, Mr. Wolff of Bruegel said, because they are more likely to sell consumer goods like fashion or food products whose price tags are an important competitive factor. German companies tend to sell products like machine tools, where reliability and precision are more important than price.AdvertisementCommercial banks around the eurozone are other possible beneficiaries of the new Draghi policy. The central bank plans to spend 60 billion euros a month, or about $68 billion, in the bond market, which will push down yields, the market interest rates on debt. When yields fall, the value of a bond with a fixed interest rate goes up. Higher bond prices should especially help banks in Italy and some other countries that have large holdings of their own country’s debt.If bankers feel better about their financial health, they may be more willing to lend to small and midsize businesses, which will in turn create jobs. Economists suspect that is exactly what the central bank is hoping for.“A big part of this is just cleaning the bank balance sheets after the sovereign debt crisis,” said Viral V. Acharya, professor of finance at Stern School of Business at New York University.But Mr. Acharya said central bank bond buying was an inefficient way to fix eurozone banks. At the rate that the European Central Bank plans to buy bonds, he said, it will take months for banks to unload their holdings.“Banks are the ones that will have to transmit this policy,” Mr. Acharya said. “I’m not optimistic this will happen very fast.”Overly indebted homeowners in Spain and Ireland have reason to raise a toast to quantitative easing, to the extent banks do become more willing to lend. They should be able to refinance their homes at even lower interest rates and make smaller monthly payments.But that benefit will be smaller in Germany, where most people rent their homes and debt levels are low. And besides being renters, Germans are also savers who will earn even more dismal interest rates.As for the most vulnerable people in the eurozone — the unemployed and the working poor — there is no certainty that any benefits from monetary stimulus will reach them.AdvertisementThe big hope seems to be that the program will improve the mood among businesses, which will be inspired to hire.“It could have some good implications in terms of the business mind-set,” said Jean-Philippe Courtois, president of Microsoft International.But because the rewards of euro-style quantitative easing are so uncertain, some economists propose a more radical solution to ensure that all citizens get their share.John Muellbauer, a senior fellow at the Institute for New Economic Thinking at Oxford University, for instance, has called on the European Central Bank to print money and simply give €500 to every person in the eurozone.That idea does not sit well with central bankers, though. “It would be very complicated to do that,” Benoît Coeuré, a member of the European Central Bank executive board, told the broadcaster Europe 1 on Monday.“If there are things to be done that target citizens directly, it is up to governments to do it,” Mr. Coeuré said. “That is not our work.”A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Risks and Rewards as Eurozone Prepares an Ambitious Stimulus Program.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.