By NICOLA CLARKJAN. 29, 2015
PARIS — Faced with mounting criticism from European governments over production problems with its newest military transport plane, the Airbus Group on Thursday announced a management shake-up at its military aircraft unit and promised a restructuring of the business to address what it said were “unacceptable” delivery delays.In a statement, Airbus said that Domingo Ureña-Raso, who as head of military aircraft was in charge of development of the A400M Atlas cargo plane, had resigned and would be replaced by Fernando Alonso, the group’s head of flight testing.Mr. Alonso, 58, will start in his new role on March 1, Airbus said. Until then, Bernhard Gerwert, chief executive of the group’s defense and space division, will serve as acting military aircraft chief.The switch comes just months after Airbus acknowledged that production snags with the plane, which cost 20 billion euros, or about $22.7 billion, to develop. The problems pushed back delivery of the planes to some European militaries, including Germany, France and Britain and risked adding to the €4 billion in expenses that the group had already absorbed since 2006.AdvertisementIn a speech to British government and military officials this week, Thomas Enders, the Airbus Group chief executive, apologized for the delays and vowed that there would be “organizational and management consequences.”AdvertisementThe news comes as a number of politicians in Germany, the largest customer for the plane, have called for Airbus managers to appear before parliament to explain the delays, which they argue have damaged the reputation of the company. The German and French governments each own an 11 percent stake in Airbus.The first A400M was delivered in 2013 to France, which now has six of the planes and has already deployed them in West Africa and in Iraq. Britain has taken delivery of two of the 22 A400Ms it has on order and Turkey has also received two. Germany, which has waited seven years for the planes, has received one and is scheduled to receive five more A400Ms this year, out of 53 on order.Speaking to reporters in Paris late Thursday, Mr. Enders said the A400M’s troubles were “not a catastrophe” but that they were “significant enough to draw these consequences.”“It is embarassing for the company,” Mr. Enders said, stressing that Airbus had no intention of requesting further funding for the plane from its government customers in the case of further cost overruns.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This will not happen,” he said. “This time around, it is the company that needs to fix this.”Mr. Gerwert, the acting chief of the military aircraft unit, conceded Thursday that Airbus had “not been performing at the level which had been expected of us.”“That is unacceptable, and we will fix that,” Mr. Gerwert said, adding that Airbus would “do our utmost” to overcome the delays “so the customers receive the aircraft they need in the shortest time possible.”The A400M has been plagued for years by cost overruns and delays, which have resulted in threats of order cancellations and postponements by important customers.AdvertisementEuropean governments agreed to a complex, €3.5 billion bailout of the A400M in 2010 after Airbus, then known as European Aeronautic Defense and Space, threatened to abandon the project if its stakeholders did not agree to assume a larger share of the plane’s upfront costs and to delay delivery.Airbus has since struggled to bring the 37-ton transporter back on track. The group has a total of 174 outstanding orders for the A400M, most of them from seven NATO member states: Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Spain and Turkey.Airbus declined to quantify the financial impact that the delays and restructuring might have, saying it would provide details when it presents its 2014 results on Feb. 27.In November, the group acknowledged that it had failed to meet a deadline that month for certification of several of the plane’s combat features, a factor that, according to the original sales contracts, would entitle government customers to cancel some or all of their orders.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.