By EMILY STEELJAN. 29, 2015
Nickelodeon, the entertainment group focused on children’s programming, said on Thursday that it would start a new subscription streaming service in March that will be available outside traditional cable or satellite television packages.The new offering from the home of “SpongeBob SquarePants” and “Dora the Explorer” will have a distinct brand intended to draw in children and their parents. More details of the product are to be disclosed in advertising sales presentations next month.“We want to satisfy the demand that is coming from the viewers out there,” said Philippe Dauman, chief executive of Viacom, the media conglomerate that owns Nickelodeon, MTV and Comedy Central.“They have an insatiable appetite for great content,” he added. “They want to view that content on every device that they own.”AdvertisementThe move signals an attempt by Viacom to prove its relevance at a time of mega-mergers and rapid digital transformations that are upending the media business. Shares in the company slid about 12 percent in 2014, after persistent ratings struggles and advertising declines. The total audience for Viacom’s television networks tumbled 18 percent during the quarter that ended Dec. 31, according to Bernstein Research. Viacom has blamed issues with the measurement process used for determining ratings for the declines.Advertisement“There is a frustration at Viacom and many other media companies that the world is moving and that the tools they have at their disposal will not help them accomplish their goals,” said Michael Nathanson, a media analyst with MoffettNathanson Research.Nickelodeon introduced a number of digital initiatives in the last year, including new apps and original series for the web and mobile. Its programming also is available for streaming on Amazon.With the offering it announced on Thursday, Viacom joins other television groups that are starting their own streaming services. CBS started a $6-a-month option in October and HBO is expected to start a stand-alone streaming service this year.Viacom may have to tread more carefully than its rivals, analysts said. Its business is built on selling its bundle of television networks to cable and satellite companies, which in turn package those networks together for subscribers. In the quarter ended Dec. 31, Viacom earned $1.1 billion, about a third of its total revenue, from those so-called affiliate fees.While creating a compelling digital-only offering from Nickelodeon could increase both subscription and advertising revenue, it could also encourage viewers to abandon their cable or satellite subscriptions, analysts said. In turn, the cable and satellite companies could drop Viacom from their lineup or force the media group to significantly cut its rates. Viacom then would need to create equally compelling subscription streaming services for its other networks, which also include VH1, BET, TV Land and Spike.“They don’t want to destroy the rest of the bundle,” said David Bank, a media analyst with RBC Capital Markets. “If it does disrupt the bundle, do they have to roll out a similar strategy with all of their properties? Will those be as compelling?”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When asked whether Viacom would need to consolidate with another television group to protect its negotiating power with cable and satellite distributors, Mr. Dauman said that the company was confident that it was on solid footing on its own.The comments came as Viacom reported earnings that matched analysts’ expectations for the quarter ended Dec. 31. Net income declined 9 percent to $500 million, or $1.20 a share.AdvertisementTotal revenue increased 5 percent to $3.3 billion, helped by a 6 percent increase in the filmed entertainment group.Domestic advertising revenue declined 6 percent for the quarter, dragged down by ratings issues.In a call with analysts, Viacom executives also disclosed — without providing details — that they would reorganize the business in the coming months to better position the company for future growth. Analysts said that the reorganization was likely to result in layoffs, with the company favoring workers with technical skills over those with traditional television backgrounds.Viacom also announced that it was spending about $400 million on two separate transactions. One was an agreement to acquire five regional television channels in India, which it will own with its existing Indian partner, Network18.Mr. Dauman said Viacom also was negotiating another acquisition “that would add to our scale in an important part of our business.” The company has reportedly been in talks to acquire a trio of comedy websites, including The Onion, Funny or Die and CollegeHumor.Sumner M. Redstone, Viacom’s chairman and controlling shareholder, was notably absent from the company’s conference call. Mr. Redstone, 91, usually makes short opening remarks. The company said he listened in from Los Angeles.Separately, Time Warner Cable, the country’s second-largest cable operator, on Thursday reported earnings that missed analysts expectations for the quarter ended Dec. 31. Net income was $554 million, or $1.95 a share, up from $540 million, or $1.89 a share, in the year-earlier period. Total revenue increased 3.8 percent to $5.8 billion, bolstered by an uptick in its business services group and the sale of Internet services. While the company increased its total customer relationships, it lost 38,000 video subscribers, not as steep a decline as it suffered in the same quarter last year.In a conference call, Time Warner Cable executives said that the company continued to seek regulatory approval for its proposed $45 billion merger with Comcast and that the deal remained on track to close “early this year.”A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Nickelodeon to Offer a Streaming Service as Viacom Steps Up Digital Efforts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.