By BILL VLASICJAN. 29, 2015
DETROIT —  After several years as the leader in profits and performance among American automakers, the Ford Motor Company hit a speed bump in 2014.Ford said on Thursday that its net income for the year plummeted 56 percent from the previous year, primarily because of higher costs, lower volumes and a series of surprising setbacks.Not all of Ford’s struggles were unexpected in a year full of big changes, like a new chief executive, a revamped pickup truck and heavy investment to expand Asian operations and restructure its troubled European division.Yet while the costs of new products and global expansion were foreseen, a rash of unexpected expenses, including higher warranty and recall costs and troubles in markets like Venezuela and Russia, combined to drag down results.AdvertisementNow Ford is under pressure to show that its transition period is over and profits will bounce back in the coming year.AdvertisementFor the year, Ford said it earned $3.19 billion, down from $7.18 billion in net income during 2013, and its global revenue fell 2 percent from the year before.The fourth quarter was particularly challenging for Ford, which ranks second in revenue behind General Motors among domestic carmakers. Its net income was $52 million, a sharp decrease from the $3.07 billion it earned in the year-ago period.The drop was partly caused by special pretax charges of $1.2 billion taken during the quarter, including an $800 million charge for currency fluctuations in Venezuela.Mark Fields, Ford’s chief executive, called the last year “solid yet challenging,” and pledged to increase pretax profitability substantially in 2015.“This is going to be a breakthrough year for Ford,” said Mr. Fields, who took over as chief executive last year upon the retirement of Alan R. Mulally.Industry analysts said that Ford’s 2014 results were mostly because of the costs of critical product introductions like the F-Series pickup and expensive, strategic moves like building new plants in India and China at the same time it was grappling with poor economic conditions in South America and Europe.But investors were not alarmed by the less-than-stellar financial results, and expect Ford to rebound in the coming year. In trading Thursday on the New York Stock Exchange, Ford shares rose nearly 3 percent to close at $14.85.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Ford likely is happy to close the books on 2014 and look ahead to 2015,” said Michelle Krebs, an analyst with the auto research firm Kelley Blue Book.AdvertisementCompany executives said that despite the lower profits, it would not deviate from its aggressive product plans and expansion strategy. However, the automaker is hopeful that it will not see a repeat of last year’s high warranty costs and international setbacks.“We had a lot going on last year, but we didn’t expect South America to fall off a cliff, or what happened in Russia, or the rise in warranty costs,” said Robert L. Shanks, Ford’s chief financial officer.Mr. Shanks said that, for example, costs for warranties and recalls increased by $1.3 billion in 2014, when many automakers, particularly G.M., incurred significantly higher expenses for vehicle safety actions.“Are we going to have recalls? Yes, they are part of the business,” Mr. Shanks said. “But I would expect to see warranty expenses to get back to normal this year.”The manufacturing changeover of the truck siphoned off profits and sales in the latter part of 2014. But Mr. Shanks said pickup production would increase steadily in the first half of this year, and help stabilize Ford’s market share in the United States.For 2014, Ford said it sold 6.32 million vehicles worldwide, down from 6.33 million the year before.Despite cost pressures and lower sales, Ford’s operations in North America continued to be the bright spot in its overall business.Pretax profit in North America was $1.55 billion in the fourth quarter, down from $1.8 billion a year earlier. For all of 2014, Ford posted pretax profit of $6.9 billion in the region, compared with $8.8 billion the previous year.The results translate into profit-sharing checks averaging $6,900 for the company’s 50,000 unionized workers in the United States.Ford’s international operations had mixed results. In South America, the company reported a pretax loss of $1.16 billion for 2104, compared with a loss of $33 million the previous year. In Europe, Ford said it had a pretax loss of $1.06 billion for the year, compared with a $1.44 billion loss in 2013.AdvertisementThe results were better in the Asia-Pacific region, and the company expects that investment in new plants in the region should add to the bottom line this year. Pretax profit hit $589 million in the region in 2014, an increase over $327 million the previous year.A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Ford Earnings Plummet, Weighed by Expenses.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.