By STANLEY REEDJAN. 29, 2015
LONDON — The financial impact of the sharp fall in oil prices has begun to show in the earnings of big energy companies.Royal Dutch Shell, the first big player to post financial results since the steep decline in oil prices, said on Thursday that earnings in the fourth quarter of 2014 had actually risen from a year earlier, as improved performance in marketing and refining offset the effects of lower oil prices.But the results were weaker than analysts had expected. A main culprit was that average oil prices in the quarter tumbled to about $72 a barrel, from about $95 a barrel.Shell’s shares were down more than 4 percent in London on Thursday.The financial picture for the sector should become clearer in coming days, as other major energy companies report results for the last quarter of 2014, which began with oil at about $95 a barrel but ended at about $55. On Thursday, the international benchmark, Brent crude, was trading at about $49 a barrel.AdvertisementShell is responding cautiously, saying that its capital spending in 2015 will most likely be similar to the $35 billion it spent in 2014. Capital expenditure in the industry has been soaring in recent years.AdvertisementBen van Beurden, the chief executive, said, “It is very important not to get into a slash-and-burn mentality,” adding that Shell would take “a very measured approach.”He also said that Shell projected a price range of $70 to $90 a barrel in the long term, and estimated that higher oil prices are required if the industry is to invest in the future.Shell’s decision not to make deep cuts in spending disappointed some analysts, but others applauded the company.“What we like is that Shell is not overreacting with respect to the oil price,” analysts at Bernstein Research in London wrote in a note to clients on Thursday. “Implied in that is that prices will recover.”After reviewing its plans, Shell deferred some projects and canceled others, Mr. van Beurden said. The decisions will lead to reducing spending on projects by $15 billion over the next three years from what the company might have spent.The unexpected drop in crude prices has put into question the viability of projects across the industry. Some companies are cutting exploration and production budgets and halting projects, and producers in the United States are cutting the number of drilling rigs around the country.Shell, which is based in The Hague, said that earnings excluding one-time items and inventory changes rose about 12 percent, to $3.3 billion, from $2.9 billion in the fourth quarter of 2013. Net income declined 57 percent, to $773 million, on revenue of $92 billion. The company’s adjusted earnings in 2014 were $22.6 billion, up 16 percent from the previous year.AdvertisementAnalysts at Liberum Capital in London said in a note to clients on Thursday that the results were “disappointing, 20 percent below consensus.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The results reflect the efforts to cut costs and to increase efficiency put in place by Mr. van Beurden, who took over as chief at the beginning of 2014. He has been trying to improve on the lackluster results of previous years by closing and selling ailing businesses and by streamlining operations.Though Shell is trying to restrain capital spending, it is still intent on drilling for oil in Alaska, which the company considers its best prospect. Mr. van Beurden said the company hoped to drill this summer in the Chukchi Sea, if the company receives​ the necessary permits and overcomes legal challenges. ​Shell’s plans to drill in Alaska were delayed after a series of accidents and other problems in 2013 and after a United States court ruling a year ago said that the Department of the Interior had awarded offshore leases in the Chukchi Sea to Shell and other companies in 2008 without fully considering the environmental risks.​Mr. van Beurden said Shell had already prepared a large amount of equipment for the operation, which has already cost the company $5 billion.It is likely to cost Shell $1 billion more if the company is authorized to drill in Alaska, and close to $1 billion even if it does not. Drilling in Alaska is “a little like operating the North Sea from New York,” ​Mr. van Beurden said.The effects of slumping oil prices were offset in the fourth quarter by the performance of its oil refining, chemicals and marketing businesses, which showed particular improvement with earnings up about $1 billion, or 178 percent, to $1.56 billion.“Our strategy is delivering, but we’re not complacent,” Mr. van Beurden said in a statement. “Weaker oil prices underline that there’s a lot more to do.”Performance in core exploration and production was less vigorous, with earnings falling 30 percent to $1.7 billion. Much of the drop can most likely be attributed to lower oil and gas prices, but big losses in the Americas and Oceania, which includes Australia, also hurt.AdvertisementShell says a $10 drop in the price of a barrel of oil translates into $3.3 billion in lower earnings on an annual basis.The company also said that it had replaced only 26 percent of the oil and gas it produced in 2014.Mr. van Beurden showed reporters a slide that indicated that the company, while improving in terms of generating cash, was still being outperformed by competitors in terms of returns on capital.Shell, which sold $2.2 billion in exploration and production assets in the fourth quarter as it trimmed positions in shale gas in the United States, said a strategic review of its global portfolio was now underway. That could lead to further divestments and write-offs.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.