By EMILY STEELJAN. 30, 2015
About a month after advertising on television for the first time, the makers of the free mobile game Heroes Charge decided at the last minute that they wanted to make a much bigger splash: a commercial during television’s biggest advertising event, the Super Bowl.UCool, the tiny studio in Silicon Valley that produces the app, announced on Friday that it was paying $2.25 million for a 15-second spot during the fourth quarter of the game on Sunday. Because the start-up decided only a few weeks ago to buy the ad, it did not have time to find a Madison Avenue agency to produce it and created the spot — featuring its red-haired Emberstar character — itself.“It is not as easy as opening up the telephone book or Googling ‘best ad agency’ and getting it started,” said Benjamin Gifford, the company vice president for user experience. “Those agencies might not think that we are being serious.”UCool is one of 15 first-time advertisers that will compete for attention on Sunday against the usual lineup of deep-pocketed brands peddling beverages, snacks, cars and technology. Super Bowl XLIX features the most newcomers since the burst of the dot-com bubble at the turn of the century.Advertisement“A lot of these brands are not in the cultural conversation, so it’s an immediate jump-start,” said Jay Russell, executive creative director at the ad agency GSD&M, which is behind the spot for Avocados From Mexico, another first-time advertiser for the game. “Good or bad, you will be known.”For those companies, the risks and rewards can be especially high. The $4.5 million that it costs for 30 seconds of commercial time can represent more than 15 percent of a small company’s entire media budget for the year, according to Kantar Media, a research firm owned by the advertising conglomerate WPP. If the spot succeeds, the marketer stands to gain instant attention and acclaim. If it flops, the marketer has most likely wasted a huge chunk of money.AdvertisementThis year’s first-timers include a mix of little-known brands seeking to use the Super Bowl’s giant stage — the game routinely draws more than 110 million viewers who pay keen attention to the ads — to build awareness. Those advertisers include Heroes Charge; Loctite, a maker of superglue; Jublia, a treatment for toenail fungus; Wix.com, a website-building service; and Mophie, a maker of smartphone accessories.“We want to make this brand famous,” said Pierre Tannoux, the director of marketing at Henkel Adhesives International, whose Loctite brand is spending more money for 30 seconds of commercial time than what it usually spends on ads for the year. The contents of the ad are a secret until game day.Eric Mason, director of communications at Wix, echoed the sentiment. “We’re one of the larger companies that people haven’t really heard of yet,” he said. “We wanted to go to the big stage to let people know who we are.”Also advertising in the game for the first time are more prominent brands that decided to try to break through the annual marketing blitz this year. Those include Carnival Cruise Lines, Skittles candy and Always feminine products.“For us, the goal of being in the Super Bowl is about changing the conversation about cruising,” said Ken Jones, vice president for corporate marketing at Carnival Corporation, which created four ads and asked consumers to vote for their favorite. “We want to reach people who have never cruised at all.”Some marketing experts said that the stampede of new advertisers was possible because several stalwarts decided to sit on the sidelines. Many automakers, for example, including Volkswagen, Jaguar and Lincoln, did not buy time this year. (The game last year featured 11 car brands, according to Kantar Media.)AdvertisementSome analysts cited the lackluster market for television ads. Although spots in this year’s game sold out, it took much longer than in years past. NBC, which is broadcasting the game, announced only on Wednesday that it had sold out. By contrast, Fox, which showed the game last year, said all its ad time had sold about two months before kickoff.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It was a challenging ad sales marketplace. I won’t diminish that,” said Seth Winter, executive vice president for ad sales at NBC Universal News and Sports Group. “This was not the easiest exercise I have been through.”Asked whether the quality of the ads would suffer this year because of the low production value that often comes with first-time advertisers, Mr. Winter said that the group had reviewed storyboards and did not expect the entertainment factor to decline.The game on Sunday features the most newcomers since 2000. Called the “Dot-com Super Bowl,” that Super Bowl featured 19 first-time advertisers and is considered a symbol of the free-spending excess of the period. Several of those marketers no longer exist, like the pet supply site Pets.com, whose ad featured a sock puppet dog crooning the Chicago love song “If You Leave Me Now.” (Pets.com closed 10 months after running that spot.)Over the last few years, the number of first-time advertisers at the Super Bowl has steadily climbed, with new entrants accounting for about 23 percent of last year’s ad roster, according to Kantar.Chobani, the Greek yogurt brand, was new to the Super Bowl last year. Its 60-second spot featured a 1,400-pound bear ransacking a grocery store in search of a wholesome, natural snack.Peter McGuinness, the company’s chief marketing officer, said that the ad, along with other related digital and social media promotions, significantly bolstered awareness of the brand. Before the game, about a third of Americans had heard of the company; after the game, awareness increased to 40 percent and sales surged 20 percent, he said.Mr. McGuinness said that Chobani was not returning this year, opting instead to run more promotions throughout the year. But, referring to the Super Bowl spot, he said, “I wouldn’t have not done it.”Indeed, most brands do not return to the big game the year after they make their debut at the Super Bowl. Two exceptions are Squarespace, the website-building service, and WeatherTech, a maker of automotive floor mats, both of which advertised last year. “It is high stakes, high stress, but the returns when you do it right are so vast and almost always worth it,” said David Lubars, chief creative officer at Omnicom’s BBDO, which is working on several spots for the game.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Newcomers Buy Ad Time at Big Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.