By SYDNEY EMBEROCT. 10, 2015
Gloria Allred, the lawyer representing a woman in a case against Bill Cosby, said on Saturday that she wanted to question the entertainer under oath a second time and revealed that his deposition on Friday took place in Boston.The highly anticipated deposition, whose location was previously undisclosed, was for a California civil case brought by Judy Huth, who says Mr. Cosby forced her to perform a sex act on him in 1974, when she was 15.“We will be filing motions with the court in connection with the deposition,” Ms. Allred said in a prepared statement, which she read on Saturday at a hotel in Boston. “We will also be seeking to take a further deposition of Mr. Cosby at a later date.”Ms. Allred said the deposition, which was to have been videotaped and recorded by a court reporter, lasted from about 9 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. with a few breaks, including one for lunch.AdvertisementMr. Cosby lost a bid this week to stop the case from going forward, though the judge in the case agreed on Wednesday that the transcripts of the deposition should be sealed for at least 60 days. Both sides have been ordered not to talk about Mr. Cosby’s statements until a hearing scheduled for Dec. 22.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Given the judge’s order, Ms. Allred said, she had “no further comment on anything that happened at the deposition of Mr. Cosby.”Ms. Huth is scheduled to be deposed on Oct. 15 at an undisclosed location.On Friday, a federal judge, also in Massachusetts, refused to dismiss a separate lawsuit by three women who have accused Mr. Cosby of sexually assaulting them in the 1970s and later defaming them when, they said, he allowed his representatives to brand them as liars. The lawyer for the women in that case, Joseph Cammarata, said on Friday that he would depose Mr. Cosby “at the earliest opportunity.”AdvertisementMr. Cosby has never been charged with a crime and has denied any wrongdoing. Andrew Wyatt, a spokesman for Mr. Cosby, declined to comment on Saturday.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.