By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJAN. 30, 2015
It was only two days ago that a Chinese government regulator chastised the Alibaba Group, the e-commerce giant, for failing to curb the sale of fake goods on its sites.Now the two appear to have made up in a hurry.The regulator, the State Administration for Industry and Commerce, said on Friday that its leader, Zhang Mao, had met with Alibaba’s executive chairman, Jack Ma, to discuss cooperating to fight counterfeiting and protect consumers.The agency made its criticism of Alibaba in a report released on Wednesday. But it is now backing away from the findings of that report, calling it a recounting of a July meeting between the two sides and not an official document with legal weight.It is a surprisingly quick turn of events for both Alibaba and the Chinese agency, given the public criticism that the S.A.I.C. delivered to one of its country’s most important Internet players.AdvertisementThe Chinese government stayed quiet about the proliferation of fake goods on Alibaba’s marketplaces for several months, particularly in the period leading to the company’s $25 billion stock market debut last fall.AdvertisementThat was despite longstanding accusations of sales of counterfeit goods — fake wine, knockoff handbags and falsely branded electronics — on Alibaba’s platforms. Only in 2012 did the United States trade representative remove the company’s Taobao online marketplace from a “notorious markets” list of counterfeit goods sellers.Alibaba has publicly criticized the phenomenon as a “cancer” and moved to crack down on it. The company said that it spent about $160 million on anticounterfeiting efforts in 2013 and 2014.Yet the S.A.I.C. moved forward with a prominent, and harshly worded, paper this week. In it, the regulator bluntly described a host of what it said were failures to halt the sales of counterfeit goods on marketplaces like Taobao and Tmall.com.That failure to halt the sales of fakes has led Alibaba to face “its biggest credibility crisis since it was founded,” the report said.That move brought a strong response from Alibaba, which acknowledged that it had more to do to halt counterfeit sales, but also contended that its regulator had been less than objective.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Officials associated with Taobao in particular accused Liu Hongliang, an official at the agency, of using inappropriate procedures in the investigation, and said Taobao would file a formal complaint.The S.A.I.C.’s blunt tone disappeared in the Friday statement. The agency described Alibaba as “steadfast and resolute” in fighting the sale of counterfeit goods, though it maintained that e-commerce platforms in China still needed to improve their self-policing.Both sides pledged to work more closely on matters like creating new regulatory mechanisms.“Both sides believe that the regulators and online platforms share the common interest to promote the healthy development of the online commerce industry and creating an online shopping environment where consumers feel safe and satisfied,” the regulator said, according to an English-language translation of its statement.In a post on its corporate blog, Alibaba said it planned to hire 300 people to form an anticounterfeiting task force to bolster its policing staff.AdvertisementA representative for Alibaba said in a statement: “The most recent S.A.I.C. posting speaks for itself. We feel vindicated.”A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Agency Softens Criticism of Alibaba on Sales of Fake Goods.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.