By RAVI SOMAIYAJAN. 30, 2015
The Daily Mail, a British tabloid that became an online behemoth with fast, salacious stories, announced on Friday that it had bought Elite Daily, a website aimed at millennials, as part of a plan to become a larger media conglomerate.Elite Daily, which describes itself as “the voice of Generation Y,” specializes in articles and videos intended to be shared online, with headlines like “9 Bets Every Girl Should Make While Watching the Super Bowl.” The purchase price was not specified, but a person with knowledge of the terms said the value of the deal was $40 million to $50 million.In an interview on Friday, Jon Steinberg, the chief executive of Daily Mail North America and a former president of BuzzFeed, said the acquisition was part of a plan to become a broader media company, “a Time Warner or a Viacom.”Mr. Steinberg said he had been an adviser to Elite Daily at the urging of Alan Patricof, the managing director of the venture capital firm Greycroft, which was a small investor in the site. Greycroft has also invested in other online media companies, including The Huffington Post.AdvertisementIn an item posted on the acquisition on Friday, Elite Daily said it was founded in February 2012 by David Arabov, then 21; Jonathon Francis; and Gerard Adams. Mr. Arabov and Mr. Francis were still at Pace University when they created it. Mr. Arabov wrote in the post that the founders had aimed to make an outlet with “an authentic voice we could relate to and content that fit the diverse scope of our interests.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The site has since grown to 65 employees and reaches 74 million unique users worldwide, according to its own figures, but it has been criticized for trolling — putting out deliberately inflammatory content to attract outraged readers.The Daily Mail’s site, which attracted nearly 200 million unique monthly visitors worldwide in December, according to the British Audit Bureau of Circulation, had little overlap in the millennial audience with Elite Daily, Mr. Steinberg said. Millennials are usually defined as those born between 1980 and 2000.AdvertisementThe Daily Mail said that between them, the two sites hoped to reach 73 million visitors in the United States, more than 36 million of whom would be part of the youth audience so coveted by advertisers.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Daily Mail Buys Site Targeting Millennials.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.