By STEPHANIE STROMOCT. 10, 2015
The beer industry equivalents of the Hatfields and McCoys are doing a mating dance. Anheuser-Busch InBev last week made public a $104 billion offer for its archrival SABMiller, which promptly rejected the price as too low.There seems little doubt, however, that Anheuser-Busch InBev will keep pushing — the $104 billion bid was its third since the companies made their courtship known in late September.Wall Street has long said it was a question of when, not if, Anheuser-Busch InBev would make a play for its giant competitor. That’s because the Brazilians who control it, while famous for cutting costs, have yet to demonstrate that they can grow without acquiring other companies.Under their stewardship, Anheuser-Busch InBev has become decidedly more profitable — but at the same time has lost market share in many places.AdvertisementIn 2008, Jorge Paulo Lemann, Marcel Telles and Beto Alberto Sicupira used InBev, itself an amalgamation of European and Latin American beer brands, to buy Anheuser-Busch. The beer business is where the three men perfected what has become their playbook, which focuses on cost and profits.AdvertisementAt Anheuser-Busch InBev and in the businesses now in the portfolio of 3G Capital, the private equity group they control, they have jettisoned noncore businesses, sold corporate frills like jets and relentlessly hacked away at seemingly inconsequential costs, limiting the use of printers, unplugging mini-refrigerators and putting executives up in budget hotel chains, sometimes two to a room.They then turned their attention to the supply chain, replacing higher cost inputs with lower cost ones — thinner glass bottles, cheaper ingredients — and pressing suppliers to give them twice as long to pay for goods. They also deployed zero-base budgeting, in which departmental managers are allocated a bare minimum each year for basic operations and asked to justify any additional expenses.Along with cutting costs, they raised prices for products slightly, so that the additional pennies from the sale of each can of, say, Bud Light, fall almost directly to the bottom line.Those higher prices also help mask what some analysts now say is the flaw in the model: falling market share. Anheuser-Busch sold 107 million barrels of beer in 2008 in the United States when the Brazilian investors acquired it, but it sold just 96 million barrels last year, according to Beer Marketer’s Insights, a trade publication. In almost every year, it has lost nearly one point of market share.Anheuser-Busch InBev has counted on increasing international sales to offset the declines, and SAB’s strong presence in such markets is an asset it covets.Mainstream beer brands in general have lost ground over that time, and Steven Lipin, a spokesman for 3G, said that Anheuser-Busch’s market share had been falling long before the Brazilians bought the company. But Benj Steinman, the publisher of Beer Marketer’s Insights, said the company’s market share was down “only marginally from its peak” before the merger. Budweiser’s share had slipped, but Bud Light’s growth had offset that decline — until it, too, began to slip after the merger.Last year, Anheuser-Busch InBev’s sales declined 1.3 percent in North America, where it sold the equivalent of 12.1 billion liters; sales declined 6 percent in Europe, where it sold 4.4 billion liters. Those declines were offset by volume growth in northern Latin America and other emerging markets, according to its financial reports.AdvertisementIn the first half of this year, total beer volumes were down 1.6 percent, according to the company. Yet cash flow and profit margins still expanded.“They raised prices more than inflation in the early years, which is the best way to leverage profitability when you’re cutting costs the way they have,” Mr. Steinman said. “That’s not working anymore, by the way.”The Brazilian investors behind Anheuser-Busch InBev and 3G declined to answer questions. In an email, a spokeswoman for the company said, “We have created the world’s leading brewer, through organic growth as well as industry-changing combinations.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bid for SAB, with brands that include Miller and Coors, would be industry-changing, and it looks like an attempt to buy sales. “They need a transaction at least every three or four years to get growth,” said David Peacock, who was an executive at Anheuser-Busch for 20 years, four of them under the Brazilians’ management.The Brazilian investors have applied the same strategies to the companies they have bought since they formed 3G. Those companies include Heinz, Kraft Foods and Burger King. But 3G’s methods have spread far beyond the companies it owns.Because 3G is seen as always setting the table for an acquisition, every food company considers itself a target and is either scrambling to get its house in order to become more competitive or to prepare for a potential sale.Mondelez, the food company based in Northfield, Ill. that owns Oreo, Triscuit and Cadbury, has felt the heat from two activist investors — Nelson Peltz and William A. Ackman — who have sold other companies to 3G. The company adopted 3G’s zero-base budgeting and recently announced 600 layoffs and further cuts to its marketing team.Campbell Soup and Kellogg have taken similar steps. ConAgra is selling its capital-intensive private-label food business and recently announced it was eliminating 30 percent of its office-based work force, about 1,500 jobs.The palpitations at America’s largest food companies are occurring in part because 3G bought and then merged Kraft and Heinz into a multibillion-dollar food company in just two years.AdvertisementBut 3G may have found its standard tactics less effective at Heinz, which had already gone through several restructurings and sold off many of its least robust businesses when 3G bought it in 2013. Dean O’Hare, former chief executive of the Chubb Group and a member of Heinz’s board at the time it was sold to 3G, said the closure of at least one Heinz plant that was attributed to 3G was already underway when it bought Heinz. “I think a lot of the job cuts they made had to do with the fact that Heinz no longer had shareholders and so a lot of corporate staff could be eliminated,” Mr. O’Hare said.3G sold corporate planes and eventually cut more than 7,000 jobs. A familiar pattern quickly emerged, however. In the 52 weeks ending July 12, which roughly corresponded to the second year of 3G’s ownership, volume sales of Heinz ketchup fell more than 6 percent, according to IRI, a market research company.Michael Mullen, a spokesman for Kraft Heinz, disputed IRI’s numbers, and offered data from Nielsen, another data and research company, showing that in the 52 weeks that ended Sept. 5, Heinz ketchup’s volume sales were down just 1.7 percent. Dollar sales, according to Nielsen and IRI, have risen, an indication of a price increase by Kraft Heinz.Mr. Mullen said the company had increased spending on television, print and social media advertising by 30 percent in the last two years. “Our strategy is geared toward focused growth and emphasizes fewer, bigger, better innovations to unite Kraft Heinz’s teams and efforts,” he wrote by email.Michael Weinstein, who was on the board at Heinz when 3G bought it, said:“They’re much more driven around the bottom line than the top line. Eventually, that can throw a consumer packaged-goods company into an ugly downward spiral that’s difficult to get out of unless it makes investments in good marketing and advertising.”At Kraft, 3G’s new management meant 2,500 jobs were cut in August and the end of the tradition of free Jell-O in the company’s canteens.Analysts have questioned how many truly significant cuts 3G can make at Kraft before it has to consider another acquisition.“What I’ve always wondered is where they are eight years from now,” Mr. Peacock, the former Anheuser-Busch executive, said of Anheuser-Busch InBev, “because once you buy SAB, you’re kind of done — there’s not much else to buy.”Because of an editing error, an article on Oct. 11 about Anheuser-Busch InBev’s ambitions to acquire a rival, SABMiller, described incorrectly Anheuser-Busch’s performance in North America and Europe last year. The company’s volume sales — not its growth — declined in both those areas.A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Brewer’s Playbook Starts With Its Checkbook.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.