By RACHEL ABRAMSJAN. 30, 2015
The toymaker Mattel on Friday promised to take swift action to reverse years of sales declines as it released grim earnings, just days after the abrupt resignation of its chief executive.Net income fell nearly 60 percent, to $149.9 million, or 44 cents a share, in the fourth quarter. For 2014, net income fell 45 percent to $498.9 million, or $1.45 a share.“We are disappointed with our results,” said Christopher Sinclair, Mattel’s chairman and its interim chief executive, “but moving forward with a heightened sense of urgency to make the necessary changes to enhance our brand relevance and improve our execution.”The company has come under increasing pressure from smaller, nimble toy manufacturers like Spin Master, the maker of one of this year’s most popular gifts, the Zoomer Dino, and Jakks Pacific, which created some of the best-selling Elsa dolls from the Disney movie “Frozen.”AdvertisementMattel’s former chief executive, Bryan G. Stockton, served in that role for three years before the company on Monday announced his departure. Last year, sales of Barbie fell 16 percent worldwide, helping to drive down global net sales 7 percent. Other core brands also had declines, Fisher-Price by 13 percent and American Girl by 2 percent. Sales of the company’s Hot Wheels toys, though, rose 3 percent for the year.AdvertisementThe company said on Friday that sales fell 5 percent last year in the North American region.Mattel has generally not benefited from the growing toy industry in the United States. Domestic toy sales grew 4 percent in 2014 to $18.08 billion, according to data from the NPD Group.Mattel also lost lucrative licensing rights to make Disney Princess and “Frozen” dolls to Hasbro, which can start manufacturing them in 2016. As major studio films reach a wider global audience, the rights to produce toys based on popular characters have become increasingly prized.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the same time, big toy companies have faced increased competition for such rights from smaller, more specialized companies. Mattel has had the rights to make smaller dolls for “Frozen,” for example, while Jakks Pacific could make larger sizes.One of Mattel’s chief rivals, Hasbro, has experienced roughly flat earnings in recent years. The toymaker will release its fourth-quarter results next month.Hasbro and Mattel have also faced stiffer competition from Lego, which has surpassed both companies in sales. Its lines of toys aimed at girls, like the Lego Friends and Research Institute play sets, have been a hit with consumers.Last year, Lego benefited from increased demand for construction toys. Sales of building sets rose 13 percent last year, according to data from NPD, outpacing the growth of youth electronics, action figures and games and puzzles.The Danish building blocks company also enjoyed wide popularity for its film, “The Lego Movie,” which earned more than $250 million worldwide since Warner Bros. released it last February, according to Box Office Mojo.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Bleak Report for Quarter From Mattel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.