AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan SobleTOKYO — Facing mounting costs to recall cars containing potentially deadly airbag defects, the Japanese automaker Honda Motor on Friday cut its profit forecast for the year by more than $400 million.Honda said its business was being eroded by the difficult auto market in Japan and expenses to deal with quality problems, mainly in North America.Honda has recalled about four million vehicles with airbags manufactured by the Takata Corporation, a safety equipment supplier also based in Japan. Honda is investigating a possible sixth death linked to ruptured Takata airbags, Honda and its lawyers said on Thursday, as a new estimate put the number of those injured as high as 64.At a briefing on Honda’s quarterly results on Friday, Tetsuo Iwamura, an executive vice president at the carmaker, sought to play down the effect of the safety problem on the company’s reputation in the United States, its largest and most lucrative market and the focal point of the airbag issue.More vehicles, including old models, have been recalled in the United States in 2014 than ever before. Explore the size and scope of the recalls, and find out if your car has been affected.Honda is Takata’s biggest customer, but other automakers have also been hit by the issue, which has led to the recall of more than 18 million vehicles in the United States alone. Inflaters in the defective airbags can burst when the airbags deploy in an accident, sending hot shards of metal flying through the cabin.“We aren’t seeing a big impact on sales in North America from the airbag issue,” Mr. Iwamura said.Still, Honda sold 54,000 fewer cars worldwide last quarter than it did in the same period a year earlier, a decline of 5 percent. Mr. Iwamura attributed the fall to slowing demand in China and a higher sales tax in Japan that has hurt sales across the car industry here.Operating profit fell 22 percent in the quarter, to 136 billion yen, or about $1.15 billion, from the same quarter a year earlier. The decline would have been worse if not for a weakening of the yen’s exchange rate, which increased the value of overseas earnings when converted to Honda’s home currency.Mr. Iwamura said the drag from falling sales and the lift provided by the yen had “canceled each other out.” That left the direct impact of the airbag crisis as the primary cause of damage to Honda’s finances.Honda has been forced to set aside hundreds of millions of dollars to repair vehicles affected by the recalls, a process that has been slowed by shortages of replacement parts. The company cut its forecast for operating profit in the financial year ending in March by ¥50 billion.The New York Times has exposed missteps and delays by automakers and federal safety regulators in responding to deadly defects in automobiles during what became a record year for recalls.Mr. Iwamura did not directly mention the latest suspected airbag death, which occurred this month in Texas. According to the Harris County Sheriff’s Office, Carlos Solis, 35, died on Jan. 18 after his 2002 Honda Accord struck another vehicle at the entrance to a parking lot in Houston. The driver’s airbag deployed and a piece of metal struck Mr. Solis in the neck, the sheriff’s report said.Mr. Solis, a father of two, was found at the scene with no signs of life and was later declared dead. An 11-year-old passenger, identified as his cousin, was not injured.In a statement released on Thursday in the United States, Honda said that it had alerted federal regulators, but added that it was too early to conclude the airbag was responsible.“We are currently working with representatives of the driver’s family to gain the access necessary to conduct a comprehensive investigation,” the company saidsaid.Honda faces other problems as well, including the falling price of gasoline. The company’s mostly small, fuel-efficient cars tend to sell especially well when gas prices are rising, and sales tail off when gas prices decline.Advertisement