By NICOLA CLARKJAN. 30, 2015
PARIS — Qatar Airways said on Friday that it had acquired a 9.99 percent stake in the International Airlines Group, the parent company of British Airways and Iberia of Spain, deepening an existing commercial partnership with the group and further extending the emirate's push into Europe.Qatar Airways, based in Doha, said it had no immediate plans to increase its holding, which is valued at roughly 1.1 billion pounds, or about $1.7 billion, and makes the carrier the largest individual shareholder of the International Airlines Group.The airline, which is the second largest of the three big Persian Gulf carriers by number of passengers after Emirates of Dubai, said it would consider taking a larger stake in the International Airlines Group “over time.” European Union rules cap ownership by foreign investors in airlines registered in the bloc at 49 percent.Akbar al-Baker, the chief executive of Qatar Airways, has long made known his interest in a possible investment in a European passenger airline, particularly as the carrier's smaller Gulf rival, Etihad Airways of Abu Dhabi, has purchased sizable minority stakes in several European airlines in recent years. Etihad holds a roughly one-third stake in Air Berlin of Germany and a 49 percent stake in Alitalia, the struggling Italian airline.AdvertisementQatar Airways’ purchase appeared to be unrelated to the International Airlines Group's bid to acquire the Irish carrier Aer Lingus for about $1.5 billion, analysts said. But the move could be helpful in persuading the Irish government, which owns 25 percent of Aer Lingus and has yet to give its blessing to a takeover, of the prospects for growth and investment that could come from joining a larger airline group.Advertisement“I.A.G. is now engaged in a charm offensive in Ireland,” John Strickland, an independent aviation consultant in London, said. “Given the Irish government’s concerns about being able to maintain connectivity with the rest of the world inside of I.A.G., I would think a deeper partnership with a rich, fast-growing Gulf carrier would be a positive card to play.”Qatar, which has one of the world’s largest reserves of natural gas, has invested much of its wealth abroad in recent years. The country's multibillion dollar sovereign wealth fund acquired 20 percent of BAA, the owner of Heathrow Airport near London, in 2012. And it has teamed up with Brookfield Property Partners to buy the Canary Wharf office-and-retail development in London, where it already owns the Shard, Britain’s tallest skyscraper, and the luxury department store Harrods.The investment in the International Airlines Group is the first by Qatar Airways in passenger airlines and follows a brief foray into the European cargo market when it bought a 35 percent stake in the Luxembourg state-owned airfreight operator Cargolux Airlines International in 2011, only to sell it back to the government in a dispute over strategy. Qatar Airways also considered acquiring a stake in Spanair, a Spanish subsidiary that is now defunct of Scandinavian Airlines, in 2012."This is not surprising,” Chris Tarry, an analyst at Ctaira, a British aviation consultancy, said of Qatar’s investment in the International Airlines Group. “The Gulf airlines have a lot of ambition and money.”But analysts said Qatar Airways’ investment strategy appeared to be distinct from that of Etihad, which has invested in a number of money-losing carriers to form a so-called equity alliance of airlines.Etihad’s chief executive, James Hogan, has pursued a novel strategy aimed at turning around these weaker airlines with an eye to gaining access to millions of new passengers as well as an entry point into strategic European hubs like Berlin and Milan. Governments in Germany and Italy, however, have resisted granting landing rights to the Persian Gulf carriers in a bid to protect carriers like Lufthansa and Alitalia.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters."This is more like a meeting of equals,” Mr. Strickland said of the Qatar-International Airlines Group combination.He added that the personal friendship between Mr. Baker and Willie Walsh, the chief executive of the International Airlines Group, was likely to have played a crucial part in sealing the transaction. Mr. Strickland said that he was doubtful Qatar Airways would be planning similar investments in other airlines.Advertisement“Mr. Baker has been clear that they were looking to invest in well-managed, financially stable airlines,” Mr. Strickland said. The International Airlines Group, which is the most profitable of Europe’s “big three” full-service airline groups, “is like the jewel in the crown,” he said. “I would not see them doing anything that would conflict with this.”Qatar Airways joined the Oneworld commercial alliance — whose members include American Airlines and Cathay Pacific of Hong Kong — in 2013, becoming the first Persian Gulf carrier to join one of the major airline alliances. The partnerships allow members to share revenue from ticket sales and offer more destinations than they could on their own.Mr. Baker described the investment in the European group as “an excellent opportunity to further develop our westwards strategy.” Mr. Walsh welcomed Qatar Airways as “a long-term supportive shareholder.”Mr. Tarry of Ctaira said it remained unclear what additional benefits a stake in the International Airlines Group would grant Qatar Airways in the near future. In their brief statements, neither indicated whether the carrier would gain a seat on the board.“By investing in I.A.G., you are making a visible statement about your relationship and probably putting down a marker for the future,” Mr. Tarry said. “But in the short run, what does it give you over and above what you already get through the alliance, with no shareholding at all?”The Qatar Airways purchase was not expected to have any immediate effect on airline passengers. Through their Oneworld alliance membership, Qatar Airways, British Airways and Iberia passengers already share airline ticket codes and frequent-flier privileges across their networks; their business and first-class members have access to the others’ airport lounges.Shares in the International Airlines Group were up slightly in trading midday Friday.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.