AdvertisementSupported byLetters To the Editor:Re “Helping to Lift the Burden of Student Debt” (The Upshot, Jan. 25), about income-based repayment, which caps student loan payments and offers loan forgiveness after 25 years, or 10 years for those working in public service jobs:As a law school graduate working as a public defender with over $155,000 in combined undergraduate/graduate student load debt, I can tell you that the revolution described in the article stopped short at addressing the real issues affecting student loan borrowers like me.While it’s true that the changes in student loan repayment plans have lessened the risk of default for public loan borrowers exclusively, income-based repayment plans aren’t addressing the fundamental problems that having enormous student loan debt can have on individuals seeking to grow and attain what I call the “benchmarks of adulthood” — like the inability to save for retirement, or save for a down payment on a home, or the difficulties of getting a mortgage due to high student loan debt — and the challenges of expanding a family with few financial resources.I’m on the income-based repayment plan and hope one day, eight years from now, to have my student loan debt forgiven in exchange for providing essential legal services to our community’s most vulnerable. I take pride in my work and hope to continue serving high-need populations, but I know that in doing so I am making it difficult, if not impossible, to reach these benchmarks of adulthood until I’m 40 because my crippling student loan debt simply doesn’t leave me with enough financial resources.Melissa NepomiachiMilwaukee, Jan. 26The writer is an assistant public defender in Elkhorn, Wis., for the Wisconsin State Public Defender.To the Editor:Kevin Carey begins his article with the simple question: “Has the student loan crisis already been solved?” He then goes on about all the little tweaks that have improved the system that has many students in its grip and contributes to our stalled economy.I read the article with interest. Free junior college is a good idea. My wife’s family with eight siblings all received graduate school educations courtesy of the City of New York and pre-Reagan federal aid to education.But, for our children who went to the University of Miami and N.Y.U. and graduated in 2008 and 2012 with scholarships that were related to our middle-class income, we have assumed debt payments including Pell grants, student loans and parent loans that total $2,500 per month, with no early exit as proposed by the latest adjustments. Interest rates range from 3.2 to 8.25 percent, mostly on the high side.The options summarized by Mr. Carey are so tricky and meager that they beg to be scrapped and replaced by a system we used to have, when education was free for all who qualified. Let’s forgive the loans and give the economy a boost, along with the moods of our students and parents.Steve SloaneGlen Cove, N.Y., Jan. 25Letters for Sunday Business may be sent to sunbiz@nytimes.com.Advertisement