In January 2013, as Cypriot banks faced collapse, Jens Weidmann, Germany’s powerful representative at the European Central Bank, made it clear how unhappy he was with the Cyprus bank bailout.It was not the E.C.B.’s job to “fund the gap of any bank runs,” Mr. Weidmann told the central bank’s governing council, according to confidential minutes of the meeting, citing both the Cyprus rescue and the Greek bank bailout in 2012.As depositors yank their savings from Greek banks, the question is being asked if the E.C.B. would bail them out again. The question gained urgency late last week as the new Greek government of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras abruptly cut off talks with the country’s lenders.On Wednesday, the E.C.B. will meet to decide whether it should approve a move by Greece’s central bank to provide emergency loans to some of the country’s largest banks. Such short-term financing, which is more expensive than traditional loans, is provided only as a last resort, when banks are bleeding deposits and cannot obtain funds from their usual lenders.And while Greece’s banks are in far better shape than they were two years ago, the fear that Mr. Tsipras’ government could be even more radical than advertised has prompted a mini bank run, with bankers and analysts estimating that as much as 14 billion euros has been withdrawn from the banks in the last month.Bankers say that these outflows accelerated late last week following aggressive anti-Europe comments by new government ministers.“People are not so much afraid of the banks,” said Gikas Hardouvelis, who was, until last week, Greece’s finance minister. “They are afraid that the Syriza government has no economic plan,” he said, referring to the party that Mr. Tsipras leads.On Saturday, one of the hard-line members of the E.C.B.’s governing council, the Finnish central banker Erkki Liikanen, said if Greece did not reach a deal with its creditors by the end of February, the central bank would stop financing Greek lenders.A day earlier, Greek bond yields spiked above 11 percent, and bank stocks — which have lost nearly half their value in the past week — continued to sink. Standard & Poor’s, the rating agency, warned that Greek banks were losing deposits rapidly and would have difficulty raising cash.Over the weekend, Yanis Varoufakis, the government’s firebrand finance minister, said it was halting discussions with the “committee of technocrats” that have been coming to Greece since 2010 to oversee the government’s austerity measures.But he also made clear that Greece would maintain broader debt discussions with its primary creditors: Europe, the E.C.B. and the International Monetary Fund. Greece must make 20 billion euros in debt payments to these entities in 2015, according to an analysis by Brean Capital, an investment firm.“We never said we would not talk to our partners or that we would default,” Mr. Varoufakis said in an interview.During his seven-month run as finance minister, Mr. Hardouvelis helped secure Greece’s first budget surplus (excluding interest payments) in decades. The harsh austerity measures that delivered this result, however, led to his government’s stinging electoral defeat.He says that the best chance for the new government to make inroads with Europe is to not focus on debt levels but to push instead for more fiscal leeway to jump-start the economy.But he also said that Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, would not look kindly upon the Tsipras government’s confrontational attitude toward its creditors, among which Europe’s central bank ranks as one of the largest.Recently, Mr. Draghi has appeared to have secured victory at Mr. Weidmann’s expense with his plan for the European Central Bank to buy a huge amount of the bonds of eurozone governments (otherwise known as quantitative easing). He may not be willing to pick another fight with the recalcitrant German over a second rescue of Greek banks.“There is a danger that the E.C.B. will not allow the funding,” Mr. Hardouvelis warned, while acknowledging what an extreme step this would be. “It’s politics. Mr. Draghi is being pushed by Germany on Q.E., so cutting funding for Greece is a way for him to gain points with Germany.”Indeed, E.C.B. watchers say that the central bank has learned from its experience in Cyprus, where it bailed out the island’s second-largest lender despite evidence that the bank was bust, which would be a violation of the E.C.B. charter.The minutes from governing council meetings during the Cyprus crisis repeatedly show how frustrated Mr. Draghi became with having to keep Cyprus banks afloat while the Cyprus government resisted signing up for a rescue program.Now, Mr. Draghi is faced with the prospect of history repeating itself as Mr. Tsipras’ decision to break off talks with Greece’s creditors will prevent much needed cash from being disbursed, while also jeopardizing the health of the country’s banks.In such a situation Mr. Draghi will have to confront the thorny question posed by Mr. Weidmann: Is it really the E.C.B.’s responsibility to keep Greek banks — or any of the eurozone banks — afloat in the face of a defiantly noncooperative government?Accordingly, the bank is now weighing a decision to curtail the time period when troubled banks can tap these last-ditch loans, called emergency liquidity assistance. Such a step would put more pressure on a stubborn government to reach an agreement with its creditors and prevent a banking collapse.In 2012, when many feared Greece would be forced to abandon the euro, Greek banks were wholly dependent for their survival on emergency loans, which reached a peak of about 160 billion euros — roughly the size of household and corporate deposits in the country now.Since then, the banks’ finances have improved considerably and they have been able to tap cheaper funds from abroad, obviating their need for emergency funds. Greek banks’ loan books have also been scrubbed as part of the recent stress tests by the E.C.B. They have benefited as well from a modest economic recovery. After eking out growth of 0.6 percent last year, the Greek economy had been expected to expand by nearly 2.9 percent this year.Recent history has shown, however, how quickly economic activity in Greece can screech to a halt in a time of duress when bank accounts are emptied and consumers stop spending.Three of the largest four banks have requested emergency support from the Greek central bank: Euro Bank, Alpha Bank and Piraeus Bank.There has been no official disclosure about how much emergency funding Greek banks have asked for and received from their central bank. But bankers in Athens say that if deposits continue to shrink, the banks will need at least 100 billion euros in last-resort loans — all of which would have to be approved by the E.C.B.Limiting emergency funds to Greek banks would be a radical measure for the E.C.B. to take given the prospect of bank failures and the potential for contagion through Europe. Capital controls would surely follow and the chances of Greece defaulting on its debts would increase markedly.For that reason, any decision by the E.C.B. to curtail emergency funding access would require a two-thirds majority vote. So, while Mr. Weidmann may well want to cut off Greece, he will need the support of a large number of his peers — not least Mr. Draghi — to get the job done.A version of this article appears in print on 02/02/2015, on page B3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: For Greece, Bank Trouble Looms Again as New Government Takes Shape.