By PATRICIA R. OLSENJAN. 31, 2015
Hoyt Harper is senior vice president and global brand leader of Sheraton Hotels and Resorts Group in Stamford, Conn.Looking inward We moved into this headquarters building two or three years ago. My office, on the sixth floor, overlooks the Harbor Point Marina. I have a great view of Long Island Sound. It’s refreshing to come in and see that on a sunny day, but I don’t spend much time looking out. I’m focused inward in the office, both literally and figuratively.1. Standing tall I’ve had a standing desk for almost my entire career at Starwood, which owns Sheraton. I also use a fitness ball, which is good for stretching and for your core and lower back.Fitness factorI try to stay fit, so I go to the gym at 5:30 a.m. for an hour, before I go to the office. During the day I also use a Power Plate, which we’re rolling out in our hotel gyms now. It’s a vibrating exercise platform that allows you to work out or stretch more efficiently. I like relieving tightness and stress with it later in the day. Our team members also come in and use it.Advertisement2. A gym anywhere Our Sheraton Gym in a Bag, which includes a foam roller, a massage stick and resistance bands, is also part of my routine. I use the roller and stick the most. I’ll grab the bands as another way to stretch.Advertisement3. Keeping it healthyI used to keep unhealthy snacks in the refrigerator in my office. Now I keep it stocked with Greek yogurt and sparkling water, and I have soft drinks and Vitaminwater for guests. Having a stocked refrigerator is just part of being in the hospitality business. My assistant goes on a restocking run every week.Lunch ritualThree days a week, I grab lunch from the cafeteria and bring it back to the office, and once a week we eat as a team. The other day is hit or miss. My favorite lunch is from Dinosaur Bar-B-Que, a restaurant that’s a stone’s throw from the office.4. Flights of fancy As a young man, I wanted to be a Navy fighter pilot, but I flunked the color part of the vision test. My wife found Air Combat USA, an organization that allows people to actually fly in and pilot a naval training plane that simulates fighter jet maneuvers, and I took a couple of flights. It’s now my hobby. Once, like a student driver, I sat next to a pilot and got to fly the plane in a simulated dogfight. I have two photos of the planes on my wall. In one, a plane is flying straight up, and in the other, I’m piloting a plane.5. Always a CheeseheadOne of my valued possessions is a signed football from Brett Favre from when he played with the Green Bay Packers. I grew up in Milwaukee. I bleed green and gold; I’m a Cheesehead and proud of it. I also have a football signed by Bart Starr, a Packer legend from the 1960s. I placed a miniature Green Bay Packer helmet in front of the balls.Striking a balanceI take work home more often than I stay late. I might leave the office at 6 p.m. and have a conference call with our China team at 8. Or, I’ll have an early-morning meeting with a team in Europe after I work out, before I go to the office. We’re a global company, but we try to create balance and a stress-free environment.Gather round I hold team meetings virtually every day. We usually meet in my office, and I encourage my team and my extended team to use the space for meetings when I’m traveling.Rules for successOne of the rules for being on my team is that you have to be smarter than me, and many would say that’s not that difficult. I surround myself with people who are smart and self-motivated. My job is to keep them focused and inspired and to empower them to perform at their best.I try to remove obstacles to getting the job done, and most important, I want them to work without fear of failure. The one thing I try to do every day is make them laugh, just to keep things light.Interview conducted by Patricia R. Olsen. Comments have been edited and condensed. A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Focus on Fitness, and a Passion for the Packers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.