
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
JAN. 31, 2015
This interview with Andrew Filev, chief executive of Wrike, a provider of project management software, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Early influences for you?A. I was insanely curious as a kid. I would pick up anything and everything and learn about it. I had very diverse interests. When I was 8 or 9, I kept my whole family entertained with my interest in alternative medicine. I was always reading textbooks through high school — physics, chemistry, psychology, business.Tell me about your parents.My parents are divorced, and I was raised by my mom. She’s amazing. She provided for the family with a full-time job and finished her college degree at the same time. That work ethic taught me a lot and gave me a “can do” attitude. I was never shy of work.Another thing that influenced me was that she gave me both independence and support. When I was growing up in Russia, I picked my own magnet school, and I commuted for two hours a day on public transportation. As long as I brought home good grades, I was given the freedom and flexibility to manage my own day.AdvertisementThat had a big influence on my management style. If something’s working great, I tend to back off. And then if somebody needs help, I try to jump in and be as supportive as possible with either advice or hands-on help.Were you involved in other things outside of class?Our school was very intense. It was one of the best schools in Russia, and a very competitive environment; some of the students won world tournaments in physics and computer science and astronomy. I didn’t have that many distractions — the weather where I grew up was terrible — and I would often spend entire weekends reading. I learned to really focus. I have the capacity to put things aside and think hard about something, and that’s some of the most valuable time you have at work.What were some early lessons for you about managing people?When I started my first company in my 20s, I knew I couldn’t rely on my authority, and I had to earn respect in a very hands-on way. That influenced the culture in that company, and in my current one. I’m getting more gray hair now, but I’m still a big believer in a more meritocratic way of managing people.So we check our egos at the door. It’s about, “This is the best decision for the company, and here’s why.” I needed to always have that explanation in my head, and I require that from everybody in the company, no matter how young or experienced they are. They should be able to explain and provide good reason for any decision they make. And if they don’t have that reason, they’d better go back to the drawing board.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bigger lessons always go back to people, too. Hiring is one of the biggest parts of a C.E.O.’s job — and it’s true for every executive. In our company, I require all executives to take an active role in hiring. It’s not just about getting recruiters to bring you a choice of candidates, and you pick the best. I tell my team: “Your job is to build the best team. The recruiter is there to help and support you, but it’s your responsibility, and you own it.” So how do you hire?Beyond technical expertise, I’m looking for three things. One is being smart. I don’t just mean I.Q. smart or Ivy League smart, although that does help. I mean being smart about how to do the job. Second, I want to know about your motivation, whether it’s curiosity or striving for excellence. You’re most effective when you’re really passionate about something.AdvertisementThe third one is your ability to get things done. Sometimes a person can be very smart academically or they can deliver an incredibly polished PowerPoint because of their previous corporate experience. But then you hire them, and you discover that they just can’t move fast enough for a start-up. For me, velocity is king in start-ups. If you can iterate quickly, that’s much more important than being a genius who can come up with an incredible solution, because it’s impossible to repeat. So how do you find out if people have those qualities?I’ve learned to test people in action. So you give them some sort of task to see how they think about things. If it’s for a sales job, you ask them to do a presentation. If it’s an engineering job, you ask them to code something. The task shouldn’t take a lot of effort because you don’t want them to do free work for a month. But the answer also shouldn’t be obvious.The end product might not necessarily be perfect, but you want them to be able to defend their decisions — “Here’s why I’m doing this.”You also want them to be very coachable. You give them feedback and listen to how they react. Either they’re learning from it and they’re participating and collaborating in the discussion, or they’re arguing with you. Or, just as bad, they’re telling you “yes” because they think that’s what you want to hear, but their ego is so big that they can’t open up and listen to what you’re trying to tell them. What if you could only ask them one question in an interview? What would it be?I would try to judge their curiosity and desire to learn. So I would ask them simply, “What is the latest thing you’ve learned on the job?” And I would listen for whether it was two years ago or yesterday, and I would listen for how challenging it was. And was it a requirement of the job, so that everybody else in their position had to learn it, or do they go beyond what was required? It’s a fun question because I get to learn a lot from it as well.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about the challenges of leading and managing.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Check Your Ego at the Door.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »