The chief executive of Ally Financial, the former lending arm of General Motors, has stepped down from his post.Michael A. Carpenter has headed Ally since 2009, not long after it was rescued by federal taxpayers as part of a broad bailout of the nation’s ailing auto industry.A former Citigroup banker, Mr. Carpenter presided over Ally’s evolution from GMAC, once General Motors’ lending arm, to a publicly traded company.In late December, the Treasury Department sold off its last remaining shares in Ally — ending one of the government’s final large investments of the Troubled Asset Relief Program, commonly known as TARP.In a statement, Mr. Carpenter said he had worked with Ally’s board on succession planning for several months before the company announced his retirement late Monday. He will be succeeded by Jeffrey J. Brown, who led the company’s dealer financial services unit.“It is the right time for me to step aside, to hand the baton to the next generation of leadership,” Mr. Carpenter said.Analysts and investors said the move was not entirely unexpected because Mr. Carpenter had achieved many of the goals he had set out to accomplish, including improving the lender’s profitability, taking it public and paying back the government.“He was hired to guide the company through a restructuring after the financial crisis and to set the stage for its operational turnaround and he has done that,” said Mark Palmer, an analyst with BTIG, a broker dealer. “There has been a feeling among investors that a move like this was feasible.”His tenure has not been without challenges. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau accused Ally of enabling auto dealers to charge some minority customers higher interest rates.Ally agreed to pay a fine, but disputed the consumer protection bureau’s findings. In a separate matter, the company said it received a Justice Department subpoena as part of an investigation “related to subprime automotive finance and related securitization activities.”Ally is one of several auto lenders that has come under scrutiny by federal and state prosecutors over how they securitize — or bundle their auto loans — and sell them to investors like pensions and mutual funds.Mr. Carpenter made waves in the auto finance industry last week during what turned out to be his final earnings calls as chief executive.He lashed out at General Motors for its recent decision to steer certain lease incentives to its in-house lending arm.What angers the company is “when we don’t get the chance to compete” for the lease business, Mr. Carpenter told analysts, employing a vulgar phrase.The decision by G.M. to cut out Ally and other lenders underscored a challenge for Mr. Brown, the new chief executive, as the lender tries to build its business beyond its former parent.After stepping down as chief executive and a member of the Ally board, Mr. Carpenter will serve as a consultant to the board.“Mike stepped in when we needed him most,” said the Ally chairman, Franklin Hobbs, who is called Fritz. “Ally is a stronger and more focused financial services company today because of him, and it has a great future thanks to his tireless leadership over the past five years.”A version of this article appears in print on 02/03/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Chief Who Guided Ally After Crisis Steps Down.