By PAUL B. BROWNOCT. 9, 2015
When it comes to investing, keep your emotions in check. Otherwise, you will become your own worst enemy.Whatever you do, never try to time the market.And there is no shame in needing help managing your money. Figure out if you do and choose your adviser carefully.These are among the common-sense lessons from a new book by John D. Spooner, a managing director at Morgan Stanley. It’s called “No One Ever Told Us That: Money and Life Lessons for Young Adults” (Wiley). While it speaks directly to people in their 20s and 30s, it has plenty of worthwhile advice for everybody else.Mr. Spooner explains his simple reason for writing the book: After the death of his wife of 45 years in 2011, he felt as if he was starting his life over again, but this time equipped with more resources.AdvertisementMr. Spooner, who is now 77, was 29 when he married. Thinking back to his younger self, Mr. Spooner writes, “I’m struck by how much I was clueless about at the time.”Now, “with some accumulated assets and many years of observing human nature” behind him, he spells out what he wishes he had known back then.The lessons are contained in a series of short essays that all end in a moral. For example:■ When you are just starting out, take a small portion of your investment portfolio and make decisions yourself. If you are happy with the results, keep going. If you are not, get help.■ If you are going to hire a financial adviser, ask about both investment philosophy and where that adviser’s money is invested.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.■ Pay attention to the strictly legal kind of insider trading. Corporate insiders — officers and directors of a company — are required to report when they buy and sell shares of their company. The fact they are selling may or may not be a sign that you want to, too, Mr. Spooner writes. Insiders may be selling to diversify their holdings. But, he says, if they are buying more, pay attention. It is quite likely a sign that they are bullish on their company’s future.When it comes to money, Mr. Spooner’s overall message that you are responsible for your financial future is a good one, and his tone is supportive. Whether readers will respond to the rest of the book is strictly a matter of taste.AdvertisementAs the subtitle suggests, he is eager to provide not just financial advice but “life lessons” as well. I found some of those less compelling. While the idea of doing things that make you stand out at work is a solid thought, I have my doubts about ideas like joining clubs early in life.Mr. Spooner’s reasoning is this: “If you live someplace for a long time you can build up enemies as well as friends” and you want to apply for membership before people want to keep you out. The moral: “Join clubs early in life, before a list grows of people who would exclude you.”Most people I know in their late 20s or early 30s are more worried about getting their adult life underway than they are about being blackballed at the local country club.Still, even that advice is consistent with another of his themes: “Plan for the worst case, not the best, in business and in life.”That, certainly, is good advice for everyone.A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page BU16 of the New York edition with the headline: An Investment Veteran’s Advice for Rookies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.