Dominic Barton, the soft-spoken Canadian who helped McKinsey & Company weather the worst crisis in its 88-year history, has been elected by the firm’s partners to a third term as managing director.It will be Mr. Barton’s final three-year term at the helm of McKinsey, the largest private partnership in the world. Under McKinsey’s rules, managing directors are limited to three terms.Mr. Barton was elected last week after only one ballot, suggesting that the 52-year-old consultant has been successful in revitalizing a partnership that was badly jolted by the October 2009 arrest of Anil Kumar, a senior partner, on insider-trading charges. It was the first time a partner been charged with violating securities laws, and he later pleaded guilty. Subsequently, as part of the same case, a former McKinsey managing director, Rajat K. Gupta, was convicted and imprisoned for insider trading. During his first two terms, Mr. Barton, the son of a missionary and a nurse, led an effort to fortify what the firm calls its culture based on values and trust. To outsider observers, the need for change was obvious, but within McKinsey some of the moves were controversial, prompting cries that the firm was operating like a “nanny state.” Mr. Barton prevailed, pushing through changes that mean that McKinsey is in a better position than it was in 2009 to spot errant consultants before they make headlines and embarrass the firm. Some, of course, still do. Recently, McKinsey and two of its consultants in Asia, Eric Thompson and Ivo Naumann, reached a confidential settlement with AlixPartners, a well-known firm that helps companies restructure their debt and operations. The dispute between AlixPartners and the McKinsey consultants, who had previously worked at the firm, spilled into public view when the firm filed a breach-of-contract lawsuit against the two  last year, contending that they took proprietary information.  The case went to trial last fall, but midway through the trial both sides signaled to the court that they were near a settlement. Lawyers for both sides have been negotiating the settlement ever since.  Mr. Barton’s election is the culmination of discussions that began among McKinsey’s directors, or senior partners, when they gathered in Rio de Janeiro in October. As is customary, the 536 directors met in small groups of 15 to 20 people to consider the kind of leader they wanted for the firm and to ponder the initiatives McKinsey should focus on in coming years. Mr. Barton was not included in the discussions, which are designed to allow for a free and unfettered airing of views. Afterward, however, the directors gave Mr. Barton a summary. One area where there was spirited debate was over McKinsey’s own corporate governance system, which was born when the firm was much smaller and had only 300 directors.  “There was a lot of push on our organizing model, how can we make it ready for the next generation,”  Mr. Barton said on Monday. “We need to be able to move faster. If the world is moving faster, how do we align ourselves to change and to allocating resources to new initiatives?” “Frankly, it is a bit of taking our own medicine,” Mr. Barton continued. “It is what we tell clients, but we are not always good at doing it ourselves.”
 Mr. Barton, who tries to meet two chief executives or government leaders each day, shared some of the insights he has gleaned from his recent meetings. Two or three years ago, he counseled clients to bypass India, saying it was too difficult to do business there. “I would say, ‘Go to Nigeria before you go to India,’” he said. However, Mr. Barton said that since the election of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, he sensed a true commitment to change the climate for businesses in India. “I don’t discount how difficult some of the legislative changes will be,” he said. But “the reform drive from the state-owned enterprises in India is more impressive than the Chinese ones.”  Mr. Barton is also bullish on a country closer to home.  “I think we should be considering the U.S. as an emerging market,” he said. “It really is a high-growth market.”Mr. Barton said the United States was benefiting from a practice known as reshoring, in which American companies bring businesses back from overseas, and also from billions of dollars spent by European companies in the United States rather than Europe because of the huge difference in energy costs.For the first time in more than a decade, McKinsey opened a new office in the United States last year,  in Denver. It also plans to open an office this year in Vancouver, British Columbia.  In a startling reversal and a sign of the strength McKinsey sees in its American practice, the firm is shifting consultants from outposts around the world to the United States. “Frankly, we should be opening up more offices in the U.S. than in China and India,” Mr. Barton said. Anita Raghavan is the author of “The Billionaire’s Apprentice: The Rise of the Indian-American Elite and the Fall of the Galleon Hedge Fund.”