BOSTON — These are heady times to be working in venture capital, a fact that is making some venture capitalists nervous.A sense of foreboding hung over a panel discussion here on Sunday aimed at Harvard Business School students considering careers in venture capital. With waves of financing moving through Silicon Valley — pushing up valuations for hot start-ups and allowing talented engineers to command seven-figure salaries — the question that the panelists debated wasn’t whether the venture capital market was hot. It was how and when the cycle would end.“My own view is we still have one, two or three very good years ahead. But then we should be cautious, because there’s no example in history where the cycle doesn’t come to an end and drag us through a very painful period,” said Adam Valkin, a partner at the venture capital firm General Catalyst Partners. “There’s no reason that it won’t be the same in this case, and that the pain won’t be as bad or worse.”One symptom of the boom is the rising cost of hiring a good developer, said David Friend, a principal at Bain Capital Ventures. On the one hand, he said, the advent of cloud computing has made it much less expensive to start a company. On the other hand, software developers are being poached by cash-rich companies for ever-higher salaries.“Now instead of buying expensive hardware, we’re buying expensive people,” Mr. Friend said. “And we’re not seeing the same pricing increase that we can push through to our customers.“So if you want to look to what’s going to pop,” he added, “people are going to say, ‘No, I’m not going to spend that much money for your product.’ And why am I spending so much money to develop it, but I can’t sell it?”A separate lecture on Sunday that was largely enthusiastic about venture capital also included some words of warning. Kate Mitchell, a co-founder and partner of Scale Venture Partners, said there was a “real war for talent” in technology. One start-up in her portfolio, she said, lost its chief technology officer when Oracle poached the worker for “well over $1 million in salary.”“I mean, a start-up is not going to be able to compete with that,” Ms. Mitchell said. Later, she added, “If not a bubble, it’s at least warm in Silicon Valley.”Discussions like these are hardly unusual in technology circles nowadays. The cover of the latest issue of Fortune magazine calls the current moment “The Age of Unicorns,” noting that “at least 80 tech start-ups are worth $1 billion or more.” In her presentation, Ms. Mitchell noted that, until recently, technology investors didn’t expect to be competing with giant asset managers like T. Rowe Price and BlackRock. But those firms and others are now regular participants in start-up financing rounds.Despite these concerns, the gears of venture capital appear to be running smoothly, with institutional investors eager to commit to venture capital funds. Over all, the industry’s returns surpassed those for buyout funds in the 12 months through last June, according to the research firm Preqin.Diane Mulcahy, a senior fellow at the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, who manages the foundation’s venture capital portfolio and is an outspoken critic of that industry, said on Sunday that she recently had a conversation with the manager of a venture capital fund that was a particularly poor performer.“I called the general partner to initiate a discussion about the wind-down of the firm,” Ms. Mulcahy said. “And he said, ‘What are you talking about? I’m soft-circled on my next fund,'” meaning investors had already expressed an interest in it.The gathering, the business school’s 21st Annual Venture Capital and Private Equity Conference, was full of ambitious students hoping to be the next Marc Andreessen or Peter Thiel. But for anyone hoping to get rich in venture capital, Mr. Friend of Bain Capital Ventures had a simple message: become a start-up founder instead.“Take advantage of this funding environment, and go take money from us,” he said with some irony. “We’ll give money to anyone. Somebody will give you money.“It’s incredible the ideas that we see,” he added, drawing laughter. “We look at them, and we say, ‘That is — somebody’s going to fund that.’ And sure enough, it happens.”