It is interesting to see how a few words in a judicial opinion can mean so much. One sentence in the recent appeals court decision in United States v. Newman that overturned the convictions of two hedge fund traders has caused the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission to cry foul and ask for its removal, contending the statement will imperil the government’s efforts to crack down on insider trading.The offending words came from the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan, which was once described by Justice Harry A. Blackmun of the Supreme Court as the “Mother Court” of securities law. In reversing the convictions of Anthony Chiasson and Todd Newman for trading on information received through a chain of tips, the appeals court described what was necessary to show that the original tipper had received a benefit for passing on the information, a requirement to prove this form of insider trading. Finding a benefit would be “impermissible in the absence of proof of a meaningfully close personal relationship that generates an exchange that is objective, consequential, and represents at least a potential gain of a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature.” In other words, just being friends is not enough to prove a violation when one doles out confidential information for another to use for trading.In a brief asking for reconsideration of the decision, the Justice Department argued that the offending sentence conflicts with the Supreme Court’s decision in Dirks v. S.E.C., which described a “reputational benefit” as sufficient when a tip is given to family or friends. Prosecutors contend that if the appeals court’s language is left to stand, it “will dramatically limit the government’s ability to prosecute some of the most common, culpable, and market-threatening forms of insider trading.” The S.E.C. filed a brief supporting the prosecutors, telling the appeals court that the “narrowed definition of personal benefit and lack of clarity about the evidence required for establishing such benefit could negatively affect the S.E.C.’s ability to bring insider trading actions.” The impact would be to “undermine investor confidence in the fairness and integrity of the securities markets.”Can one sentence really lead to such a parade of horrors for the government in policing insider trading? There is always a bit of hyperbole when lawyers argue cases, and asking judges to reconsider a decision requires pointing out just how wrong they were — never an easy task with a group who usually think they are right.The Newman decision has already resulted in one prosecution falling by the wayside. Last week, the Justice Department asked the Federal District Court in Manhattan to dismiss charges against five defendants who received information about IBM’s impending acquisition of SPSS from a law school friend of one defendant who worked on the deal. In a letter to the judge, prosecutors said that the appeals court’s decision “creates a novel evidentiary bar for tipper benefit, and tippee knowledge of such a benefit, that the government cannot now meet.”Because prosecutors sought a dismissal “without prejudice,” the government can still pursue the case if it can persuade the appeals court to change its opinion. The trading took place in 2009, and federal law permits prosecutors to refile the charges within six months even though the case would otherwise fall outside the five-year statute of limitations.Although the Newman decision appears to create a “buddy exception” to insider trading, prosecutors can still pursue cases based on friendship as long as there is some evidence of a benefit that could be considered valuable. There are cases in which information is passed simply because the recipient is a friend, but often something more valuable is exchanged when confidential information is doled out secretly. In a prosecution of golfing friends in Boston, in which the information was passed on a napkin in the clubhouse pub, an indictment filed on Dec. 10 — coincidentally, the day the Newman decision came down — states that after making nearly $300,000 in profits, the recipient offered the tipper an opportunity to invest in a real estate development. That would appear to meet the requirement of showing something valuable beyond just the friendship, even when it took place after the tip.Whether the appeals court’s decision will reach courts in other parts of the country also remains to be seen. In the insider trading prosecution of Douglas V. DeCinces, a former major league baseball player, and James V. Mazzo, the former chief executive accused of tipping about an impending acquisition of his company, the indictment does not  detail a benefit from Mr. DeCinces beyond the friendship between the two men. Yet the Federal District Court in Santa Ana, Calif., denied the defendants’ request to dismiss the charges based on the Newman decision. The trial is scheduled to begin on Tuesday.Nor does it appear that the Newman decision will affect insider trading cases involving information about a tender offer. Under Rule 14e-3, it is a violation to use information for trading once a substantial step has been taken to commence a tender offer, but there is no requirement that a benefit be provided by the recipient in exchange for it. All the government is required to show is that the recipient “knows or has reason to know” the information is confidential and came from a party to the transaction. The Justice Department and the S.E.C. are understandably objecting to the tighter standard for proving the benefit in tipping cases when there is only evidence of friendship as the motive. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit has made proving insider trading more difficult in tipping cases but did not erect an insurmountable hurdle. Whether it is the cataclysm the government makes it out to be is hard to assess because charges can still be pursued as long as there is evidence of something more tangible than just friendship.