LONDON – The parent of British Airways tried to sweeten the pot on Monday in hopes of winning over the Irish government in its $1.5 billion bid for Aer Lingus, the Irish carrier.The parent company, which is known as International Consolidated Airlines Group, or I.A.G., said it would be willing to commit to not selling Aer Lingus’s landing and takeoff slots at Heathrow Airport near London without the Irish government’s approval and would pledge to operate those connections between Heathrow and Ireland for five years.The British Airways parent also pledged to keep the airline’s head office in Ireland and not change its name without government approval.“We are committed to maintaining and strengthening Aer Lingus. We want to develop air services that ensure Ireland’s connectivity is enhanced,” Willie Walsh, the I.A.G. chief executive, said in a news release.  “In seeking the support of the Irish government, we propose to offer it legally binding commitments that go well beyond the protections currently available to it,” Mr. Walsh said. “These commitments would give the Irish government an important role that they do not have today in securing the future of Aer Lingus.”   The new commitments come after the Irish media reported over the weekend that Enda Kenny, the Irish prime minister, was seeking a “permanent cast-iron guarantee” from I.A.G. that Ireland’s airports maintain their connections to Heathrow as part of any deal to acquire the airline.The Irish government is Aer Lingus’s second-largest shareholder, holding a 25.1 percent stake in the airline. The discount carrier Ryanair, which holds a 29.8 percent stake in Aer Lingus, is the Irish airline’s largest shareholder.Aer Lingus rejected two takeover offers late last year from I.A.G., but has said it would be willing to accept the latest sweetened proposal made last month if certain conditions were met.In its latest bid, I.A.G. has said it was offering 2.55 euros a share, or about $2.86, including a dividend, for the airline. The deal, if consummated, values Aer Lingus at about €1.36 billion.As part of the deal, Aer Lingus would continue to operate as a separate business with its own branding and management, I.A.G. said.I.A.G. is one of the world’s largest airline companies, carrying more than 77.3 million passengers in 2014. Its portfolio of carriers includes British Airways and two Spanish carriers: Iberia, a full-service airline, and Vueling Airlines, a low-cost carrier.The company posted revenue of €15.2 billion in the first nine months of 2014, up 7.4 percent from the period a year earlier.A version of this article appears in print on 02/03/2015, on page B6 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Irish Skies.