It has been more than a year since Sysco, the big food distributor, agreed to buy its closest rival, US Foods, for $3.5 billion. Now, Sysco finally believes it has come up with a way to get the deal past antitrust regulators.Sysco said on Monday that it had agreed to divest 11 distribution centers in a bid to obtain the blessing of regulators including the Federal Trade Commission. Sysco will sell the centers for an undisclosed sum to Performance Food Group, which will be its nearest rival after the deal for US Foods closes.When Sysco’s acquisition of US Foods was announced, critics immediately raised concerns about an overly consolidated market.After the acquisition, Performance Food Group will have less than 10 percent of the multibillion-dollar market,which supplies restaurants and catering facilities with food, cookware and kitchen supplies.And at the time, Sysco chief executive’s, Bill DeLaney, hinted that he expected that the the company might have to sell some choice assets.“Even with some divestitures, we still see this is a very attractive deal,” he said at the time.Still, Mr. DeLaney expressed frustration with regulators for demanding what it believed was onerous conditions and prolonging the closing of Sysco’s deal.“Over the past 12 months, we have worked in good faith with the F.T.C. to help them better understand the highly competitive U.S. food service distribution industry and the significant customer benefits that will result from the merger of Sysco and US Foods,” Mr. DeLaney said in a statement on Monday.“Unfortunately, the F.T.C. has taken a different view of the potential competitive impacts of the merger,” Mr. DeLaney said. “While we respectfully but vigorously disagree with the F.T.C.’s analysis, we believe this divestiture package fully addresses its concerns.”Sysco will now present the package to the regulator and seek its approval.The sale of those distribution centers will have an impact on the expected benefits of the deal. Sysco said that together, the 11 centers generated $4.6 billion in revenues last year.But the deal will still be lucrative to Sysco. It said it believed it could achieve $600 million in synergies within four years even after the divestitures.A version of this article appears in print on 02/03/2015, on page B6 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Food Concession.