By CONRAD DE AENLLEOCT. 9, 2015
When you set out to build a diversified stock portfolio, should you emphasize assembling a broad mix of businesses or a broad mix of countries where the business is done?Recent research suggests that the first factor is more important because globalization has diminished the relevance of the second.Companies today tend to sell products or services to customers all over the world and have work forces that are equally scattered. That means that the nature of a company’s activities contributes more to earnings and other measures of corporate health than its mailing address or where its stock is listed for trading, according to a study by Morningstar Investment Management.The returns of stock markets vary, but to a large degree that is because of concentrations in different sectors, Morningstar’s analysis showed. From 2000 through mid-2014, for instance, more than half the variability in dividend growth across markets in developed economies was because of the mix of sectors among them, the study found.AdvertisementIt has become routine to buy exchange-traded funds that focus on regions or single countries to help diversify a portfolio. But that tactic may have the opposite effect by inadvertently providing excessive exposure to one sector or another.Advertisement“Investors in country E.T.F.s need to be aware of the potential correlation between them due to similar sector weights,” said Philip Straehl, the senior research consultant at Morningstar Investment Management who wrote the study. “Since sectors are a key driver of corporate fundamentals across international stock markets, diversification across sectors needs to be a key consideration when constructing global stock portfolios.”Kim Arthur, chief executive of Main Management, a firm that runs portfolios comprising E.T.F.s, agreed that if you are going to invest abroad, “you had better know the sector exposure you’re getting.” He noted that technology has a dominant weighting in Taiwan, for instance, and that financial services are a substantial sector in Hong Kong.The risk of having lopsided exposure to a sector is somewhat diminished for Americans who invest internationally if they have a broad domestic portfolio to begin with, Mr. Straehl said. The American market is more diversified than others, he pointed out, and the size of the American economy ensures that companies derive more of their sales and profits from within the country than is true elsewhere.Having a broad mix of sectors is vital for achieving diversification. Going a step further and tweaking the mix, allocating more to some and less to others based on prevailing business and economic conditions, may help investors beat the market consistently, some advisers contend. That is true for domestic and international portfolios alike, they say.“Sector allocation is more important than trying to find that perfect international allocation,” said James Stack, president of InvesTech Research, a business that provides asset management and financial advice. “When energy is going up, energy companies everywhere are going up. Materials companies go up on rising commodity prices.”Financial services is one of several sectors that typically perform poorly toward the end of an economic upswing and bull market, a period when interest rates often climb, he said. Other weaker late-cycle sectors are utilities and consumer discretionary, the group that includes retailers, airlines and manufacturers of big-ticket items like washing machines and cars.Better bets in an aging bull market, he said, are health care and technology, where earnings can continue to grow as the economy is beginning to roll over. Once a bear market begins, health care and other defensive sectors, such as consumer staples and utilities, generally outperform.AdvertisementDuring the early phase of a recovery, stocks in those sectors are comparatively weak as investors gravitate toward alternatives that are more sensitive to growth, such as technology, financials and consumer discretionary.Investors can use sector E.T.F.s to play these trends, and a rapidly expanding number of asset management companies, such as Mr. Arthur’s, do it for a living. Assets in sector-rotation E.T.F. managed portfolios totaled $20.2 billion at the end of last year, according to Morningstar, a date selected because several companies were slow in reporting more recent figures. Three years earlier, the total was $6.3 billion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The patterns that Mr. Stack highlighted, with certain sectors rising and falling with or contrary to economic and market cycles, have been observed across many bull and bear markets. But capitalizing on them can be problematic for several reasons, advisers caution.It is difficult to know with any precision where the economy and market are except in hindsight, although Mr. Stack contends that there are usually signposts that give investors a rough idea if they are keen enough to spot them. Lately the evidence suggests to him that the market has reached a crossroads.The economy seems to be humming along, but “from a technical standpoint this market appears to be in trouble,” he said. The ratio of rising stocks over decliners began deteriorating before the third-quarter swoon, as did the ratio of stocks hitting 52-week highs versus lows. As a result, he has been “shifting to defensive sectors, ones that do best in the last year of a bull market,” he said, such as health care, and limiting exposure to financials and consumer discretionary.Another tricky aspect of sector investing is putting companies in the right boxes. Take Amazon.com and Netflix, two leading technology stocks that are not uniformly categorized as technology stocks by all analysts. The first is a retailer and the second provides entertainment, making them consumer discretionary companies, as Standard & Poor’s reasons. The presence of such large, de facto technology companies could explain why consumer discretionary, a late-cycle sector, has continued to perform well.Another impediment to playing sectors profitably is that sometimes investors are all too aware of where they are in the cycle and pay too much to be in the right place at the right time, said Jan Erik Warneryd, senior portfolio manager of Hillswick Asset Management, another firm that runs E.T.F. managed portfolios.When history suggests that a particular sector should excel, it often turns out that “people have already positioned themselves for it,” he noted. “We want to do things that other people aren’t doing.”Based on the most recent survey of global fund managers by Bank of America Merrill Lynch, published in mid-September, other people have had heavy allocations to consumer discretionary, bank and technology sectors. Managers have been light on materials and especially energy.AdvertisementMr. Warneryd’s largest positions are in telecommunications, health care and utilities, with a more modest overweighting in financials. His portfolio has a relatively light consumer discretionary weighting because it has “the richest valuation of any sector,” he said. Contrary to his contrarian ambitions, his smallest holding is in energy.Mr. Arthur says he also is concerned about consumer discretionary valuations, and he finds telecoms overvalued, but he is more hopeful about energy. He notes that the average dividend yield on energy stocks, about 3 percent, is substantially higher than the yield on 10-year Treasury bonds, recently 2 percent, a rare development after a prolonged decline in energy.“We have been stepping into it, but we could be stepping on a land mine,” Mr. Arthur acknowledged, referring to energy. “That’s the Achilles’ heel with these things. Being early is a lot like being wrong.”A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page BU17 of the New York edition with the headline: Spread Out Investment Risk by Company, Not Country.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.