FEB. 1, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.01 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.05 percent and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.02 percent.These tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:TUESDAYLong Beach, Calif., Unified School District, $180 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New York System of Higher Education, $60.8 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Pennsylvania, $1 billion of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementVirginia Public School Authority, $458.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Wisconsin, $279.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementONE DAY DURING THE WEEKBeavercreek, Ohio, Community School District, $67.8 million of debt securities. Ross, Sinclaire & Associates.Beaverton, Ore., School District, $80 million of debt securities. Piper Jaffray.Camas, Wash., School District, $53.8 million of general obligation and refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Cherokee County, Ga., School System, $109 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Citizens Energy, $155.8 million of debt securities. J.P. Morgan Securities.East Bay Municipal Utility District, $70 million of debt securities. Siebert Brandford Shank.Foothill/Eastern Transportation Corridor Agency, $77.6 million of revenue and refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Forsyth County, Ga., Water and Sewage Authority, $75 million of revenue and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Gilroy, Calif., Unified School District, $66 million of debt securities. George K. Baum.Jackson County, Mo., Reorganized School District, $71.9 million of general obligation bonds. George K. Baum.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Katy, Tex., Independent School District, $209.5 million of debt securities. J.P. Morgan Securities.Long Beach, Calif., Unified School District, $90 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.AdvertisementLos Angeles, Calif., Department of Airports, $499.4 million of revenue and refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley and J.P. Morgan Securities.Louisiana Community Development Authority, $78 million of refinancing bonds. Stephens Inc.Maine Housing Authority, $66 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Mississippi, $694.6 million of debt securities. J.P. Morgan Securities, RBC Capital Markets, Raymond James & Associates and Bank of America.Omaha, Neb., Public Power District, $109.9 million of debt securities. RBC Capital Markets.Oregon, $152 million of revenue and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Palm Beach, Fla., School District, $224.5 million of debt securities. J.P. Morgan Securities.Rockford, Ill., School District, $57.8 million of debt securities. Stifel, Nicolaus.Round Rock, Tex., Independent School District, $150.6 million of debt securities. RBC Capital Markets and Citigroup Global Markets.Southern California Public Power Authority, $111.6 million of revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Tampa Bay Regional Water Supply Authority, $167 million of refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Trinity Health Credit Group, $955 million of debt securities. Bank of America.University of Colorado Hospital, $265 million of revenue and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Wylie, Tex., Independent School District, 273.3 million of debt securities. Hutchinson, Shockey, Erley.A version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.