By TIM GRAYOCT. 9, 2015
If the long bull market didn’t end in the third quarter, it certainly sputtered and coughed. With share prices sagging, even many of the top-performing mutual funds couldn’t eke out gains. They just lost less than most of their peers.The Vanguard LifeStrategy income fund, an indexed offering, limited its losses by holding a big slug of bonds. By charter, the fund allocates 80 percent of its shareholders’ money to bonds and 20 percent to stocks. It declined, but by just 0.79 percent for the quarter.The fund is part of Vanguard’s LifeStrategy family — four indexed funds with fixed allocations to stocks and bonds. They differ only in the proportions of these allocations. They are what is known as “funds of funds”: they don’t buy stocks and bonds directly but rather hold shares in four other Vanguard index funds: its Total Stock Market index fund, Total International stock index fund, Total Bond Market II index fund and Total International bond index fund.“LifeStrategy Income is one of our single-fund solutions,” said Francis M. Kinniry, a principal in Vanguard’s investment strategy group. “With it, you in effect own the entire global equity market — more than 5,000 U.S. stocks and more than 5,000 non-U.S. stocks. On the fixed income side, you have more than 5,000 U.S. bonds and more than 5,000 non-U.S. bonds. It’s world-class diversification.”AdvertisementOver the last several years, as the costs of international investing have fallen, Vanguard has raised the LifeStrategy funds’ international stakes. Today, about 24 percent of the income fund’s total assets are invested in foreign bonds and about 8 percent in foreign stocks. Vanguard responded to research showing that too many investors have a home bias — they invest too much of their money in their home country and end up with insufficient diversification, Mr. Kinniry said.
            How three of the better performers of the third quarter of 2015 fared against the market — and against their peer groups of funds.        VanguardLifeStrategy IncomeCaldwell & OrkinMarket OpportunityPolen Growth+10%+5+0–5S. & P. 500TOTAL RET.S. & P. 500TOTAL RET.S. & P. 500TOTAL RET.–10JASJASJASTHIRD-QUARTER RETURNSVanguardLifeStrategy IncomeCaldwell & OrkinMarket OpportunityPolen Growth–0.8%+0.7%+5.1%Large-cap growthConservative allocationLong-short equity–6.7%–3.9%–4.1%Vanguard LifeStrategy Income+10%+5+0–5S. & P. 500TOTAL RET.–10JASTHIRD-QUARTER RETURNSVanguard LifeStrategy Income–0.8%Large-cap growth–6.7%Polen GrowthS. & P. 500TOTAL RET.JASPolen Growth+0.7%Conservative allocation–3.9%Caldwell & Orkin Market OpportunityS. & P. 500TOTAL RET.JASCaldwell & Orkin Market Opportunity+5.1%Long-short equity–4.1%OCT. 9, 2015
“Our rationale was accessibility and affordability,” he said. Vanguard’s commitment to low expenses keeps the fund cheap: Its expense ratio is 0.14 percent, compared with 0.74 percent for its average peer, according to Morningstar’s data.AdvertisementWhereas Vanguard’s fund owns thousands of stocks, the Polen Growth fund holds just a handful — lately only 22 — and socks them away for years. One of its holdings, Oracle, has been in the portfolio for more than a decade. “Oracle predates me by a few months,” said Daniel A. Davidowitz, co-manager of the fund. Mr. Davidowitz, who is also Polen Capital’s chief investment officer, joined the company in 2005.Mr. Davidowitz and the other co-manager, Damon A. Ficklin, hunt for stocks with steadily growing earnings. But unlike many growth-stock managers, they are not primarily seeking new breakthroughs in biotechnology or online commerce. They aim for proven, durable growers. Thus their portfolio is filled with familiar names like Apple, Nike, Starbucks and Nestlé. “Our margin of safety is the permanence of a company’s franchise and our estimate of the longevity of its growth,” Mr. Davidowitz said.Take Nestlé. “It may be a boring company, but year in and year out, it compounds its earnings growth” and has been doing so for decades, he said. “If you invest in companies like that, you can ride alongside their earnings growth.”Patience is the key to the two managers’ approach. “We try to think out at least five years,” Mr. Davidowitz said. “We’re also willing to not do things. You want to try to fix things when you’re underperforming, but that may just be a short-term problem in the market that has nothing to do with the businesses you own. Sitting on your hands can be a discipline in investing — it’s difficult for humans, especially in a business where there’s a scoreboard every day.”Starbucks is another example of a seemingly mature company that has continued to yield good returns. The managers bought in about five years ago and have watched the stock mostly climb since.“Starbucks overplayed back in the 2000s when they focused almost exclusively on growing their number of stores,” Mr. Ficklin said. After shuttering several hundred underperforming outlets, the chain has aimed to increase same-store sales and find new goods to sell besides its many coffee concoctions. “They’ve rolled out better food offerings and are selling more tea,” he said. Starbucks is also striving to keep expanding in emerging markets like China.AdvertisementAn advantage of investing in large, established outfits is downside protection when other stocks slip, Mr. Davidowitz said. “Our portfolio tends to have lower volatility than the market,” he said.Polen Growth, which has a net expense ratio of 1.25 percent, gained 0.7 percent in the third quarter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Michael B. Orkin, manager of the Caldwell & Orkin Market Opportunity fund, says he strives to provide downside protection for his investors, too. Partly he does that by employing a kind of investment — the short sale — that some people see as perilous. His fund is a so-called long-short offering.When investors short a stock, they borrow it and then sell it. When they must return the borrowed shares, they buy them. If the price has fallen, they profit. If it has risen, they lose. In theory, short sales are infinitely risky because a stock’s potential rise has no ceiling.“We say there’s risk in going long and in going short,” Mr. Orkin said. “Shorts are riskier than longs on an individual basis. But when you have longs and shorts together in a portfolio, we believe it makes a lot more sense.” In that view, shorting can represent an additional tool for diversification.Lately, Mr. Orkin has shorted for-profit education companies. He would not say which ones. “Their degrees are generally overpriced and of low quality,” he said.He said he was also bearish on China’s economic prospects and has capitalized on that belief by shorting commodity-sensitive companies like producers of copper, iron ore and mining machinery.For the fund’s long positions, Mr. Orkin has lately favored the same sorts of investments that the Polen managers do: well-known, enduring companies that sell directly to consumers. The fund’s recent holdings included Target, Walt Disney and Home Depot.“We’re looking for stable, well-run longs,” he said. Disney typifies that, with its sturdy brand and portfolio of movies, broadcast networks and theme parks. Plus, the economy has lately helped both Disney and Home Depot. “Lower gas prices are good for Disney’s theme parks, and Home Depot is benefiting from the housing market recovery,” he said.Mr. Orkin trades frequently; his fund’s recent turnover ratio was 434 percent. He attributed that to his efforts to manage risk. “When the market gets volatile, we tend to trade more,” he said. But he said the goal was to achieve steady returns, even as he jumps in and out of investments. “We say we’re trying to climb a staircase, not ride a roller coaster.”AdvertisementThe fund, which has an expense ratio of 1.44 percent, returned 5.13 percent in the third quarter.A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page BU16 of the New York edition with the headline: Top-Performing Funds Won by Losing Less.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.