AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaThe New Republic is a small magazine that set off a big commotion. Late last year the magazine’s owner, Chris Hughes, decided to replace Franklin Foer, a former top editor whom Mr. Hughes had lured back to run the magazine in 2012. When word got out, Mr. Foer resigned and was followed by a dozen outraged staff employees and dozens more contributing editors.In the weeks that followed, the magazine, which has a relatively small print circulation of about 45,000 and three million readers online, became a symbol for a much bigger fear in journalism — that the web, with its speed, its appetites and even its money, would help bring an end to a certain kind of thoughtful, collegial writing; that words for their own sake, not merely as temptations for advertisers or social media algorithms, were a thing of the past. At the magazine’s new offices in Union Square in New York last week, Gabriel Snyder, who replaced Mr. Foer, said he had stopped reading the coverage about his first issue, which will come out Monday. He was trying to ignore online chatter suggesting that his choice of a cover article, about the complex history The New Republic has with issues of race, was a cynical move mandated by Mr. Hughes and a P.R. team. Word of the cover had leaked nearly instantly, along with the idea that the article was some kind of tactical strike against the former staff.Mr. Snyder said the idea that the cover had been decided by committee was “pure fiction” and added, speaking generally, that while he respects those who chose to leave the magazine along with Mr. Foer, “there’s a line that you cross between disagreement and actually actively trying to see its end, its demise.”He did not specify who he thought had circulated the cover, but the animosity from those who left the magazine still burns hot and bright. “Merits of the story aside, it is hard to evaluate the decision to publish it outside of Chris Hughes’s desire to justify his mismanagement and ineptitude,” Jonathan Chait, one of the contributing editors who left, said in an interview. Asked what Mr. Hughes could do to win him and others back, Mr. Chait answered: “If the magazine turns out to be as good as the one that Chris Hughes destroyed, sure, that would be great.”Mr. Snyder and a team of newly hired employees and freshly promoted staff members given bonuses to take on extra duties plan to rebuild the magazine around what he is calling “fixations.” These will be four to six topic areas, like climate change, that are anchored by long articles but will be surrounded by smaller pieces, videos and graphics. Though many talented journalists left, he said, he now has the opportunity to start with something of a blank slate, and build a modern newsroom in which there is little distinction between print and digital. His first issue, which comes just weeks after he took the job, includes articles on maternity, climate change and disillusionment with the progressive president of Uruguay. But Mr. Snyder cautioned that he had not yet decided on the specific fixations, and that some might be dictated by the journalists he will continue to hire. Guy Vidra, the magazine’s chief executive, who had been cast as one of the villains of the recent turmoil, acknowledged in an interview that he speaks a different language from some of the former staff members, and that his word choices alienated some. To him, journalism remains “content.” The vehicles for delivering journalism are “products.” The New Republic’s history is a “competitive advantage” to be “leveraged.”But he said that the issue of phraseology aside, the idea that the magazine had to decide between its heritage and its future online “is a completely false choice.” He has a three-year strategy, he said, based on cultivating a loyal and engaged audience rather than a large one. He said the magazine would target “an emerging generation of leaders” between 25 and 45 who are “urban, educated, affluent and diverse.” He feels there are tens of millions of people who fit the bill, and who are very attractive to advertisers. “Historically The New Republic spoke to a very influential but very narrow sliver of our society,” he said. “And we are determined to broaden ourselves.” He plans to spend 2015 rebuilding and shifting the culture of the magazine, and 2016 in carrying out plans to bring in new products, such as audio versions of stories for commuters, and create more partnerships with other platforms and brands. Mr. Hughes, who made hundreds of millions of dollars as a founder of Facebook, says he too thinks in terms of years for the transition, but he declined to specify a timeline (though the magazine has signed a 10-year lease on its new offices, sleekly designed by the firm that did Mr. Hughes’s own apartment). “One of the key things is trying to create a culture of innovation around here,” he said. “But that takes time. There’s no shot clock.”“From a financial perspective I want it to be sustainable,” he added, “and thrive as a business. The more it thrives as a business the more journalism we can do, and the more impact we can have.” The magazine loses money, but a representative declined to specify a precise amount.He has spoken to some of those who have left, he said, and found that they took a different view on the importance of such things. “But the reason that I do think we have to talk about apps and products, and audio and video, is because I think that gets the high-quality journalism to a broader audience,” he said. “To just focus on one single way of expressing an idea,” he said, referring to the print magazine, “does disservice to the journalism.”The magazine will have to compete with various versions of itself, and with its own diaspora. It had long been a farm team for bigger publications, and in the weeks since the core staff fragmented, many of its members have been snapped up. Leon Wieseltier, the longtime literary editor, joined The Atlantic. Julia Ioffe has joined The New York Times Magazine. David Hajdu, a music critic, joined The Nation. Jason Zengerle joined GQ. And a few blocks away, on the fourth floor of the Huffington Post offices, Greg Veis and Rachel Morris, former executive editors of the magazine, have started an enterprise unit. They are aiming, with an eventual staff of four or five and a roster of contract writers, to publish 52 longer articles a year. The articles, Mr. Veis said in an interview last week, will focus on topics that hold some public interest. They will be supplemented with storytelling methods available online — such as visualizations, graphics, videos and additional reporting. “The idea is when we did it in print, we would finish a story and put it out there and it would just be this one piece,” Mr. Veis said. On the web, he said, it will feel “almost like a studio system around the main piece.” The initiative will most likely begin in earnest in May, when The Huffington Post has an overhaul.He, like Mr. Foer and some other former employees, declined to comment specifically on the magazine he left. “I wish them luck,” he said. “I hope it’s good. It’s an institution that I deeply, deeply love, and it would make me happy if they did good work.” Advertisement