By SYDNEY EMBERFEB. 1, 2015
Jean Chatzky, the financial editor of NBC’s “Today” show, has made a career sharing personal finance tips with adults. Now, she is trying to reach a much younger audience.Last month, Ms. Chatzky and Time for Kids, a division of Time Inc., introduced a magazine intended to teach financial literacy to fourth, fifth and sixth graders. The PwC Charitable Foundation, which was started by the giant financial consulting firm PwC, is backing the publication.“Kids are very interested in money,” Ms. Chatzky said. “What we’re trying to get across to them is money is a tool that they need to know how to manage to succeed in life.”The magazine, called Your $, will be distributed monthly during the school year to roughly two million students in schools nationwide. Each four-page issue will cover an aspect of finance, like budgeting, investing and taxes.AdvertisementThe January issue, for instance, used the story of Jeff Xie, who won $75,000 last year in the Jeopardy Teen Tournament, as a starting point for a discussion on managing money and saving for college. February’s issue includes a feature on digital currency like Bitcoin. (“What do you call money you can’t see, touch or deposit in a bank? It sounds like the start of a joke. But it’s Bitcoin.”) The March issue will focus on identity theft.AdvertisementA magazine like Your $ is part of a broader effort to educate children about money, said Nan J. Morrison, the chief executive of the Council for Economic Education.In particular, big banks and consulting companies have become involved in financial literacy efforts, in part because teaching children about money is an easy way to buff their brands. Among others involved in financial literacy programs for children and teenagers are Capital One, H&R Block, T. Rowe Price and Wells Fargo.“There’s a long list of corporations in the financial services industry who are in this space,” Ms. Morrison said. “People sensed a renewed need during the last financial crisis, and the barriers to entry are low.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Your $ is more Highlights than Money magazine. Each issue has an “Ask Jean” section, where Ms. Chatzky, who has written nine books on personal finance, answers basic questions about money. Bright colors and pictures flood its pages.“Some of these topics might be considered dry, so the trick is to make it really visually appealing for kids,“ said Nellie Gonzalez, the editor of Time for Kids.Underwriting the Time for Kids money magazine is part of PwC’s Earn Your Future program, a five-year, $160 million commitment — $60 million in cash and $100 million worth of volunteer work — to teach children financial skills.Mitch Roschelle, a partner at PwC and a trustee of the PwC Charitable Foundation, called the program, which started in 2012, a way for PwC employees to make an impact by sharing their financial knowledge. The magazine was an extension of the financial literacy curriculum PwC had developed for classrooms.Some specialists question whether school is the best place to teach financial literacy, contending that economic values should be taught at home. But Ms. Chatzky, a mother of two, said the key was repetition.“You can talk about things in school, but it has to be brought home,” she said. “I think a dialogue about finances should be an ongoing dialogue throughout your life.”A version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: New Magazine Teaches Children Financial Lessons.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.