By THE NEW YORK TIMESFEB. 1, 2015
Here are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week.MORE TURBULENCE POSSIBLE After a testing start to the year, global markets face the prospect of more turbulence this week. Investors will weigh any statements or moves by Greece’s new government, which vehemently opposes the terms of the country’s bailout.The stock market will also be examining fourth-quarter earnings releases from corporate giants including General Motors and Exxon Mobil. In this nervous environment, investors will also sift United States economic releases, including the jobs numbers on Friday, for any signs that the economy is slowing. —Peter EavisJOBS FIGURES ARE DUE The big kahuna of monthly economic data will come out Friday, when the Labor Department reports the latest figures for hiring and unemployment in January. Payrolls surged in the final quarter of 2014, with employers adding an average of 289,000 workers a month, significantly more than the 246,000 monthly rate for the entire year.The consensus expectation on Wall Street is that payrolls jumped by 235,000 last month, but some optimists are looking for a considerably larger number if the momentum carried over into 2015. The unemployment rate is expected to fall by 0.1 percentage point to 5.5 percent, but just as significant for economists and traders will be the change in average hourly earnings.AdvertisementMost workers have had very slight wage growth since the recovery began in 2009, despite the falling unemployment rate, and the Federal Reserve is keeping a close tab on whether wages are finally rising. In December, wages actually fell slightly, but economists are looking for a slight increase in average hourly earnings this time around. —Nelson D. SchwartzTWITTER EARNINGS Twitter, the popular short-form message service, will report fourth-quarter earnings on Thursday. Investors will pay close attention to the company’s user growth numbers, which have paled in comparison to rival networks like Facebook and Instagram, and have not lived up to analysts’ expectations over 2014.AdvertisementAnd after a year of dismissing important executives who have failed to attract newcomers to the service, Dick Costolo, the company’s chief executive, is likely to stave off questions from analysts as to whether he is the right person to lead the company. —Mike IsaacAUTOMAKER RESULTS Two domestic automakers, General Motors and the American division of Fiat Chrysler, will report fourth-quarter earnings that should benefit from strong sales of new vehicles in the United States. Fiat Chrysler, which announces results for its United States unit on Tuesday, is the hottest carmaker in the market and earning big profits from its Ram pickups and Jeep sport utility vehicles.G.M., which reports earnings on Wednesday, will cap a tumultuous 2014, in which it spent heavily to recall about 30 million cars and trucks in the United States and compensate victims of a defective ignition switch that set off the biggest safety crisis in the automaker’s history. —Bill VlasicBP AND EXXON MOBIL RESULTS Exxon Mobil and BP are the next two major oil companies to report in an earnings season that has been unusually painful because of the collapse of oil and natural gas prices in recent months. Exxon Mobil, which reports on Monday, is expected to still eke out a profit mainly because its refinery and chemical businesses are likely to show strength.The earnings report for BP on Tuesday is particularly important because the company still faces legal challenges related to the 2010 Deepwater Horizon explosion and spill in the Gulf of Mexico and risks for its Russian business because of Western sanctions. —Clifford KraussPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.OPEN INTERNET RULES A step toward open Internet, or net neutrality, rules will be made this week. Tom Wheeler, chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, must present his proposal to the other commissioners by Thursday. Mr. Wheeler has already suggested that he favors regulating Internet service like a public utility. But the details of how will be crucial. His proposal will be grist for further debate and lobbying. The commission is scheduled to vote on Feb. 26. —Steve LohrAUTO SALES NUMBERS After a blockbuster year for auto sales, the industry will announce its first monthly numbers of 2015 on Tuesday. Analysts predict that it could be a strong start, with many companies expected to post double-digit increases over January 2014. Automakers recently gathered for the annual Super Bowl of cars, the North American International Auto Show in Detroit, where lavish displays and muscular vehicles had many in the industry feeling the wind at their backs, especially with gas prices lower than in recent memory. —Aaron M. KesslerAdvertisementINDIA BANK REVIEW The Reserve Bank of India releases the result of its next monetary policy review on Tuesday. Governor Raghuram Rajan had been expected to begin cutting rates next Tuesday but made a quarter-point reduction on Jan. 15, between formal policy reviews, and hinted then at further rate cuts. Economists are uncertain if he will act again on Tuesday or wait until after the government unveils its next budget on Feb. 28. —Keith BradsherBANCO SANTANDER EARNINGS Banco Santander will report its fourth-quarter results on Tuesday as Ana Patricia Botín continues to put her stamp on the Spanish lender, which her father ran for three decades until his death in September. In November, Ms. Botín replaced the bank’s chief executive and reshaped its board of directors.Last month, the bank raised its capital by 7.5 billion euros, or $8.5 billion, and cut its dividend sharply to ease investor concerns about the strength of its balance sheet. Santander, one of Europe’s largest banks, has benefited in recent quarters from an improving Spanish economy and a decline in provisions for delinquent and defaulted loans. —Chad BrayLVMH RESULTS  LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, the world’s largest luxury goods group, will report its financial results for 2014 on Tuesday. As demand for high-end leather handbags, watches and jewels has slowed with the cooling economies of China and Russia, analysts will be interested to hear what executives are expecting for 2015.Led by its new head of women’s wear, Nicolas Ghesquière, the group has spent the last year revamping the image of Louis Vuitton, its most valuable and recognizable brand, which accounts for about a third of its sales and almost half of its profits. The company may also indicate its plans for the 2.8 billion euros in proceeds that it booked in December from the distribution of its 23 percent stake in Hermès, a rival French luxury house, to the group’s shareholders. —Nicola ClarkSONY PICTURES EARNINGS With many of Sony Pictures’ computer applications still down after November’s crippling hacking attack, the company will be trying to return to normal with a Wednesday earnings call. It probably will not have final results for the quarter that ended in December 2014 because of continuing efforts to repair its networks. Still, many will be waiting to learn what impact the cyberattack had on Sony.Perhaps just as important, it may be revealed what the next step is for Sony’s beleaguered mobile unit, which recent reports said could shave an additional 1,000 jobs soon. —Paul Mozur​A version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: January Job Figures, and the Greek Bailout.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.