By JAMES KANTERSEPT. 30, 2015
European Union financial officials on Wednesday laid out plans for making more sources of investment available to European business, as a way to encourage American-style venture capital and fund-raising in the region.The plan, promoted by Jonathan Hill, a Briton who had business ties to the London finance industry and is now the European commissioner overseeing financial markets, is meant to stimulate growth in Europe. But parts of the proposal would require the approval of European Union governments and lawmakers, and could take years to come to fruition, if it ever does.European business has long been more dependent than American companies on a primary source — financing by banks — to fund business. There is also a patchwork of regulations across Europe making it hard for companies to line up other forms of financing.Small and medium-size businesses get about five times as much funding from capital markets in the United States as they do in Europe, according to the European Commission, which is the administrative arm of the European Union.AdvertisementThe bank-funding model is particularly common in Germany, although some other countries, particularly Britain, have already created a wider range of alternatives to bring together investors and businesses.AdvertisementCritics of Mr. Hill contend that he aims to make all of the European Union operate too much like the more American-style British system and to use the effort as a tool to deregulate the financial sector.The main idea behind the proposals introduced on Wednesday is to create a so-called capital markets union that would force structural changes in the European Union economy and make it easier for start-ups and other businesses to cross borders within Europe to secure the funding they need from sources available in other member states.To encourage more participation of venture capital funds in the European economy, Mr. Hill proposed relaxing rules that often prevent such funds from operating across national borders and make them less expensive to operate.The idea of a capital markets union may sound “abstract,” but it is not, Mr. Hill said at a news conference. “It’s about creating the right conditions for more funding to flow from Europe’s savers to Europe’s businesses,” he said.The current lack of options means “many European ideas are heading offshore to markets where funding is easier to come by,” Mr. Hill warned.The proposals received a broadly positive reception from the financial industry on Wednesday.“The commission’s plan offers us the chance to develop world-class capital markets in Europe, and ensure companies of all sizes have access to a diverse range of funding sources,” said Dörte Höppner, the chief executive of the European Private Equity and Venture Capital Association, an industry group in Brussels.And the plan was hailed by the British government, which expects the City of London to benefit as a global financial hub.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If we get this right, all of Europe will gain,” Harriett Baldwin, the economic secretary to the British Treasury, said in a statement. “Greater capital markets union will also strengthen financial stability and create new opportunity for financial services, which Britain is particularly well-placed to benefit from.”AdvertisementBut there was skepticism from Burkhard Balz, a lawmaker at the European Parliament from Germany, where the strongly entrenched bank-lending sector fears its role could be undermined.“Bank credits will continue to have a central role in Europe,” Mr. Balz, who sits on the Parliament’s influential Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, said in a statement. “We do not want to Americanize businesses’ access to finance.’’Asked about those concerns, Mr. Hill said that “no one is seeking to copy and paste the American system.” He also suggested that introducing new funding channels would “free up bank balance sheets” in countries like Germany and allow them to continue lending to small businesses.Mr. Hill took his Brussels post last fall after a career in Britain, where he founded the public relations firm Quiller Consultants, with clients in the financial industry, before joining the House of Lords. In February, under his guidance, the European Commission began a study  to identify European impediments to raising capital. Wednesday’s announcement was a plan for removing those obstacles.The proposed steps could also help an aging population in Europe to plan and save for retirement, Mr. Hill said, by creating new ways for private savers’ money to be pooled into investment funds.One component of the plan, which could prove to be one of the more controversial, is to revive financial tools that were in use before the financial crisis erupted in 2008 and were subsequently reined in by regulators.That includes a draft law Mr. Hill introduced on Wednesday for securitization — the process of slicing up loans, like mortgages, and packaging them into bondlike instruments — to encourage that activity while ensuring adequate regulatory oversight to protect investors.The legislation is aimed at make it easier for investors to understand where they are putting their money, and remove some complexity, when they invest in securitized assets. Rebuilding that market could inject investment worth 100 billion euros, or $112 billion, into the European economy, according to the commission.“The commission has rightly recognized that to make Europe more competitive, it should support market-driven solutions,” said Matthew Fell, the director for competitive markets at the CBI, an industry association in Britain.AdvertisementMr. Hill on Wednesday also proposed amending an existing law that governs insurance companies, in order to lower their capital-reserve requirements when they invest in major infrastructure projects like highways and telecommunications networks, to encourage that activity.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.