By JOHN F. WASIKOCT. 9, 2015
In August, as the stock market plummeted, many investors jumped into the fray and sold off their holdings at a loss.Not everyone did this, though. There’s some compelling evidence that individual investors who were engaged in passive retirement investing, through 401(k)'s and autopiloted target-date funds, hewed to their stock positions. The value of their holdings, in many cases, dropped, but such investors could benefit handsomely if the market resumes its long-term trend upward.The evidence isn’t conclusive, but it is suggestive: One gauge that tracks trading activity in 401(k)’s, for example, shows that the needle barely moved when the market headed south in August.Although trading levels in these retirement funds were seven times normal on Aug. 24 — the highest-volume trading day since 2011 — a 401(k) index monitored by Aon Hewitt showed that an average of only 0.026 percent of total account balances transferred in August. That compares with 0.021 percent for July, but is still less than a relatively tranquil May, in which 0.031 percent of balances moved.AdvertisementJohn Nofsinger, author of “The Psychology of Investing” and a professor at the University of Alaska, Anchorage, who researches behavioral economics, has found that the type of account people hold largely determines how they invest.Advertisement“People rarely trade in 401(k) accounts,” Mr. Nofsinger said. “But in online brokerage accounts, there’s more potential for trading.” He said he was adding to his retirement funds in August “because I could buy more shares at a lower price. I don’t need the money next year or the year after.”The steady-as-she-goes attitude of many retirement fund investors contrasts sharply with the behavior of investors who, on cue, pulled billions out of stock funds to retreat to cash, mainly in the form of money-market funds. “Investors panicked,” said Todd Rosenbluth, director of exchange-traded fund and mutual fund research at S&P Capital IQ. “The fear we saw in August related to international markets and signs of sluggish growth in China. Investors thought it was going to get worse.”As a result of this mass anxiety, investors over all yanked more than $1 billion from diversified stock mutual funds in the last two weeks of August, according to S&P Capital IQ and Lipper, and also pulled some $5 billion out of similar exchange-traded funds in the week ending Aug. 26. Investors moved relatively small amounts of money into funds with holdings in small and midsize companies and in some diversified alternative strategies aimed at making money from market declines, according to S&P Capital IQ/Lipper fund data.In short, while retirement investors appeared to be a big exception, the timeworn trend of active investors bailing out of stocks and jumping into the lifeboats of income-oriented vehicles has re-emerged in the recent downturn. That said, data on fund flows remains imprecise: No analyst has a detailed picture of how much E.T.F. or mutual fund money is being shifted by big institutions such as banks and hedge funds.Based on anecdotal evidence, industry analysts said they believed that the bulk of money being moved in and out of E.T.F.s was controlled by these big traders, not by individuals. Morningstar noted a surge of money in August into E.T.F.s specializing in sophisticated strategies that exploit a down market through leverage, options, commodities and volatility-focused funds; big, institutional investors may have been the source of these fund flows.One interesting sidelight emerged from the S&P Capital IQ/Lipper data: After investors pulled $5 billion out of traditional stock mutual funds in the week ending Aug. 26, when they re-entered the market the next week, nearly $8 billion flowed into stock E.T.F.s, which are mostly low-cost, passive index vehicles tracking large sections of the market.Another pattern emerged as well: When the market nosed up in late August and early September, investors again began to chase short-term returns.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Fund flows have a strong tendency to chase returns,” said Alina Lamy, a senior analyst for Morningstar, the Chicago-based financial information company. “But in the past, investors haven’t been the best market timers. During the 2007 crisis, for example, they were selling when they should’ve been buying.”AdvertisementIn any case, the overall move into cheaper funds has been part of an investor-friendly, long-term trend. The average fund expense ratio — what managers charge annually as a percentage of funds under management — dropped to 0.64 percent as of the end of 2014, Morningstar reports. That’s down from 0.76 percent five years ago, a trend that’s beneficial for fund investors, since more of their money goes to work and less of it goes to managers. Over the last decade, more than 95 percent of fund money has gone into the cheapest funds.What’s clear is that, aside from cost-cutting trends, most active investors who try to time the market are usually wrong about when to get in and out. Subsequently, their errant behavior is punished by poor total returns.According to a long-running study by Dalbar Associates, a financial consulting company, over the 20 years through 2014, investors it surveyed earned slightly more than 5 percent annually. During the same period, the Standard and Poor’s 500-stock index averaged nearly 10 percent a year.This huge performance gap is attributed to individuals trying to time the market during downturns, a perennial pitfall. During the market crash in October 2008, Dalbar’s investors lost 24 percent, compared with about 17 percent for the S.&P. stock index, a pattern most likely repeated on a smaller scale in August by active traders.People who bolt when they’re scared and re-enter when they feel confident typically miss the best buying opportunities. They sell low and often buy high.Patient investors, however, are usually rewarded for sitting on their hands. Mr. Rosenbluth of S&P Capital IQ, who has tracked 20 stock market downturns in the minus 10 percent to minus 20 percent range since 1945, found that the average market recovery time was about four months from a bottom. Those engaged in panic selling, of course, never quite know when the nadir is — and usually aren’t invested in the market to benefit from the upsurge.What if you just can’t help yourself and want to flee to cash during the next market decline? Realign yourself with where you want to be in the future and trust in the likelihood that a global portfolio of stocks will outperform bonds and cash, Mr. Rosenbluth says. “Three to five years from now,” he said, “we think stocks will be higher.”In a similar vein, Ms. Lamy, the Morningstar analyst, said, “Control what you can control and focus on long-term goals.” That means beating inflation through stock investing, diversifying, planning for sustainable retirement income and ignoring short-term trends. Know how much risk you can take. If you felt queasy in August and jumped into icy waters, you were probably taking on too much market risk.The history of downturns holds some timeless lessons.The boring, passive approach of buy and hold has provided rewards in the stock market, but only for those people able to take the long view and hold on during stormy times.A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page BU15 of the New York edition with the headline: Retirement Investors, Riding Out the Panic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.