Ever since Jerome Monroe Smucker first started selling apple butter in 1897, the company that bears his name has been best known for jams, peanut butter and other treats.Now J.M. Smucker is moving into the world of dog biscuits and cat soufflés.The company announced on Tuesday that it would buy Big Heart Pet Brands, the pet food company once known as Del Monte, from its private equity owners for about $5.8 billion, including debt, in a bid to expand into a fast-growing $21 billion business.The deal, Smucker’s biggest ever, will add brands like Milk-Bone, Kibbles ’n Bits and Meow Mix to a stable that already includes Smucker’s jelly, Jif peanut butter and Folgers coffee. Richard K. Smucker, the company’s chief executive and a great-grandson of J.M. Smucker himself, described the move in an interview as one of the most transformational in the company’s 118-year history, biggest even than when it bought Folgers for about $3.3 billion five years ago to expand into hot beverages.He added that other food giants, like Mars, already had sizable pet food divisions. (Last year, Mars bought Procter & Gamble’s pet foods business, including the Iams and Eukanuba brands, for $2.9 billion.)“It’s not uncommon at all for leaders in the industry to be in human food and pet food,” Mr. Smucker said. “Pet food is one of the fastest-growing areas in the center of the store.”Adding Big Heart, which is based in San Francisco, will add $2.2 billion in sales and the top maker of pet snacks. It could also provide a shot in the arm to help revive Smucker’s sales, which have been relatively flat since 2012.The deal will mean yet another new owner for Big Heart this decade. The company, then known as Del Monte Foods, was acquired more than four years ago by a group that included the investment firms Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, Vestar Capital Partners and Centerview Capital for $5.3 billion.Even though it bore the Del Monte name, known for canned vegetables and fruit, the company was already drawing half of its sales from the likes of Meow Mix and Milk-Bone, more than from canned sliced peaches and pineapple, having scooped up those pet brands from competitors.The company’s chief executive, David J. West, decided to focus on the faster-growing pet food industry. In late 2013, he sold the company’s human food division to Del Monte Pacific, an Asian company, for nearly $1.7 billion. What remained took on the name Big Heart and continued focusing on new lines of products, like Milk-Bone Brushing Chews, which help clean dogs’ teeth.Before the Del Monte Pacific deal was announced, however, Mr. West — who knew Mr. Smucker and his brother, Tim, from his time as an executive at Nabisco and Hershey — asked whether Smucker was interested in buying the canned foods division.Mr. Smucker politely declined. But he expressed interest in the other side of Mr. West’s business.“‘If you’re ever interested in selling the pet food business, give me a call,’” Mr. Smucker recalled telling his counterpart.Last August, Mr. West gave telephoned him. At the time, Big Heart was considering whether to go public as an independent company or to sell itself to a bigger food manufacturer, quietly contacting a small group to gauge their interest.Mr. Smucker quickly responded, and the two sides began working on a deal. Easing the talks, the two executives said, was the sense that both companies had similar cultures and a similar marketing proposition for their brands: tugging on customers’ heartstrings.“In my household, my dog gets better treatment than I get,” Mr. West said. “Our values and theirs, they really just sat right on top of one another.”Under the terms of the transaction, Smucker will give to Big Heart’s owners 18 million newly issued shares and $1.3 billion in cash. It will also assume $2.6 billion in debt.At that price, the private equity firms will have made roughly double their investment in the company, according to a person briefed on the matter.Mr. West will continue to lead the pet foods business and will become a director of Smucker as well. KKR, Vestar and Centerview will each be able to name an observer for the combined company’s board.Through the deal, Smucker expects to reap about $200 million in annual cost savings within the first three years after the takeover closes. It also anticipates its pro forma earnings per diluted share to rise by about 10 percent in its 2017 and 2018 fiscal years.One potential stumbling block for investors may be the amount of debt that Smucker will take on, with what the company owes swelling to about $6.5 billion and its annual interest payments growing to $200 million. But Mr. Smucker contended that the company could handle the bigger financial obligations and was expected to maintain its investment-grade credit rating, even while maintaining its existing dividend payout formula. “We’re very confident that we’re funding this the right way,” he said. Investors seemed pleased by the move, at least initially. Shares in Smucker rose 3.3 percent in after-hours trading, to $109.35.Even after the transaction closes, Smucker may still look to further deal making to help expand even more in the pet food category.“We’ll never say ‘never’ to other acquisitions,” Mr. Smucker said.A version of this article appears in print on 02/04/2015, on page B3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Smucker in Large Deal for Purveyor of Pet Fare.