Sometimes, a tax increase saves jobs.President Obama’s fiscal year 2016 budget introduces a one-time 14 percent tax on approximately $2 trillion of so-called unrepatriated foreign earnings. The tax would raise about $248 billion  over the next five years, which  would be used to help pay for infrastructure projects and replenish the Highway Trust Fund. The proposal would also impose a 19 percent tax on future foreign earnings (with an 85 percent credit for any foreign taxes paid), allowing such earnings to then be brought back to the United States with no additional tax due. Under current law, multinational corporations based in the United States are nominally taxed at a 35 percent rate on worldwide income. But the tax does not have to be paid on earnings by a controlled foreign corporation until the company pays a dividend to its United States parent. So the tax can be (and often is) deferred indefinitely by keeping the earnings abroad. Companies like Microsoft, Apple, Google and Pfizer have stockpiled hundreds of billions of dollars abroad in the hopes of bringing it home later at a reduced tax rate. Such earnings are often referred to as trapped foreign earnings.  The tax bill they would have to pay to bring those earnings to the United States is leading some companies to reinvest the money abroad, even if they get a lower pretax return on investment. Companies often prefer leaving it overseas over paying  the tax and returning the money to shareholders or reinvesting at home. This foreign earnings “lock-out” effect is conceptually similar to the “lock-in” effect of a high capital gains rate on individual investors. If the tax rate on capital gains is too high, individual investors may hold on to appreciated assets rather than sell them, particularly if enticed by the possibility that their heirs would be able to avoid the tax when they inherit the assets. In the State of the Union address in January, President Obama coupled his proposed increase in the capital gains rate with a proposal to make death a taxable event for wealthy households, precisely to offset this concern about lock-in of previously untaxed assets.The White House proposal on foreign earnings takes a similar approach, taxing foreign earnings up front and eliminating deferral. Taxing the old “trapped” foreign earnings at a 14 percent rate allows multinationals to repatriate the money and return it  to shareholders via a dividend or redemption. Or companies can choose to reinvest the funds in the United States. There would be no restrictions on what a company could do with the repatriated money, unlike some “tax holiday” proposals that would try to force companies not to use repatriated funds to pay dividends or redemptions.Going forward, the 19 percent tax on foreign earnings becomes a sort of multinational corporate minimum tax. Although wholly domestic corporations would face a 28 percent tax rate (25 percent for manufacturing corporations), multinationals would pay 28 percent on domestic earnings and 19 percent on foreign earnings (with roughly an 85 percent credit for foreign taxes paid).  My one quibble is that the rates should be even lower, especially if the international tax proposal is coupled with increased taxation on the capital income of shareholders. The White House plans to use the revenue from the one-time 14 percent tax to help pay for domestic infrastructure programs and to help replenish the Highway Trust Fund.   The money from the one-time tax could be used to reduce the top corporate tax rate in the United States to 25 percent and still have cash left over to, say, reduce payroll taxes or expand the Earned Income Tax Credit, which helps the working poor.Indeed, lower rates would make this proposal more promising to Republicans and Democrats alike. The framework already resembles ones put forth by former Representative Dave Camp, a Republican and the former chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, and by former Senator Max Baucus, a Democrat and the former chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. The 14/19/25/28 percent rate structure is a useful opening bid, but a similar framework could be applied with slightly lower rates. During the debate about corporate inversions and papered-up transactions that facilitate global income shifting, it is easy to lose sight of the real effects of the current international tax system: the loss of American jobs. Under current law, the 35 percent tax on repatriated earnings coupled with indefinite deferral encourages American multinationals to shift income offshore, keep it offshore and permanently reinvest the earnings offshore. The White House proposal, by contrast, is neutral as to whether the earnings are reinvested here or overseas or simply returned to shareholders for reinvestment elsewhere in the economy. There is no reason the tax system should encourage corporate managers to create jobs overseas rather than at home. The White House proposal is the right framework to move us toward a more rational international tax system.