By CARLA FRIEDOCT. 9, 2015
The Federal Reserve’s decision not to raise its target interest rate drew plenty of attention last quarter, but the real news for bond investors was what actually did happen.Namely, high-quality bonds delivered on their core role as life jacket in residence for diversified portfolios.When the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index fell 12 percent from late July to late August, the $170 billion invested in the Vanguard Total Bond Market index fund and exchange-traded fund gained nearly 0.8 percent.Among actively managed funds, the $98 billon Pimco Total Return bond fund shed less than a half a percent and the $67 billion Metropolitan West Total Return bond fund gained 0.4 percent.AdvertisementThe calm before the storm, you say? After all, the Federal Reserve didn’t cancel a rate increase, but for the umpteenth time just pushed it out a bit further.AdvertisementTrue, but the timing of the first move is far less important than the magnitude of what comes after. And that’s not looking nearly as ominous as what has been predicted by the bond fearmongers for the last seven years.At a news conference last month, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, said that even after the initial increase, policy “will likely remain highly accommodative for quite some time.”The plain-English translation: We want to start moving our target rate from the zero level that has been in place since the financial crisis, but we are in no rush to move it much, or move it fast, given that there’s no sign of our economy overheating.In its latest communiqué the Fed indicated that it did not expect its target interest rate to exceed 2.6 percent before 2018.“This next cycle of rising rates is going to be far more benign than past cycles,” says Ford O’Neil, lead manager of the $20 billion Fidelity Total bond fund (and its E.T.F. clone) and a 25-year bond market vet.That suggests long-term investors using core bond funds as portfolio diversifiers might benefit from tuning out all the anxiety about the coming rate rise.Total returns will indeed probably dip into negative territory when rates do begin to rise. Bond fund and E.T.F. total returns are the sum of interest payouts and price changes. When yields rise, prices fall. But the damage should be a bruised elbow, not a trip to the emergency room.AdvertisementSince 1926, there have been just five periods when intermediate-term Treasury prices fell more than 5 percent — the average was a 7 percent loss over 11 months — but losses were recouped in three to seven months, according to Morningstar. Not exactly an eternity if you’re a long-term investor.But it might feel like one along the way. Tad Rivelle, chief investment officer for fixed income at TCW, which manages more than $140 billion in United States bond portfolios, including the MetWest Total Return bond fund, says that after seven years of extremely low volatility courtesy of the Federal Reserve’s spurring a big borrowing boom — releveraging, in marketspeak — he expects volatility to snap back “like a jack-in-the-box” when the bond market begins its march to normalization.MetWest Total Return shifted to a “risk off” stance 18 months ago, given a dearth of compelling values and the fact that “long releveraging cycles don’t go on forever,” Mr. Rivelle said. The fund’s current average five-year duration, a measure of sensitivity to changes in interest rates, is more conservative than the 5.6 years for the benchmark Barclays U.S. Aggregate bond index. And while up to 20 percent of the fund can be invested in high-yield bonds, it currently has less than 5 percent riding on so-called junk.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thomas H. Atteberry, manager of FPA New Income, is always worried about risk. For decades the fund has been able to deliver on its two mandates: deliver a positive return over 12 months, and over a five-year stretch generate an annualized return that is at least one percentage point better than inflation. But right now the fund’s five-year return is running about a quarter of a percentage point above inflation.“Job 1 is protection of capital, and you can’t do that and generate higher returns, given that risk-free Treasuries are yielding less than inflation,” Mr. Atteberry said. Treasuries maturing in fewer than 10 years currently pay less in interest than the inflation rate. FPA New Income’s average duration is below 1.5 years.Research Affiliates, which designs asset allocation and index strategies, expects even core bond funds to outpace inflation by only one percentage point annually over the next 10 years. (Before you groan at that, consider that the firm estimates the S.&P. 500’s annualized real return will also be around 1 percent.)If you want your bond portfolio to have a shot at generating higher payouts, you may need to venture out into riskier fare like junk bonds and emerging-market debt, which tend to suffer big declines when turmoil hits. The International Monetary Fund last month cited growing concern about the liquidity of such bonds, which aren’t as easy to trade as Treasuries.Mutual funds and E.T.F.s own a hefty share of them, and the worry is that if too many investors want to sell their shares the next time the markets hit trouble, the funds could push bonds into a downward spiral, sending prices even lower.The Loomis Sayles Bond Fund has the leeway to venture far afield from the high-grade United States issues at the heart of core bond funds, in search of higher income and returns.AdvertisementOver the last 15 years, the fund’s 8 percent annualized gain has performed three percentage points better than the average core bond fund. A co-manager, Elaine Stokes, says the fund is currently near its 35 percent maximum allocation in high-yield bonds, a position that grew late last year when the commodity sell-off created better values.The fund also has a small slug of dividend-paying stocks, convertibles and some foreign government bonds. That generates a current yield of close to 4 percent, nearly double the income payout for core bond funds.Loomis Sayles sees a potentially valuable silver lining if pockets of the bond market indeed have liquidity problems. When trouble hits, the free-ranging team anticipates it will be able to buy “fundamentally strong credits at significant discounts.”But a seatbelt is required for times when market volatility perks up. Last quarter the fund lost more than 4 percent, as riskier bonds were yanked down in the face of global growth concerns. Similar multisector bond funds lost 2.6 percent on average.Perhaps the best risk-reward trade-off right now is municipal bonds. Yields are in line with what Treasuries currently pay out, and that’s before you factor in the tax break if you’re investing in a taxable account.The 1.8 percent current yield for the high-grade Vanguard Intermediate-Term Tax-Exempt fund is the equivalent of 2.5 percent if your federal tax bracket is 28 percent.For investors in the 35 percent tax bracket, the effective yield is 2.8 percent. That puts you well ahead of the 2.1 percent yield for the taxable Vanguard Total Bond Market index fund.A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page BU14 of the New York edition with the headline: A Timely Reminder of a Life Jacket’s True Value.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.