By KATIE THOMASFEB. 2, 2015
The main system for keeping track of the dangerous side effects of prescription drugs is deeply flawed, primarily because drug makers are submitting incomplete information about the problems to the Food and Drug Administration, according to a new study by a nonprofit group that tracks drug safety issues.The study, by the Institute for Safe Medication Practices, found that only about half of reports of serious side effects submitted by manufacturers met basic standards for completeness, containing a patient’s age, sex and the date the event took place. Reports collected by the F.D.A. itself, by contrast, were found to meet those basic standards in 85 percent of cases.The difference is noteworthy because drug makers’ reports account for close to 97 percent of all adverse events that are collected by the system. The report analyzed more than 847,000 case reports received for the 12-month period that ended in March of 2014.Providing such details can be key to evaluating a drug and how different groups of people, such as women or older people, might react to it.AdvertisementThe F.D.A.’s adverse-event reporting system is the major way that the agency and other drug safety experts keep track of problems with medicines after they have entered the marketplace, but the data have long been assailed as flawed and are known to account for only a fraction of the actual adverse events caused by prescription drugs. Reporting serious side effects is voluntary by doctors and patients, but drug companies are required to notify the F.D.A. any time they become aware of an adverse event caused by a drug they manufacture.AdvertisementThomas J. Moore, the senior scientist at the institute and the lead author of the report, noted that some companies — including Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Biogen Idec and Amgen — consistently submitted high-quality reports. Others, including Par Pharmaceutical, a generic drug manufacturer, and Cubist Pharmaceuticals, which was recently acquired by Merck, performed well below average. “We know it is feasible to do reasonably complete reports,” he said. So the main reason for the low quality in other cases, he said, “is lack of due diligence by the manufacturers.”The study took a close look at one prominent drug, the hepatitis C treatment Sovaldi, which was approved at the end of 2013 to great fanfare, both because it cures a majority of patients and because of its high cost, at about $1,000 per pill.But the study found that Sovaldi’s manufacturer, Gilead Sciences, included basic information in only 39 percent of the adverse-event reports it submitted to the F.D.A. in the first quarter of 2014. By contrast, Vertex, which until recently made a competing drug, Incivek, submitted “reasonably complete” information 71 percent of the time for the same period. The study did not find any evidence of safety concerns for Sovaldi, but the poor-quality data makes “cases that are identified difficult to evaluate,” the report found.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a statement, Gilead said it made multiple attempts to obtain detailed information from sources like doctors and consumers, but the information it received was often incomplete. Because companies must report this data within a short time frame, “we have to submit these reports, even with scant information,” the company said.Dawn Kalmar, a spokeswoman for Vertex, said, “We’re in the business of helping people with serious diseases, and we take the safety of those people taking our medicines seriously, and work hard to ensure we are reporting data appropriately.”Stephen J. Mock, a spokesman for Par Pharmaceutical, said his company very rarely received reports directly from consumers or doctors, and most of its reports came from information gleaned from medical literature and reports. Those almost never include the date of the adverse event. He noted that the company reported a patient’s age and sex in more than 82 percent of cases, which was better than most manufacturers. “We have an extremely diligent staff when it comes to reporting adverse events,” he said.A spokeswoman for Merck, speaking on behalf of Cubist, declined to comment.A spokesman for the F.D.A. acknowledged that adverse-event reports were often incomplete, and said improving the system was “of great interest” to the agency. However, doing so “is challenging because of the voluntary nature of the reporting.”He said the agency was working on several initiatives to use modern data-mining techniques to better analyze the reports, and is also ramping up its Sentinel Initiative, which uses outside information gleaned from sources like insurance claims data to look for potential problems.The report found that some aspects of the system appear to be getting worse. Drug makers are in increasingly close contact with patients as they remind them to refill prescriptions, or offer assistance in getting a drug covered through insurance. But if the manufacturers learn that a patient has died during one of these calls, they are required to report it to the F.D.A., regardless of whether the drug was suspected as a cause of the patient’s death, potentially muddying the data.AdvertisementAn easy remedy, Mr. Moore said, would be to require drug makers to ask some simple questions before reporting such cases, such as whether the drug was suspected in the patient’s death. “Large amounts of money are being spent collecting essentially worthless data,” Mr. Moore said. “There’s really no reason not to fix it.”An article on Tuesday about a study that found flaws in the system for reporting serious side effects from pharmaceutical drugs misstated part of the name of the nonprofit safety group that conducted the study. It is the Institute for Safe Medication Practices, not the Institute for Safe Medicine Practices. The article also misspelled the name of a hepatitis C treatment made by Gilead Sciences. It is Sovaldi, not Solvadi.A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Drug Makers’ Data on Side Effects Is Called Lacking in a Report.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.