AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaThe Justice Department will not prosecute Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation or 21st Century Fox over voice mail interceptions and payments to public officials, actions done by their journalists in London, the companies said on Monday. “We are grateful that this matter has been concluded and acknowledge the fairness and professionalism of the Department of Justice throughout this investigation,” Gerson A. Zweifach, general counsel for the companies, said in a statement Monday afternoon.Investigations in Britain and the United States began in 2011 after a series of allegations that journalists at Mr. Murdoch’s British tabloid News of the World had intercepted the voice mail messages of celebrities, politicians and other newsmakers, in an effort to get scoops. British police and the United States Department of Justice began inquiries. Mr. Murdoch in 2011 shuttered News of the World — at the time, one of the best-selling newspapers in the world — and was forced to appear before a panel of British lawmakers. The company settled hundreds of civil claims and incurred hundreds of millions of dollars in legal and other costs. Some senior journalists went to jail As the scandal deepened to include News of the World’s sister tabloid, The Sun, along with allegations of payments to public officials and improper relationships between British politicians and Mr. Murdoch’s influential British media holdings, some suspected the contagion might cross the Atlantic and affect his American interests. In an annual report at the end of last year, News Corporation warned that civil and criminal matters still threatened to “damage its reputation, impair the company’s ability to conduct its business and adversely affect its results of operations and financial condition.” The announcement on Monday seemed to mark the end of at least part of that threat. Last year the most senior executive in Mr. Murdoch’s companies to stand trial, Rebekah Brooks, was acquitted of charges related to phone hacking, hiding evidence and bribing public officials for information.And one of Mr. Murdoch’s sons, James, who was once at the center of the scandal, has since moved to America to take up a senior position in 21st Century Fox. The scandal was also a factor in the split of Mr. Murdoch’s holdings into two companies in 2013, a move that was well received on Wall Street. Advertisement