By CLIFFORD KRAUSSFEB. 2, 2015
As the price of crude oil fluctuates, why some countries are faring much better than others.HOUSTON —  Oil prices rose and gasoline prices remained low and stable on Monday, the opposite of what usually happens when labor strife threatens the operations of refineries.About 3,800 members of the United Steelworkers union walked off their jobs on Sunday at nine refineries and chemical plants that process roughly 10 percent of the nation’s gasoline, diesel, heating oil and jet fuel.It was the first time since 1980 that workers staged such a broad strike against the nation’s refineries, but at all but one of the refineries, energy companies were able to keep operations going with nonunion management crews. The one plant that was shut, Tesoro’s refinery in Martinez, Calif., was already partly shut down for seasonal maintenance.The country is already awash in fuel supplies, giving the refiners and the union time to settle their dispute before there is a meaningful impact on consumer energy prices and the nation’s economy.AdvertisementEnergy experts said both management and unions had ample incentive to settle the dispute. Refiners are making excellent margins these days with cheap crude supplies and robust demand for the more expensive spring blends they will be producing in the next couple of months. At the same time, unions have only slight leverage in plants that are not particularly labor-intensive.“I have never seen a refinery strike that has actually resulted in the shutdown of a U.S. plant,” said Tom Kloza, global head of energy analysis for Oil Price Information Service. “Management can operate and they have a lot of automated systems.”AdvertisementThe average price of a gallon of regular gasoline nationwide on Monday was $2.06, unchanged from the day before. Global oil benchmark prices rose more than 3 percent on Monday, when the Brent oil price approached $55 a barrel. If a serious refinery stoppage were imminent, gasoline prices would be expected to surge because of the lack of supply, and oil prices would be expected to fall because of the expected drop in demand.The current national average gasoline price is about $1.22 a gallon less than it was a year ago, according to the AAA auto club. But AAA said it was possible that prices would rise in the coming weeks because of planned maintenance of refineries as they begin the switch from winter fuels to summer fuels.The issues involved in the labor dispute include health care, overtime and staffing levels, which union leaders say are too low, leaving workers tired and prone to error. The union also noted what it called “daily occurrences” of fires, emissions, leaks and explosions that threaten local communities without the industry’s taking adequate action.Talks to reach a new three-year contract began Jan. 21.A protracted stalemate could lead to a nationwide strike of 30,000 union workers at refineries, chemical plants and pipeline facilities, which could potentially affect nearly two-thirds of the nation’s fuel production. While most energy experts think that is unlikely, union leaders are talking tough.“The oil companies do not want to work with us to improve the workplace and safety at oil refineries and facilities,” said a union vice president, Thomas M. Conway.Representatives of the oil companies involved, including Shell Oil, Tesoro, Marathon Petroleum and LyondellBasell Industries, say they are committed to negotiating a resolution of the dispute.A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Oil and Gas Prices Steady Despite a Refinery Strike.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.