By EMILY STEELFEB. 2, 2015
The advertising lesson from Super Bowl XLIX: Ads with puppies continue to score with viewers while spots featuring a dead child are seen as a major fumble.By several counts, Budweiser led the pack of game day advertisers with a spot that depicted its iconic Clydesdale horses rescuing a lost puppy and taking it home. The ad attracted more than 4.2 million online views by midday Monday and captured 12 percent of online activity about the Super Bowl spots, according to a measurement firm, iSpot.tv.Budweiser, which also ran an ad celebrating its brewing process, was mentioned more than 234,000 times on social media during the game, with nearly half of the comments expressing a positive sentiment and many more neutral, according to Amobee, which tracks digital response to brands.In stark contrast, another much-talked-about spot was Nationwide’s morbid commercial that showed a young boy saying that he will never learn to ride a bike, get “cooties,” learn to fly, travel the world or marry because he died from a preventable accident. While the brand was trying to highlight its “Make Safe Happen” program about increasing safety at home, the spot angered viewers.Nationwide was mentioned more than 238,000 times on social media, with 64 percent of those comments negative, according to Amobee. (Nationwide ran another spot featuring the actress Mindy Kaling that seemed to resonate more positively.)Advertisement“The sole purpose of this message was to start a conversation, not sell insurance,” Nationwide said in a statement. “We want to build awareness of an issue that is near and dear to all of us — the safety and well being of our children.”AdvertisementAnother highlight was a commercial for Procter & Gamble’s Always feminine products that asked what it meant to do a physical activity “like a girl.” The ad focused on how girls often lose their confidence after they go through puberty. It showed little girls answering the question by running fast and punching strong, while older children and adults answered by acting weak.The Always spot captured 8.6 percent of online activity and 1.6 million viewers, according to iSpot.tv.NBC showed 48 minutes of ads during Sunday’s game, according to Kantar Media. That included about seven minutes of network promotions.Sunday’s game featured ads from 15 first-time Super Bowl advertisers. Amobee said that the “Rookie of the Year” award went to Skittles, which generated more than 85,000 social mentions, more than three times those for some other newbies.In addition to its humorous spot, the brand received a boost when Marshawn Lynch, the Seahawks running back, was seen gobbling the rainbow-colored candy moments before the game began.A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: In Super Bowl Ads, Puppy Is a Winner.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.