AdvertisementSupported byEssayBy John SchwartzIt is time to celebrate the wonders of our captains of industry — those who innovate and make the world a better place.At least, they are making it a better place for themselves. At least for a while. And even if their innovations sometimes leave me wondering what they were really thinking.I am speaking of innovative companies like Volkswagen. Its decision to use software to cheat on emissions tests shows just the kind of bold, out-of-the-box thinking that is celebrated chiefly in the movies, where the puckish prankster gets away with his high jinks. Didn’t audiences cheer James T. Kirk for beating the Kobayashi Maru, a no-win exercise meant to test students’ character, by hacking the system and reprogramming it to pass a class at Starfleet Academy?We love winners, and we love a rascal. Most of the time. But now Volkswagen’s chief executive, Martin Winterkorn, has resigned, despite his company’s Loki-like ingenuity and the fact that his name sounds like a Bond villain’s. Life, apparently, is less like the movies than many people think.Which brings us to Martin Shkreli, a young financier, pharmaceutical executive and founder of the privately held Turing Pharmaceuticals. He bought the drug Daraprim, which treats parasitic infections, and promptly raised its price to $750 a pill, from $13.50. Plenty of drug companies have increased prices overnight, and intermediators often overcharge for drugs — how much did that aspirin you took in the hospital cost? — but Mr. Shkreli’s move set off a firestorm of scorn and spittle.Maybe it’s because Mr. Shkreli is 32, and looks as if he probably still gets carded in bars. Maybe it’s because he brashly fought back, calling critics morons and defending the move. Or that journalists like my colleague Andrew Pollack have detailed other controversies from his past business dealings.For whatever reason, then, he has become everyone’s bad example. In her presidential campaign, Hillary Rodham Clinton has cited his cocky move in a call for limits on price gouging. Collect Records, a punk-rock label Mr. Shkreli supported, broke off relations with him.A week ago I walked by a loud anti-Shkreli protest on Sixth Avenue in New York City. People were holding up signs with his photograph and slogans like “The Face of Greed.”That’s got to hurt.I asked a crisis consultant, Eric Dezenhall, why Mr. Shkreli had become such a pariah so quickly. His answer was simple: “Chutzpah works if you’re peddling glitzy Manhattan real estate or trash talking a heavyweight opponent in a Vegas fight. When Congress, the F.D.A. and trial lawyers are the gatekeepers to your future, it’s a little less cute.”Now Mr. Shkreli has backed away from his combative stance and says he is lowering the price of the drug, though he hasn’t said by how much.I say it’s time to salute this financial prodigy. He’s bold, and I am a fan of bold thinking. I also love the idea that he named his company Turing Pharmaceuticals, presumably after the cryptography pioneer Alan Turing. Among other things, that genius was famous for the “Turing test,” which asks whether a computer can trick someone into thinking it is a human. This company seemed to be pursuing a different test, one that asks whether a person can masquerade as a soulless computer.But upon further analysis it’s clear that what Mr. Shkreli is up to is just a variant on surge pricing; charging more for things that people really want, or need. That’s the strategy pursued by the tech-powered car service Uber, and it’s worked like a charm!Wild prices are all around us. You can see Broadway’s hottest show, “Hamilton,” tomorrow, if you are willing to pay $477 for a ticket. How fitting for a musical about the man who built the American financial system.But to me, this kind of pricing isn’t used nearly often enough. Think of how much you could actually charge for a public restroom. The one at Madison Square Park costs 25 cents. Imagine how much more you could charge on St. Patrick’s Day, when crowds throng the streets and beverages are consumed. No city would run a deficit under my bladder-surge pricing plan.And on the subject of pills, do you have any idea what a man who wants Viagra would really pay for a pill if the opportunity suddenly arose, or needed to arise?I wanted to ask Mr. Shkreli about all of this, so I got his cellphone number. I’m a reporter, after all, and have skills. Also, throngs of haters on the Internet posted his phone number and other personal information. Anyway, I texted him a request for an interview. “No comment,” he responded.Still, I had so many questions. I’ll ask them here.Mr. Shkreli — may I call you Martin? — how can I make money off your business acumen? Turing is privately held, so a guy like me can’t buy shares. You were planning to take the company public, but that clearly has to be put off for a while.You seem to be the kind of guy who will always make money, and we investors like to latch on to winners. Do we want our executives to be nice? Not really, any more than we want our divorce lawyers to be as friendly as puppies. We claim to like puppies, but we pay for pit bulls.Which brings me to my last question, Mr. Shkreli. With your willingness to take risks and seeming ability to say anything that comes to your head, should you be limiting yourself to the commercial realm?Won’t you please run for president?Sadly, you are still too young. Only 32!But you’re good at math, I know. So think of this arithmetic: In three years, you’ll be 35. Two years after that comes 2020, an election year. Plenty of time to raise the money you need to finance your campaign.Americans are flocking to the candidacies of Donald Trump and Carly Fiorina, the two business titans in the 2016 race. You are younger than either of them and have better hair.So I ask you: Why not Shkreli?You could run on a platform of fixing health care.Advertisement