By CLIFFORD KRAUSSFEB. 2, 2015
HOUSTON —  Exxon Mobil on Monday reported a sharp drop in fourth-quarter revenue and profit because of declining oil prices. But the company did better than many of its competitors, thanks to improved profit margins at its chemical business.The deep earnings decline for Exxon, the largest American oil and gas producer, was expected; net income fell to $6.57 billion from $8.35 billion in the same quarter last year. Executives blamed lower commodity prices, but there were other troubling signs, especially the company’s decline in oil and gas production of 3.8 percent during the quarter.Both profit and revenue of $87.3 billion were down 21 percent from the year earlier.The results were bolstered by profits from asset sales, a successful arbitration settlement from a past nationalization by Venezuela and other one-time special items. The company said it was cutting its quarterly share buybacks to $1 billion, from $3 billion, and while it did not give explicit new guidance on its investment plans for the year, it was clear that it was trying to cut costs.“We’re probably in the early innings of this effort,” Jeffrey J. Woodbury, Exxon’s vice president for investor relations, said in a conference call. “More is to come in that area,” he added, referring not only to declining rig counts but also to rig rental rates and other service costs.The company’s shares ended the day’s trading 2.5 percent higher at $89.58, outpacing the gain in the overall market.AdvertisementBrent crude, the international benchmark, fell more than a third to an average of under $80 a barrel in the final three months of 2014. Oil prices plummeted further in January, raising the likelihood that earnings for Exxon and other oil companies would deteriorate more in the current first quarter.AdvertisementOil prices have surged more than 10 percent in recent days, but most experts doubt they will recover in a sustainable way until the second half of the year, at the earliest.“Unless oil prices recover meaningfully this year, energy stocks, including Exxon, are expensive despite the correction in the last six months,” said Fadel Gheit, a senior oil company analyst at Oppenheimer & Company.Exxon tried to put a positive face on the results. It reported positive results from its drilling in Argentina, as well as an expansion of its development plans in West Africa and off the North Atlantic coast of Canada. But Exxon has also suffered from the continuing crisis in Ukraine and western sanctions on Russia, forcing the company to suspend work with the Russian company Rosneft on exploration in the Arctic.“Exxon Mobil’s results illustrate the value of our proven business model that integrates upstream, downstream and chemical businesses,” Rex W. Tillerson, Exxon’s chief executive, said in a statement. “Our balanced portfolio uniquely positions Exxon Mobil to deliver superior results throughout the commodity price cycle.”Fourth-quarter earnings from upstream production were $5.5 billion, down $1.3 billion from the previous year. Its earnings from United States production operations far exceeded those abroad, with American production earnings up $317 million for the quarter compared with those overseas, which were down $1.6 billion from the previous year.On the positive side, the company reported that its chemical business earnings were $1.2 billion, $317 million higher than the year before, in large part because of lower natural gas prices that serve as a feedstock.The company noted that most of its reduction in oil production came from the expiration of a concession in Abu Dhabi.A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Exxon Mobil Revenue and Profit Off 21% on Oil Decline.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.