By REUTERSFEB. 1, 2015
HONG KONG — The property developer Kaisa Group said on Monday that its chief executive had resigned — another blow to the embattled company that may become the first Chinese home developer to default on foreign bonds.The company said its chief, Jin Zhigang, had stepped down “to devote more time to his personal career development” and would continue as executive director. It added that there had been no disagreement with the board.Kaisa’s bond prices fell after the announcement, with investors disappointed that 2.37 billion renminbi, or about $380 million, of asset sales in Shanghai announced on Sunday was not the full-blown rescue deal they had been hoping for.It was not immediately clear who would be replacing Mr. Jin, who had been at the helm since 2012. Company executives were not available for comment about his successor.AdvertisementKaisa, which is based in the southern Chinese city of Shenzhen, is struggling to meet its debt obligations after the abrupt departure of several senior executives and a local government block on its property sales.AdvertisementKaisa said Sunday that Sunac China Holdings would buy two of its units in Shanghai and acquire majority stakes in two others.“The most immediate concern for offshore bondholders is whether Sunac’s involvement would be limited to the purchase of these properties,” said Dilip Parameswaran, chief executive of Asia Credit Advisors.“If that is the case, the purchase consideration is likely to be claimed first by onshore lenders, leaving little benefit for offshore lenders.”Creditors made at least 28 court filings requesting an asset freeze against Kaisa and its subsidiaries from Jan. 6 to Jan. 9 in Shenzhen, according to records in the city’s Intermediate People’s Court, involving 17 financial institutions.Kaisa’s bond prices plunged in December after Shenzhen sales were blocked, but they had started to recover on rising hopes of a so-called white knight rescue deal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.However, its bonds due in 2020, on which the company missed a coupon payment deadline last month, recovered somewhat in Monday trading — over 80 cents on the dollar, from a low of just over 30 cents on the dollar in mid-January.Investors are mindful that the projects sold over the weekend are in Shanghai, while Kaisa’s problematic projects, which may be prohibited from sale, are in Shenzhen.Some analysts said the deal Sunday could be the first of a series of transactions between Kaisa and Sunac.Advertisement“Yesterday’s transaction could provide Kaisa with the funds required to hold off default, giving Sunac further time to structure a more comprehensive deal,” Mark Reade of Mizuho Securities said on Monday.Political issues could also be slowing the resolution of Kaisa’s problems, with the reason for the prohibited sales in Shenzhen still unclear.Last week local government officials said the government “needs some time to resolve this incident,” as the case was linked to China’s crackdown on corruption, according to local Chinese news reports.At their lows, Kaisa’s bonds had lost as much as two-thirds of their value since the decline started in early December. Shares halved in a one-month plunge before trading was suspended in December.Kaisa is in a 30-day grace period after it missed the Jan. 8 due date for a $26 million coupon payment on its bonds. After it missed that payment, Standard & Poor’s inflicted a seven-notch downgrade on Kaisa that took it down to SD, or selective default.Trading in shares of Kaisa, which is listed in Hong Kong, has been suspended since Dec. 29.The chairman of the company, Kwok Ying Shing, resigned in December. Its vice chairman, Tam Lai Ling, and its chief financial officer, Cheung Hung Kwong, also stepped down in December.A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.