Staples’ deal to buy Office Depot for $6.3 billion had been long awaited by investors — but especially by one of the most prominent activist investors of the past four years.And that isn’t Carl C. Icahn or William A. Ackman or Daniel S. Loeb.It is Jeffrey Smith’s Starboard Value, a $3 billion hedge fund that has claimed some notable victories in its relatively short life. Last year alone, the firm managed to oust the entire board of Darden Restaurants, the parent of Olive Garden, a feat that relatively few of its peers can claim.Last week, Yahoo outlined a plan to dispose of its 15 percent stake in the Alibaba Group without paying a big tax bill, an announcement made after months of public pressure by the hedge fund.It is an enviable track record for a firm that came into being only in 2011, though Starboard traces its roots back to Ramius Capital, an investment firm founded by a former chief executive of Shearson American Express.After Ramius merged with the Cowen Group, an investment bank, Mr. Smith took several executives and spun off what became Starboard.Since then, the activist firm has grown its ambitions by taking on bigger targets. It waged a fight with AOL’s board in 2011, demanding that the Internet company shut down its Patch local-news division and sell off its patent trove to gain additional cash.Though Mr. Smith failed to gain board seats, AOL nonetheless shut down Patch and sold its patents to Microsft for more than $1 billion.Starboard’s most prominent victory came in the Darden fight, even if it was the second activist investor to surface in the restaurant operator’s stock. The firm followed the lead of Barington Capital Management, a smaller hedge fund, in pressing the company to break itself in two.Starboard famously unveiled a nearly 300-page presentation critiquing nearly every aspect of Darden’s management, down to the company’s insufficient salting of Olive Garden’s pasta.Though the restaurant operator unveiled some steps meant to increase returns to shareholders, including by selling off the Red Lobster chain, Starboard and Barington criticized many of the moves as misguided, and Mr. Smith pushed to unseat the entire board. Shareholders signed onto the campaign, and in OctoberLast fall, Starboard began publicly calling on Yahoo to divest its shares in Alibaba in a “tax-efficient” way, while warning the company not to embark on an acquisition spree with any proceeds from the move.And late last year, the hedge fund emerged as a big investor in both Staples and Office Depot — the latter of which had been the previous target of a Starboard campaign — calling on the two to merge. The alternative was to face a potential board challenge.Not all of Starboard’s campaigns have succeeded. The hedge fund fought to block the $4.7 billion sale of Smithfield Foods to a Chinese meat processor in 2013, but dropped its opposition after failing to cobble together a competing offer.And Yahoo, Staples and Office Depot have contended that they began preparing for their respective announcements before Mr. Smith’s firm began its campaigns. Moreover, Yahoo repeatedly rebuffed a Starboard suggestion that it merge its core Internet business with AOL, in which the hedge fund maintained a stake.By MICHAEL J. DE LA MERCED and DAVID GELLESThe deal to unite Staples and Office Depot, the two biggest providers of office supplies, is likely to face antitrust scrutiny — regulators shot down a similar deal in 1997, but the competitive landscape has since changed.