Zoetis, an animal health care company, has added a top lieutenant of the activist investor William A. Ackman to its board of directors, as part of a deal that avoids a possible fight.Zoetis said on Wednesday that it had appointed to its board William F. Doyle, a member of the investment team of Mr. Ackman’s hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management. In addition, Zoetis said it would later appoint another director agreed on by both Zoetis and Pershing Square.The agreement forestalls any fight between Mr. Ackman and Zoetis, a veterinary medicine maker that was spun off from Pfizer in 2013 and has a roughly $21.8 billion market capitalization. Shares of Zoetis declined modestly in early trading on Wednesday. Pershing Square, which owns an 8.3 percent stake in Zoetis, said in November that it would hold talks with the Zoetis management and also consult with another activist fund, Sachem Head Capital Management, which owns a 0.9 percent stake.Zoetis initially raised its defenses, adopting a shareholder rights plan intended to block any takeover attempt. It also struck a $255 million deal to buy the animal health assets of Abbott Laboratories.Mr. Ackman is known in the corporate world as one of the most powerful practitioners of activist investing, often taking stakes in companies and lobbying for change. Last year, he stunned Wall Street by teaming up with Valeant Pharmaceuticals International in an effort to acquire the Botox maker Allergan. Though that deal never materialized, Mr. Ackman, whose firm had a big stake in Allergan, walked away with a profit when Allergan was sold to Actavis instead.Mr. Ackman is set to take a far quieter approach with Zoetis. Mr. Doyle’s appointment, which expands the board to 10 directors, took effect on Tuesday. Mr. Doyle will serve on the board’s corporate governance committee, Zoetis said.As part of the deal, Zoetis said, Pershing Square and Sachem Head have agreed to standstill provisions. These usually prevent an investor from enlarging its stake.Mr. Doyle, who joined Pershing Square in 2013, was a classmate of Mr. Ackman’s at Harvard Business School. He has a background in health care, having served as an executive at Johnson & Johnson and then co-founding a firm that invested in health care technology companies.“We welcome Bill to the Zoetis Board,” Juan Ramón Alaix, the Zoetis chief executive, said in a statement. “I am confident he will provide valuable insight and perspectives as we continue to enhance our position as the world leader in animal health.”