By RAVI SOMAIYAFEB. 3, 2015
The images spread rapidly online Tuesday, some more graphic than others: A caged Jordanian pilot, captured by the militants of the Islamic State late last year, was shown apparently being burned alive.The video was readily available, particularly on social media. It raised a sensitive issue for news outlets once again: Should they show the images, just a click away for most readers anyway, or refrain?The slickly produced video, showing what appeared to be the burning of First Lt. Moaz al-Kasasbeh, who was captured on Dec. 24 after his jet went down over northern Syria, was perhaps the most shocking in a series of filmed killings by the extremist group; previous videos had all shown beheadings.The Daily News in New York published an image of the flames appearing to engulf Lieutenant Kasasbeh. And BuzzFeed posted a series of images, following the flames as they approached him.AdvertisementBut most other outlets chose to use images from earlier in the 22-minute video. The New York Times initially showed Lieutenant Kasasbeh standing outside the cage in an orange jumpsuit, with militants behind him. Online, The Washington Post published a photo of him in his uniform. The paper's editor, Martin Baron, said by email that he would probably settle on an image similar to the one used by The Times: “Outside the cage and before any flame. That’s in line with what we’ve done previously with the beheadings.”AdvertisementA Reuters story on the death showed the pilot’s family holding up image of him at a rally calling for his release. The Associated Press used a similar photograph with its story.A spokesman for The Daily News said that although it would warn readers of the graphic content, the images should not be sanitized.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a statement, BuzzFeed said that its general belief is that it is not “a protective barrier or an artificial wall between the news and our readers. We avoid being prurient, but this horrific incident can’t be sanitized.” It said its policy is to avoid the most graphic images, and to give readers a warning.The National Security Council said American intelligence officials were working to confirm the authenticity of the video.Curious readers can find gruesome or offensive images or videos within seconds on their phones. So censoring them on news sites has less impact. But ISIS, in particular, thrives on propaganda, seeking to attract new devotees with the promise of brutal and immediate religious war. It craves prominent coverage.Unlike some brutal news photographs, such as those from the Vietnam War, gruesome stills from the ISIS videos do not offer much news value, said Bruce Shapiro, executive director of Columbia University’s Dart Center for Journalism and Trauma. “We already know that ISIS is capable of astonishing brutality,” he said. The standard test for editors, Mr. Shapiro added, is whether they would show a similar image of a murder in New York or London.A published image of the moments before Lieutenant Kasasbeh’s death, he said, would almost certainly upset those who knew and loved him, and could “play into ISIS’ desire to spread terror.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.