By ANDREW POLLACKFEB. 3, 2015
Gilead Sciences sold $10.3 billion of its new hepatitis C drug Sovaldi in 2014, a figure that brought it close to being the best-selling drug in the world in only its first year on the market.The sales figure, announced on Tuesday in Gilead’s earnings report for the fourth quarter, falls short of the $12.5 billion in sales recorded in 2014 by AbbVie’s autoimmune disease drug Humira, which is believed to be the world’s top-selling pharmaceutical.But sales of Sovaldi were lower than they might have been because of Gilead’s introduction of an even newer hepatitis C drug, Harvoni, which recorded $2.1 billion in sales since its approval in October. Together Sovaldi and Harvoni achieved $12.4 billion in sales, just short of Humira’s total.Almost all of those sales were in the United States. The sudden huge increase in spending on Sovaldi has strained the budgets of health plans, state Medicaid programs and prison systems, putting the drug at the center of a heated debate over drug prices. It did not help that Gilead priced Sovaldi at $1,000 a pill.AdvertisementMany health plans are now trying to control costs by pitting Gilead against AbbVie, which introduced a hepatitis C treatment called Viekira Pak in December. Many of the plans are offering to pay for only one company’s drugs as a way to get them to offer bigger discounts.AdvertisementOn Tuesday, the pharmacy benefit manager Catamaran became the latest to cast its vote, saying that Gilead’s Sovaldi and Harvoni would be the exclusive choices for hepatitis C treatments on two of its formularies, the list of drugs it will pay for.The depth of the discounting has been confidential and a matter of great Wall Street speculation. But in the conference call on Tuesday, Gilead executives revealed some numbers.They said that they expected the gross-to-net adjustment, a measure of discounting from list price, would average 46 percent for their hepatitis C drugs in the United States in 2015, more than double the 22 percent in 2014. For certain Medicaid programs and the Department of Veterans Affairs, they said, rebates exceeded 50 percent.Gilead’s shares fell about 5 percent in after-hours trading, perhaps because the extent of the discounting was greater than some investors had expected.All the new drugs can cure more than 80 percent of patients and have few side effects. The effectiveness has led to strong demand for the drugs among the three million or more Americans with hepatitis C, a viral infection that gradually destroys the liver. Previous treatments had onerous side effects and cured a smaller percentage of patients.Harvoni is a combination of Sovaldi and a second drug in a single pill taken once a day. It has a list price of $94,500 for the typical 12-week course of therapy. Sovaldi, also a once-a-day pill, has a list price of $84,000 for a 12-week treatment course, but it must be taken with at least one other drug. Viekira Pak from AbbVie is four pills a day and has a list price of about $83,000 for 12 weeks.AbbVie struck first in the battle for payers, winning exclusive status from Express Scripts, the nation’s largest pharmacy benefit manager. Gilead struck back, winning exclusive status from the No. 2 pharmacy benefit manager, CVS Health. Gilead’s drugs have also been favored by some other health plans, including Aetna, Humana and Anthem.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’ve never seen anything like this,” Mark A. Thierer, chairman and chief executive of Catamaran, said at the J. P. Morgan Healthcare Conference last month. He said Gilead and AbbVie kept revising the proposals they submitted to Catamaran. “This has been very beneficial to us, just sitting still and watching this happen,” he said.AdvertisementThe discounts and rebates should reduce costs per patient paid by insurers. But it is not clear if they will significantly reduce overall costs for treating hepatitis C. That is because in some cases, in exchange for the discounts, payers are agreeing to treat more patients, even some with little liver damage. Until now, many plans have been restricting treatment to patients with more advanced liver disease.“We’ve negotiated with the aim of increasing access,” Paul Carter, Gilead’s executive vice president for commercial operations, said in the conference call.Gilead said that 140,000 patients in the United States had started treatment with Sovaldi or Harvoni since Sovaldi’s approval in December 2013. Both Gilead and AbbVie executives expect the number of treated patients to grow. Mr. Carter said the health system could handle as many as 250,000 patients in 2015.Its success with hepatitis C more than doubled Gilead’s overall revenues to $24.9 billion in 2014, compared to $11.2 billion a year earlier. Net income after certain adjustments was $13.3 billion, or $8.09 per diluted share, compared to $3.5 billion, or $2.04 per diluted share for 2013.In the fourth quarter alone, revenue was $7.3 billion, compared to $3.1 billion for the fourth quarter of 2013. Net income, after adjustments, was $3.9 billion, or $2.43 per diluted share, compared to $930 million, or 55 cents per diluted share, a year earlier.Gilead now is faced with figuring out what to do with all the cash it is generating. Some investors speculate the company will make a big acquisition.On Tuesday, the company announced that it would start paying a quarterly dividend of 43 cents a share in the second quarter. Most biotech firms, viewing themselves as growth companies, do not pay dividends, though big pharmaceutical companies do.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Sales of New Hepatitis C Drug Soar to $10.3 Billion, Straining Budgets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.