By BROOKS BARNESFEB. 3, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  Disney reported a 19 percent increase in quarterly profit on Tuesday, with growth from its consumer products, theme parks and movie businesses offsetting another period of modest decline at ESPN.For the quarter that ended on Dec. 27, the first of Disney’s 2015 fiscal year, the entertainment giant reported net income of $2.18 billion, or $1.27 a share, up from $1.84 billion, or $1.03 a share, a year earlier. Revenue rose 9 percent, to $13.39 billion.Analysts had been expecting $1.07 cents a share for income and revenue of $12.87 billion. Disney shares rose as much as 5 percent in after-hours trading, to roughly $98.50.Disney is known for exceeding analyst expectations, but not by such a wide margin. Notably, the company faced arduous year-on-year comparisons; the first quarter of 2014 was a flush period fueled by the release of the blockbuster “Frozen” in theaters, stout sales of the Disney Infinity video game and record theme park attendance.AdvertisementThis time around, profit climbed substantially in every division except for the one that has traditionally served as Disney’s financial engine: ESPN. Operating income at the company’s cable networks division, which is dominated by ESPN but also includes properties like the Disney Channel, declined 2 percent, to $1.26 billion.AdvertisementThe decline, while modest, is likely to feed investor concern about higher sports programming costs. It was the third quarter in a row that more expensive contracts — this time with the National Football League — dented ESPN’s financial results. ESPN also saw higher administrative costs in the quarter and lower ad revenue.While acknowledging a “short-term” impact from rising sports costs, James A. Rasulo, Disney’s chief financial officer, told analysts on a conference call that the company was “confident in our ability to continue to grow ESPN in the long term.” Mr. Rasulo added that ESPN would see higher costs again in the second quarter but that the impact toward the end of the year would be “much lighter.”On the bright side, revenue climbed 11 percent at Disney’s cable division, powered by higher Disney Channel domestic affiliate payments and international advertising sales. ABC Family also saw improved results.The star of the quarter was Disney Consumer Products, which generated operating income of $626 million, a 46 percent increase from a year earlier. Merchandise related to “Frozen,” “Guardians of the Galaxy” and stalwarts like Spider-Man and Minnie Mouse contributed to the gain. Disney noted that its chain of retail stores contributed meaningful growth in Europe, Japan and North America.Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, told analysts that the consumer products unit has seen unusual “post-holiday momentum.” He noted that several new films, including a live-action “Cinderella” in March and “The Avengers: Age of Ultron” in May, could bring substantial merchandise sales.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Operating profit at Walt Disney Parks and Resorts surged 20 percent, to $805 million, because of higher ticket, merchandise and food spending at Disney World in Florida and Disneyland in California, both of which had record attendance. Occupancy at Disney’s domestic hotels reached a stellar 89 percent.Results were weaker overseas as a result of higher costs at Hong Kong Disneyland and construction spending at Shanghai Disneyland, which Disney said on Tuesday would open in spring of 2016. (Principal construction remains on track to be finished by the end of this year, the company said.) Mr. Iger told analysts to expect the company to soon unveil “ambitious” plans for “Star Wars”-themed expansions at multiple parks.Home entertainment spending on films like “Maleficent” and “Guardians of the Galaxy” contributed to a 33 percent increase in operating profit at Walt Disney Studios, to $544 million.The company’s broadcast television division reported a 35 percent increase in operating income, to $240 million, due in large part to the sale into syndication of Disney-owned programs like “Criminal Minds,” “Scandal” and “Once Upon a Time.” Disney’s broadcast network, ABC, notched advertising declines, however.AdvertisementAnd Disney Interactive, a unit that includes video games and Disney.com, had a 36 percent rise in operating income, to $75 million, driven by mobile gaming.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Disney Profit Jumps 19%, Even as ESPN Falters.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.