By PATRICIA COHENFEB. 3, 2015
When a Montana judge ordered Hyundai to pay $73 million in punitive damages last year to the families of two teenagers killed in a car crash, she found that the South Korean automaker had “recklessly” ignored scores of warnings over more than a decade about the steering defect blamed for the accident.But even if Hyundai is eventually forced to pay the full amount of the damages, the punishment could be substantially reduced through a tax loophole that permits the company to save millions of dollars by deducting any court-ordered punitive damages as an ordinary business expense. The result, critics say, is that taxpayers are in effect subsidizing corporate misconduct.“This tax loophole allows corporations to wreak havoc and then write it off as a cost of doing business,” said Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, who introduced a bill last month to outlaw the deductibility of punitive damages like the ones imposed on Hyundai.“That undermines the whole point of punitive damages.”Carmakers are far from the only companies that can exploit loopholes that allow them to lower their tax bill by deducting fines, forfeitures and other payments related to wrongdoing. Although the tax law forbids deductions for criminal fines and penalties owed to the government, other kinds of payments — to compensate victims or correct damages — are eligible for a tax deduction.AdvertisementThe rating agency Standard & Poor’s, which was accused of helping to cause the financial crisis with its inflated assessments of mortgage investments, is eligible to deduct half of the $1.37 billion settlement with state and federal prosecutors it agreed to this week, according to the U.S. Public Interest Research Group, a consumer-oriented nonprofit. The result would be a roughly $245 million reduction in its tax bill, the research group calculated.AdvertisementWhich payments are deductible and which are not is often a mystery to the public. The overwhelming majority of cases, whether with a government agency or private individuals, are settled, enabling companies to hide just how much of the agreement’s sticker price is eligible for a write-off.At least 80 percent of the more than $42 billion that BP has paid out because of the 2010 Deepwater Horizon rig explosion that killed 11 people and spewed oil into the Gulf of Mexico qualifies for a tax deduction, according to U.S. PIRG. That has saved an estimated $10 billion to $14 billion for the company. The exact amount is uncertain because of the lack of transparency, the group complained.Brandon Garrett, a law professor at the University of Virginia and author of “Too Big to Jail,” said that BP was “asking taxpayers, in effect, to pay for the victim compensation fund it agreed to set up.”Despite having to paying millions or even billions of dollars in fines, many companies look at the payments as just the cost of doing business.“Any future penalties should not permit massive hidden tax write-offs,” he said.(The $13.7 billion in additional fines related to violations of the Clean Water Act that a judge is reviewing would not be tax-deductible.)Many of the banks accused of shady mortgage deals and foreclosures that contributed to the financial crisis were able to deduct part of their multibillion-dollar settlements. The same day in 2013 that JPMorgan Chase announced a $13 billion deal with the Justice Department, for example, the bank’s chief financial officer emphasized that $7 billion of the total would be deductible. And $11.63 billion of Bank of America’s record $16.65 billion settlement in August is eligible for a tax break, experts said.Senator Leahy is only the most recent in a long line of Republican and Democratic leaders and lawmakers — including Presidents George W. Bush, Bill Clinton and Barack Obama — who have tried, without success, to limit these sorts of tax breaks.Senator Charles Grassley, Republican of Iowa, who has regularly railed against tax write-offs for corporate wrongdoing, said he and Senator Jack Reed, Democrat from Rhode Island, plan to reintroduce legislation to prohibit violators from deducting government-ordered settlements.AdvertisementComplaints by Senator Grassley and other Republicans, including John McCain of Arizona, spurred Boeing in 2006 to forgo deducting $615 million it paid as part of a deal to avoid criminal charges arising from a contracting scandal.Phineas Baxandall, a senior analyst at U.S. PIRG, said closing the loophole was the perfect tax issue for the new Republican-controlled Congress to take on. “Both sides can see this as a way to advance their agendas,” said Mr. Baxandall, who co-wrote a 2013 report on allowing deductions for fines titled “Subsidizing Bad Behavior.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even the most popular tax reforms, however, have faltered in the midst of partisan feuding over the tax code as well as protests by business lobbyists.Mr. Baxandall and other critics have pushed the government to bar tax deductions when they draw up settlements. The $1.2 billion agreement with Toyota that ended a criminal investigation into its concealing of defects specifically noted that the payment — ordinarily deductible — “shall be treated as a penalty paid to the United States government for all purposes, including all tax purposes.”For civil cases, like the Olson families’ lawsuit against Hyundai, Gregg Polsky, a law professor at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, urges plaintiff lawyers to remind juries and judges that punitive damages are tax-deductible so they have the option of raising the award to offset the tax windfall.Mr. Polsky argues that the practice would also have an impact on settlements. “It seems like a pretty common-sense idea,” he said. “When it’s deductible, you’re basically subsidizing the punishment.”That approach may not, however, appeal to victims, whose punitive damage awards are taxed as regular income, as opposed to some other types of awards.Companies defend the practice, pointing out that they are frequently the target of frivolous lawsuits and sometimes suffer from what they consider excessive jury awards. Settlements and damages are an inevitable cost of doing business, they say, and are, therefore, justifiable deductions.Many supersize awards are often reduced in subsequent legal rounds. In October, a federal judge in Louisiana reduced the $9 billion in punitive damages that Takeda Pharmaceutical Company and Eli Lilly and Company were ordered to pay for failing to warn users that their diabetes drug Actos raised the risk of bladder cancer.AdvertisementThe new punitive damages, $36.8 million, are still “large enough to accomplish the jury’s clear aim: to send a message to the defendants that their wrongdoing must stop,” the judge said. The companies, which still face thousands of other lawsuits in state courts, can deduct that award.In the Hyundai case, a jury blamed a defect in a steering mechanism and “actual malice” for the 2011 crash that killed three people, including Tanner Olson, 14, and Trevor Olson, 19. The jury awarded $240 million in punitive damages.Four months later, Lake County District Judge Deborah Kim Christopher reduced the punitive damages to $73 million, while noting that Hyundai’s “reprehensibility” still justified a sizable award.The company, which has attributed the accident to fireworks exploding in the car before the crash, has said it will appeal.In August, federal regulators fined Hyundai $17.4 million for failing to report a different defect, one involving the brake fluid in its Genesis cars. That fine is not deductible.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: When Company Is Fined, Taxpayers Often Share Bill.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.