By STEPHANIE STROMFEB. 3, 2015
Chipotle Mexican Grill, the made-to-order burrito chain that is the darling of the millennial generation, continues its sizzling financial performance.In the quarter that ended Dec. 30, sales at Chipotle stores open at least one year expanded by 16.1 percent, raising overall revenue to $1.07 billion compared with $844.1 million in the same period a year earlier.Earnings jumped 52.3 percent to $121.2 million, or $3.84 a share.“Consumer trends are changing, which we believe is a great result of people becoming more discerning about where their food comes from, how it was raised, and how their meal was prepared,” Steve Ells, co-chief executive of Chipotle, said in a statement. “The continued loyalty we see from our customers, as well as third-party research, and the growing number of concepts imitating Chipotle, all point to the relevance of our vision and the impact we are having on food culture.”Still, the results appeared to fall short of investors’ expectations, and the company’s shares were down about 5 percent in after-hours trading.AdvertisementThe chain’s profile has risen of late, because of the poor performance of McDonald’s, which recently let its chief executive go after a period of weak financial performance that some attribute to more competition from restaurants like Chipotle. McDonald’s owned a minority stake in Chipotle from 1998 to 2006, when it also divested itself of noncore holdings in Boston Market and Donatos Pizza.AdvertisementChipotle, together with chains like Boston Market and La Madeleine, have driven the growth of what the restaurant industry calls “fast casual,” a format selling foods prepared from high-quality ingredients in an assembly-line fashion to a customer’s specifications.Such restaurants appeal in particular to consumers between the ages of 18 and 34, who prize customization, minimalism and intense flavors in what they eat.Last year, Chipotle raised prices on its beef burritos 4 to 6 percent, passing the higher cost of the meat on to its consumers — who didn’t balk. That helped increase average check size and profit margins.The company also added almost 200 new stores last year, a pace it plans to continue this year, which has helped spur overall revenue growth.It has started two Chipotle-like businesses, ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen and Pizzeria Locale, which so far has two restaurants. Investment analysts are watching these new concepts closely, to see if Chipotle can strike gold more than once.“They deliver on what their brand stands for, simple, good food at a good price,” said Mark Kalinowski, an investment analyst at Janney Montgomery Scott. “That’s not saying that they do it for everyone, but they are true to what they promise.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Kalinowski, who estimated that the company would post same-store sales growth of 17 percent in the fourth quarter of last year, said no company that he knows of has managed to propel sales as vigorously as Chipotle. “Yes, they had a price increase but the bulk of the growth is coming from new customers,” he said. “It’s simply just more people going there to eat.”But over the last year, there have been scattered signs that the company’s strict adherence to certain standards for animal welfare and preference for organic, locally grown ingredients may serve as constraints on growth.AdvertisementSupplies of meat from animals raised in compliance with humane treatment standards are tight. In 2013, the chain had to post signs in some stores to let customers know that it could not guarantee the beef it was serving had been raised without antibiotics because supplies ran short after cattle men culled animals because of drought.And last month, similar signs went up in about one-third of its more than 1,700 stores, telling customers carnitas were not available after a company audit found that one of Chiptole’s pork suppliers was not meeting its standards for humane living conditions.“Since we made this decision, the majority of sentiment from our customers has been very supportive,” Mr. Ells said in a conference call with analysts. “In email and comments, along with social media, most customers are applauding us for standing firm.”Mr. Ells said the disruption had strengthened the company’s commitment to sourcing ingredients from sustainable sources.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Shares Fall at Chipotle, Although Sales Rise.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.