By RAVI SOMAIYAFEB. 3, 2015
The New York Times Company said on Tuesday that its annual operating profit declined in 2014 because of investments in digital journalism and severance costs from a round of job reductions. Revenue was flat as growth in digital advertising and circulation offset declines in its print business.Last year, the company posted an operating profit of $92 million, down from $156 million in 2013. During the fourth quarter of 2014, operating profit was $62 million, compared with $69 million during the final three months of 2013.Mark Thompson, the company’s chief executive, highlighted digital advertising numbers, specifically noting growth in mobile and video ad sales, as well as native advertising, which are ads that resemble news articles. Digital advertising revenue increased 19 percent in the last three months of 2014, compared with the same quarter a year earlier. For all of 2014, digital advertising revenue rose to $182 million, almost 12 percent higher than the previous year.Those gains counterbalanced continued declines in print advertising. The Times Company’s total advertising revenue declined less than 1 percent for the year compared with 2013, a figure that Mr. Thompson noted was the most encouraging year-over-year advertising trend for the company since 2005.AdvertisementIn a call with investors, Mr. Thompson said that the company had high hopes for growth in international subscribers. About a third of Times readers online come from outside the United States, he said, and the company plans versions of The Times in other languages.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, the company had a challenging 2014. Several new digital subscription products like the apps NYT Now and NYT Opinion did not generate significant new revenue. The company also eliminated more than 100 newsroom jobs through buyouts and layoffs. On Tuesday, Mr. Thompson said in a statement that the company would “continue to invest in digital growth but will also bear down on costs to defend our profitability.”AdvertisementThe Times ended the year with 910,000 paid digital subscribers, a 20 percent increase from the previous year. Mr. Thompson said the company was on track to exceed one million digital subscribers this year.He said that in 2015, The Times “will remain focused on using our unique journalism and brand to broaden and deepen our audience and to monetize that audience more effectively through innovation in both digital and print.” He cited the coming reintroduction of The New York Times Magazine and a recent partnership with the Women in the World conferences, run by the former New Yorker editor Tina Brown, as initiatives being introduced in coming weeks.While conferences are a relatively small part of the company’s business, its revenue from other sources, which include conferences, increased 10 percent during the last quarter of 2014, and increased 3.6 percent for the year.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: New York Times Co. Profit Falls Despite Strides in Digital Ads.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.