AdvertisementSupported byPolitical EconomyBy Hugo Dixon | ReutersThere are two schools of thought about how the eurozone should play its negotiations with Alexis Tsipras, the new Greek prime minister. One is that other leaders and the European Central Bank should back him into a corner. The other is that they should give Mr. Tsipras, the leader of the radical-left Syriza party, time.The latter is the better option. Not only would it minimize the chance that Greece would ultimately quit the euro, but it also would cut the risk of a financial and political backlash in the rest of the eurozone in the event that Athens did leave.This is not the same as saying the eurozone should cave in on the substance of what is at stake. Although it should give Greece debt relief — especially as Syriza has now abandoned its demand to write off half its borrowings — it should only do this if Mr. Tsipras commits himself to further reforms.The eurozone could easily bring things to a head at the end of the month, when Greece’s current bailout program ends. The E.C.B. could then refuse to act as a lender of last resort to the country’s banks, provoking an acceleration of deposit flight and leaving the government with no option but to impose capital controls.Advocates of such a hard line say it will bring Mr. Tsipras to heel. But it might not work out like that at all. Mr. Tsipras would be able to argue that the rest of the eurozone had ganged up on a newly elected government. Rather than backing down, he might be able to stoke nationalistic fever.The Greeks do not wish to leave the euro, fearing the move could lead to years of political strife and economic chaos. But if their pride was affronted, Mr. Tsipras might be emboldened to call a referendum on taking Greece out of the euro. And he might win it.Such an outcome wouldn’t be good for the rest of Europe. Greece, which is already snuggling up to the Kremlin, might fall into Russia’s sphere of influence — something narrowly avoided at the end of World War II. Manifestly unfair treatment of the Greeks would also play into the hands of populists and euroskeptics in other countries, who would run the narrative that the European Union was brutal and undemocratic. Other euro countries might be destabilized as investors speculated that they, too, might be driven out of the euro.But if the eurozone gives Mr. Tsipras time, the outcome could be very different. He will still be under pressure because the government will go bust by the end of June unless it can find some way to repay bonds owned by the E.C.B.Syriza says it wants to borrow only an additional 1.9 billion euros, or about $2.15 billion, because the state is already over-indebted. It plans to repay the E.C.B. with new perpetual bonds, which pay interest but never repay the principal. But this demand is unrealistic because the central bank probably could not agree to it without flouting European Union law. So ultimately Athens will need more than €1.9 billion, and there are only two realistic sources of new cash. One is the €7 billion left in the current bailout program. But Mr. Tsipras will get this only if he cuts a deal with the eurozone.The other option is to issue bonds. But Greece’s finances are so shaky that it will not be able to do that unless the eurozone grants it a backup credit line — and it will not do that unless Mr. Tsipras comes to terms.So the eurozone holds the trump cards. But that does not mean it should play them now. In particular, the E.C.B., whose governing council meets on Wednesday, should not cut off liquidity to Greek banks at the end of February.Mr. Tsipras should, of course, be strongly encouraged to ask for an extension of the current bailout program while he is negotiating a new deal. That would do a lot to calm depositors. But even if he refuses to, the E.C.B. should still authorize what is known as emergency liquidity assistance.Such assistance would not be able to keep Greek banks afloat for long if there was a proper bank run because lenders have to supply collateral. But it may be enough to bridge the next few months.The other eurozone leaders should give Athens that time. By doing so, they will increase the chance that Mr. Tsipras will negotiate sensibly. He will be reluctant to take things to the brink and beyond if he is not confident of having the Greek people behind him.Despite his new, emollient line, the Syriza leader may still overplay his hand. Decisions to increase the minimum wage by 28 percent, cancel privatization plans and hire back redundant civil servants are already quite provocative.Capital controls might still need to be imposed if there is a bank run and the collateral needed for liquidity assistance dries up. But, in such circumstances, the Greek people might force Mr. Tsipras to change his mind.What is more, if Greece did leave the euro, there would be less political backlash elsewhere. It would be easier to paint Mr. Tsipras as a delinquent leader who had thrown away his country’s chance for recovery. There would also be less risk of financial contagion, as it would be possible to argue that Greece really was an exception.  Hugo Dixon is editor at large of Reuters News. Advertisement