By KEITH BRADSHERFEB. 3, 2015
HONG KONG — Two more central banks have joined the growing international trend toward monetary stimulus as an antidote for weak global demand, as India on Tuesday reduced the reserves that commercial banks must hold while Australia cut its benchmark interest rate to a low.The Indian action was aimed at freeing banks to lend more instead of parking money in government bonds, while the Reserve Bank of Australia sought to directly reduce the cost of borrowing. Both actions were intended to encourage companies and individuals to borrow, spend and invest.The two central banks joined the European Central Bank, the Central Bank of Russia, the Bank of Canada, the Monetary Authority of Singapore and others in recent weeks that have taken measures to bolster their economies.Raghuram G. Rajan, the governor of the Reserve Bank of India, said at a news conference that he had not yet seen enough economic data to justify a further interest rate cut beyond the reduction of 0.25 percentage points he made on Jan. 15.Advertisement“Until we get more data, I think we’re on pause,” he said. Particularly in India, lower oil prices have reduced the threat of inflation.AdvertisementMr. Rajan said he especially wanted to see coming data on economic output and inflation, and the annual budget proposal from the government, which the finance minister, Arun Jaitley, is scheduled to announce in Parliament on Feb. 28.“We have a budget coming up that is a significant change in the fiscal space,” Mr. Rajan said. “Let the monetary policy follow its due course.”But Mr. Rajan said the next move on interest rates, when it does come, would probably be to lower them.He reduced the statutory liquidity ratio — the share of demand deposits and liabilities like certificates of deposit that banks must hold as reserves — to 21.5 percent from 22 percent. The reduction will take effect this weekend.The Reserve Bank of Australia reduced its benchmark interest rate by a quarter of a percentage point, to 2.25 percent, as Australia’s mining sector has slowed because of tumbling mineral prices.In an interview at the Indian central bank’s headquarters on Jan. 14, Mr. Rajan cited the broad benefits that lower oil prices would have for inflation, trade and other aspects of the Indian economy. But he was cautious about relying on oil prices to stay low indefinitely.“Over the year, we are likely to see some of these disinflationary pressures from oil show up,” he said at the time.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One problem for the Reserve Bank of India is that commercial banks have been slow to pass on lower interest rates to borrowers. As Mr. Rajan noted on Tuesday, most commercial banks were quick to cut the interest rates that they pay to depositors after the central bank lowered rates on Jan. 15. But with only a couple of exceptions, banks have left their own lending rates unchanged in the past three weeks.AdvertisementCommercial banks have used the difference between what they collect from borrowers and what they pay to depositors to fatten their profit margins and set aside money to offset large rosters of nonperforming loans. Mr. Jaitley ordered the country’s mostly state-controlled banks a month ago to stop making loans and giving out jobs based on political influence, a deeply ingrained practice that has contributed to an accumulation of bad debts and may prove hard to eradicate.In the interview on Jan. 14, Mr. Rajan predicted that competition would eventually prompt banks to lend more cheaply, a point he reiterated on Tuesday.The Reserve Bank of India conducts a comprehensive monetary policy review every two months, and the decision on Tuesday coincided with such a review. The next review is scheduled for April 7.Mr. Rajan surprised investors by cutting rates on Jan. 15 between formal reviews; he said Tuesday that he hoped to stick to interest rate changes at monetary policy reviews in the future, but on Jan. 15 he felt a need to act immediately.Mr. Rajan pointed out that he had announced as part of the previous monetary policy review, on Dec. 2, that he was ready to ease policy as soon as the evidence justified it. All of the important economic indicators on issues like inflation were available on Jan. 15.Most economists had not expected the Reserve Bank of Australia to cut interest rates until its next monetary policy meeting in March, but it acted at its regularly scheduled meeting on Tuesday. Glenn Stevens, the central bank’s governor, expressed concern in a statement announcing the rate cut that unemployment had been rising gradually over the past year, even as inflation has slowed.“In Australia, the available information suggests that growth is continuing at a below-trend pace, with domestic demand growth over all quite weak,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Central Banks in India and Australia Take Steps to Lift Growth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.