SAN FRANCISCO — As an in-house financial specialist at two Silicon Valley technology companies, Christian B. Keller was privy to confidential information he agreed not to share.Instead, according to government regulators, he used his knowledge to help run an insider-trading scheme that generated nearly $750,000 in illicit profits.The Securities and Exchange Commission accused Mr. Keller and three others, including an analyst at Barclay’s, of illegally trading ahead of four news announcements made by Mr. Keller’s employers, Applied Materials and then Rovi.The other defendants are John Gray, 38, the Barclay’s analyst, and two friends of Mr. Gray: Kyle Martin, 35, and Aaron Shepard, 37. All have agreed to settle the securities violation charges.The scheme, as outlined in a court filing by the S.E.C., bore several of the hallmarks of modern insider-trading plans: using stock options; trading in someone else’s name; using prepaid cellphones as disposable “burners,” and making carefully structured cash withdrawals to try and avoid detection.“Despite their careful planning, we were able to detect the suspicious trading and effectively use our cooperation program to expose their nefarious scheme,” Jina L. Choi, the director of the commission’s San Francisco office, said in a statement.The insider-trading ring began in August of 2009, when Mr. Keller — then a four-year employee of Applied Materials, a designer of semiconductor manufacturing equipment — learned that the company planned to buy a smaller peer, Semitool. Two months later, he approached Mr. Gray with a proposal: trade securities in Semitool ahead of the announcement.To cover their tracks, the S.E.C. alleged, the two men decided to bring in Mr. Martin, then employed at a Beverly Hills car dealership who didn’t know Mr. Keller personally as anything other than Mr. Gray’s “buddy from Applied Materials.” Each man would share in a third of any profits that the the scheme generated.Mr. Martin soon joined the group and opened a new brokerage account. Around Nov. 12, Mr. Gray helped him buy Semitool call options, which give their buyer the right to buy stock in the company at a specific price and time. (Mr. Martin bought options in his own account as well.)When Applied Materials announced the transaction five days later, the ring reaped $22,598.23 from trades in their pooled account, and Mr. Martin earned himself nearly $5,000 from his own activity.The scheme revived in January of 2011, when Mr. Keller learned that his employer planned to buy Varian, another seminconductor-manufacturing specialist. This time, he turned to the burner phones — the kind made popular on TV shows like “The Wire” — that he and Mr. Gray could later dump.Again, the group bought call options in the takeover target ahead of the deal announcement, this time collecting $137,623.82 and Mr. Martin netting an additional $92,235.59 for his own account.In early 2012, Mr. Keller jumped to Rovi, which makes software for digital entertainment devices like cable TV boxes. According to the S.E.C., within months he tippped off Mr. Gray about two announcements his employer planned to make that would likely lead to its stock price dropping.The group — this time bringing in Mr. Shepard, then a self-employed installer of car stereos — bought put options, which allow the holder to sell stock at a preset price. By July of 2012, the scheme collectively had garnered $486,797.23 in profits.Within a few weeks, Mr. Gray then opened a bank account to distribute gains to the ring.But the scheme was eventually uncovered by the S.E.C., with the commission noting that Mr. Martin and Mr. Shepard cooperated.All four have agreed to settle the charges without admitting wrongdoing, paying nearly $1.7 million in penalties and disgorged profits. The majority of that will come from Mr. Gray, who agreed to pay $758,200.46.Mr. Gray also agreed to a lifetime ban from the securities industry, while Mr. Keller assented to a 10-year ban from serving as an officer or a director of a publicly traded company.