The boutique investment bank Moelis & Company on Thursday reported a higher fourth-quarter profit, though its results fell short of Wall Street’s expectations.Moelis, which had an initial public offering last April, said its fourth-quarter net income rose 13 percent, to $38.3 million, compared with results in the period a year earlier. On an adjusted basis, the profit amounted to 51 cents a share, missing the expectation of 55 cents by analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters.Despite advising on a number of transactions that closed in the quarter, Moelis said its revenue declined 7 percent, to $143.9 million. The firm attributed the decline primarily to a weaker market for restructurings, which are an important source of business. Analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters had higher expectations, forecasting revenue of $163.4 million.Still, Moelis noted an unfavorable comparison with revenue in the fourth quarter of 2013, which was its strongest period on record. The firm expanded in its first year as a public company, adding a net of 64 bankers, including eight managing directors, during 2014. It had a total of 381 bankers, including 94 managing directors, at the end of the year.Kenneth D. Moelis, the chairman and chief executive, told analysts on a conference call on Thursday that he was optimistic about the outlook for mergers and acquisitions. He said he thought that a cycle of deal-making was just starting to gain steam.Unlike past merger cycles, he said, the current one was motivated by companies’ desire to reduce costs.“I believe we are in a disinflationary, or possibly even a deflationary, environment, where it is very challenging for companies to achieve significant top-line growth,” Mr. Moelis said.“Companies are focusing on taking out costs, and they’re also upgrading the quality of their cash flows and their balance sheets,” he added. “As a result, M.&A. activity is heavily driven by creating efficiencies. Companies are looking at every line item on their financial statement to identify where they can save costs.”He said this logic could explain the recent popularity of tax inversions, in which a company makes an acquisition with the intention of moving its headquarters overseas to reduce its tax bill. Inversions, he said, were not a “unique event” but rather part of a broader effort to cut costs.“It’s the beginning of what I think of as a long cycle,” Mr. Moelis said, “that will lead to a lot of M.&A.”