Open warfare appears to be breaking out on the board of the GFI Group, according to a filing on Thursday in a Delaware court. The fight relates to the failed attempt of GFI, a New York brokerage firm and clearinghouse, to sell itself to the CME Group and the role of GFI’s executive chairman, Michael Gooch, in that increasingly dysfunctional process. Shareholders rejected that deal last week in light of a pending higher offer from Howard W. Lutnick’s BGC Partners after a prolonged bidding war.In the wake of the rejection, there was some hope that GFI would negotiate a deal with BGC. But instead, the company issued two news releases indicating that its board might have not been so eager to turn to BGC. The first news release, dated Jan. 30, said that “the company’s board of directors will explore strategic alternatives with any and all interested parties to maximize shareholder value for all shareholders. These alternatives could include, among others, joint ventures, mergers and/or acquisitions.” On Monday, GFI issued a second news release that said, “The GFI board urges shareholders to take no action on the BGC tender offer at this time.” The release went on to reiterate that “the GFI board is actively engaged in a process to explore strategic alternatives with any and all interested parties to maximize shareholder value for all shareholders.”I wrote earlier this week that the reaction to the first news release could only be incredulity. How could the GFI board not speak to BGC after all that had happened? Instead, it issued banal news releases. Other people had the same thought, prompting the litigation filing. The filing discloses that on Monday, Mark Lebovitch, an partner at the law firm Bernstein Litowitz Berger & Grossman, one of the firms representing shareholders in litigation against GFI in Delaware, wrote to Glenn Kurtz, a partner at White & Case, the law firm representing a two-member special committee of independent directors at GFI  that was responsible for considering a takeover of company.  These directors had previously recommended that GFI select BGC’s higher bid. Their recommendation, however, was overridden by the two management directors, which included Mr. Gooch, and a third director who had previously resigned from the special committee. In the email, Mr. Lebovitch asked about the independent directors’ role in the news releases. It was a natural question given their previous support of the BGC deal, and it was puzzling why they had suddenly turned equivocal. In response, Mr. Kurtz wrote: “The special committee members have authorized me to respond to your inquiry as follows: (i) They did not vote to issue the Feb. 2 press release, (ii) They never saw a draft of the Feb. 2 press release, (iii) They did not know that GFI intended to issue the Feb. 2 press release, (iv) They did not urge stockholders not to tender into the BGC offer or to not take any action on the BGC tender offer after the CME merger agreement was terminated, and (v) They did not vote last Friday [Jan. 30, 2015] to explore new alternatives as described in the Jan. 30 and Feb. 2 press releases.”This is a carefully worded email, which by any measure shows a rift on GFI’s board. The email appears to be saying that with respect to the Jan. 30 news release, the directors knew about it, and may have even discussed it at a board meeting, but did not authorize it. As for the Feb. 2 release, the two directors were not even given the courtesy of participating in the deliberations over whether to issue it.  What is most likely happening is that the other three other directors have frozen out the two independent ones and alone authorized these news releases. However, if the allegations in the filing are true, the failure in the news releases to mention the independent directors’ opposition or the fact that two-fifths of the board was unaware of this recommendation does not exactly meet best practices in disclosure. It may also have given the false impression that the entire board was unwilling to endorse the BGC bid after the failure of the CME deal. The plaintiffs put it in starker terms in their filing, contending that the news releases “clearly had one purpose: to discourage GFI’s public stockholders from tendering to BGC so that BGC would not meet the 45 percent threshold for completion of BGC’s outstanding tender offer.” In this light, the plaintiffs continued, the failure to consult the special committee and issuing these news releases in the name of the full board “misled” stockholders “into thinking that the independent board members still opposed” the BGC transaction. This is troubling on so many levels it makes my head hurt. In addition to raising a disclosure issue, at the very least, the email from the special committee’s counsel appears to  highlight the schism on the board as Mr. Gooch tries to salvage control of the company. This is all a bit unprecedented, and it remains to be seen how this will be sorted out in Delaware court. Earlier this week, I speculated that the Delaware court may not look too kindly on Mr. Gooch’s actions. If this filing is true, it may be yet another black mark for him as the court sorts through the facts and figures out how to fix this thorny situation if it finds wrongdoing. GFI declined on Thursday to comment on the litigation filing. Meanwhile, BGC on Wednesday extended the deadline on its offer and disclosed that, including its 13.4 percent stake, 43 percent of shares had already been tendered, just shy of the 45 percent it needs to seal a deal.In a filing on Wednesday, BGC also disclosed that it had met with GFI, meaning there is at least some discussion.  But the other news releases appear to suggest that the three directors who now control GFI are not exactly enthusiastic about the BGC bid. The three could be justifying their position by asserting they need time to make sure BGC offer is the best one available. Again, this has to be met with incredulity. The BGC offer has been pending for some time, nothing else has emerged, and that’s not surprising given Mr. Gooch’s attempts to control the process.  No doubt, GFI will respond to this filing, but in the meantime it is losing the public relations battle, if not the actual one. GFI shareholders are left to sit and wonder what is going on, questioning whether they are being kept in the dark, and possibly misled, by their own management. 