
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
OCT. 8, 2015
For Glamsquad’s chief executive, Alexandra Wilkis Wilson, her formative start-up experience at Gilt was all about learning how to balance risks with careful planning.This interview with Alexandra Wilkis Wilson, chief executive of Glamsquad, an app-based beauty provider, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences for you?A. I was really passionate about the piano. It was a big part of my life. I went to the Manhattan School of Music every weekend, and I played competitively until about the 10th grade.I learned a lot of lessons about handling mistakes. People make mistakes every day in life, and I learned at a very young age, under pressure and in a completely silent room filled with people, how to rebound if you hit a wrong note, how to keep your composure, how to not get distracted and how to finish the piece and take a bow.I’m now eight years into the start-up world, where mistakes are bound to happen. And you have to be able to think quickly and rebound from them and recalibrate very quickly. It goes back to what I learned as a musician. You really can’t lose momentum, and you can’t let your head start playing with you.AdvertisementWhat did you study at college?As a child, I grew up bilingual, with Spanish and English at home, and then I started French at a pretty young age in school. And then in high school, through friendships with a family from Brazil, I started learning Portuguese. I created a major at Harvard that was called Romance studies, which involves three or more languages. I didn’t want to give up a language, so I did Spanish, French and Portuguese 19th-century literature.The Times’s Corner Office columnist, Adam Bryant, speaks with women executives about leadership, management and success in a business. Updated MAY 14, 2015And did you have an idea what you wanted to do for a career?I thought I would probably go into finance because that was what I had seen other people do successfully. This was back in 1999, and it was actually pretty easy to get a job in investment banking. I did that for three years.AdvertisementWhat did you like and dislike about it?It’s easy to complain about. There certainly were long hours, but I appreciated that people are given a lot of responsibility at a very young age. I traveled all over Europe, all over Latin America. You learn to be totally professional. Every detail mattered, every number had to be triple-checked.But it was also a culture where people managed by fear. I didn’t enjoy seeing people get yelled at. I didn’t like seeing politics and egos at play. I thought that if I were ever in a position to create culture, I would do things differently.You were a co-founder of Gilt before joining Glamsquad. Did you always want to be an entrepreneur?I was that young girl who ran a lemonade stand, and I used to make all kinds of bracelets and jewelry. And if someone said they liked the bracelet I was wearing, I would offer to sell it to them. After business school and before we started Gilt, I worked at Louis Vuitton for a time on the sales floor, and that’s when I realized I could sell anything.I also usually don’t take no for an answer. I have that glass-half-full approach to life. If someone says maybe, that’s a maybe, and if someone says no to me, that’s also a maybe.This is your first C.E.O. role. Give me an example of your leadership style.When I first started with Glamsquad, I took our most senior leaders to an off-site. One of the exercises we did was to ask everyone to tell the group, “Here’s what you need to know about me in order to influence me.” You could almost list your pet peeves — these are the things that drive me crazy, these are the things I respect. It was powerful.
                Four chief executives describe the importance of taking stands, and of making sure they’re heard.            And what are your pet peeves?I don’t like procrastinating. I like people to be organized and punctual. I hate it when people haven’t done analysis before they show up to a meeting. I get very frustrated when people don’t follow through. If I assume that someone’s going to be doing something and then I find out that they haven’t done it, that’s very frustrating to me. In a start-up, there are so many things happening that you can’t drop the ball.AdvertisementI also can’t stand people who overpromise and underdeliver. I have so much respect for people who underpromise and overdeliver.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.How do you hire?Especially at the executive team level, I look for people who can adapt to changing environments and who aren’t going to be so concerned about what the job description says. In a start-up, things are going to evolve. I look for people who are willing to put in the hours, who can work well with others and have this can-do attitude.I want to feel their passion in an interview. Why do they think our company has the potential to be a $1 billion company? You need people who are hungry, who have something to prove — to themselves, to their families, it doesn’t really matter, but they need to have that drive.What career and life advice do you give to new college grads?I keep it pretty simple. No. 1, figure out what you’re good at. The earlier you can figure out what you’re good at, the better off you’re going to be, and you can position yourself earlier in your career for success. No. 2, what are you passionate about? What type of job is going to make you feel like, when that alarm clock rings, you are genuinely excited to wake up and jump out of bed and get to the office? I didn’t even know that was possible until I became an entrepreneur.The last piece of advice is about networking. It’s so important, as soon as you can, to build relationships, to keep in touch with people, to do kind acts for other people without expecting something in return, because there are going to be moments in your career or your personal life where you might need to ask for help and favors. Just be a nice person.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice.This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Right Way to Hit a Wrong Note.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »