Who wants to be a billionaire? Everyone it seems, and not always to good effect.Although many book titles promise wealth, power and glory, two books — “Bold: How to Go Big, Create Wealth, and Impact the World” and “The Self-Made Billionaire Effect: How Extreme Producers Create Massive Value” — reflect society’s growing unhealthy obsession with the “B” word in very different ways. “Bold” (2015: Simon & Schuster) is a breathless manifesto on the potential of emerging technologies to not only transform the world but turn anyone with big enough dreams into a billionaire. Written by Peter Diamandis, a successful serial tech entrepreneur, and Steven Kotler, a journalist and  human performance guru, the infectious optimism of “Bold” is  inspirational, even if it is sometimes comically hyperbolic. In their view, only the asteroid that brought the Cretaceous Period to an abrupt end compares to the transformative power of the “exponential technologies” that threaten to upend “the large and innovation-resistant companies that have done it the same way for decades.”  The book is meant to “offer a highly practical playbook” to create a generation of “exponential entrepreneurs” who can exploit these technologies “to go from ‘I’ve got a neat idea’ to ‘I run a billion-dollar company’ far faster than ever before.” Where do I sign up?The book contains compelling descriptions of the potential of certain new technologies — for example, 3D printing. This is followed by an enumeration of the psychological elements required, in the authors’ view, for an entrepreneur to become fully “exponential.” These are reinforced by interviews with four billionaires meant to epitomize the “Bold” mind-set.Fully half of the book, however, argues that the digital crowd fueled these unprecedented opportunities.  Detailed descriptions are provided on crowdsourcing, crowdfunding, digital community building and even step-by-step instructions on how to organize online incentive competitions. Some of the case studies of businesses leveraging the power of the crowd are fascinating. Oddly though, none of the four billionaires selected to typify the book’s core lessons – Elon Musk, Larry Page, Jeff Bezos and Richard Branson – used crowd technologies to build or fund their core businesses (though Mr. Branson did license a prize technology for one of his more recent ventures). Also, the main claims of the book itself are based much more on  old-fashioned research than on crowdsourced material.Overstating the importance of digital developments, both individually and collectively, undercuts the credibility of what is otherwise an often insightful and persuasive narrative. Claiming that, for the first time, humanity has “the potential to significantly and permanently raise global living standards,” suggests a lack of familiarity  with the Industrial Revolution and the later introduction of refrigeration.   It may feel as if the world is changing faster than ever today. But in 1914, we went to war on horses and by 1945, we dropped the atomic bomb.  That reflects a lot more disruptive changes than we have experienced since the first dot-com domain name was registered in 1985. A more basic question, though, is whether the optimism of the book  is fundamentally misplaced.  The premise that the disruption of the “large and lumbering” necessarily leads to exponentially greater entrepreneurial profit opportunities is flawed. It is true that that the killer app of the Internet seems to be the destruction of longstanding barriers to entry enjoyed by incumbent business leaders.  But the same structural changes that threaten incumbents typically make it impossible for insurgents to enjoy the same level of profitability and increase the chances that new disrupters are not far behind.  This is great news for consumers, but even with exponential growth in demand for some of these exciting new products and services, it has never been so hard to make a buck.For all of their talk of untold billions waiting for those willing to answer the call, the authors seem conflicted about the profit motive. Without an M.T.P., which stands for massively transformational purpose,  efforts to leverage a digital community will fail in their view. Monetization is sometimes presented almost as an afterthought.By contrast, the authors of “The Self-Made Billionaire Effect: How Extreme Producers Create Massive Value” (2014: Portfolio/Penguin) fully embrace the virtues of making a billion in itself. As partners at the consulting arm of PricewaterhouseCoopers (a firm that advises the large and lumbering corporations rather than serial entrepreneurs), John Sviokla and Mitch Cohen are concerned with a very different question than the one  posed by “Bold.” They want to figure out how to get entrepreneurs who are capable of earning a cool billion on their own to instead stay at big companies.  Seriously. Mr. Sviokla and Mr. Cohen look for commonalities among self-made billionaires, many of whom either quit or were fired from the established corporations that are clients  of the management consulting industry.  They then explore what large corporations can do to create a more hospitable environment for these “massive value creators.”PwC set up a research team that collected data on 120 randomly selected self-made billionaires, and conducted interviews with many  of them. Notably, fewer than 20 percent  came from the technology sector. The money management and consumer products sectors were not far behind.  In all, among the 19 industries were represented in the sample set. More than 80 percent  of these entrepreneurs found profitable ways to participate  in – typically by establishing a new niche — rather than fundamentally disrupt mature established industries.Equally interesting is that absence of any significant commonalities in early life experiences; factors like education and wealth seemed to play no systematic role. More than half started their first job while still teenagers. More than a quarter, however, didn’t start their first business and almost three-quarters didn’t  begin their blockbuster idea until at
least their 30s.  Failing to find any easily quantifiable link, the PwC researchers claimed to have been able to identify certain key “habits of mind” that connected their  billionaires. The habits are associated with a “producer” mentality, as contrasted to a “performer” ethos. Producers play across the value chain – from conception and creation, to marketing and distribution. Performers excel at one task. In a head-to-head competition on any individual job, a performer is likely to surpass a producer.  But the producer’s judgment, reflected in an ability to integrate diverse activities and balance conflicting demands, is the defining the characteristic that self-made billionaires share.The guts of the book uses interviews with selected billionaires to highlight five areas where the producers’ judgment – the effective management of risk, creativity and time are three of these – is essential to achieving outsized outcomes. The overarching argument of “The Self-Made Billionaire” is that big corporations overvalue performers and should work to shift the balance toward producers.The basic data and many of the stories told make the book worth reading. But the broader conclusions seem forced and, although not without intuitive appeal, unsupported by the actual research described.  First, all billionaires are not created equal.  An entrepreneur who smells a market bubble and sells quickly at the top even as his business evaporates is a fundamentally different animal than one that builds a sustainable multibillion-dollar franchise.  It is hard to argue that Mark Cuban isn’t a genius for selling Broadcast.com to Yahoo for almost $6 billion shortly before the Internet bust and hedging his stock to boot. But his success is a different kind of genius from Joe Mansueto, who went  from reading mutual fund prospectuses in the 1980s to building the mutual fund authority Morningstar, which he still runs today. There is something wrong-headed in trying to develop an all-encompassing theory that captures both habits of mind simply because they each produced 10-figure returns.Second, the methodology of interviewing billionaires for the secrets to their success seems inherently unreliable. Everyone who ever went on a date has a well-prepared life story that, although usually true in its broad outlines, inevitably avoids certain unpleasant details. The billionaires here seem equally invested in a particular narrative of their success. So maybe it was the case, as he claims, that Jeffrey Lurie’s experience working at his family’s General Cinema theater chain  and starting  a film production company  gave him a blinding insight into the future of football as entertainment before anyone else.  Or maybe he just really wanted to own the Philadelphia Eagles in 1994 and got lucky when the value of football franchises exploded.  It really is not possible to say from the record here, and certainly not possible to draw conclusions on the habits of mind of self-made billionaires. Even if the insights about how self-made billionaires come to be are correct, do we really want them working at big established corporations? “The Self-Made Billionaire” opens with the question of what would have happened if Steven P. Jobs had stayed at Atari or Michael R. Bloomberg had stayed at Salomon. It is very hard to believe that society would have been better off if these entrepreneurs had stayed put at their large corporations, no matter what kind of environment had been created for them. PwC still may be correct that big businesses would do well to value producers more than they do. It is just not clear that the behavior of self-made billionaires has much to do with the topic.  Probably the best way to study PwC’s hypothesis would be examine successful corporations rather than successful entrepreneurs.  What that examination would probably reveal is that most value is created from the relentless focus on small, continuous improvements, not singular blockbuster technologies. By distracting from this fundamental truth, the fetishism of billionaires and billion-dollar ideas reflected in both of these books is far more likely to destroy than create value.