One year after emerging from the longest bankruptcy in United States history, W.R. Grace, the chemicals company marred by its legacy of products tainted by asbestos, is splitting in two. One company will include Grace’s catalysts technologies and materials technologies businesses. It is expected to have about $1.8 billion in annual sales. The other will include its construction products and Darex packaging businesses. That operation is expected to have about $1.5 billion in annual sales. Grace has not determined names for the two new companies yet.The deal will be structured as a spinoff that is tax free to shareholders. Grace has a market value of about $7.5 billion, and its stock was up 11 percent on Thursday after the split was announced. “The time is right to create two strong, independent companies that will benefit from improved strategic focus, simplified operating structures and more efficient capital allocation,” Fred E. Festa, Grace’s chief executive, said in a statement. For much of the 20th century, Grace included asbestos in some of its products. And although Grace stopped selling products that contained asbestos in 1973, about the time the scientific consensus emerged that the chemical was harmful, the company remained burdened by its legacy. By 2001, Grace faced more than 129,000 personal injury claims related to its distribution of asbestos, and the company was forced to file for bankruptcy. After years of negotiations with creditors, Grace reached a settlement in 2008 and created independent trusts to pay for asbestos-related claims. The plan was approved in 2011, but the company only emerged from bankruptcy last February. During the more than decade that passed, the company continued operations with businesses in construction, materials and chemicals. “We have a world-class team of talented people who have worked hard to transform Grace into a high-performing company,” Mr. Festa said. “Those efforts allow us to take this next important step in our evolution.”A version of this article appears in print on 02/06/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: W.R. Grace to Split.