The boom in mergers and acquisitions last year helped Lazard, the boutique investment bank, report a fourth-quarter profit that exceeded analysts’ expectations.Lazard said on Thursday that its adjusted profit rose 57 percent, to $172.4 million, from the period a year earlier. The results amounted to $1.29 a share, surpassing the $1.06 a share that analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters had expected.The firm reported operating revenue of $645.8 million in the fourth quarter, 4 percent higher than in the period a year earlier. Analysts had expected revenue of $616 million.Lazard, which in contrast to its giant rivals on Wall Street offers only financial advice and asset management services, worked on a number of prominent transactions that were completed in the fourth quarter. It advised the Walgreen drugstore chain on its acquisition of a remaining 55 percent stake in Alliance Boots, and it advised 21st Century Fox on its $9.3 billion sale of European holdings to BSkyB.One assignment, advising Burger King on its $11.9 billion merger with Tim Hortons of Canada, generated unwanted headlines. The deal, which some critics in Washington portrayed as motivated by taxes, became a headache for Antonio Weiss, the Lazard banker who was under consideration for a senior job at the Treasury Department. (Mr. Weiss eventually withdrew from contention for that job, instead accepting a role as counselor to the Treasury secretary.)Over all, Lazard’s revenue from mergers and acquisitions and related work rose 17 percent, to $297.2 million, from the fourth quarter of 2013.The firm’s revenue from its asset management business, which primarily invests in equities, declined 3 percent in the fourth quarter from the period a year earlier, harmed by stock market volatility. But Kenneth M. Jacobs, the chief executive and chairman, said he thought volatility would not cause any lingering problems for Lazard.Mr. Jacobs said in an interview that he believed the “factors that underpin an M.&A. cycle are in place,” including the confidence of corporate managers, the availability of financing and the outlook for corporate valuations.“The recent volatility probably rocks confidence a little bit,” Mr. Jacobs said, “but as long as you remain constructive on the macro environment, you should be constructive on the M.&A. environment.”