The turmoil in the energy sector weighed on Apollo Global Management in the last three months of 2014, as the private equity giant reported sharply lower profit.Apollo said on Thursday that its economic net income after taxes — a profit measure that includes unrealized investment gains or losses — declined 79 percent in the fourth quarter, to $93.8 million, from the period a year earlier. On a per-share basis, the profit amounted to 23 cents a share, falling short of the 32 cents expected by analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters.Underpinning the lackluster results were declines in Apollo’s investments in energy, according to a person briefed on the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity. One major holding, EP Energy, the publicly traded oil and gas company in which Apollo owns a roughly 23 percent stake, experienced a 40 percent decline in its stock price during the fourth quarter.Although that loss and others were not realized, they still had a significant effect on Apollo’s investment profit, which takes unrealized moves into account. Factoring in cash profits from investments as well as unrealized losses, Apollo reported a so-called carried interest loss of $5 million for the fourth quarter, compared with a $526.8 million profit in the period a year earlier.Apollo’s private equity segment, usually a powerful profit generator, reported that economic net income fell 87 percent, to $40 million, compared with the fourth quarter of 2013. The segment’s carried interest income amounted to just $20.6 million, 95 percent lower than a year earlier.The firm said its private equity funds appreciated by less than 1 percent in the quarter.Apollo is hardly alone in experiencing pain because of investments in the oil industry. A range of energy companies backed by private equity firms have suffered as oil prices, after peaking last June, have collapsed. But Apollo and its rivals are also trying to capitalize on the sector’s troubles. Apollo is quickly gathering capital for a new fund to buy the debt of troubled energy companies, according to a confidential email obtained by DealBook.The firm’s credit business, too, suffered in the fourth quarter. Its economic net income fell 42 percent, to $93.3 million, from the period a year earlier, as it experienced investment losses.Despite the troubles, Apollo continued to generate cash for its shareholders and the investors in its funds. Its distributable earnings, a profit measure reflecting the cash that can be given to shareholders, amounted to $374.4 million, 26 percent lower than the period a year earlier. The firm declared a dividend of 86 cents per share.Apollo’s assets under management totaled $159.8 billion as of the end of the year, a slight decline from the level of $161.2 billion a year earlier.Apollo and its rivals prefer to use nonstandard metrics to report results. According to generally accepted accounting principles, Apollo reported $22.2 million of net income in the fourth quarter, 86 percent lower than the period a year earlier.“In 2014, Apollo continued to position itself for consistent long term growth, investment excellence and diversification,” Leon D. Black, the chief executive, said in a statement. Noting that his funds invested about $10 billion of capital during the year, he said he believed the investments “can generate meaningful future returns for our investors and shareholders.”A version of this article appears in print on 02/06/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Apollo Profit Falls.