
OCT. 12, 2015

As The New York Times celebrates one million digital-only subscribers, we’re taking note of other important milestones as well: We recently passed 20 million Twitter followers, 10 million Facebook fans, and 500,000 Instagram followers. These benchmarks give us a nice excuse to pause and recognize some of the ways you, our readers, play an important role in shaping our journalism across the social web.
You’ve engaged with our journalists on multiple platforms, asking thoughtful questions of our reporters, such as during Pope Francis’ visit to Latin America, when we invited readers to talk to the Rome bureau chief Jim Yardley. You talked with the reporter Jodi Kantor about the workplace culture at Amazon. Marijuana legalization was discussed with the editorial page editor Andy Rosenthal, prompting a question from Snoop Dogg. And we all got a bit hungry at lunchtime chatting about what we’d be cooking for dinner later that night. Each year, the Travel section publishes a list of Places to Go. And for the past two years, you, our readers, have shared tales of your travels with us.“52 Places to Go in 2015” (Dec. 2014)In July, Nicholas Winton, the Briton who rescued 669 children from the Holocaust, died at age 106. We turned to our readers to find the original Winton’s Children and their descendants and asked them to share their stories.“Winton’s Children Share Their Stories” (July 2013)Days before Ireland’s vote in a referendum to legalize same-sex marriage, we asked our Facebook fans in the country to share their thoughts. Through our readers’ comments, we met Brighid and Paddy Whyte, a Roman Catholic Irish couple married for 50 years who urged citizens to vote in favor of the measure.“For One Irish Couple, Backing Gay Marriage Is a Matter of Family Values” (May 2015)The New York Knicks had a dismal 2014-2015 season, so the beat reporter Scott Cacciola decided to take a sabbatical and check out good basketball around the country. You introduced him to scores of great teams, including the Central Illinois Xpress, the only team of girls in a fifth-grade boys’ league.“Team’s Mission: Beat the Boys (and Maybe Make Them Cry)” (Jan. 2015)During a snowstorm in January, we asked readers in the northeastern United States to share their Instagram photos of the snow. And for the first time, we picked a few standout submissions and printed them on the front page. “Instagram Photos From the Snowstorm” (Jan. 2015)More than 17,000 recipes are yours to be tasted on New York Times Cooking. We love hearing your variations on how you make these recipes your own. You also let us know when you dare not even try one of our suggestions. Take for instance our choice of grape salad as the signature Thanksgiving dish for Minnesota in ”The United States of Thanksgiving,” a state-by-state recipe guide to the annual tradition. And it didn’t stop there. You questioned our suggestion of adding peas to guacamole. So did President Obama. Recipe: Grape SaladRecipe: Green Pea Guacamole Over the past three years, our readers have helped us cover one of the most important topics in the United States.: The high cost of health care and the Affordable Care Act. In Elisabeth Rosenthal’s series, ”Paying Till It Hurts,” which examined the costs of health care, you shared your stories about managing costs and treatment. And since the Affordable Care Act was put into place, you’ve continually shared your experiences with the law.Paying Till It HurtsIs the Affordable Care Act Working? (Oct. 2014)Earlier in the summer, we invited Instagrammers to join us on a South Bronx graffiti walkabout to capture photos of notable street art and graffiti. Your task was to find the answers, photograph them and post pictures on Instagram using the hashtag #NYTPhotoHunt.Every time you share a Times story, you join a global conversation on the news and ideas that shape our world. Thanks to you, ”The Price of Nice Nails” became a worldwide Twitter and Facebook trending topic in May. Several other United States Twitter trending topics including ”SEAL Team 6,” ”Relapse or Homelessness” and ”We Don’t Cry for Lions” were sparked by your shares of Times articles. Advertisement