PARIS – BNP Paribas, the largest French bank, on Thursday reported strong fourth-quarter profit, putting a positive finish on a year in which it paid a record fine in the United States and pleaded guilty to having traded illegally with blacklisted countries.The bank, based in Paris, said net income in the October to December quarter soared more than tenfold, to 1.3 billion euros, or $1.5 billion, from €110 million in the period a year earlier, when its profit had been depressed by the provisioning of reserves against the eventual settlement with the United States authorities. Revenue rose 7.2 percent from a year earlier, to €10.2 billion.Although the figures were in line with market expectations, the stock fell 3.7 percent in early trading in Paris on Thursday.BNP Paribas would probably like to forget 2014. After initially failing to cooperate with regulators in Washington and New York, it pleaded guilty and paid an $8.9 billion penalty to settle charges that it had violated criminal sanctions against blacklisted countries, including Iran and Sudan, by disguising transactions and helping those nations clear billions of dollars through accounts in the United States. The fine, a record for such a case, also came with a temporary freeze on some business operations in New York.For all of last year, the bank reported net income of €157 million, far below the €4.8 billion it had reported for 2013. Excluding one-time charges, which factored in €6 billion related to the settlement, the bank said net income would have been €7 billion.Jean-Laurent Bonnafé, the bank’s chief executive, acknowledged the “significant impact of one-off items” on the annual results. Aside from the regulatory shipwreck, he said in a statement, BNP Paribas “delivered a good performance,” with revenue growing in all of its operating divisions.BNP Paribas, along with its French rivals Société Générale and Crédit Agricole, accounts for a significant share of the more than €6 trillion of assets in the country’s banking system. French lenders are under pressure to keep costs down to maintain profit growth in an economy that has been largely stagnant for most of the past few years.Last year was also notable for the European Central Bank’s asset quality reviews and stress tests, an in-depth examination of the finances of the eurozone’s biggest lenders. BNP Paribas comfortably passed muster in those tests. On Thursday it reported that a measure of its ability to withstand financial shocks, its common equity Tier 1 ratio, stood at 10.3 percent at the end of December, up from 10.1 percent in September.Looking forward, BNP Paribas warned that the weak eurozone economy would weigh on its results, and that record-low interest rates were hurting revenue in its retail business. It also said that the cost of complying with new taxes and regulations – including contributions to the bloc’s resolution fund – will sap about €500 million from net income in 2016, declining gradually afterward.BNP shares had been down about 12.5 percent over the past year.