By EMILY STEELFEB. 4, 2015
Twenty-First Century Fox slashed its guidance for long-term growth on Wednesday because of struggles in its broadcast group, unfavorable foreign currency exchange and shifts in its film group, sending shares in Rupert Murdoch’s media empire tumbling more than 5 percent in after-hours trading.The company now expects profits for the fiscal year 2016 to be in the “mid-$7 billion range,” down from its original target of about $9 billion, Chase Carey, the Fox chief operating officer, said in a conference call. (The $9 billion estimate was later adjusted to $8 billion because of the divestment of some assets.)A major factor in the revised forecast is the Fox broadcast network, which has faced ratings and advertising challenges more significant than the company had expected. While Fox has scored some recent success with its hip-hop drama “Empire” and improved ratings for its “American Idol” music competition, its overall ratings have spiraled downward. Adding to those issues, Mr. Carey said, is the broader migration of viewers and ad dollars to digital outlets.Mr. Carey said that the broadcast network was in a stabilization stage, with new leaders at the helm. He said that it would continue to invest in new programming in the next 12 months to try to build a network of hits.Advertisement“If we wanted just improved profits, we’d squeeze programming and squeeze marketing and we don’t think it’s the right move,” he said. “What we’re really talking about is stabilizing the broadcast business and providing a platform to grow. But I think that real growth comes in the next couple of years, not the next 12 months.”AdvertisementThe comments came as Fox reported that it had beat expectations for the three months ended Dec. 31, its second fiscal quarter, with total net income of $6.2 billion, or $2.88 a share. That was up from $1.2 billion, or $0.53 a share, in the same quarter a year ago. The results were propelled by more than $5 billion in gains from the sale of its Direct Broadcast Satellite Television businesses, Sky Italia and Sky Deutschland, which in November were sold to Sky Broadcasting Group.Excluding the gains from the satellite business and other items, Fox’s adjusted earnings were $1.1 billion, or $0.53 a share, up from $756 million, or $0.33 a share.Total revenue for the quarter, including the satellite businesses, declined 1.3 percent to $8.1 billion. Excluding the Direct Broadcast Satellite businesses, revenue increased 10 percent to $7.4 billion, driven by growth in its cable network businesses, which had strong affiliate and advertising growth, and its film business. The film unit benefited from a strong slate in the quarter that included “The Maze Runner” and “Gone Girl.”While profits in the television group increased, advertising revenue in the group dipped 3 percent in the quarter because of lower entertainment ratings at the Fox Broadcast network.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fox ended the quarter with $10.1 billion in cash, reflecting the proceeds from the sale of Sky Italia and Sky Deutschland. Executives said that the company was inclined to use the cash to invest in itself rather than pursue outside acquisitions.When asked whether Fox was interested in rekindling its bid for rival Time Warner, which had been rejected last summer, Mr. Carey laughed and said no. “I won’t give my moved-on spiel, but we have moved on,” he said.Also on Wednesday, the investment group led by the Saudi billionaire Prince Alwaleed bin Talal said that it had sold most of its stake in the News Corporation, Mr. Murdoch’s publishing and media group, which separated from Fox in 2013.Kingdom Holding, which was the second-largest holder of News Corporation voting stock after the Murdoch family, said it had reduced its holdings of Class B voting shares to 1 percent, from 6.6 percent, and generated $188 million on the sale. Mr. Alwaleed said that the sell-off was part of a broader portfolio review and that they “remain firm believers in News Corp.’s competent management.”The transaction did not affect Kingdom Holding’s 6.6 percent ownership of Fox, which is worth about $1.7 billion, Kingdom Holding said.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Fox Reduces Its Forecast for Growth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.