By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 4, 2015
American companies hired at a solid pace last month, a private survey found, the latest sign of steady improvement in the job market. And a separate report said that the American service industry grew at a faster pace in January.ADP, a payroll processor, said on Wednesday that companies added 213,000 jobs last month, a decent increase though also the smallest in four months. The figure suggests that Friday’s government report will also show a solid burst of hiring. Economists surveyed by FactSet expect the government’s report will show that employers added 230,000 jobs.The ADP numbers cover only private businesses and sometimes diverge from the government’s report, which includes government agencies.Businesses have added 200,000 jobs or more in nine of the last 10 months, according to the ADP report.AdvertisementManufacturers added 14,000 jobs, down from 23,000 in December. Construction companies hired 18,000 more workers, down from 26,000 the previous month. But services companies increased hiring: A category that includes retail, transportation and utilities companies added 54,000 jobs, up from 40,000 in December.AdvertisementMark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics, which compiles the report, said oil and gas drilling companies had started to cut back on their payrolls in response to a sharp drop in the price of oil. Yet companies that have benefited from lower oil prices have yet to step up hiring, he said.Employers added nearly three million new jobs in 2014. Still, last year’s job gains have yet to push up wages much. They rose just 2.1 percent in 2014, the Labor Department said last week. That’s up slightly from the previous year, but below the roughly 3.5 percent gain that is consistent with a healthy economy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A separate report released Wednesday, by the Institute for Supply Management, said that services companies grew at a slightly faster pace in the last month, led by hotels, restaurants and financial firms.The group said on Wednesday that its services index rose to 56.7 in January, up a small amount from a revised reading of 56.5 in December.Both months were below a revised November reading of 58.8, which was the best showing since last May. The November level was revised substantially lower from a previous estimate of 59.3, which had been near an eight-year high.Any reading over 50 indicates expansion.Paul Ashworth, chief United States economist at Capital Economics, said the services sector of the economy was being helped by the boost to households’ purchasing power from lower energy prices, which is giving consumers more to spend on other items.The Institute for Supply Management reported on Monday that its index for manufacturing fell to 53.5 in January, the third straight drop, pushing this gauge of factory activity to its slowest pace in a year.Eight services industries reported growth in January, while eight industries reported that activity contracted. The industries reporting the biggest contractions were mining and arts and entertainment.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Survey Shows 213,000 Jobs Added in January, Echoing Outlook for Growth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.