By DIONNE SEARCEYFEB. 4, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The housing market is finally on the mend, but any major transformation in the government’s role in the housing economy does not appear to be on the agenda of a top federal housing regulator.On Wednesday, in his first on-the-record meeting with reporters since becoming director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency more than a year ago, Mel Watt came across as a cautious tinkerer, one who is hesitant to make sweeping changes that might be perceived as exceeding his mandate as the overseer of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the government-owned institutions that back most home loans.Mr. Watt, a former congressman from North Carolina, succeeded Edward J. DeMarco, who was criticized for being reluctant to introduce programs to help struggling homeowners.Since assuming the job, Mr. Watt, a Democrat, has started a handful of plans intended to strengthen the housing market, including encouraging down payments as low as 3 percent of the purchase price for buyers who are short on cash.AdvertisementThat plan addressed concerns from housing advocates who have complained that credit standards that once were so loose they ensnared people who could not afford loans, swung too far in the other direction after the housing bubble burst.AdvertisementBut some housing specialists have criticized the plan as going so far that it could open the door to potential defaults, fearful it could prompt a repeat of some of the worst aspects of the housing crisis. Mr. Watt dismissed those complaints, saying the plan included credit counseling and other measures that would keep buyers on track with payments.Whatever the merits of the plan, it is doubtful it will have much impact on the overall housing market. Mr. Watt said on Wednesday that the plan probably would attract only a small number of people. He added that he could not say how many had applied.“We’re not trying to control how many people buy a house,” he said. “We’re just trying to make it possible.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Watt’s other ideas for helping homeowners appear similarly modest. He recently testified before members of Congress that he was weighing whether to introduce a plan for debt relief for borrowers whose homes are underwater, meaning the owner owes more on the mortgage than the home is worth.On Wednesday Mr. Watt said that plans for helping homeowners reduce the size of their loans, known as principal reduction, would be too costly if applied to everyone whose home was underwater. He said he was considering a more narrow effort but was still analyzing options.One bright note is that the number of people whose homes are underwater had been declining, he said. While many people are “severely late” in making their mortgage payments, they are still making them, he said.“If you did principal reduction, would these people come back and be borrowers again? That’s a difficult analysis to go through,” he said. “We’re walking kind of a tightrope here.”Performing a balancing act is central to Mr. Watt’s role. He is trying to encourage more home buying without risking a return to the excessively loose lending standards that helped cause the crisis.But Mr. Watt said he did not intend to play a role in deciding whether his agency should change the terms of oversight of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac now that the worst of the housing crisis is over. It is up to lawmakers to decide whether to scale back the role of his agency, which took control of Fannie and Freddie during the crisis to prevent them from going bankrupt.Advertisement“I don’t know that I perceive it’s my responsibility to start that conversation,” Mr. Watt said.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Overseer of Fannie and Freddie Takes Cautious Steps to Strengthen Housing Market.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.