By BILL VLASICFEB. 4, 2015
DETROIT —  Growing demand for Ford Motor’s new pickup truck will prompt a transition to higher wages for up to 500 of the company’s entry-level union workers.On Wednesday, Ford said that it would add 1,550 new jobs at four plants in the United States to increase production of the latest version of its top-selling F-series pickup.By adding the jobs, Ford said, it will exceed its nationwide cap on entry-level workers, who earn about $19 an hour. And as a result, 300 to 500 of the company’s entry-level employees will transition to the $28-an-hour wage earned by longtime factory workers.The transition is the first time that any entry-level workers at the three domestic carmakers have moved up to the higher wage scale since the companies agreed to a two-tier system in their 2007 contract with the United Automobile Workers union.Advertisement“For the first time, we will have some entry-level people transitioning to the traditional wages,” said Bill Dirksen, Ford’s vice president for labor affairs. “It is another example of promises made and promises kept.”AdvertisementFord has 50,000 workers in the United States represented by the U.A.W. About 14,000 of them are paid entry-level wages.Based on a formula in the union contract, Ford must move entry-level employees up to full-wage status once their numbers exceed about 28 percent of overall blue-collar employment, Mr. Dirksen said.Because of their government bailouts and bankruptcies, neither General Motors nor Fiat Chrysler’s American division have caps that restrict their entry-level numbers.Currently, more than 40 percent of Fiat Chrysler’s union workers in the United States are entry-level employees. At G.M., about 20 percent are entry level.The union’s new president, Dennis Williams, has said that his goals for bargaining this summer on a new labor contract include getting pay increases for both entry-level and full-wage workers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Union officials welcomed Ford’s announcement about transitioning some lower-paid workers to full-wage status.“We’re excited that Ford continues to make good on its commitment to our U.A.W. members by transitioning entry-level employees,” said James Settles Jr., a U.A.W. vice president.Mr. Dirksen, the Ford vice president, said that the affected entry-level workers would be chosen based on seniority. They will move up to the higher wage scale during the first quarter of this year.AdvertisementHe said the workers were scattered at manufacturing facilities across the country, but primarily work at Ford assembly plants in Chicago, Kansas City, Mo., and Louisville, Ky.The impetus to move entry-level workers up to full-wage status was the decision to add jobs to increase production of the F-150 pickup, Mr. Dirksen said.“We need to make more of these trucks to meet the demand of the marketplace,” he said.Ford sold 54,000 full-size pickups in January, a 12 percent increase from the same month in 2014.The company took a risk by substituting aluminum body panels in the new truck in place of traditional steel parts. The change made the truck lighter and improved its fuel efficiency, but also raised question about its durability.The 1,550 new jobs will be added at Ford’s Kansas City assembly plant, and at three component plants in the Detroit area. Mr. Dirksen declined to say how many more pickups would be built because of the additional workers.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Demand for a Ford Pickup Means Higher Pay for 500 Workers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.