By SAM ROBERTSFEB. 3, 2015
Sherry Arden, whose exuberance as a promoter and perspicacity as a publisher helped invigorate the book industry with a raft of celebrity tell-all memoirs like Christina Crawford’s “Mommie Dearest” and pop psychology primers like Gail Sheehy’s “Pathfinders,” died on Jan. 27 at her home in Santa Monica, Calif. She was 91.Her death was confirmed by her daughter Cathy Arden, who said her mother had dementia.While her name was usually relegated to a mention in a book’s acknowledgments, Ms. Arden was a force in the industry as publicity director, president and publisher of William Morrow & Company.She promoted numerous best sellers, including Ms. Sheehy’s 1981 sequel to “Passages;” Ms. Crawford’s 1978 exposé about her mother, the actress Joan Crawford; and the business classics “The One Minute Manager” and “The Peter Principle: Why Things Always Go Wrong” (positing that managers rise to the level of their incompetence). She also shepherded books by Peter Bogdanovich, Doris Day, John le Carré, Sophia Loren, Malcolm Muggeridge, Sidney Sheldon, Jacqueline Susann, Shelley Winters and Morris West.Ms. Arden succeeded despite two handicaps: She had not ventured full time into the male-dominated world of book publishing until she was 40; and, though she apparently never revealed it, she lacked a college degree.AdvertisementShe was born Shirley Waretnick in the Bronx on Oct. 18, 1923, the daughter of immigrants from Russia. Her mother, Rose, a seamstress, was confined to a sanitarium with tuberculosis for much of her daughter’s childhood and died when the girl was 12. She was raised by her father, Abraham, an upholsterer, in Delaware before moving to Merrick, on Long Island, and then Manhattan.AdvertisementDuring the Depression, prompted by a classmate’s taunt, she asked her father, who was supplementing his income by running a candy store downstairs from their apartment, whether they were poor.“Her father took her hand, led her down to his candy store, brought her over to the cash register and took out lots and lots of pennies and started throwing them up in the air and on the counter,” Cathy Arden said in an interview. “ ‘Does this look poor to you?’ he shouted gleefully.”Ms. Arden’s first marriage, to Hal Arden, ended in divorce. In 1979 she married the screenwriter George Bellak, a cousin, who died in 2002. Besides her daughter, she is survived by two grandchildren. Another daughter, Doren, died in 1981.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Arden skipped three grades between elementary school and high school, but after marrying at 17 and raising two daughters, she missed the opportunity to apply to college. She nonetheless claimed on job applications that she had graduated from Columbia or Barnard, where she had taken a few courses.“She felt no one would have even considered her or taken her seriously if she had told them the truth,” Cathy Arden said. “It was a secret she carried around all her life and was always afraid she’d be ‘found out,’ even when she became the president and publisher of William Morrow. She was a brilliant woman who rose to the top of the publishing industry, and yet still thought she may not be good enough because she was not a college graduate.”Ms. Arden worked at Coward-McCann before joining Morrow, where she remained until 1989, when she became a literary agent. Her colleagues’ recollections of her read like book-jacket blurbs.“She was an original, back when I knew her, in the late ’60s and early ’70s, when publishing was so sleepy, where women were secretaries and you had to wear skirts,” said Joni Evans, who was a “manuscript girl and proud of it” at the time and later became a publisher herself.Ms. Sheehy said, “Sherry was exuberance personified — an early pioneer among women book publishers.”She was also a mentor to men and women alike.“She championed my hits, ignored my flops — a rare and precious thing to find in top management,” said Ellis Amburn, whom she hired as a senior editor. “One of her greatest gifts was knowing how to interpret acquisition editors and their creative writers to the conservative bottom-line business types who control the money.”AdvertisementMs. Evans recalled: “I had a Sidney Sheldon book — his first, I think — and the editor and I went in to see Sherry and said it was spectacular. She read it overnight and predicted it would be a big best seller. I said we had so many, maybe we should wait a year. And she said, ‘Joni, we can always handle success.’ ”An obituary on Thursday about the publisher Sherry Arden misidentified the book by Gail Sheehy that Ms. Arden promoted. It was “Pathfinders,” not “Passages.”A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page B18 of the New York edition with the headline: Sherry Arden, a Champion of Best Sellers, Dies at 91.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.