DuPont has driven a wedge between shareholders and the billionaire activist Nelson Peltz.Adding two turnaround veterans to the $70 billion company’s board may make stockholders think twice about voting in a rival slate from Mr. Peltz’s Trian Fund Management. DuPont says Mr. Peltz rejected an offer to add one of his choices because he wanted the spot himself. He may just have been outplayed.The nominees put forward by DuPont are impressive. Edward Breen, the chairman of Tyco International, presided over two breakups at the once-struggling industrial conglomerate during his decade as chief executive. James Gallogly led rival chemical maker LyondellBasell out of bankruptcy.That kind of experience means Mr. Peltz, who says that DuPont’s performance has fallen short under Ellen Kullman and that the company should consider breaking itself up, may now face an uphill struggle to persuade other shareholders to support his alternative slate. Of Trian’s four board nominees, including Mr. Peltz himself, only one – Robert Zatta, a former Campbell Soup executive who is now acting chief executive of soon-to-be-acquired lithium producer Rockwood Holdings – has experience at the helm of a chemical company.It’s a crafty piece of jujitsu by Ms. Kullman after her initial response to Trian’s public critique of DuPont’s performance last autumn failed to assuage Mr. Peltz’s agitation. But Mr. Peltz left himself vulnerable to being boxed in by refusing to discuss a settlement with DuPont at a meeting in Chicago on Wednesday. In a letter to Trian, DuPont said it had also offered to put one of its nominees on the board if the activist agreed to drop its alternative slate. The company said Mr. Peltz refused to consider any deal that didn’t involve a seat for him.Even if the blown power play results in the rejection of Mr. Peltz’s slate, he may end up relatively satisfied. At the very least, two strong independent appointments from DuPont’s own nominating committee should leave him feeling reassured that the refreshed board has the experience necessary to give proper weight to his proposals.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.