Until a few weeks ago, Jenna Dabbs was a federal prosecutor in Manhattan, leading the charge in prosecuting some of the biggest and toughest drug kingpins in the world.Now, she’s working for the billionaire investor William A. Ackman at his $18 billion hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management.Ms. Dabbs, former chief of the narcotics unit for the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan, confirmed on Friday that she had joined Mr. Ackman’s hedge fund about a week ago. She left the United State attorney’s office after about eight years of working mainly on drug and securities cases. She was chief of the narcotics division for about a year and a half.Ms. Dabbs, 39, is senior counsel at Pershing Square and works on compliance and regulatory issues.“For me, it was a decision based on a prior relationship with Bill, whom I have known for many years,” she said. “I think it makes a lot of sense in this industry, a highly regulated industry, to have someone with a prosecutorial background.”The move reflects a growing trend of seasoned prosecutors’ bypassing the traditional career path of a job at a big law firm in favor of one at a hedge fund or private equity firm. (Mr. Ackman’s fund employs about seven lawyers.) The hiring of former prosecutors by top money managers also underlines the heightened regulatory environment after the financial crisis.Bringing in a former prosecutor also carries a good deal of gravitas with investors — especially the big public pension plans that sink a lot of money into hedge funds and private firms, said Jason Wachtel, a managing partner at JW Michaels & Company, a recruitment firm that specializes in hiring compliance officers and lawyers for hedge funds and private equity firms.“It sends a clear message to employees and regulators that the fund takes their compliance program seriously,” Mr. Wachtel said.In the last few months, Coatue Capital Management hired Zachary Feingold, a former federal prosecutor in Manhattan, to become its deputy chief general counsel and chief compliance officer. Also, Folger Hill Asset Management, a new hedge fund started by Sol Kumin, a former executive at SAC Capital Advisors, hired another former federal prosecutor, Lisa Baroni, as its deputy general counsel and chief compliance officer.Steven A. Cohen, the billionaire investor and owner of Point72 Asset Management, the successor firm to his SAC Capital, is looking to hire a former federal prosecutor as the new general counsel of his $10 billion family office. Mr. Cohen’s firm has retained the executive recruitment firm Spencer Stuart to oversee the search.Mr. Cohen, whose SAC Capital pleaded guilty to insider trading charges and paid $1.8 billion in penalties to federal prosecutors and securities regulators, wants to hire a former prosecutor as its top lawyer to send a message that his new firm will not tolerate the kind of improper trading that took place at his hedge fund. A newly rebranded website for Point72 quotes Mr. Cohen as saying that he wants his family office to be seen as a firm that “acts with integrity and professionalism and sets the standard for ethical behavior.”Point72 has already hired one former federal prosecutor, Vincent Tortorella, who joined the firm in April. Mr. Tortorella, its chief compliance and surveillance officer, is overseeing a separate job search to recruit several F.B.I. agents to the firm.Ms. Dabbs, who was a lawyer at Covington & Burling before becoming a federal prosecutor, joins Pershing Square as other changes in the hedge fund’s legal hierarchy are underway. Last month, the firm announced it was hiring Stephen Fraidin, a partner at Kirkland & Ellis with a long history of working on corporate mergers, as vice chairman. At the same time, Roy Katzovicz, chief legal officer for Pershing Square, announced he was leaving after nine years at the firm.A version of this article appears in print on 02/07/2015, on page B6 of the NewYork edition with the headline: A Former Federal Prosecutor Joins Pershing Square.