By AARON M. KESSLERFEB. 5, 2015
After a year of a record number of recalls in the auto industry, the Obama administration is aiming in its proposed budget to nearly triple the funding for defect investigations at the government’s auto safety agency and increase its overall budget by 20 percent annually over six years.But the proposal, like many items in the president’s proposed budget, faces an uncertain fate in the Republican-controlled Congress. As of Thursday, John Thune, the chairman of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation who is a Republican from South Dakota, had yet to weigh in on the requested increase for the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. A spokesman said the committee was “still reviewing” the proposal.A spokeswoman for the House Energy and Commerce Committee, headed by Fred Upton, Republican of Michigan, said the panel was reviewing the proposal but that “our oversight of N.H.T.S.A. over the last year has revealed that problems facing the agency run deeper than staffing or funding.”The House committee is also waiting for the results of an oversight report it requested in October from the Government Accountability Office.AdvertisementThe agency has fallen under scrutiny as more than 60 million vehicles were recalled in the United States last year, double the previous record set in 2004. Five times last year, the agency’s acting head was called before congressional hearings, where lawmakers criticized the agency for failing to identify potential defects and act on consumer complaints.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In its budget released this week, the Obama administration is proposing to increase funds for the agency’s Office of Defects Investigation to $31 million from about $11 million. Agency officials say that will allow them to hire more staff members to comb through an increasing number of consumer defect complaints.Anthony Foxx, the transportation secretary, told reporters this week that the increase was about “giving N.H.T.S.A. the tools it needs” to keep on top of about 75,000 complaints a year, and that the defects office simply is overwhelmed with only 28 full-time staff members. The proposal would increase that number by 57.AdvertisementThe agency’s new administrator, Mark Rosekind, recently said it was important for the agency not just to have more positions, but the right kind of people in those roles — jobs that are increasingly about using technology and data skills to decipher the information on crashes in the United States. Mr. Rosekind said he wanted to bring more Silicon Valley-style innovation to data analysis so the agency could spot potential problems early, before they became full-blown crises.An earlier version of this article described incorrectly the proposed staffing increase for the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The proposal would increase the staffing by 57 employees, not bring the staffing up to 56 employees.A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Obama Budget Calls for N.H.T.S.A. Funds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.