By THE NEW YORK TIMESOCT. 11, 2015
 The new Greek government of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras will face a major test this week when a barrage of economic reforms and austerity measures demanded by Greece’s international creditors will need to be voted on to become law.Legislation detailing dozens of actions — from liberalizing the Greek energy market to imposing stricter criteria for the protection of indebted homeowners — is expected to be submitted to Parliament on Monday; a vote is due by the end of the week.Approval of the measures is required to unlock a loan installment of 2 billion euros from Greece’s third bailout, worth €86 billion, or about $98 billion, that was signed by eurozone finance ministers in August after several months of turbulent negotiations. —Niki KitsantonisAlmost all of the big banks will report their third-quarter financial results this week. JPMorgan Chase will go first Tuesday afternoon — a deviation from its normal morning earnings announcement. Analysts are expecting that JPMorgan will report lower revenue and profits than it did for the same period last year.AdvertisementWall Street banks have warned that their results will be hobbled by difficult trading conditions in recent months, as global economic instability has returned to the fore. The expectation that the Federal Reserve will wait longer before raising interest rates is also crimping the profits that banks are expecting to make from loans. —Nathaniel PopperAdvertisementSenior European officials and technology executives will gather in Brussels on Tuesday to address how the region has dealt with a number of issues, including a perception in the United States that Europe has used recent investigations into technology companies like Google and Facebook to give local competitors an advantage. European officials have denied that.Attendees of the annual meeting will discuss jump-starting investment in Europe’s lagging telecom industry, as well as how large American tech companies can operate across the 28-member bloc. —Mark ScottFirst Data Corporation, which processes more than 40 percent of electronic payments in the United States, is expected to price its initial public offering on Wednesday in what could be the largest I.P.O. of the year.Backed by the private equity giant Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, First Data has been marketing 160 million shares for $18 to $20 apiece, indicating an offering size of $3 billion, at the midpoint, and a valuation of $16.7 billion. The stock, listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol FDC, will begin trading on Thursday. —Leslie PickerFigures due from the Commerce Department on Wednesday are expected to show that consumer spending increased modestly in September, as strong auto sales offset the effect of lower gasoline prices and weakening spending in other retail categories. Analysts predicted that overall retail sales increased 0.2 percent from the previous month, though that figure could dip into negative territory if auto sales are excluded.Retailers are looking to the holiday season to bolster a choppy year for sales. Even so, the National Retail Federation, a trade group, said last week that it expected sales in November and December to rise by 3.7 percent, to $630 billion, less than last year’s 4.1 percent gain. —Hiroko TabuchiIt’s show time this week at Netflix. Its first original feature film, “Beasts of No Nation,” about a child soldier in West Africa, is scheduled to make its global debut on Friday on the streaming service and select theaters in the United States. The film kicks off Netflix’s foray into original movies. Other projects in the works for Netflix include four Adam Sandler films, the first of which will be available in December. The sequel to “Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon” will be available globally in 2016.AdvertisementAlso this week, Netflix will report its third-quarter earnings on Wednesday. Investors will be looking for updates on the company’s aggressive global expansion as well as how it plans to continue to grow in the United States, where its business is more mature. Last week, Netflix increased the price of its most popular plan, which offers two simultaneous streams, by $1, to $9.99, for new customers. Other plans remained unchanged at $7.99 and $11.99. —Emily SteelPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Thursday, the Labor Department will report the data for the Consumer Price Index in September. There have been few signs of inflation lately, and economists expect the overall C.P.I. to fall by 0.2 percent, a decrease driven mostly by lower gasoline prices. Excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core prices will probably show a 0.1 percent rise, which is also considered tame in terms of inflation. —Nelson D. SchwartzMore industry, less finance. That has been the story at General Electric for a while now, and analysts expect more of the same when G.E. reports its third-quarter results Friday morning. G.E.’s management has argued that the company deserves more credit from Wall Street for its postfinancial crisis transformation, a shift away from finance and toward its industrial businesses.The activist investor Nelson Peltz agrees. He announced a friendly $2.5 billion investment last week, which helped increase G.E.’s share price by 10 percent. —Steve LohrOn Friday, the University of Michigan will report its preliminary reading on consumer sentiment for the month of October. Economists expect consumer sentiment to move higher from September’s level of 87.2, which suffered as Wall Street markets fell and growth overseas slowed.With stocks recovering somewhat since the beginning of the month, and gas prices falling, consumers may be feeling reassured about the economy’s prospects. —Nelson D. SchwartzA version of this article appears in print on October 12, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.