By MICHAEL CIEPLY and BROOKS BARNESFEB. 5, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  Fissures revealed by the hacking at Sony Pictures Entertainment have raised the prospect of profound change at one of Hollywood’s oldest institutions: the Motion Picture Association of America.In a behind-the-scenes drama, the Sony Pictures chairman, Michael Lynton, last month told industry colleagues of a plan to withdraw from the movie trade organization, according to people who have been briefed on the discussions. He cited the organization’s slow response and lack of public support in the aftermath of the attack on Sony and its film “The Interview,” as well as longstanding concerns about the cost and efficacy of the group.Reversing course in mid-January, as the Oscar nominations were being announced, Mr. Lynton stayed in. But he and other studio executives are now discussing proposals that could alter the structure, mandate and governance of a 93-year-old organization that has been the policy front for Hollywood’s major film studios.If adopted, their still emerging propositions might jolt the group into line with the new realities of a changing entertainment business. They might, for instance, open the association to new members and expand its interests to include television programs or digital content. They might also reduce the heavy annual contribution of more than $20 million that is required of each of the six member companies: Walt Disney, Warner Bros., Paramount Pictures, 20th Century Fox, Universal and Sony.AdvertisementOne suggestion would even involve selling or perhaps redeveloping the organization’s Washington quarters, which is on prime real estate near the White House. Under tightened government ethics rules, the building’s screening room, though still active, is no longer the scene of lavish movie-and-dinner nights that were once popular with lawmakers.AdvertisementAsked about the discussion of a serious reworking of the M.P.A.A.’s mission and structure, Christopher J. Dodd, chief executive of the association, said: “I’m for that, completely.”Speaking by telephone on Wednesday, Mr. Dodd, a former senator from Connecticut, said he was on his way to a Los Angeles dinner with top studio executives, where he expected to engage in a broad conversation about goals and possible changes.Though he declined to discuss Sony’s near exit, Mr. Dodd said of Mr. Lynton: “He’s there. I’m glad he’s there. I think he’s handled this well.” As for other members’ position on revamping the organization, Mr. Dodd noted that “some feel more strongly about it than others.”Strains within the film association were thrown into sharp relief in early December at the height of the hacking crisis engulfing Sony. That is when Sony’s sister studios — still unsure about the source of the attack, and most with an eye on their own interests — did not line up behind an effort by Mr. Dodd and the actor George Clooney to show support for Sony and “The Interview,” a comedic sendup of the Korean leader Kim Jong-un.Warner Bros. had been willing to sign on to a public expression of support, according to people briefed on the exchanges. But other studios were largely wary, and Mr. Dodd was hampered by a rule that requires alignment of all member companies behind any significant step.The need for full agreement has kept the association from influencing some major policy debates, as member companies and their parent corporations wrestle with diverging interests.The M.P.A.A. has taken no bold stand, for instance, on proposals to regulate the web through the Federal Communications Commission. Presumably, Comcast — which owns Universal and has a vast broadband operation — might view any such move differently from Sony or Disney, which own no such pipelines.AdvertisementOn another front, state and local film commissioners in New York and elsewhere have sometimes carried the brunt of legislative fights for production subsidies. Under Mr. Dodd, however, the organization has considerably stepped up its fight for incentives and support for commissioners.Mr. Lynton declined through a spokesman to discuss tensions between Sony and its peers or deliberations about the future of the M.P.A.A. Similarly, representatives of the other M.P.A.A. member companies declined to comment.But over a dozen people with knowledge of company actions and positions, most speaking on condition of anonymity to protect relationships, described over the last several weeks an industry debate that was likely to result in at least some changes.Kevin Tsujihara, the chief executive of Warner Bros., said he, like Mr. Dodd, welcomed an examination of the organization that would mirror a similar review of cost and mission at his company. “Now is as good a time as any” to look at fundamental questions, Mr. Tsujihara said in an interview. He added: “We haven’t, as an industry, evolved fast enough.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sony, Warner and Paramount are clearly interested in proposals for change. Where the other companies fall in the debate remains to be seen.“The bigger issue is that it’s the motion picture association,” said Katherine L. Oliver, who was New York’s commissioner of media and entertainment under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and now consults with cities through the Bloomberg Associates nonprofit.“Who represents the growing television industry and the growing content creation industry?” Ms. Oliver asked, voicing a question that is now being examined by the M.P.A.A.’s member companies.In private conversations over the last week, people associated with various member companies — with some exceptions — expressed satisfaction with Mr. Dodd, who succeeded Dan Glickman as the M.P.A.A. chief in 2011. Mr. Dodd’s current employment contract extends to the spring of next year. Mr. Lynton, who contributed to Mr. Dodd’s presidential campaign in 2007, was among those who strongly backed his appointment to the M.P.A.A. post.And those people largely acknowledged that the film studios depend heavily on the association for core cross-company functions. Those notably include the supervision of a film ratings system, and the operation of a separate unit that protects movie titles from use by others under a voluntary industrywide arrangement.AdvertisementBut those briefed on the position of several companies said virtually all the studios have chafed lately at the high cost of maintaining the M.P.A.A., along with its worldwide antipiracy and market access operations, particularly as Sony, Warner and others are cutting staff and costs.As recently as 2012, public tax filings by the film association, a nonprofit, showed one-year expenditures of about $69 million, supported by dues of about $10 million from each studio, plus income from the ratings system and other sources, to support a staff that then numbered about 200.But the current contributions are approaching $25 million a year, according to several executives. (Others say the number is slightly lower, depending on how the spending on dues and other support is counted.) That reflects some growth in operating expense under Mr. Dodd, who was paid about $3 million in 2012, according to the tax filing.Mr. Lynton and others have posited that including television companies and units in an expanded trade organization would better reflect the current realities of entertainment, while spreading the cost of global efforts among a larger number of participants. Television shows are generating more money and viewers than film, often for the same companies that make movies.Any such expansion would probably end the rule of unanimity, theoretically making the M.P.A.A. or a successor more nimble. But it would also bump quickly into existing policy organizations — for instance, the National Cable and Telecommunications Association or CreativeFuture, Hollywood’s antipiracy alliance — with overlapping membership and mission.On Wednesday, Mr. Dodd said he had “talked with a lot of people” about expanded membership over the last several years.As for selling that Washington building, which is also near a number of embassies, he sounded a note of caution. “It’s an important spot,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: After Sony Hacking, the M.P.A.A. Considers Major Changes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.