By HIROKO TABUCHIFEB. 5, 2015
The logo-emblazoned handbags of Michael Kors are seemingly everywhere these days — and that is a growing cause of concern for the affordable luxury brand.Both sales and profit topped estimates at New York-based Michael Kors in the third quarter, driven by strong e-commerce and international sales, according to results posted by the company Thursday. Kors also added 194 stores to its fast-expanding global network of boutiques, now 509 strong.But same-store sales growth in the United States, its biggest quarter, slowed for the fourth consecutive quarter, fueling concerns that customers may be starting to tire of the Kors brand. Kors has also been heavily discounting its offerings to drive sales, marking down its bags as much as 50 percent online during the holidays.“The problem is it’s popping up everywhere,” said Neil Saunders, a New York-based analyst at the retail consultancy Conlumino. “The brand’s become a bit too common, and that erodes its value. It’s having to discount to get consumers interested to buy.”AdvertisementIn a call with analysts, Michael Kors’ chief executive, John D. Idol, acknowledged that the American market was maturing. But he argued that the store sales numbers did not accurately reflect the rapid growth in the brand’s sales online, which jumped 73 percent last quarter compared with the same period the previous year.Advertisement“We believe that comparable store sales including our e-commerce business is a more accurate reflection of our performance,” Mr. Idol said. He later acknowledged, however, that “North America will eventually slow.”He also put slowing sales in the United States down to a shift in this season’s tastes away from large handbags toward smaller, lower-priced offerings.“The large handbag trend has kind of slowed down and it’s all about medium handbags,” Mr. Idol said. “Cross bodies are also a very hot fashion category today, and they’re at a lower price point.”And in an apparent show of his fashion acumen, Mr. Idol lamented that some of the brand’s recent offerings had been too fashion-forward. On one hand, the Greenwich leather satchel, which comes in colorful pop colors, is a smash hit, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“But there were certain products that didn’t perform as well for us, like the Bucket bag, which from a fashion standpoint you just have to be a part of,” Mr. Idol said, referring to the company’s leather carryall. “Unfortunately, from a retail standpoint, we didn’t get the same kind of resonation.”Michael Kors said total revenue surged 30 percent to $1.31 billion in the third quarter through Dec. 27, slightly above analyst estimates. Net income for the quarter came to $303.7 million, or $1.48 per diluted share, also topping analyst estimates.Revenue in North America rose by 22.6 percent compared with the same period last year. Growth was much higher in both Europe and Japan, which each saw sales jump 72.1 percent.The company said it expected total revenue for the full year to climb to $4.4 billion, with comparable-store sales worldwide climbing in the low double digits.A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Michael Kors Earnings and Sales Exceed Analysts’ Estimates.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.