By BROOKS BARNESFEB. 5, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  Succession at Disney became clearer on Thursday, as Thomas O. Staggs beat out a rival to become the company’s No. 2 executive, a post that makes him the favorite to replace Robert A. Iger as chief executive in 2018.Mr. Staggs, 54, chairman of Disney’s sprawling theme park operation, will become the conglomerate’s chief operating officer, Disney said. All of Disney’s divisions — consumer products, a movie studio, ESPN, theme parks, ABC, a fleet of cruise ships — will now report jointly to Mr. Staggs and Mr. Iger, who has run Disney since 2005 without a second in command.Mr. Staggs will continue to lead the theme park unit until a successor is named.The promotion does not guarantee Mr. Staggs the top job at the Walt Disney Company, the world’s largest entertainment company. Rather, he will spend the next three years proving himself to Disney’s board, which has been acutely focused on a careful transfer of power. Mr. Iger took over after a period of turmoil and with no clear succession plan at Disney. He has said he plans to retire in June 2018.Heightening the pressure is the fact that Mr. Iger’s tenure has — so far — been nothing less than golden, with a rejuvenated animation studio, the acquisition of Marvel Entertainment and resort expansions contributing to soaring earnings and a stock price that has lately passed $102, its highest level in decades.AdvertisementOne major unanswered question is what will become of James A. Rasulo, 59, the company’s chief financial officer. Mr. Rasulo had been competing with Mr. Staggs to succeed Mr. Iger, and his current contract expired at the end of January.Advertisement“Tom is an incredibly experienced, talented and versatile executive,” Mr. Iger said in a statement. Mr. Staggs said, “I am humbled and honored by the opportunity.” Mr. Iger, Mr. Staggs and Mr. Rasulo declined to be interviewed.In recent years, Mr. Staggs has delivered record attendance at Disney World in Florida and Disneyland in California and successfully solved technological difficulties with a $1 billion vacation-planning and payment system in Florida. With Mr. Iger, he has also overseen the most important building project at the company since the 1970s: Shanghai Disneyland, a $5.5 billion resort that will open in spring 2016.In selecting Mr. Staggs, Mr. Iger in very basic terms opted for Disney D.N.A. Mr. Staggs has made clear a taste and enthusiasm for Disney’s core brand — movies, vacations and TV shows that are sweet-spirited and sentimental.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Staggs is widely liked inside Disney, where he has been a supporter of a strategy, set by Mr. Iger, to make long-term bets that sometimes run counter to the quarter-by-quarter mentality of Wall Street. Even rank-and-file Disney fans know him: At the 2012 unveiling of a $1.1 billion upgrade to California Adventure, a park in Anaheim, Calif., visitors stopped Mr. Staggs to ask for his autograph.Mr. Rasulo, in contrast, has more erudite personal tastes in entertainment, supporting the Los Angeles Philharmonic in particular. He spent years living in Paris, where he oversaw Disney’s European theme parks. Still, he was a formidable contender. He has presided over some of the most successful quarters in Disney history, fueled in part by a well-executed and aggressive cost-cutting program.Mr. Rasulo’s attention to detail — Mr. Staggs is known as being a bit more hands off — also won him the support of several major shareholders.Disney has dismissed the notion of a race between the two men, but Mr. Iger effectively set one in motion in 2009, when he flipped their roles. Mr. Staggs was previously chief financial officer and Mr. Rasulo was chairman of parks. At the time, Mr. Iger said the move was meant to deepen the experience of his bench.Mr. Staggs, a former investment banker, joined Disney in 1990 as a manager of strategic planning and advanced through the ranks to become chief financial officer in 1998. That role gave him a window into Disney’s many businesses, but he notably lacks experience in the traditional Disney strongholds of movie production and television. Both Mr. Iger and his predecessor, Michael D. Eisner, began as television executives.The decision to name a No. 2 was prompted in part by Mr. Iger’s own contract extensions. He was initially supposed to step down in June 2016. Last fall — as Disney notched record financial results, contributing to a soaring stock price — Mr. Iger agreed to extend his tenure until June 2018. But he promised Mr. Staggs and Mr. Rasulo that he would not prolong their wait for advancement.AdvertisementMr. Iger spent about five years as second in command to Mr. Eisner, a period that allowed him to learn each of the company’s varied businesses. But unlike Mr. Iger, Mr. Eisner had no clear succession plan and passed the baton only after a shareholder revolt coincided with a hostile takeover attempt and fizzling performance in crucial areas like animation.A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Disney’s Head of Parks Is Named to No. 2 Spot.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.