By DAVID JOLLYFEB. 5, 2015
PARIS — Stocks and bonds fell sharply in Athens on Thursday as the new Greek government’s showdown with its European partners appeared to be nearing a decisive stage.The main Athens stock index fell 5.2 percent, led by a 9 percent decline in financial shares. Bond prices tumbled, with the yield on the 10-year Greek government bond, which moves in the opposite direction of the price, climbing above 10 percent, nearing its Jan. 30 peak of 10.8 percent.On Wednesday, the European Central Bank ratcheted up the pressure on the government of Alexis Tsipras, the new Greek prime minister, saying it was shutting off an important source of funding to the Greek financial system. The central bank will no longer accept Greek bonds as collateral in monetary policy operations, where banks have access to cash at a rock-bottom interest rate of 0.05 percent. The banks still have access to emergency funding through the Greek central bank.Gavriil Sakellaridis, the government spokesman, described the European Central Banks decision as “political” and part of continuing negotiations between Greece and the country’s creditors.Advertisement“It is political and does not affect the country’s economy,” he said on Greek television. “We are not blackmailing, but neither will we be blackmailed.”AdvertisementAnti-austerity groups called for a protest outside Parliament on Thursday against the central bank’s withdrawal of funding and Germany’s tough stance against Greece. The slogan of the movement is: “We won’t be blackmailed, we won’t give in. We are not afraid, we will not go back, we’re winning.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Tsipras and his finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, are working to convince their European partners that it is in everyone’s interest to give Greece some maneuvering room after the punishing reform program that the troika of lenders — the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund — imposed in exchange for bailing out the country.On Thursday, the damage appeared to be limited to Greek markets. The euro was up 0.2 percent against the dollar at $1.1369, while the broad European stock market was down about 0.1 percent.Carsten Brzeski, chief economist at ING Germany in Frankfurt, said in a research note that the central bank’s move, while a sign that it was prepared to play hardball, would in fact have limited consequences in the short term. That is because, he noted, the European Central Bank had already provided the means for Greek banks to get a lifeline from their national central bank in the form of so-called Emergency Liquidity Assistance.Mr. Varoufakis was scheduled to continue his financial diplomacy in Berlin on Thursday, meeting with Wolfgang Schäuble, the German finance minister.Niki Kitsantonis contributed reporting from Athens.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.