OCT. 11, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Tuesday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Wednesday.At the close of the New York cash market Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.01 percent. The six-month rate was 0.07 percent, and the four-week rate was 0.00 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:TUESDAYFlorida, $230.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New York State Dormitory Authority, $951.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYNevada, $256.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Suffolk County, N.Y., $157.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementWashington Suburban Sanitary Commission, Md., $390 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYAdvertisementDowney Unified School District, Calif., $50 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKChicago, $439 million of wastewater transmission revenue refunding bonds. Ramirez.Coast Community College District, Calif., $162 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Hartland Consolidated Schools, Mich., $54.3 million of taxable refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Hawaii, $747 million of general obligation bonds. Bank of America.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Irving Independent School District, Tex., $139.4 million of unlimited tax school building refinancing bonds. William Blair.Successor Agency to the Community Development Agency of Menlo Park, Calif., $52.8 million of tax allocation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Michigan State Trunk Line Fund, $54.9 million of refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York City Housing Development Corporation, $53.7 million of multifamily housing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York Mortgage Agency, $135.5 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Northwest Independent School District, Tex., $88.2 million of refinancing bonds. Bosc.Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, $210 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.South Dakota Health and Education Facilities Authority, $176.2 million of revenue bonds. Cain Brothers.Texas Public Finance Authority, $370 million of general obligation and refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.AdvertisementUtility Debt Securitization Authority, N.Y., $1 billion of restructuring bonds. Bank of America.A version of this article appears in print on October 12, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.