AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressTurboTax, the country’s most popular do-it-yourself tax preparation software, said on Friday that it had temporarily stopped processing state tax returns because of an increase in fraudulent filings. State agencies have reported a rise in filings with stolen personal information, said Intuit, the company behind TurboTax.Most victims found out that a fraudulent tax return was submitted in their name when they received a rejection notice after filing their returns, said Julie Miller, an Intuit spokeswoman.There have been no issues with federal returns to date because the Internal Revenue Service has adopted stronger fraud detection policies, Ms. Miller said.Intuit said it resumed filing of state returns at about 6 p.m. Eastern time Friday with increased fraud protections, a day after it halted them.Intuit is working with a security company, Palantir, to investigate the problem. So far, there has been no security breach of its systems, Intuit said. Instead, company officials say they think personal information was stolen elsewhere and used to file returns on TurboTax.Ms. Miller linked the problem to recent security breaches at large companies. This week, Anthem, a major health insurer, said hackers had gained access to the Social Security numbers, names, addresses and personal information of about 80 million people. Earlier security breaches have occurred at JPMorgan Chase and retailers that include Home Depot and Target.“You have a pretty rich pool of data out there in the world,” Ms. Miller said.Intuit said state tax returns already filed when the halt began on Thursday would be transmitted as soon as possible. TurboTax processed 30 million tax returns last year, Ms. Miller said.A rival, H&R Block, which also sells tax preparation software, did not respond to a request for comment. Liberty Tax said it was letting TurboTax customers file state returns free at its more than 4,000 locations around the country. Shares of Intuit, based in Mountain View, Calif., fell $3.88, or 4.2 percent, to close at $87.83. Advertisement