By EMILY STEELFEB. 6, 2015
A compilation of Brian Williams’s television appearances shows how his accounts of a 2003 episode on military helicopters in Iraq gradually became more perilous.Scrambling to contain a crisis engulfing one of its most prominent on-air personalities, NBC will begin an internal investigation into Brian Williams, the embattled evening news anchor who has admitted he misled the public with a harrowing tale of a forced helicopter landing in Iraq.The “fact-checking” inquiry, confirmed on Friday by several people in the network’s news division, will review not only the Iraq incident but also Mr. Williams’s reporting during Hurricane Katrina in 2005, as well as any other issues that arise during the investigation.Richard Esposito, the head of NBC’s investigative unit, will lead the inquiry. Mr. Esposito does not report to Mr. Williams, who holds the positions of both anchor and managing editor for “NBC Nightly News.”In a staff memo on Friday, Deborah Turness, the president of NBC News, said that the network had “a team dedicated to gathering the facts to help us make sense of all that has transpired.”AdvertisementMs. Turness said that she and Mr. Williams had spoken with the “Nightly News” team on Thursday and addressed more employees in an editorial meeting on Friday.Advertisement“Brian apologized once again, and specifically expressed how sorry he is for the impact this has had on all of you and on this proud organization,” Ms. Turness said in the memo, which was obtained by The New York Times.NBC News executives have not publicly addressed the issue, hunkering down on Friday as Mr. Williams’s troubles continued to draw a frenzy of criticism. Across the web, commentators have been aggressive in questioning not only Mr. Williams’s reporting but NBC’s handling of the problem. Some military veterans and commentators have called for his resignation.Executives canceled external meetings and said that the issue was absorbing all of their focus, people in the news division said. Current and former NBC employees discussed the ultimate fate of the news anchor, shocked by his fall from grace and the turmoil it had created at the network.Mr. Williams has not addressed the issue publicly since Wednesday, when he apologized on his newscast for embellishing an account of an incident in 2003; over the years he came to say that he was in a helicopter that was hit by enemy fire, an assertion he now says is not true. On his newscasts Thursday and Friday, he did not mention the controversy.If Mr. Williams is forced to step down, it would be a huge blow to the news division, which is in a cutthroat ratings race with the rival networks. In this season to date, NBC has averaged 9.3 million total viewers for its nightly broadcast, compared with 8.7 million for ABC and 7.3 million for CBS, according to Nielsen.In addition to tarnishing Mr. Williams’s once pristine reputation, the scandal has led to broader questions about the management and the credibility of NBC’s news operations.“NBC’s credibility is damaged by this because their principal news figurehead, which is really what an anchorman is, had some clear credibility questions distinguishing the truth from the reality,” said Mark Feldstein, a professor of broadcast journalism at the University of Maryland, who previously worked at NBC News.AdvertisementThe latest tumult also represents another setback for Ms. Turness. Since joining NBC in 2013, she has had to remove David Gregory as host of “Meet the Press” because of low ratings, ending his two-decade career at the network. She also had to scramble to find a new head for the “Today” morning show after firing Jamie Horowitz only 10 weeks after she had hired him. The network also was heavily criticized this fall when its chief medical editor, Dr. Nancy Snyderman, violated a self-imposed quarantine after being exposed to Ebola in Liberia.NBC News executives and Mr. Williams were not made available for an interview.For NBC, Mr. Williams is more than just a nightly news anchor. He’s a bona fide celebrity on par with Jimmy Fallon, Matt Lauer and Bob Costas in representing the face of the broadcast network. Should Mr. Williams be forced to step down, it is not clear who a successor would be, industry executives said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Creating a succession plan has not been a top priority at the network as it has focused on sorting out issues with its “Today” show. Mr. Williams has been viewed as a block of stability, and in December the network extended his contract, with the terms reported to be as much as $10 million per year for five years.Some media critics and TV industry insiders questioned NBC’s plan to conduct an internal investigation rather than work with an outside group.“Internal investigations are inherently suspect because NBC has a literal financial investment in Brian Williams and his brand,” Mr. Feldstein said. “They have been paying him millions of dollars a year and spending millions more to promote his image as their public face, as their brand, specifically promoting his integrity as a source for news.”In other media scandals, Mr. Feldstein said, changes in personnel and practice mostly came after external investigations.Others in the TV news business questioned the point of the investigation, given that Mr. Williams already admitted that he had made false claims about his experiences in Iraq.News of the internal investigation was first reported by The Daily News of New York.Mr. Williams now admits that his portrayal of the helicopter journey was misleading, and that he had been on a different helicopter, behind the one that was hit. He said he had “conflated” the two versions, and apologized.It’s not clear whether other people at NBC were aware that Mr. Williams’s version of the events was inaccurate.AdvertisementOn Friday, other statements by Mr. Williams also started to draw close scrutiny. Some blogs and media outlets questioned Mr. Williams’s description of what he saw while reporting on Hurricane Katrina. In one account, he described seeing a person committing suicide. At another time, he said that he had heard a story of a man killing himself by jumping from the upper deck of the Superdome in New Orleans.Tom Brokaw, who held the anchor chair before Mr. Williams, said in an email that he “neither suggested nor demanded Brian be fired,” refuting news reports that he had done so. But Mr. Brokaw also did not offer up an endorsement of his successor, saying only, “His future is up to Brian and the executives of NBC News.”Before the episode, Mr. Williams long had been considered one of the most trusted people in not only in the news business but in the country as a whole. He was trusted by about three-quarters of consumers, making him the 23rd-most-trusted person in the country, according to the celebrity index of The Marketing Arm, a research firm owned by Omnicom. That places him alongside the likes of Denzel Washington, Warren E. Buffett and Robin Roberts.A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Embattled Anchor Faces ‘Fact-Checking’ Inquiry at NBC.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.