By JOHN HARWOODFEB. 6, 2015
Highlights from a conversation with Mr. Froman, who is negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a trade pact that is considered one of the few points on which Democrats and Republicans can agree.WASHINGTON —  The United States trade representative, Michael B. Froman, a Harvard Law School classmate of President Obama’s, is scrambling to complete the one big deal that appears ripe for compromise between Republicans and Democrats — the Trans-Pacific Partnership with a dozen countries from Canada to New Zealand. The deal, being negotiated, forms the core of Mr. Obama’s much-promoted “pivot” toward Asia.Mr. Froman discussed the challenges in an interview. A condensed, edited transcript follows; a video of the interview is at nytimes.com/business.Q.  Most people in Washington think the trade deal you’re negotiating with our Pacific partners is the one and only thing to which both this president and this Congress can agree. Does that put added pressure on you?A. (Laugh) The president’s trade agenda is on a short list of issues where the Republican leadership has said that this is something they want to work with him on. We’re not considering failure.AdvertisementQ. A couple of your predecessors told me that if you had not gotten trade negotiating authority from Congress by the end of June, this deal was not going to happen in this presidency. Are you giving Congress a timeline?AdvertisementA. We’re working with our trading partners to complete T.P.P. as soon as possible, consistent with the objectives we’ve set out. In parallel we’re working with Congress to get trade promotion legislation that has broad, bipartisan support. We’d like to complete the negotiations of T.P.P. and get it through Congress this year.Q. If you’re a Republican, and you have the slightest doubt about whether this agreement is going to be in the best interests of the country, why should you lift a finger to help this president?A. Both parties see there’s an opportunity to help promote growth, create opportunity, unlock export potential for America’s farmers, America’s small businesses. This is core to middle-class economics. There’s an interest on both sides coming out of the election to find areas that they can work together.Q. If you’re a Democrat, why should you think this deal is going to be any different from deals you’ve hated — like Nafta, the North American Free Trade Agreement — that, in fact, some Democrats think is antithetical to middle-class economics?A. When President Obama was running for president, he called for the renegotiation of Nafta. And that meant taking labor and environmental standards, putting them at the core of the agreement. That’s exactly what we’re doing through T.P.P. — but not just with Mexico and Canada, with 40 percent of the global economy.Q. Isn’t it a fact that the era of big trade expansion and trade agreements coincides with the era of income inequality and middle-class stagnation? Why shouldn’t the average person assume those two things are related, and that trade is one of the reasons the middle class hasn’t moved ahead?A. A lot of the move towards greater inequality started before there were trade agreements. It’s important not to conflate globalization and technology, and the impact that that has on our economy, and trade agreements. Globalization is a force. It’s out there because we have container ships, because we have air travel, because we have broadband. That’s made it easier for companies to locate at different places around the world. Trade agreements are how we shape globalization.AdvertisementQ. An NBC/Wall Street Journal poll asked respondents to list in order of priority what they want Washington to do. Trade agreements came in dead last. Doesn’t that tell you the American people have reached a conclusion about the impact of trade agreements, and that they don’t believe what you just said?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. Some of the past agreements haven’t necessarily lived up to all of their promise. That’s why it’s important for us to demonstrate how we’re doing things differently here.Q. Opponents of the deal have been making the case that because you’re scared of the public reaction, you and other negotiators have been holding details of the negotiations secret. What about that criticism?A. Our goal is to be as transparent as we possibly can while being able to negotiate the best deal for American interests. Every member of Congress can see the text. We’ve opened up advisory committees to have more representation by labor unions, by environmental groups, by consumer groups, by development groups, health care groups. We’re always looking for ways to improve transparency.Q. Do you need to hold up China as a boogeyman to get the votes to pass this? If you do that, don’t you encourage China’s suspicion that this is targeted at them?A. There are lots of other negotiations. China is involved with one involving 16 countries, spanning from India all the way to Japan. It doesn’t try to achieve the same levels of environmental protections, labor protections or intellectual property rights protections. It doesn’t commit to an open and free Internet. It doesn’t put disciplines on state-owned enterprises. So there is a real difference here between our approach and the approach of other countries. It’s got to be better for American workers, and American small businesses, American farmers, American entrepreneurs that we’re the ones out there setting the rules of the road with our trading partners at a very high level, rather than letting them be set as a race to the bottom.Q. We know multinational corporations want this. But if you’re the average worker in the United States who has often been left behind while big firms and their shareholders have done very well, what would you get?A. Only a small fraction of our small and medium-sized businesses export. So there’s huge opportunity here. these are small and medium-sized businesses who see growth from opening markets, increasing exports, being able to hire more people, pay higher wages. And to us, that’s the real driver of this agreement.Q. If that’s true, why is it so hard to get the votes?A. People still feel quite insecure about their economic future. They have a legitimate set of concerns. The question is whether trade agreements are going to be able to help us shape the future, and shape globalization in a way that plays to American interests and American values. That’s firmly what the president, and we, believe we’re doing.A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: The Politics of Trade: The Top U.S. Negotiator Answers 10 Questions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.