By BEN SISARIOFEB. 6, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  On Sunday, the eyes of the music world will be on the Grammy Awards in the Staples Center. But shortly afterward, the industry’s attention will shift to a much less glamorous location: a federal courtroom in Manhattan, where Pandora will square off against the giant licensing agency BMI in the latest fight over music royalties in the digital age.The trial, which begins on Tuesday, will determine how much Pandora, the popular Internet radio service, pays BMI’s songwriters and music publishers to stream their songs.The larger debate over music royalties online has galvanized musicians, and the Justice Department is reviewing the regulatory agreements that govern BMI and Ascap, its rival. Both groups — which together handle nearly $2 billion in royalties when songs are played on the radio or streamed online — complain that the licensing system in place for decades is now outdated.“The foundation of Pandora’s business was built with the words and music of songwriters, and we are fighting on their behalf to secure rates that reflect the true value of their work in today’s digital marketplace,” Stuart Rosen, BMI’s general counsel, said in a statement.AdvertisementPandora, a 10-year-old service that was at the vanguard of music streaming, is struggling to prove itself on Wall Street. On Thursday, the company reported that it had $921 million in revenue last year, and paid a total of $446 million in music licensing costs, most of that for recordings, which are separate from the songwriting and publishing rights handled by Ascap and BMI.AdvertisementPandora now competes against terrestrial radio companies for advertising dollars, but the cost of the company’s music licenses has been a constant concern for analysts. In addition to its fights with BMI and Ascap, Pandora is in the middle of another battle with the music industry over the cost of its recording rights, which are set by a separate panel of federal judges in Washington.An advertising shortfall at the end of the year led Pandora to miss analysts’ revenue targets for the fourth quarter. On Friday, shares in the service closed down 17.2 percent, at $15.24, and a number of analysts downgraded the stock in response to the earnings report.John Egbert, an analyst at Stifel Nicolaus, wrote that the lower-than-expected revenue in Pandora’s fourth quarter “was disappointing and clearly ill-timed, given Pandora’s recent share price volatility.” Since its peak a year ago, the stock has lost more than half its value.BMI and Pandora declined to comment on their plans for the trial, which will be heard before Judge Louis L. Stanton in United States District Court for the Southern District of New York. But both sides have laid out much of their strategy in reams of court documents since the suit was filed by BMI in June 2013. The BMI trial also mirrors a similar case between Pandora and Ascap last year.Pandora currently pays BMI 1.75 percent of its revenue, but it wants to reduce that fee to 1.7 percent to match what most radio broadcasters pay for their streams. Pandora will argue that its service is effectively just another form of radio.BMI wants Pandora’s rate raised to 2.5 percent. It will argue that Pandora is a more interactive form of media than traditional radio, and — since it lacks nonmusic programming like news and talk — simply makes more extensive use of music than a typical radio station does.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is why the rate court system was established — to adjudicate exactly these types of disputes,” Dave Grimaldi, a spokesman for Pandora, said in a statement.To support their claims, BMI and Pandora are expected to point to other licensing deals that have been reached in the open market, like the one that Pandora struck last year with BMG, a big music publisher.Advertisement“Each party will be trying to show what an appropriate marketplace rate would be, and argue that those are benchmarks for the court to consider,” said David D. Oxenford, a lawyer who has worked with Pandora in the past but is not involved in this case.The difference between what the two sides are proposing may be minuscule, and indeed dwarfed by the costs of paying for nearly two years of litigation. But music executives say that the intensity of the fight underscores the importance of every percentage point in royalties as overall media consumption shifts online.For both Ascap and BMI, the larger issue in these cases is the threat of large publishers quitting those organizations entirely. Under their regulatory agreements, known as consent decrees, Ascap and BMI cannot refuse a request to license their songs, and recent rate-setting trials have left the music companies frustrated.In the Ascap case last year, the judge left Pandora’s royalty rate unchanged but dealt the music world a blow by saying that Ascap and two large music publishers, Sony/ATV and Universal, demonstrated “troubling coordination” in how they negotiated with Pandora. That opinion may have set off action by the Justice Department, which last summer issued inquiries to Ascap and the publishers.Ascap and music publishers appealed last year’s Pandora decision. Oral arguments in that appeal are set to begin next month.A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Pandora Readies for Another Royalties Battle, This Time With BMI.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.