By JACK EWINGFEB. 6, 2015
FRANKFURT — Siemens, one of Germany’s flagship industrial companies, said on Friday that it planned to cut 7,800 jobs, or 2.3 percent of its work force worldwide, as it eliminates layers of management in an attempt to become as profitable as its main competitors.About 3,300 of the job cuts will be in Germany. Over all, the company’s staffing levels will remain stable worldwide, it said, because Siemens will invest about 1 billion euros, or about $1.1 billion, in improving its sales force and in research and development. Siemens has about 340,000 employees worldwide, including 46,000 in the United States and Puerto Rico.Joe Kaeser, the Siemens chief executive, had signaled last week that job cuts were likely after the company reported a 25 percent fall in net profit in the last quarter of 2014.The job cuts are part of a broader reorganization, announced last year, which included reducing the number of its main business units to 10 from 16. Siemens has often faced criticism for being too bureaucratic and slow-moving.AdvertisementSiemens is a major supplier of equipment to the energy industry, and has been hit by reduced demand from oil producers after a plunge in oil and gasoline prices. Siemens also makes high-speed trains and other equipment for public transportation, as well as medical scanners and automation equipment for factories.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The changes at Siemens “will enable us to get our company back on a sustainable growth path and close the profitability gap to our competitors,” Mr. Kaeser said in a statement. “These steps will bring our businesses closer to our customers and make us significantly faster.”AdvertisementSiemens is often seen as a bellwether of the German economy, but in this case its problems may not be reflected by the economy as a whole. The company is suffering from its exposure to the energy industry, and from its need to improve a management structure that investors have long complained is inefficient.The job cuts at Siemens come amid signs of an upswing in German industry. Industrial production in the country, the eurozone’s largest economy, rose 0.1 percent in December, according to data published on Friday. Analysts said the increase, while small, was a positive sign considering the long break for the holidays. It was the first time since 2011 that industrial production rose four months in a row, analysts at ING Bank said.The data “shows that Germany’s industrial backbone is gradually gaining momentum,” Carsten Brzeski, an economist at ING, wrote in a note to clients.A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Siemens Prepares to Eliminate Layers of Management.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.