AdvertisementSupported byStrategiesBy Jeff SommerThe housing market has shown signs of life recently. Prices have risen, mortgage rates are very attractive and construction is reviving. But recall where the market has been over the last 20 years and you’ll start to see a less cheerful picture. In fact, from a longer perspective, it appears that the housing market, as it stands now, isn’t stable or sustainable. It is, arguably, still on artificial life support. Return for a moment to November 1994. That’s when President Bill Clinton told the National Association of Realtors that many more Americans should own their own homes, because homeownership went “to the heart of what it means to harbor, to nourish, to expand the American dream.” He called on the nation to embark on a public-private effort to lift the homeownership rate, which then stood at just above 64 percent.In Mr. Clinton’s vision, so-called government-sponsored enterprises — the mortgage-financing giants known as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac — were to play an outsize role in providing affordable home mortgages to ever-widening groups of people. To a surprising extent, that vision became reality. The homeownership rate began to soar — census figures show that it peaked in 2004 at a little above 69 percent. That was during the Bush administration, which also embraced the dream of expanding homeownership. Anyone who was awake during those years knows that America had a colossal housing boom, followed by a monumental bust that shook the global economy. The housing market is now much improved. But the trauma of the public-private housing industry isn’t entirely over. That is evident in a startling statistic reported last month by the Census Bureau: The homeownership rate dropped all the way to 63.9 percent at the end of 2014. That’s lower than it was when Mr. Clinton said homeownership was too low. The rate has declined consistently for years now, a drop that accelerated with the wave of foreclosures set off by the housing crash. With thousands of people still owing more on their mortgages than their houses are worth, national preferences have been shifting and fewer people say they believe they should buy a home. A national consumer survey conducted for Fannie Mae in December asked whether people would buy or rent if it were time to move. The share who said they would buy fell to 61 percent — a record low. Those who said they would rent rose to 34 percent.This sea change in attitudes might be proceeding even more briskly if it weren’t for national policy aimed at giving people an inducement to buy homes. Consider mortgage rates: The average rate for standard 30-year fixed mortgages is under 3.6 percent, an extraordinarily low rate made possible, in large part, by the intervention of governmental or quasi-governmental authorities. First, there’s the Federal Reserve, which stepped into the market for mortgage-backed securities in 2009, filling the yawning gap that opened after banks and investors shunned that market after the subprime mortgage crisis. As of Feb. 4, according to data compiled by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the Fed held $1.74 trillion in such securities, giving it a dominant position.While it stopped adding to its holdings in October, the Fed is keeping those it owns, reducing supply. That, as basic economics tells us, tends to increase prices. In fixed-income markets, interest rates, or yields, move in the opposite direction of prices: The Fed is holding mortgage rates down. Until now, its actions have helped to fuel whatever housing recovery we’ve seen, but the Fed’s current policy bias is to tighten monetary conditions. As a result, mortgage rates are likely to rise. That does not bode well for the housing market. As Barclays Research said in a report last Wednesday to clients on the outlook for housing: “History suggests a rise in mortgage rates causes a decline in housing demand and residential investment.” Unless the incomes of working people rise sharply, which virtually no one predicts, housing will undergo “a bumpy ride toward normalization,” the report said.Then there are government agencies whose main focus is housing, like the Federal Housing Administration, which guarantees mortgage loans, and those two government-sponsored enterprises, Fannie Mae and its sibling, Freddie Mac.Fannie and Freddie are, technically, private companies. Until 2008, when they required a $188 billion bailout, they were often said to be both independent of the government and backed by it. That unusual status gave their bonds a cachet close to that of United States Treasuries. Now, Fannie and Freddie are wards of the government. They are, officially, in “conservatorship,” regulated chiefly by the Federal Housing Finance Agency. And while their cash flow is positive, they haven’t been building up capital as a cushion against losses from risky loans: Since 2012, the Obama administration has required that they send nearly all of their profits directly to the Treasury. That’s helping the government’s finances over the short term, but taxpayers will be liable if Fannie and Freddie’s loans sour again. The agencies don’t issue mortgages. They buy them from lenders, rebundle them into securities and guarantee them if they default — guarantees that have kept the market humming, reducing mortgage rates. Together, Fannie and Freddie are backstopping more than $5 trillion in loans, according to testimony in a congressional hearing on Jan. 27. Without that backing and those Fed purchases, the housing market would be in much worse shape.At the same time, statistics being compiled by the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative research organization, suggest that risky housing loans are again becoming more common. Most of these loans are being guaranteed by the F.H.A. and Fannie and Freddie, said Edward J. Pinto, co-director of the institute’s International Center on Housing Risk. The riskiest pockets of the country, he says, are in parts of California that were hit hardest during the housing bust. They include the Central Valley and Riverside and San Bernardino Counties. A longtime critic of federal housing policies, Mr. Pinto said: “We’re not in a crisis at the moment, but the trend is troubling. We’re heading in the wrong direction.” Melvin L. Watt, director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency, says those agencies are monitoring risk carefully, while also trying to fulfill their mandates to keep the housing market liquid and affordable. Mr. Watt has begun funneling some of the agencies’ money into a trust fund to provide housing for low-income groups and to reduce mortgage fees and required down payments. Those moves have raised the ire of congressional Republicans, like Jeb Hensarling of Texas, chairman of the Financial Services Committee. Mr. Hensarling said last month that the federal housing agencies were competing “to become the nation’s biggest subprime lender.” Mr. Watt, for his part, says it’s up to Congress to figure out what to do with Fannie and Freddie. With Republicans and Democrats at loggerheads, it’s highly unlikely that any decision will be forthcoming. In the meantime, it’s hard to be satisfied with the state of the housing market. It’s in far better shape than it was five or six years ago, when prices were plummeting and financing was frozen. We’re not in an urgent crisis. But it seems likely that we will be if some of these problems aren’t resolved. Advertisement