
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
FEB. 7, 2015
This interview with Lois Braverman, chief executive of the Ackerman Institute for the Family, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences for you?A. I grew up in a working-class section of Philadelphia, in a very close-knit family. We were first-generation Americans — from Romania and Russia originally — and my mother was very concerned that I become more American. They sent me at an early age to elocution lessons.I was very, very shy, and I learned from those lessons how to get up in front of an audience. They started putting me in plays at school, and I got much more comfortable speaking to large groups.Other influences?I’m the oldest daughter in my family. My mother was the oldest in hers, and my grandmother was the oldest of seven sisters. In the psychotherapy world, we call that being “loaded.”AdvertisementWhich means?You’re kind of loaded to be domineering. My mother and my grandmother were seen as very strong, opinionated, determined, disciplined and highly responsible women. Interestingly, we all married husbands who were the youngest in their families. The relational paradigm in the family was that women were in charge.And I remember thinking that my mother was always right. If she said, “No, this is a better way to do it,” it actually was a better way to do it. As I got older, I started feeling that I had her organizational sensibility, and I felt that my way of doing things was the right way to do it.I call that the “firstborn ‘right’ disease” because it can create a lot of difficulties in your personal relationships. But in organizations, it actually gives you the courage to make decisions and to take risks because you have this internal sense that you’re right. Even though I know intellectually I’m not always right, it’s easier to make a decision as a leader.How has your background as a psychotherapist affected your understanding of leadership?I didn’t come into the field to lead an organization. I was trained to do individual, couple and family therapy. One of the things about family therapy training is you come to understand that reality is all about perception. If people are in conflict, it’s because we really are perceiving some aspect of the world differently at that moment.What makes a big difference in relationships — especially marriages and parent-child relationships — is that when you hit those differences, does the other person make room for the difference? I have to make room for the legitimacy of your point of view, and not let my righteousness make me think my perception is more meaningful than yours. That idea fundamentally shaped me as a leader, because I saw how much trouble people had because they would get into these fights over who was right or wrong. It doesn’t generate a lot of creativity, and it doesn’t generate innovative ways of being together.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.How does that approach play out for you day to day as a leader?I may think I know the answer, but I hold onto that and say, O.K., but there may be other answers here. And there may even be differences in terms of how we define the problem, because it can be different depending on where you sit in an organization. There’s an administrative reality and there’s a front-line worker reality, and those realities are very rarely the same. Organizational conflicts escalate when people don’t feel heard, when they don’t feel like their perception of reality has a chance to at least be heard.AdvertisementA lot of companies also get bogged down because people operate in silos, and they see their colleagues as “them” rather than “us.”That kind of polarizing behavior can get very personal, right? People really start to demonize, pathologize or psychoanalyze others, and to see their colleagues through a negative lens. Often that comes from a place where you’re feeling anxious or stuck and not able to get something done. And so you really have to hold on to the idea — as a genuine, authentic, core belief — that everybody is really doing the best job that they can, and that they are a resource for you.But sometimes people just aren’t performing, and you have to let them go. How do you maintain the balance between empathy and making tough decisions about people?Because I’m really focused on what we have to accomplish. Everything has to be in the service of the families we see. I actually have fired quite a few people in my tenure, and it wasn’t easy. Some people were quite loved by a large number of their colleagues, but I had to keep the bigger picture in mind. Part of my responsibility as the head of the organization is that not everybody is going to be happy with me.How do you hire?I learned early on that my judgment could be really impaired by a great conversation. Someone being personable doesn’t necessarily make them very responsible. Even though it’s more fun to interview a personable and charming person, I now really look for people who are very responsible. If I’m looking for a young person for an administrative job that requires a lot of attention to detail, I hire someone with a high G.P.A., even if they’re not necessarily personable. You don’t get great grades unless you have worked really hard.If hiring were like speed dating, and you could ask somebody only a couple of questions to decide whether to hire that person, what would you ask?I would ask, “What do you think would be challenging for you to be working in this environment?” And, “In terms of your personality and temperament, what will you bring that will be helpful to working in this environment?”Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about the challenges of leading and managing.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Making Room for Differences.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »