By RAVI SOMAIYAFEB. 6, 2015
A compilation of Brian Williams’s television appearances shows how his accounts of a 2003 episode on military helicopters in Iraq gradually became more perilous.In the earliest days of the Iraq war, in March 2003, two convoys of helicopters left a base in Kuwait, flying toward Najaf and the front line. One convoy was hit by enemy fire, and the other was not, according to four people present that day.What happened to those helicopters has since become a matter of dispute. Brian Williams, the NBC News anchor, was embedded on one of those missions. In an initial report, broadcast in 2003, NBC’s Tom Brokaw described “a close call in the skies over Iraq.” Mr. Williams said, “The Chinook ahead of us was almost blown out of the sky.”In the years since, Mr. Williams adapted the story to say that he was actually on a helicopter that crash-landed after taking enemy fire. He apologized for the mistake on Wednesday, but since then, as the controversy over Mr. Williams escalated, conflicting accounts have emerged of what actually happened. On Friday, NBC News said it would begin an internal investigation that would review the Iraq episode and other reporting by Mr. Williams.The following account is based on interviews with four soldiers: Christopher Simeone and Allan Kelly, who say they flew Mr. Williams, and Jerry Pearman and Joe Summerlin, who were part of the mission that was shot down. (Mr. Pearman and Mr. Summerlin also gave an account at the time of the episode in 2003 to the military newspaper, Stars and Stripes.)Three Chinook helicopters of the 11th Aviation Task Force left the base first, the four men said. They were carrying heavy loads of Apache helicopter parts, slung beneath them. They were flying 50 to 100 feet above the desert at more than 100 knots.AdvertisementMr. Summerlin was on Aircraft 099, the second helicopter in the group. Below him, he saw five or six Iraqi men leap out of a truck, wielding weapons. Bullets began flying. They sounded, Mr. Summerlin said, like hammers hitting the helicopter. Most of the bullets and a rocket-propelled grenade, or R.P.G., hit the boxes of parts they were carrying. This almost certainly saved their lives, Mr. Summerlin and Mr. Pearman said, along with heroic piloting. Another R.P.G. also passed cleanly through the helicopter’s tail rotor without destroying it. Mr. Williams had film of that hole in his 2003 story.AdvertisementOne of the bullets that hit the helicopter struck its electrical panel. That and other damage caused the helicopter to rear up and down, its warning lights flashing. It landed and skidded to a halt near a desert airstrip, just feet from a sand berm that happened to have other American troops nearby. The other two aircraft in the convoy flew away to safety.Back at the air base, Mr. Simeone, part of a different division, was told that, in addition to carrying parts for a bridge to an area of desert known as Objective Rams on a separate mission, he would be carrying Mr. Williams, Gen. Wayne A. Downing and two or three of their staff members.Another pilot, Rich Krell, Mr. Simeone and Mr. Kelly said, flew the other helicopter in their group. Mr. Krell told CNN on Wednesday that his helicopter had been fired on, too. But on Thursday, he recanted his story and said he was “questioning his memories.”Mr. Simeone, along with Mr. Kelly and another pilot, said that they completed their mission safely but that a dust storm forced them to land. They saw Mr. Summerlin’s helicopter, surrounded by other soldiers, and decided that would be a good place to set down.As Mr. Summerlin recalls it, Mr. Williams’s helicopter landed at least 30 minutes or as much as an hour after their crash. Mr. Williams disembarked. He asked some questions, Mr. Summerlin recalls, took some video, and then left them without waiting to do an interview.Mr. Summerlin and Mr. Pearman said they thought Mr. Williams’s initial 2003 report was disingenuous. He conflated his mission with theirs, they said, and implied — but never said — that their helicopters were close to his.“It certainly cannot be a case of fog of war, or that someone is confused from 12 years ago,” Mr. Pearman said. “That is the kind of event that, to this day, I can remember a fair amount of detail.”AdvertisementMr. Summerlin’s wife, watching in Germany, did not see her husband in the NBC report, he said, and worried that perhaps her husband, who slept in the desert for days after the episode, was actually missing in action. “She was pretty upset,” he said.In 2003, Mr. Pearman said, soldiers could not send instant messages to their families. Communication was much more sporadic. “So when you start stories that are really untrue, you start muddying the water,” he said. “It’s not only a large problem because of the stories themselves, it’s hard for the families.”Mr. Pearman said that in another apology that Mr. Williams published on Facebook, the news anchor still seemed to suggest that his helicopter had been close to the ones that came under fire, stating that he “was indeed on the Chinook behind the bird that took the R.P.G. in the tail housing.” He was “still squirming around what actually happened,” Mr. Pearman said. “It wasn’t all that truthful.”For Mr. Summerlin, the reporting by Mr. Williams remains hurtful.“For him to diminish what we felt, what for me was a big experience,” Mr. Summerlin said, “is a slap in the face to all of the soldiers who were there.”A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page A17 of the New York edition with the headline: Soldiers in Brian Williams’s Group Give Account of 2003 Helicopter Attack.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.