AdvertisementSupported byThe WorkologistBy Rob WalkerSend your workplace conundrums to workologist@nytimes.com including your name and contact information (even if you want it withheld for publication). The Workologist is a guy with well-intentioned opinions, not a professional career adviser. Letters may be edited.During a recent job search, I heard back from a company about a position I desperately wanted. I had an in-person interview that went really well. Throughout the process, my main contact used phrases like “top candidate” and otherwise indicated that I had a good shot.Eventually I was told, “I’ll let you know either way by Monday.” Then came an email letting me know that there had been a delay. When I continued to hear nothing, I checked back and got the same line — delays in the process, corporate is doing background checks, we’re still really interested in you, etc. I never heard anything, and ended up accepting another offer elsewhere.I know that many interviewers make the promise that they’ll call either way and then don’t follow through. But because I got so far and seemed to be doing so well on this one, here’s my question: Should I be worried that I got a bad reference and that was the breaking point?I am sure I’ll be applying for jobs again at some point. So I wonder if this should be cause for alarm, or if it’s just impossible to find out what went wrong. ASHEVILLE, N.C.The fact that you landed a different job makes it seem less likely that there’s a Judas among your references. But having confidence in the people you’ve singled out to endorse you isn’t trivial. So if you have any doubts, you have a good excuse to conduct a reference checkup of sorts.Contact your references and ask if they did indeed hear from that company you were so interested in. Be careful how you frame this: You’re checking up on that potential employer, not your references. You may discover that they weren’t contacted, which would suggest that the problem lies elsewhere.If they did hear from the company, then press a little further. But remember the pretext of your inquiry. Don’t ask, “So did you say nice things about me?” Respectfully inquire — in a manner that suggests you know that your references are perceptive people — whether the potential employer’s call seemed perfunctory, engaged, enthusiastic, suspicious, etc. Listen carefully to the answer; there’s a good chance it will include clues about what your reference thinks of you, even though that’s not what you asked.The thing is, nobody wants to serve as a reference for someone he or she doesn’t really endorse. But it can be extremely unpleasant to just come out and say so. Anyone you enlist as a reference ought to be not just willing, but happy, to serve that role. Your real mission, then, is to give any reluctant reference a chance to subtly signal an enthusiasm gap.For example: “He was really thorough — and of course I raved about you and said he’d be crazy not to hire you.” That’s a keeper. On the other hand: “Oh yeah, she did leave a message, but I haven’t had a chance to call.” Judas!Peer Review: The Office NemesisI feel that your recent response to the person with the hostile co-worker — referred to as “Frank” — didn’t go far enough in citing possible ways to respond to the situation.The manager should inform Frank that outward displays of dislike or contempt toward a co-worker are totally unacceptable and will not be tolerated. The manager should spell out specifically what the intolerable behavior is, such as the eye-rolling and shuddering the letter-writer mentioned. I am in favor of pursuing further dialogue with the manager and co-workers, as you suggested, before taking such a measure. However, I think you could have been clearer in stating the writer’s right to a harassment-free work environment. ZOE WALDRON, NEW YORKSeveral readers advocated a tougher response to Frank, with some basically branding him a bully who should be disciplined or simply fired. I don’t disagree with these readers. In fact, I think their core point is worth addressing directly.Suppose Frank’s manager (as opposed to his co-worker) had asked for advice on how to deal with the situation as described: One employee supposedly has a visceral but unexplained dislike for another, and at times this manifests itself to such a degree that it’s obvious to the entire group.While managers can’t make employees like each other, they just insist on professional and respectful behavior. So as this writer suggests, Frank’s manager needs to be blunt about his unacceptable actions. Frank should have the opportunity to defend or explain himself, but the point isn’t to explore his psyche. It’s to be clear about what is expected of all parties in the workplace. If the problem persists, the manager has established the lines that shouldn’t be crossed, and the consequences.The back story may turn out to be more complicated than initially described. But it’s a manager’s job to address this sort of issue squarely. If there’s something more going on here than workaday office politics, it could develop into a serious problem. And either way, a manager should want workers to be focused on their work, not brooding about an unfriendly colleague.Advertisement