By BARRY MEIEROCT. 11, 2015
Dr. Dennis Paustenbach, the head of the scientific consulting firm ChemRisk, has long been a leading expert for companies under legal fire for environmental practices or product safety. He and his firm have also drawn the scrutiny of investigative journalists.In 2005, The Wall Street Journal reported on a controversial role ChemRisk played during the case that became the basis for the movie “Erin Brockovich.” Seven years later, The Chicago Tribune raised questions about a study by Dr. Paustenbach on the safety of flame retardants. And a 2013 article by the Center for Public Integrity examined his efforts to roll back a proposal concerning workplace safety.Dr. Paustenbach has insisted that ChemRisk’s work is scientifically sound and ethical, adding that plaintiffs’ lawyers have been behind the attacks on its credibility. And until recently, the company had never sued any publications or writers for defamation.But the firm is now locked in a legal fight with some unlikely and defiant opponents: two environmental activists who published an unpaid article in The Huffington Post about ChemRisk’s work related to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill.Advertisement“If they had not said a word and let it go, it would have slipped off into obscurity,” said one of the authors of the article, Karen Savage, a former middle-school math teacher who noted that the article was initially read by only 400 people.AdvertisementThe lawsuit against Ms. Savage, 49, and her co-defendant, Cherri Foytlin, 42, highlights how the Internet has blurred the line between activists and journalists. But it also raises questions about why ChemRisk is pursuing the case when it chose not to sue a more formidable adversary, The Wall Street Journal, against which it raised similar complaints.Thomas Clare, a lawyer who has long represented Dr. Paustenbach, said the researcher was traveling and unavailable for an interview. In a statement, ChemRisk, which is now a unit of Cardno ChemRisk, said its goal in bringing the action was to “set the record straight and alert anyone who chooses to publish false claims that they will be held accountable.”It also said that Ms. Foytlin and Ms. Savage had intended to write a “hit piece,” and as long as the article remained online, its “falsehoods will continue to do substantial harm to ChemRisk’s reputation.”The two women appear unfazed. Without resources to hire a lawyer, they initially represented themselves. And last year, after a New York state court threw out ChemRisk’s original lawsuit on jurisdictional grounds, Ms. Foytlin took to her Facebook page when the company again sued Ms. Savage and her in Massachusetts.“That’s cool fellas,“ wrote Ms. Foytlin, a mother of six who lives in Rayne, La. “We’re up for Round Two. Bring it, but you betta go tell ya Daddy that people with nothing to lose rarely do. See ya in Boston, Bruh.”The two women are also fighting back. Pro bono lawyers who now represent them recently filed a motion to get ChemRisk’s action dismissed under a Massachusetts state law that protects activists from lawsuits intended to chill advocacy on public policy issues. Such actions are known as strategic lawsuits against public participation, or Slapp suits.The paths of the women and ChemRisk converged not long after the 2010 explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico. Ms. Savage and her four children, who live in Boston, have spent summers in Louisiana. At the time of the BP incident, Ms. Foytlin had a part-time job writing feature articles for her hometown newspaper, which has since closed.AdvertisementBoth women said they became concerned about the potential health risks of chemicals released by the rig’s blowout, as well as substances used by BP to disperse the spill. Ms. Foytlin said she had taken a BP-sponsored trip to the gulf to observe cleanup activities and returned with a hacking cough.“I was having trouble breathing,” she said. “My doctor thought it was bronchitis, and that’s when I knew what people were saying about the spill were right.”In 2011, ChemRisk published a study that found no link between the volatile chemicals released by the explosion and the health problems that cleanup workers reported. ChemRisk described its study as “independent,” but Ms. Savage had her doubts, which intensified after she read an account in The Wall Street Journal about the firm’s role in a lawsuit indelibly associated with Erin Brockovich, a clerk at a California law firm who pushed the case forward.In that episode, a utility, PG&E, was sued over chromium leaking into a town’s water supplies. During those proceedings, it emerged that a 1987 study published by a scientist in China, Zhang JianDong, had found high rates of cancer among residents of villages there who drank chromium-polluted water.PG&E hired ChemRisk to examine the data underlying Dr. Zhang’s report. What followed has long been the subject of controversy.In 1997, Dr. Zhang published a second study in which he appeared to retract his earlier finding of a link between chromium-polluted drinking water and cancer. But in 2005, The Wall Street Journal reported that court papers indicated that ChemRisk had “conceived, drafted, edited and submitted” that research to scientific publications without disclosing its role in it. ChemRisk also paid Dr. Zhang $2,000 for his “research assistance” on the study, the newspaper reported.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ChemRisk has insisted that it did nothing wrong and that Dr. Zhang signed off on the report. But the professional journal that published the study retracted it.In 2013, Ms. Foytlin and Ms. Savage, who met before a protest march by Gulf Coast activists from New Orleans to Washington, contributed an article to The Huffington Post about ChemRisk and its Deepwater Horizon report.In it, they charged that ChemRisk had a “long, and on at least one occasion fraudulent, history of defending big polluters,” a reference to their interpretation of The Journal’s article about the “Erin Brockovich” case.AdvertisementA spokesman for Dr. Paustenbach immediately asked The Huffington Post to retract the article. The website referred the complaint to Ms. Foytlin, who posted a note on her Facebook page in which she told ChemRisk to “kiss my derriere.”ChemRisk then filed its defamation lawsuit. But the company, while suing Ms. Foytlin and Ms. Savage, apparently opted not to file a similar action against a more experienced opponent, The Wall Street Journal.Responding to questions from The New York Times, ChemRisk initially issued a statement saying that it had not sued the newspaper because it believed that The Journal’s decision to publish several letters to the editor had “set the record straight.”But the company revised that stance after a Times reporter informed it that a review of correspondence showed that ChemRisk had apparently demanded that The Journal, long after publishing those letters, retract or correct its article.“If we had known that we’d still be dealing with the damaging falsehoods in The Wall Street Journal article nearly 11 years after it was printed, we definitely would have sued The Journal in 2005,” Mr. Clare, the firm’s lawyer, said in a statement.ChemRisk’s letters to The Journal a decade ago also indicate that it made nearly identical claims about the economic and reputational damage it had suffered from the newspaper’s article as the ones it is now making in its lawsuit against Ms. Foytlin and Ms. Savage.“The financial and professional impact of this story has now directly resulted in the loss of millions of dollars in revenues for our organization and this cannot be tolerated,” Dr. Paustenbach wrote The Journal in 2006. “A retraction or correction of the record must occur.”At a hearing scheduled for this week, a judge in Massachusetts is expected to hear arguments about whether Ms. Foytlin and Ms. Savage qualify for protection under the state’s anti-Slapp statute. And that question may hinge on whether the women acted as journalists or as activists seeking to influence public policy.AdvertisementIn court papers, ChemRisk has argued that the state law does not apply to the women because, among other reasons, its protections are limited to those participating directly in public policy decisions, like matters before a town council.Ms. Savage, who is studying journalism part time at the City University of New York, said that she and Ms. Foytlin rejected an earlier offer from ChemRisk to drop the case if they retracted the article and issued an apology over social media. Their stance is unlikely to change.“Just the idea that they think they can get anything from me,” Ms. Foytlin said. “I have a mortgage, a 1999 Suburban and I have six kids.”A version of this article appears in print on October 12, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Criticized in Print, Consultant Takes On Defiant Foes .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.