First, the Manitowoc Company announced that it would split itself in two, after facing pressure from two of the most prominent activist shareholders around.Now, the manufacturer, based in Wisconsin, has struck a formal peace agreement with one of them, the billionaire Carl C. Icahn.Manitowoc said on Monday that it would give Mr. Icahn a seat on both its own board and that of the food service division that it plans to spin off as an independent company next year. It also agreed to shape the food-service business’ corporate governance with an eye toward shareholder-friendly provisions. Those include putting its directors up for election every year and letting investors with the support of at least 10 percent of outstanding shares call for a special meeting of their fellow shareholders.Moreover, the company agreed to give Mr. Icahn a waiver from a Wisconsin state law clamping down on hostile takeovers, a move that will let the activist investor accumulate up to a 14.99 percent. He currently owns about a 7.7 percent stake.In return, the billionaire has agreed to support Manitowoc’s existing slate of directors at the company’s annual meeting this year, as well as to refrain from further public criticism.“We applaud the ability of Manitowoc’s board of directors and management to recognize the importance of separating the companies as well as the importance of good corporate governance,” Mr. Icahn said in a statement. “We strongly believe that the separation of Manitowoc’s core businesses will create two stronger companies and that, in combination with improved corporate governance, shareholder value will be greatly enhanced by this agreement.”The settlement highlights Mr. Icahn’s newfound fixation with the corporate governance rules of corporate spinoffs. With such newborn companies likely to draw takeover interest, he has argued, their parent corporations shouldn’t take steps to deter those suitors.That tact was unveiled last month. Mr. Icahn struck an agreement with eBay in which he will get a representative on the eBay board who can then become a director of the newly public PayPal. Moreover, the online payment processor also adopted similar corporate governance rules to Manitowoc’s food service unit.The activist investor then threatened a proxy fight at Gannett, arguing that the media company, which plans to break itself up in two, should adopt similarly lenient rules for both its television business and its newspaper division.Behind Mr. Icahn’s campaigns is the sense among corporate agitators that companies that plan to split themselves in two — a phenomenon prompted in large part by activist investors — are shielding their soon-to-be-spun-off divisions from takeover interest with strong defenses.Among the criticisms that the billionaire Nelson Peltz has leveled at DuPont is that the manufacturer has imbued its forthcoming performance chemicals spinoff with aggressive defenses. The business’ directors wouldn’t be up for election every year, for example, and changes to corporate bylaws would require the support of 80 percent of shares.“It’s corporate governance from the ’70s and ’80s. This is 2015,” Mr. Peltz told DealBook last month.People close to DuPont have argued that the rules are merely intended to give the newly formed company time to establish itself without have to worry about takeover interest from the start.