By HIROKO TABUCHIFEB. 8, 2015
When Paula Schneider took the helm at American Apparel’s sprawling factory and offices in Los Angeles last month, she found more than 3,000 cutters, sewers and designers working up a storm — but just one planner coordinating it all.It was symbolic, the brand’s new chief executive said, of the frenzied manner in which the company had been run under its founder, Dov Charney, fired last year because of accusations of sexual harassment and personal misconduct.“There was literally one person in the planning department,” Ms. Schneider said in an interview. “And for a business this size, that’s an insurmountable amount of work. There’s some brilliance here, there absolutely is. And there’s some things that could be best-in-class, but aren’t.”Ms. Schneider has set to work instilling more order and discipline. She added four planners to oversee the designing, knitting, dyeing, cutting and sewing that American Apparel has made it a point to keep in America, and she will soon add more.AdvertisementMs. Schneider is also setting a new tone with American Apparel’s suggestive advertising strategy, in the past described as borderline pornographic. She wants to steer some of that edgy energy, she says, toward social issues that its younger customer base might identify with.AdvertisementAmerican Apparel’s new advertising campaign features Brendan Jordan, the teenager who leapt to viral-video stardom when he danced in the background of a reporter’s live news broadcast at a Las Vegas mall.“Here’s this 15-year-old kid talking about how he came out of the closet, and what it’s like to be 15 and gay, and we gave him his voice,” Ms. Schneider said. “This is an edgy brand and it’s always going to be an edgy brand, and it’s about social commentary, it’s about gay rights, and it’s about immigration reform. It’s about the things millennials care about.”Ms. Schneider will need to bring more than discipline or a shift in advertising to save American Apparel, which has not turned a profit since 2009 and whose share price has since slumped by three-quarters since then.Though the company has started to narrow its losses, it is still expected to lose some $55 million this year, as problems with a new distribution center and legal costs related to Mr. Charney’s departure weigh on its bottom line.There are more immediate concerns over American Apparel’s future. Mr. Charney, who has fought to regain control of the company and owns 43 percent of its shares, has not given up on a comeback.The board is studying a separate offer of interest from Irving Place Capital, the private equity firm run by John D. Howard, which said in December that it would consider paying as much as $245 million for American Apparel, pending due diligence.The retail industry aimed at teenagers has been upended by the onslaught of so-called fast-fashion retailers like Forever 21 and H&M, which constantly churn out the latest runway-inspired pieces to offer at their stores for rock-bottom prices.AdvertisementWilliam Susman, managing director at Threadstone Partners, an advisory firm that focuses on the retail sector, said that American Apparel was poised to fare better than other such retailers, because of its emphasis on a core set of basic products that appealed to a younger generation with a growing logo fatigue.The American Apparel brand had a loyal customer base — but those strengths have long been squandered because of the management problems, he said.“The original culture at American Apparel was ‘wild, wild West.’ But today the company is a large entity and it needs to have a higher professionalism,” Mr. Susman said “But their customers are a little outsider, a little rebel. Paula can’t walk away from that too much.”Ms. Schneider, who previously led a turnaround at Warnaco, the world’s largest swimsuit manufacturer, also argued that American Apparel’s “Made in America” strategy makes it well placed to take on the fast-fashion threat.“If you look back in the early 1990s, there was a lot of stuff that was being made in L.A., made in America,” said Ms. Schneider, who has also held top executive positions at Big Strike, the women’s apparel company, and the women’s wear retailer BCBG Max Azria. “Then it became an obsolete business model because you could go overseas, you could make it for far less.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Fast fashion kicked in, and all of a sudden those people overseas couldn’t change things fast enough,” she said. “But we can put something out on the floor on Monday, find out on Thursday that it’s a hit, go back into production on it on Friday and have it back out on the floor again a week later. No one else can do that.”Another big focus at the company is its online business, where the brand has fallen behind rivals like American Eagle, she said. About 15 percent of American Apparel’s overall revenues are online, and Ms. Schneider said she would make it a priority to increase that number “significantly.”“Where we are, we don’t sell enough online compared to our peers,” Ms. Schneider said.Internationally, American Apparel’s expansion has been uneven, with just a single store in some countries, like Brazil or Switzerland. The retailer must decide whether to open more stores in those countries to build local awareness and momentum, or get out. The company runs 236 stores worldwide, of which 133 are in the United States.And at home, too, American Apparel will probably have to close some of its poorly performing stores, though Ms. Schneider said that there were other markets that were underserved that the company might expand into.AdvertisementPerhaps most significant, Ms. Schneider heads a company grappling with a problem that stems largely from Mr. Charney’s behavior toward female employees, which has dogged him and the company for years.Several women have filed sexual harassment lawsuits against the founder, and in 2010, the Los Angeles office of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission determined that the company discriminated against “women, as a class, on the basis of their female gender, by subjecting them to sexual harassment.”The American Apparel board fired him as president and chief executive in June after an internal investigation found that he had misused company money and had allowed an employee to post naked photographs of a former female employee who had sued him. Mr. Charney had denied all the accusations. He was completely removed from the company last month.Ms. Schneider, a well-known public speaker on women’s empowerment and preventing abuse, could help change that culture. Another woman, Colleen Brown, heads the company’s board, which until last year included only men. And Ms. Schneider pointed out that women now dominated American Apparel’s ranks: the presidents of wholesale and retail, the general counsel and the managers for Europe and Asia are all women, she said.It is unclear how aggressively Mr. Charney can pursue a comeback bid.He entered a partnership with a hedge fund, Standard General, to amass his stake in the company but in the process signed away virtually all of his voting rights on his shares, which he cannot exercise without Standard General’s consent.That agreement also allowed the hedge fund to name three of seven seats on American Apparel’s revamped board, including Ms. Brown. Mr. Charney declined to comment.Ms. Schneider, for now, is set on charting her own course. One of her recent priorities: American Apparel’s Valentine’s Day ads.“We have a woman who’s like eight feet tall in it, a transgender person, a woman who’s 70 years old,” she said. “So it’s a very broad mix of people. We’re a very accepting brand.”“It’s not going to be benign,” she said of the new American Apparel. “Whether it’s going to be sexy, or whether it’s going to be social causes, it’s going to be interesting.”A version of this article appears in print on February 9, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: With New Chief, American Apparel Shifts Focus.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.