AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel Bromwich“Is Russell Westbrook a cat or a dog?”Westbrook is, in fact, the star point guard for the Oklahoma City Thunder, so this was a somewhat jarring question to pose to his fellow players during the National Basketball Association’s All-Star weekend in 2013. Nonetheless, they played along.James Harden thought Westbrook was more of a dog. Dwyane Wade hedged. “He’s a cat-dog,” he said.Finally, Westbrook weighed in. “Wolf,” he said. The cat-or-dog question came from a host of “The Basketball Jones,” an N.B.A. podcast started in 2006 by three Canadian basketball fanatics who will bring their blend of deep basketball analysis and irreverent, goofy attitude to the N.B.A.’s All-Star festivities this weekend in New York.“I always think we were made for All-Star weekend, because it’s supposed to be fun,” says Phil Elder, one of the hosts, who is known professionally as J. E. Skeets. But this year, the hosts of “The Jones” will be broadcasting for the league itself. A little more than a year ago, “The Jones” podcast was rebranded as “The Starters,” a television program shown weeknights on NBATV. It is available to stream live and download as a podcast but it exists primarily as a television broadcast. In its second season, “The Starters” is growing quickly in popularity. According to the network, viewership has increased by 24 percent this season, with podcast downloads up 22 percent. NBATV says it will continue to raise the show’s profile. Plans for this weekend include an hourlong live show at 6 p.m. Friday, with player interviews and an appearance by the basketball great George Gervin. “They prove you can be entertaining and smart on TV without being overbearing and loud about it,” said Zach Lowe, an N.B.A. writer for the Grantland website and a podcaster.In the wake of the hit true-crime show “Serial,” podcasts are widely acknowledged to be growing. A recent report from Edison Research indicates a “dramatic increase in podcast consumption.”Jeff Ullrich, the co-founder of the podcasting network Earwolf, says the shift has been palpable. “My 70-year-old retired dentist in St. Charles, Ill., is telling me that he can relate to the thing that I have done in my career, when 18 months ago my best friends didn’t know what a podcast was,” he said.“The Starters” hosts are part of a wave of podcasting personalities jumping to television, including the soccer commentators “Men in Blazers,” the comedian Marc Maron and the hosts of “Comedy Bang Bang.” But the basketball enthusiasts acknowledge that the shift can be challenging. “The Starters” television show occasionally feels less rich to longtime fans of the podcasts. “What you’re hearing on the podcast is years of repetition and experience, so it’s kind of ingrained in us, and it’s pretty easy,” said one of the hosts, Tassos Melas, who goes by Tas. “While on the TV side, not that we’re not good at it, but it’s different every year. It’s just not shooting the breeze as easily,” he said. “They’re two completely different mediums,” Mr. Elder said. “Everyone was telling us, ‘It’s not the same, it’s not the same.’ Well it’s not the same because it’s a TV show we’re making.”Though “The Starters’ “ television audience is growing, Mr. Elder and Mr. Melas, with the show’s other personalities, Trey Kerby and Leigh Ellis, have not abandoned podcasting. This season they introduced “The Drop,” a weekly, podcast-only show that is downloaded 70 percent more frequently on average than the podcast of the daily “The Starters” television show, according to the network. Last week’s episode featured references to Katy Perry’s Super Bowl halftime show and a discussion of some of the more handsome N.B.A. stars.“The Starters” TV show has tried to incorporate the lighter elements of “The Basketball Jones” podcast in a way that recreates the spontaneity of its hosts’ old material. On their show last Thursday, in a segment called “Meme Team,” the hosts counted down some of the goofiest moments from the N.B.A. that week. Number one on the countdown was Westbrook’s reaction to being stiffed on a high five by a teammate. In the video, he turned around sharply and glared at the offending player.“That screams cat to me,” Mr. Elder said. “Case closed, right? He’s more like a cat.”Advertisement