By THE NEW YORK TIMESFEB. 8, 2015
Here are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week.• Brian Williams Begins Leave Monday night officially begins Brian Williams’s indefinite leave from NBC’s “Nightly News,” while the network investigates the anchor’s admittedly false account of a forced helicopter landing in Iraq in 2003 and his reporting during Hurricane Katrina, among other issues. Lester Holt, the anchor for “Dateline,” will step in as a substitute.Mr. Williams also will not appear on CBS’s “Late Show With David Letterman” on Thursday as had been planned, a person who works for NBC News confirmed. —Emily Steel• Oil and Steel Reports The fallout from the deep slump in oil prices will continue to be in evidence this week when Total, the French giant, reports quarterly and annual results on Thursday. Patrick Pouyanné, who became chief executive last year after the death of Christophe de Margerie in a Moscow plane crash, is expected to present his cost-cutting plans at a news conference in London.AdvertisementOn Friday, results from ArcelorMittal, the world’s largest steel maker, will show whether economic jitters in Europe are beginning to put the brakes on what had already been a painfully slow recovery for the industry. ThyssenKrupp, Europe’s second-largest steel maker, will report on the same day. —Stanley ReedAdvertisement• European Leaders MeetCan Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany avoid a showdown over austerity with Greece’s newly elected prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, at a meeting of European Union leaders on Thursday? Mr. Tsipras wants far less onerous terms for an international bailout of his country. Ms. Merkel, backed by leaders from other European creditor nations, wants the Greeks to stick to previously agreed-upon reforms and cuts.Mr. Tsipras looks set to win a vote of confidence in the Greek Parliament by a comfortable margin early in the week.But by failing to strike a compromise with Europe, Mr. Tsipras could lead his country into a default and a chaotic exit from the euro, which would pose risks to the wider European economy. Efforts to defuse the tensions go into high gear on Wednesday evening, when the Greek finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, joins his 18 eurozone counterparts for emergency talks ahead of the leaders’ meeting. —James Kanter and Niki Kitsantonis• Hasbro EarningsThe toy industry will be paying keen attention to Hasbro’s earnings on Monday morning, after a recent management shake-up at Mattel drew more scrutiny to two giants that have struggled to keep up with changes in technology and consumer appetites. Unlike Mattel, whose earnings have been gloomy, Hasbro’s earnings per share have been roughly flat in recent years. Analysts will pay special attention to how much items like Hasbro’s Get Up and GoGo My Walkin’ Pup Pet and Transformers action figures lifted holiday sales. —Rachel Abrams• Swiss Bank ResultsThe Swiss bank UBS will report its fourth-quarter results on Tuesday and Credit Suisse will report its results on Thursday. The big question on the minds of investors this week will be the potential impact on the banks’ bottom lines of the rise of the Swiss franc to the euro. Last month, Switzerland abandoned measures to hold down the value of the franc to the euro as concerns about Europe’s economy pushed the euro downward.UBS and Credit Suisse have both said that they did not sustain trading losses as a result of the jump in the franc after the Swiss National Bank’s move in January, but the rise in the franc could potentially lower their profits. Both banks hold capital in a variety of currencies, like the dollar, but report results in francs.In a research report last month, Barclays estimated that the move in the franc could reduce UBS’s results by as much as 14 percent and Credit Suisse’s results by as much as 15 percent. —Chad BrayAdvertisement• Clash Over Music Royalties Trial begins in federal court in New York on Tuesday in a case pitting Pandora Media, the Internet radio giant, against the music licensing agency BMI, the latest clash over the value of music online.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pandora wants its royalty rate lowered to what terrestrial radio broadcasters pay, while BMI — a clearinghouse for millions of songs — wants Pandora’s rate raised, arguing that it makes more intensive use of music than any traditional radio station.The case comes as Pandora has been pummeled by Wall Street over lower-than-expected revenues, and also as legal and regulatory issues in the music industry are under scrutiny. Last week the United States Copyright Office recommended a series of changes in music copyright, and the Justice Department is currently considering changes in the decades-old regulatory agreements that govern BMI and its rival, Ascap. —Ben Sisario• Chinese Inflation China releases its consumer price index and producer price index for January on Tuesday morning in Beijing. Falling prices for oil and other commodities are expected to result in very low inflation at the consumer level, around 1 percent, and continued deflation at the producer level, with prices falling more than 3 percent from a year earlier.But other monthly statistics normally issued in the second week of each month will not be coming out at all, including industrial production, retail sales, overall fixed asset investment and real estate investment.The Lunar New Year holiday falls each year between late January and the middle of February — it is in the third week of February this year — and has a big effect on the economy because factories close for at least a week and often longer. So year-on-year comparisons of output in January or February are almost meaningless, and China waits until early March to release aggregate figures for January and February for numerous economic indicators. —Keith Bradsher • Elis I.P.O Elis, the French provider of rental uniforms, table and bed linens and carpets to businesses, is expected to begin trading on Euronext in Paris on Wednesday after pricing its initial public offering. The offering comes as European I.P.O.s are on pace for their best start since the financial crisis. Elis intends to sell 670 million euros, or about $763 million, in new shares in the I.P.O., while an entity controlled by the French buyout company Eurazeo and a group of Elis employees and managers plans to sell about €50 million of their holdings in the company.Eurazeo acquired Elis from the French private equity firm PAI Partners in October 2007 in a deal that valued the company at about €2.28 billion. Eurazeo currently holds an 83 percent stake in Elis. Elis expects to price its I.P.O. at €13 to €16.50 a share. —ChadBray• Tesla’s NumbersThe electric carmaker Tesla Motors will report its fourth-quarter earnings on Wednesday evening, and investors will be watching to see whether the company was able to achieve its goal of delivering 33,000 cars last year. Unlike other automakers, Tesla does not report monthly sales figures, only quarterly deliveries, and it needs around 11,000 more vehicles to make its target.AdvertisementTesla’s stock is still up year-over-year, but it has been in a slide since September as the market worried about the company’s troubles in China and the prospect that Tesla might not be profitable until the end of the decade. —Aaron M. Kessler• Fashion Week BeginsThe fall New York Fashion Week kicks off Wednesday, a perfume-infused nine days of designer shows from upstarts like Karolina Zmarlak and industry stalwarts like Marc Jacobs and Ralph Lauren. Among the events generating the most buzz is the expected introduction of a new line from Adidas and the hip-hop artist Kanye West, reflecting the strength of the “athleisure” fitness apparel boom in the United States. The twice-yearly fashion week, sponsored by Mercedes and run by the WME-IMG agency, is in the midst of an overhaul, and is set to move from Lincoln Center to downtown Manhattan later this year. —Hiroko Tabuchi• January Retail SalesOn Thursday, the Commerce Department will report on retail sales in January. In December, retail sales fell as gas stations took in less money because of plunging energy prices, and because some holiday shopping had shifted to November. Economists expect the headline number to decline again for January, with gas prices continuing to drop and auto sales softer. Excluding those two often-volatile categories, economists expect retail sales to have increased by 0.4 percent in January, as consumers put the money they were saving on fuel to work elsewhere. In addition, frantic preparation for the blizzard that largely failed to materialize on the East Coast may have given retail activity a tiny boost last month. —Nelson D. SchwartzA version of this article appears in print on February 9, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.