AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberA pair of fast-growing digital media companies, Vox and BuzzFeed, have landed their first interviews with President Obama.Ezra Klein and Matt Yglesias of Vox sat down with the president in January. Their interview will be published online Monday morning. Ben Smith, the editor in chief of BuzzFeed, will speak with the president at the White House on Tuesday.The interviews are the latest indication that Vox and BuzzFeed News have emerged as serious news organizations, and are a further sign of the Obama administration’s efforts to connect with millennials and broaden its reach beyond traditional media outlets.“We’ve always covered the White House quite aggressively, and I think that they want to speak to our audience,” Mr. Smith said. “This is sort of a demonstration of how, when you do serious news and you have a mass audience, those things can really support each other rather than getting in each other’s way.” Mr. Obama will also participate in a video shoot with BuzzFeed’s new video production unit.Vox and BuzzFeed News are both leveraging Facebook to publicize the conversations. On Sunday afternoon, Vox posted a short preview of its interview on the social networking site. BuzzFeed News has invited users to submit questions for the president before the interview, and plans to post video of Mr. Obama exclusively on Facebook.The interviews are the most recent attempt by President Obama to use new media platforms, including YouTube, Twitter and Vine, to get out his message on a number of policy issues. Mr. Obama has also appeared on the mock celebrity interview show “Between Two Ferns,” on the comedy website Funny or Die, and sat for interviews on “The Daily Show” and “The Colbert Report.”Dan Pfeiffer, the departing senior adviser to the president, plans to offer recommendations for integrating the White House’s digital media strategy with its communications operation.For both BuzzFeed News and Vox, the interviews represent a significant step forward for new digital media organizations, which continue to encroach on territory once reserved for print and broadcast news outlets.“Interviewing the president is a great journalistic opportunity, and that’s how we approached it,” Mr. Klein said in a statement. “What we wanted to do here, above all, was to create something that would have a lot of enduring value to our readers.”In the brief video clip posted on Vox’s Facebook page, Mr. Obama’s remarks are interspersed with infographics. By Sunday evening, the video had already been viewed more than 320,000 times.Advertisement