FEB. 8, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.09 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.02 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:TUESDAYFranklin, N.J., Board of Education, $81.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.South Carolina, Coastal Carolina University, $95 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Washington State, $483.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYMaryland Department of Transportation, $280 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementPalm Beach County, Fla., $66.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYSequoia Union High School District, Redwood City, Calif., $55 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementONE DAY DURING THE WEEKBrevard, Fla., Board of Education, $101 million of certificates of participation. Citigroup Global Markets.California, $154.5 million of River Islands Public Financing Authority bonds. Southwest Securities.California, $195 million of college debt securities. Morgan Stanley.Colorado, $67.9 million of certificates of participation. Stifel Nicolaus.Connecticut Housing Finance Authority, $150 million of housing mortgage finance program bonds. Bank of America.Detroit Public Schools, $187.5 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.El Paso Independent School District, $108.4 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. William Blair.Gwinnett County, Ga., School District, $240 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hartford Stadium Authority, $59.8 million of lease revenue bonds. Jefferies.Indiana Finance Authority, $136 million of state revolving fund refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Indiana, $91.2 million of hospital debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Louisiana Local Government Environmental Facilities and Community Development Authority, $62.5 million of health care facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler.Maryland, $165 million of Johns Hopkins University taxable bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.McLennan County, Tex., Junior College District, $52 million of limited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James.AdvertisementNashville, $104.3 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.New York Mortgage Agency, $132.3 million of homeowner mortgage revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Oklahoma City, $64.8 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Omaha Public Power District, $90 million of electric system revenue bonds. Bank of America.Pennsylvania Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $300 million of university revenue bonds. Bank of America.Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency, $149.4 million of single family mortgage revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.South Carolina Public Service Authority, $1.1 billion of revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Tacoma, Wash., $98.1 million of sewer revenue and refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Torrance, Calif., Unified School District, $163 million of general obligation bonds. George K. Baum.Washington State University, $170 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.A version of this article appears in print on February 9, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.