AdvertisementSupported byBy Stanley ReedLONDON — Under pressure from the British government, the LetterOne Group, an investment vehicle led by the Russian billionaire Mikhail Fridman, said on Sunday that it had sold oil and natural gas assets in the British North Sea to Ineos, a Switzerland-based petrochemical company with no previous experience operating oil and gas fields.LetterOne acquired the North Sea holdings in March as part of its purchase of DEA, the Hamburg-based unit of the German utility RWE, for 5.1 billion euros, or $5.8 billion. But the British government refused to accept LetterOne as the new owner out of concerns that Mr. Fridman and his partners might in the future be subject to Western sanctions. Britain and other Western countries have imposed a variety of sanctions against Russian interests in response to Russia’s intervention in Ukraine.Mr. Fridman appears to hope that the sale will allow him to advance his goal of building a global telecommunications and energy conglomerate from a base he has established in London. With Russia under pressure from the West over Ukraine, Mr. Fridman needs a secure international base from which to pursue acquisitions and manage his interests.There are signs that relations with the government of Prime Minister David Cameron have improved since May, when Mr. Cameron’s Conservative Party won a majority in Parliament and was no longer obliged to govern in a coalition with the Liberal Democrats.As evidence of a change in tone, LetterOne received a letter in July from a senior official in the British Department of Energy and Climate Change, stating that “the U.K. welcomes inward investment” and that the decision to force the sale of the North Sea assets “is not a judgment on the suitability of LetterOne’s owners to control these or any other assets in the U.K.” Jonathan Bennett, a British government spokesman, declined to comment on the letter or confirm its authenticity.Britain’s reluctance to have a Russian billionaire operate what it considers to be strategic assets has given Ineos the opportunity to acquire some choice fields in the North Sea at a time when prices have been driven down by the sharp fall in oil and gas prices over the last year. Ineos purchased the British assets for about $750 million, according to a source close to the negotiations, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.According to Ineos, the fields it is acquiring account for up to 8 percent of Britain’s gas production, “enough to warm one in 10 British homes.” While Ineos lacks experience in operating oil and gas fields, it owns major refining and petrochemical businesses in Britain, including a complex at Grangemouth, Scotland, which was the site of a struggle between the company and labor unions in 2013.Jim Ratcliffe, Ineos’s chairman and main shareholder, has been trying to secure energy supplies and raw materials for his operations by importing shale gas from the United States. He is also seeking government permission to explore for shale gas in Britain. Mr. Ratcliffe said in a statement on Sunday that the acquisition was the “first step” in fulfilling the company’s goal of making strategic investments in the North Sea. “It will also help our U.K. petrochemical assets to have ongoing access to competitive energy,” the statement said.Mr. Fridman has moved his residence to Britain and set up a corporate headquarters in London to manage his growing holdings outside of Russia. Through his L1 Energy subsidiary, which has as its chairman John Browne, the former chief executive of BP, Mr. Fridman plans to invest as much as $10 billion in oil and gas properties around the globe.According to its website, LetterOne manages about 48 percent of VimpelCom, a large telecommunications company based in Amsterdam, and about 13 percent of Turkcell, a Turkish telecom company. LetterOne says it is looking for further acquisitions, including companies that develop apps and streaming services, and operators of data centers and signal towers.Advertisement