Divestment, the rallying cry against apartheid in the 1980s, just isn’t what it used to be.The updated version of the practice, which advocates the shunning of stocks of companies perceived to be involved in something objectionable, is focused on fossil fuels. Stanford and a handful of other colleges have pledged to divest their endowments of such investments, but in a world where universities are fighting for every dime and trying to keep tuition rates down, most of them, including Harvard and Yale, have demurred.Divestment has always been a bit peculiar. As an individual, if you don’t want to own the stocks of a cigarette or gun manufacturer, that is your call. There are any number of socially responsible funds permitting you to do so. Divestment campaigns, on the other hand, typically involve someone else’s money, often university endowments. Universities are usually liberal communities that often view themselves as agents of social change, which may make divestment an easier sell.This was certainly the case in the campaign against South African apartheid. More than 180 universities, including Stanford, Harvard, Yale and the University of California, agreed to divest in whole or in part their investments in companies that did business in South Africa.The South African campaign is the platinum standard for the fossil fuel, and indeed any other, divestment movement. Activists often try to paint their campaigns to be as similar as possible to the South African one, hoping to pick up the gloss and ignite momentum among universities that will push the entire nation to act.Yet the problem with this view is that the apartheid divestment movement, at least, may not have accomplished much of anything. The leading study on the issue found that the stock prices of companies singled out by the campaign did not suffer any significant declines. That makes intuitive sense. Markets were already aware that these companies were involved with South Africa, and there are always investors who are simply willing to earn a return. That’s what the authors found — those who made opposition to apartheid a priority sold and others simply bought. Economically, divestment appears to have had little effect on companies.There’s no reason to think that would be different in the case of fossil fuels. Fossil fuels are a trillion-dollar industry, and most investors cannot avoid it. After all, 43 companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index are energy companies.Still, even if divestment has no economic effect, it could have a practical one, pushing society as a whole to embrace it. Again, the South African campaign is the role model. It contributed to the adoption of the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act of 1986, which imposed sanctions against South Africa. And 250 United States companies did indeed divest, though exports to South Africa actually grew from 1985 to 1988. So while there is no significant evidence that the divestment movement directly reduced company values, it did make the atmosphere more heated for companies that remained in South Africa.But unfortunately for the fossil fuel divestment movement, times have changed.Endowments are the lifeblood of the elite universities. Harvard’s $36 billion endowment produces a third of the university’s annual revenue. For the university, politicizing its endowment may not be an option given that every cent of return is needed. This is the line Harvard’s president, Drew Faust, took in rejecting the call to divest from fossil fuels. “Significantly constraining investment options risks significantly constraining investment returns,” she said. Universities simply don’t want to risk not earning the money they need. And it goes without saying that if the endowment return falls short, students will pay the cost in terms of higher tuition.Then there is the danger of the slippery slope. If a university divests from fossil fuels, what will be next? Just this last week, the student council of the University of California system voted to call on the university to divest from Brazil, Egypt, Indonesia, Israel, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, Sri Lanka and the United States — yes, even the United States — because of what it called human rights violations. The University of California in particular has faced repeated calls for divestment in connection with a number of issues of varying importance. To stem the tide, it now has a policy to divest only from those companies doing business with any country that the United States has declared is committing genocide.It is easy to poke fun at a student council and the idealistic world students live in, but once an endowment starts divesting for noneconomic reasons, it could be a very steep hill indeed. Investing would be dictated by a cacophony of political interests instead of sound economic principles. Ms. Faust of Harvard addressed this in her statement, noting that conceiving “of the endowment not as an economic resource, but as a tool to inject the university into the political process or as a lever to exert economic pressure for social purposes” would jeopardize the academic mission of Harvard. It also might hurt the very students asking for divestment by reducing the significant subsidy they receive from Harvard’s endowment.The fossil fuel divestment movement is acutely aware of this issue and responds by saying it is unique. It frames divestment as one of the few defining issues of our time involving an existential crisis.Stanford was a big coup for the activists because its endowment of $21 billion is huge and it was willing to act. But Stanford might be unique among the most prestigious universities. Thomas F. Steyer, the hedge fund billionaire who is on the board of trustees and is a big donor, is spending hundreds of millions of dollars to finance candidates to address global warming and pushed hard for the resolution. Moreover, Stanford has a history of taking steps on the environment, calling in 2009 for Exxon Mobil to address global warming. So Stanford may be an outlier, a product of its history and donor base.But even Stanford did not fully embrace the movement. It did not divest from oil, natural gas or power companies that rely on coal. It divested from only about 100 coal companies in a world with thousands and thousands of companies responsible for global warming.As a practical matter, Stanford couldn’t go further without severely crimping its investment policy. When Stanford decided to divest last May, the University of California decided against it. About 10 percent of its endowment assets are in fossil fuels.Stanford divested from those coal companies, but they didn’t abruptly close shop. Indeed, even if every university agreed to divest, those coal companies would still be in business. Companies will not commit suicide in response. This is drastically different from South Africa, where companies could simply leave. So the endgame for the fossil fuel divestment movement is hard to see, at least in the case of divestment itself.Still, there is hope that Stanford’s step will ignite a greater and broader movement.So far, no other top university or one with a big endowment has joined in, but the University of Maine and the New School did recently. The list, though, is limited to about 20 mostly small institutions. This is not to say that the movement won’t convince more universities and even prominent groups. For instance, the Rockefellers, heirs to the Standard Oil fortune, announced last year that they were divesting from fossil fuels. And many universities will view it as an opportune event. The New School used its divestment announcement last week as a branding exercise, stating that it would “reshape” its entire curriculum around global warming and climate change.Ending global warming may be a noble and worthwhile goal, but perhaps the activists should try instead to lobby Congress and those that directly make policy. Universities are just trying to pay the bills.A version of this article appears in print on 02/11/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Using Anti-Apartheid Strategies to Battle Fossil Fuels.