AdvertisementSupported byPolitical EconomyBy Hugo DixonPopulism has infected European politics. But it can be beaten. The three things needed for mainstream politicians to win back control of the debate are competence, fairness and leadership. To some extent, the fight is already succeeding.Demagogic movements of the left and right have gained traction in most European Union countries since the credit crunch. Parties such as the National Front of France, the U.K. Independence Party of Britain, the Five Star Movement of Italy, Podemos of Spain and Syriza of Greece have burst into prominence.Populists are damaging because they propose seemingly attractive policies that would have disastrous results if implemented. This was glaringly the case after Alexis Tsipras — so far the only one of the current crop of populists to have taken power — became Greek prime minister in January.The first step, if mainstream politicians hope to beat back populism, is competence. For Europe at the moment, that means competent management of the economy. This is the main explanation for David Cameron’s re-election as British prime minister in May and Pedro Passos Coelho’s victory in Portugal this month. Mariano Rajoy, who is presiding over a fast-growing Spanish economy, should benefit from the same trend when he faces the voters in December.Mr. Passos Coelho and Mr. Rajoy have also benefited from Mr. Tsipras’s terrible first term in office, followed by a huge U-turn that has given the Greek prime minister a chance to redeem himself. This has been a useful antidote to left-wing populism in Portugal and Spain — so much so that Podemos has dropped to fourth place in some recent Spanish opinion polls.Matteo Renzi, the Italian prime minister, is also pushing hard to establish his credentials for competence. Mr. Renzi has initiated a whirlwind of reforms — to the gummed-up jobs market, the banking system and the country’s dysfunctional Constitution — in the hope that this will bear fruit by the time he faces the electorate in 2018.Mr. Renzi seems unafraid to bash far-left populists from foreign countries to remind colleagues in his center-left Democratic Party of the importance of sticking to the middle ground. Last month, he lambasted both Yanis Varoufakis, Mr. Tsipras’s disruptive former finance minister, as well as Jeremy Corbyn, the leader of Britain’s Labour Party.President François Hollande of France hasn’t shown the same commitment to change as Mr. Renzi — although his prime minister, Manuel Valls, and economy minister, Emmanuel Macron, have bought into the need to reform France’s sclerotic economy.While competence is the most important way to combat populism, it may not be enough. After all, Mr. Tsipras was re-elected last month despite a dazzling display of incompetence.Part of the explanation is that new parties are not yet associated with corruption. That includes nonpopulist parties such as Ciudadanos of Spain. By contrast, almost all established parties carry baggage.The right-wing ones need to stop kowtowing to big business. The left-wing ones have to cease pandering to trade unions and public employees. But all find it hard to break with their client-list pasts.Mr. Renzi has been the most successful politician in forging a new path. Though a man of the left, he has no truck with the vested interests of the left. He has started to articulate a concept of social justice, a central value for the left, which depends on giving everybody a fair chance rather than doling out goodies to specially favored groups.Mr. Cameron is tentatively taking a similar approach, albeit coming from the right. In his speech to the Conservative Party conference last week, he laid out a liberal, centrist vision of a society where everybody had opportunity. Now he needs to deliver on this.Even competence combined with a modern vision of fairness may not be enough to combat the demagogues. Leadership is also needed. Populism has found fertile ground in the eurozone partly because Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany lacked the courage to explain to her people how their country benefits from the common currency, and how foolish lending by its banks was partly responsible for the Greek crisis.Equally, if Britain quits the European Union, it will be largely down to Mr. Cameron’s lack of leadership. Not only has he done little to explain how Britain benefits from being in the union; his government has even told British business not to campaign in favor of membership until he has finished renegotiating the country’s relationship with it. The field has been left wide open to euro-skeptics to peddle the populist line that Britain can enjoy all the benefits of membership without the costs.Mainstream politicians need to have the guts to take the fight to the demagogues, in the same way that Mr. Renzi is. Combine that with competence and justice, and Europe will be able to keep the populist bacterium from escaping its Petri dish.Hugo Dixon writes a weekly column for Reuters Breakingviews. For more financial commentary, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement