Kohlberg Kravis Roberts said on Tuesday that its fourth-quarter profit fell 89 percent, hurt by turmoil in the energy sector.K.K.R., the private equity giant, said its economic net income — a profit measure that includes unrealized gains or losses — was $86.6 million in the fourth quarter, compared with $789.6 million in the period a year earlier. The earnings amounted to 5 cents a share after taxes, significantly short of the 45 cents a share expected by analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters.The disappointing results reflected heavy losses from K.K.R.’s investments in the oil and gas business. One energy company in its portfolio, Samson Resources, which it acquired with other investors for $7.2 billion in 2011, was wounded by factors including falling natural gas prices and a large amount of debt. K.K.R. said the losses in its portfolio of privately held energy investments were largely unrealized because it had not yet sold the investments. But such losses are an important factor in calculating a private equity firm’s profit.In its overall portfolio of private investments, K.K.R. said economic net income fell 88 percent, to $76.8 million, compared with results in the period a year earlier. The firm’s portfolio of public investments also proved troublesome, showing a loss. That segment reported an economic net loss of $11.4 million for the quarter, compared with economic net income $111.2 million in the quarter a year earlier. K.K.R. said the cause was unrealized losses in certain credit investments. Some of K.K.R.’s rivals have also suffered losses in energy, especially as oil prices collapsed in the second half of last year. Apollo Global Management said last week that its fourth-quarter profit fell 79 percent, harmed by investments like the oil and gas company EP Energy.K.K.R., which is led by Henry R. Kravis and George R. Roberts, was able to reap cash profit from its investments in the fourth quarter, but the rewards were lower than in the past. The firm said its distributable earnings — a profit measure that reflects cash that can be given to shareholders — declined 26 percent, to $376.3 million. K.K.R. announced a dividend of 35 cents a share.The firm raised capital for several new funds in the quarter, helping push its assets under management to $98.6 billion at the end of the year, compared with $94.3 billion a year earlier.K.K.R. and its rivals prefer to use nonstandard metrics to report results. According to generally accepted accounting principles, K.K.R. reported a $583,000 loss for the quarter, compared with a profit of $277.9 million in the period a year earlier.A version of this article appears in print on 02/11/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: K.K.R. Profit Disappoints.