By JOHN SCHWARTZFEB. 9, 2015
Universities that decide to shed their investments in fossil fuel stocks could hurt the value of their endowments, according to a new report.“The economic evidence demonstrates that fossil fuel divestment is a bad idea,” the report says.The study created a series of stock indexes, compared their returns and found that funds without energy-sector stocks underperformed those with them — by as much as 0.7 percent, according to the analysis.Adding in transaction costs and reduced diversification, “the costs to investors of fossil fuel divestiture are highly likely and substantial, while the potential benefits — to the extent there are any — are ill-defined and uncertain at best,” wrote the lead author of the study, Daniel R. Fischel, who is president and chairman of an economic consulting company, Compass Lexecon.The estimated cost to the roughly $456 billion in university endowments would be more than $3 billion a year.AdvertisementAs the divestment movement gains momentum, the report is likely to be cited in debates over divestment’s merits. An essay on the research by Mr. Fischel, who is also a professor emeritus and a former dean of the University of Chicago law school, is scheduled for publication in Tuesday’s Wall Street Journal opinion pages.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The new report was commissioned and funded by the Independent Petroleum Association of America. Professor Fischel said in an interview that the industry group and its financing did not influence the outcome.AdvertisementThe historical investment analysis used in the report cannot predict future market results, of course, and many proponents of divestment argue that selling off fossil-fuel stocks is also fiscally prudent, because those companies’ performance will be at risk if the world shifts away from fossil fuel consumption.Also, institutions that decide to divest generally acknowledge that their actions have more to do with moral considerations than economic ones. But Professor Fischel said that squeezed budgets could sway divestment discussions, as shrinking endowments could mean “decreased money for scholarships for disadvantaged students, which one might consider a worthy moral goal as well.”The new report counters the conclusions of prior research that predicts negligible impact, and even benefits, from fossil-fuel divestment. A June 2013 report from Northstar Asset Management predicted a divestment penalty of only 0.15 percent, and a report from the Aperio Group, a portfolio adviser, argued that the impact on portfolio returns of divesting the 15 stocks most derided by environmental activists would be “virtually nonexistent.”A version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Study Claims Oil Divestiture May Hurt College Endowments.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.