
Frequent Flier By                     
JARED GUTSTADT

FEB. 9, 2015
I WENT to New York about 15 years ago with plans on becoming a dot-com zillionaire. I moved right before the first dot-com bubble burst, so that didn’t work out. Then I figured I needed an actual skill and I enrolled in N.Y.U.’s Interactive Telecommunications Program at the Tisch School of the Arts.I started playing in a band to help pay for graduate school, and I was also editing and doing music for TV shows for an internship with Heavy.com. The only travel I ever did was with the band. We took tours across the country and I was delusional about our chances of making it big. I swear, every band we opened for did make it big. We didn’t.I realized I wasn’t going to be a rock star, but at the same time, I started getting royalty checks for some music I worked on for a TV show. It was an ‘aha!’ moment. Now I’m C.E.O. and founder of a six-year-old start-up called Jingle Punks, which creates digital music for clients.This is the most travel I’ve ever done. I’m not a great flier, and I do get a little nervous. I’m also a little shy, so at first, I found it somewhat difficult to talk to seatmates. Now, I really enjoy it.AdvertisementI’ve had many seatmates tell me about their children who may be tinkering in the garage with their computers and are mixing music. I love hearing about it, and through these conversations, we’ve actually found some people who are really great musicians. We’re proud that we could give someone a chance.In the early years of my business, I would freak out if I was late to a meeting or if any staff members were late. Now, I’m a lot more sympathetic, I realize how travel can just go wrong.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I was flying from New York to Tampa and I had checked some luggage. When I went to the carousel, my bags weren’t there. I was complaining a lot and then I heard this gentleman tell me to stop being a “meanie weanie” and do 10 push-ups.I realized it was the fitness legend Richard Simmons calling me out. I turned five different shades of red, but I did the 10 push-ups, and people started laughing. Mr. Simmons gave me some travel tips and we even took a picture together. That incident made me realize that I have to be a lot more Zen about business travel, and so far, so good.AdvertisementI do work a lot on the plane. I just stick my headphones on and do my thing. Like a lot of musicians, I also hum a lot of the music I may be working on, forgetting that I’m on a plane with people who may not appreciate my humming.We got a project from an ad agency whose client is Meow Mix. Everybody knows the Meow Mix jingle. It gets in your head and never leaves. It does exactly what music is supposed to do for a brand. Our job was to produce some remixes of the jingle in different genres for a viral campaign. So we did a cat rave, a country version and an electronic dance music track.It was a lot of fun for us, but it probably wasn’t a lot of fun for my airplane seatmates because when I was working on the project on the plane, I couldn’t stop humming the Meow Mix jingle. I mean who really wants to sit next to someone humming, “meow, meow, meow, meow,” repeatedly? I had more than a few people look at me like I was nuts, but I’m sure they started humming it, too.As told to Joan Raymond. Email: joan.raymond@nytimes.comQ. How often do you fly for business?A. At least once a week, mostly throughout North America.Q. What’s your least favorite airport?A. Turkey’s Ataturk Airport. I had trouble navigating it, which is kind of sad because I thought I was pretty good at this stuff.Q. Of all the places you’ve been, what’s the best?A. Whistler Blackcomb, the ski resort north of Vancouver, Canada. It’s my happy place.Q. What’s your secret airport vice?A. I’ve been lucky enough to be able to travel first class, and I love those first-class lounges and that 20 to 30 minutes I have to unwind. Jack Daniels and a good meal aren’t bad either.A version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Push-Ups, and Some Zen, at the Baggage Carousel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »