By RACHEL ABRAMSFEB. 9, 2015
Strong sales of Transformers action figures, My Little Pony products and other licensed toys helped Hasbro’s revenue rise 5 percent last year, despite negative currency fluctuations and broader industry woes.The company said on Monday that its adjusted net earnings in the fourth quarter rose to $154.9 million, or $1.22 a share, up from $148.8 million, or $1.12 a share, in the same period last year. The company’s shares closed up more than 7 percent on Monday, at $59.66.As children have increasingly favored digital toys and games, big toymakers have struggled to compete with smaller, nimble upstarts to create new products.International markets have become increasingly important to Hasbro, which has bolstered its foreign operations in recent years. Last year, overseas sales of $2.02 billion made up nearly half of Hasbro’s total revenue and increased 8 percent from 2013. By comparison, revenue in the United States and Canada rose just 1 percent to $2.02 billion in 2014.AdvertisementBut the strength of the United States dollar created unfavorable currency fluctuations for the company.AdvertisementWhile Hasbro’s revenue grew 5 percent to $4.28 billion in 2014, it would have grown 7 percent if not for changes in foreign exchange rates.Net revenue increased 1 percent to $1.3 billion in the fourth quarter, but would also have risen 7 percent, excluding a $75.4 million negative impact from currency fluctuations.Adjusted net earnings rose 10 percent to $408.7 million, or $3.15 earnings a share, in 2014.Hasbro’s results come after Mattel reported bleak financial results for the fourth quarter. Hasbro has done a good job of navigating some of the industry’s problems, like a decline in demand for traditional toys, especially those for younger children, said Sean McGowan, an analyst with Needham & Company.“They’ve got a better portfolio of licensed brands,” Mr. McGowan said.Mr. McGowan credited sales of Transformers action figures internationally, for example, for helping to increase revenue in emerging markets by 20 percent, to $689.8 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On a call, Brian D. Goldner, Hasbro’s president and chief executive, credited the strength of the company’s Transformers and My Little Pony franchises, as well as a spike in boys’ toys over all, with helping sales last year.Hasbro is also sitting on a potential windfall from some of its new licensing agreements, a major focus for the company.Hasbro won the rights to make toys based on some of Disney’s princess characters beginning in 2016, and Mr. Goldner said that the company’s entertainment and licensing segments posted their highest annual revenue ever last year.Hasbro will also introduce toys based on this year’s latest installment of “Star Wars,” the toy industry’s most anticipated film in a year crowded with big Hollywood movies.AdvertisementWhile Hasbro toys for films including “Avengers: Age of Ultron,” “Jurassic World” and “Fantastic Four” will hit shelves between four and eight weeks before the films’ release, consumers will begin to see some “Star Wars” products beginning in September, and then more film-related products closer to the movie’s December premiere, Mr. Goldner said.Some of Hasbro’s growth was offset by a 4 percent decline in sales of preschool products, including Playskool and Sesame Street brands, last year.Sales also declined for Furby, a cuddly talking creature that Hasbro revamped in 2012.Shipping delays at some of California’s ports required Hasbro to account for higher shipping costs, but Mr. Goldner said he did not expect the impact of the strikes to be significant in 2015.A version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: My Little Pony and Transformers Toys Help Lift Hasbro Sales, and Its Profit Jumps.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.