Jet.com, a soon-to-start online marketplace that aims to loosen Amazon’s grip on e-commerce, said Wednesday that it had raised $140 million in a new round of funding.The investment, led by Bain Capital Ventures, values the company at almost $600 million, according to people briefed on the funding round — an unusually high valuation for a start-up that has not yet opened for business. Other venture capital investors, including Accel Partners, General Catalyst Partners, Goldman Sachs and Google Ventures, also participated in the funding, which follows earlier investment rounds totaling $80 million.The start-up has generated buzz among investors with a novel approach to shipping and pricing. Jet.com promises to offer the lowest prices on the Internet by tackling what its founder, Marc Lore, says are gross inefficiencies that hobble e-commerce today. To offer the best deals, Jet.com matches shoppers with local merchants that might be able to offer lower shipment costs, for example, or allows shoppers to select slower deliveries or to waive returns for further savings. The service is set to begin on a limited basis in March.“Every time a customer adds something to their shopping basket, we reoptimize and reprice every item in the basket,” Mr. Lore said. “We’re more like a financial trading system than an e-commerce site,” he said. “We do the complicated math in real time.”Investors are also attracted to Mr. Lore’s past success with Diapers.com, a highly-successful site that Amazon acquired in 2010 for $550 million. Mr. Lore then helped the online behemoth bolster its household products offering, before leaving Amazon in 2012. “It’s a huge, gigantic, highly disruptive yet doable idea led by an amazing team,” said Joel Cutler, co-founder and managing director at General Catalyst Partners. “It’s illogical, shipping small goods in small amounts across the country. Jet offers a smarter way to do it.”Jet, however, faces a formidable and established opponent in Amazon, which is known to aggressively undercut rivals – even accepting losses on sales — to safeguard market share. Just as Mr. Lore’s Diapers.com was taking off, for example, Amazon waged a price war, dropping prices as much as 30 percent on diapers. And to pressure Mr. Lore to sell his business, Amazon rolled out a copycat baby products service called Amazon Mom – a move described by Brad Stone, author of the book, “The Everything Store: Jeff Bezos and the Age of Amazon,”  as Amazon’s “thermonuclear option.”News of the investment was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal. 