By BARRY MEIERFEB. 10, 2015
Doctors have long prescribed a muscle relaxant called cyclobenzaprine to treat injuries like back strains, using five- or 10-milligram pills.But doctors who also dispense the drugs they prescribe directly to patients have recently embraced a new pill that contains 7.5 milligrams of the muscle relaxant. There is no evidence to suggest that the pill works any better except, perhaps, for doctors and the middlemen supplying them. They can charge $3.45, or about five times as much as a five- or 10-milligram pill.Over the last two years, states nationwide have moved to crack down on so-called physician dispensing of prescription drugs, a practice largely limited to doctors who treat injured workers. But doctors and companies have responded by exploiting loopholes in those rules and adopting new strategies to stay one step ahead, recent studies suggest.One tactic has been to create novel dosages of old drugs to get around cost controls on traditional ones, according to a report issued in January by the Workers Compensation Research Institute, a group in Cambridge, Mass. Along with the 7.5-milligram version of cyclobenzaprine, the muscle relaxant, new dosages of two older painkillers, tramadol and hydrocodone, that carry far higher prices than the standard versions, have also appeared, the study found.Advertisement“The regulations stimulated this innovation,” said Richard A. Victor, the executive director of the research group, which is financed by insurers and state governments.AdvertisementAlong with the new drug strengths, doctors are finding ways to generate added income by dispensing medical foods and compounded drugs, other studies show.Typically, a doctor writes a prescription that is filled at a pharmacy. But with physician dispensing, the doctor gives the patient the drug and bills an insurer for its cost. Behind that transaction is a network of small companies and distributors that manufacture or repackage drugs for dispensing by doctors and collect payments from insurers, splitting the profits with physicians.Doctors say the practice benefits patients because it is convenient and allows physicians to better monitor the patient’s use of medication. Insurers and business groups have long tried to control or eliminate physician dispensing because of its higher costs and because doctors in some states were dispensing large volumes of narcotic painkillers like OxyContin.A number of states, including Florida, Pennsylvania and Indiana, have adopted rules tying the price of a drug dispensed by a physician to a benchmark known as the medication’s “average wholesale price.” The rules vary, but they typically allow the cost of a physician-dispensed drug to reflect a small markup above the medication’s “average wholesale price.” Some states do not allow any markup, but permit a doctor to charge a modest prescribing fee.Mr. Victor said that staff members at the Workers Compensation Research Institute, while reviewing data for another project, stumbled over information indicating that entrepreneurial doctors and companies had responded with new strategies. By producing a novel dosage, a manufacturer could also create a new “average wholesale price” for that dose that bore little relation to existing forms of the drug and could be many times higher.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Looking at two states, California and Illinois, the group found that doctors who dispense drugs had quickly embraced those dosage forms. By early 2013, dispensing physicians in California were using the 7.5-milligram version of cyclobenzaprine as often as traditional strengths. Just a year earlier, they had rarely, if ever, prescribed the new dosage and doctors who send patients to pharmacies do not use it, the study found.Similar trends were seen in California and Illinois for two narcotic painkillers, tramadol and generic Vicodin, which have recently appeared in new dosages at far higher prices, the study found. The new form of tramadol contains 150 milligrams, rather than 100 or 200 milligrams. The new form of generic Vicodin contains 2.5 milligrams of hydrocodone rather than five milligrams.A small Los Angeles-based company called KLE 2 Pharmaceuticals appears to be a major supplier of the new drug doses, which it promotes on its website. The company uses contract manufacturers to make the drugs, which it sells to middlemen known as repackagers that supply the medications to doctors. The president of KLE 2, Kevin Laxer, who also runs a compounding pharmacy, declined to be interviewed for this article.AdvertisementPrescribing data reviewed by The New York Times indicates that a Los Angeles physician, Dr. Edwin Haronian, and a Chicago-area physician, Dr. Ronald L. Silver, prescribe the new dosage forms of tramadol and generic Vicodin. They did not respond to telephone calls or email messages sent to their offices.Alex Swedlow, the chief executive of the California Workers’ Compensation Institute, a research group financed by insurers, said he was unaware of any evidence showing that the new versions of cyclobenzaprine, tramadol or generic Vicodin were more effective than existing ones.He also added that efforts by California lawmakers to rein in the cost of physician dispensing had largely failed, adding that companies and government officials had begun discussing other options to address the practice. “There is interest in moving towards a formulary,” said Mr. Swedlow, referring to a list of drugs that doctors could dispense for specific conditions.An executive with the Illinois Chamber of Commerce, Jay Shattuck, said that representatives there from insurance companies, businesses and government agencies expected to meet shortly to discuss the issue.Meanwhile, another recent study by a consulting group, CompPharma, found that doctors treating injured workers were increasingly using compounded medications, such as specially prepared topical creams to treat pain containing various drugs and ingredients. There is little evidence such preparations work, the consulting group reported.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: New Dosages of Old Drugs Help Raise Their Prices.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.