By EMILY STEEL and RAVI SOMAIYAFEB. 10, 2015
A compilation of Brian Williams’s television appearances shows how his accounts of a 2003 episode on military helicopters in Iraq gradually became more perilous.Brian Williams, the embattled NBC news anchor whose credibility plummeted after he acknowledged exaggerating his role in a helicopter episode in Iraq, has been suspended for six months without pay, the network said on Tuesday night.“This was wrong and completely inappropriate for someone in Brian’s position,” Deborah Turness, the president of NBC News, said in a memo. Lester Holt, who stepped in for Mr. Williams this week, will continue as the substitute, the network said.The suspension culminated a rapid and startling fall for Mr. Williams, who at age 55 was not only the head of the No. 1 evening news show, but also one of NBC’s biggest stars, a frequent celebrity guest on “Saturday Night Live,” “30 Rock” and the late-night talk show circuit.Mr. Williams has been drawing 9.3 million viewers a night, and his position seemed unassailable. Even as the stature of the nightly newscast faded in the face of real-time digital news, Mr. Williams was one of the most trusted names in America and commanded the respect accorded predecessors like Walter Cronkite, Tom Brokaw and Peter Jennings.AdvertisementBut his embellishment of his helicopter journey and questions about his other reporting undermined the trust viewers placed in him. In the six days since he admitted his mistake, he was pilloried relentlessly online, with Twitter feeds mocking him and amateur truth squads investigating his past reporting. Almost none of his peers in the news business came to his support.AdvertisementSix months is a long time to disappear from the television landscape, and analysts said it would be difficult for him to re-establish himself as a viable nightly presence.“I don’t know how he can ever read the news with a straight face, or how the public will respond if he does,” said Mark Feldstein, a broadcast journalism professor at the University of Maryland. On the other hand, he added, “Maybe they’re hoping that with a six-month cooling-off period, he’s got a loyal fan base.”Mr. Williams was informed of his punishment Tuesday morning when he went to the Upper West Side apartment of Stephen P. Burke, the chief executive of NBCUniversal. Only the two men were present, according to a person briefed on the meeting, and Mr. Burke informed Mr. Williams that NBC had decided to suspend him. The “Nightly News” staff learned about it in a meeting after the evening broadcast.“By his actions, Brian has jeopardized the trust millions of Americans place in NBC News,” Mr. Burke said in a statement. “His actions are inexcusable and this suspension is severe and appropriate.”Mr. Burke said that Mr. Williams “has shared his deep remorse with me, and he is committed to winning back everyone’s trust.” He added, “He deserves a second chance, and we are rooting for him.”NBC did not make its top executives available for comment, and Mr. Williams did not respond to phone calls and an e-mail seeking comment. A friend who spoke to Mr. Williams on Tuesday described him as “shattered.”For NBC, the suspension provides at least a temporary solution to the crisis that has engulfed the network since Mr. Williams admitted last week that he had misled the public with the helicopter story, and apologized. The episode has called into question not only the credibility of Mr. Williams but also the ethics and culture at NBC News. It is not clear whether other people at NBC were aware of Mr. Williams’s version of events.AdvertisementMs. Turness said in a memo to NBC News staff that executives decided to suspend Mr. Williams because he misrepresented the Iraq episode on the “Nightly News” broadcast. She said that executives also were concerned about the way he portrayed his reporting away from his newscasts. That includes his descriptions of reporting on Hurricane Katrina as well as other coverage.“We have concerns about comments that occurred outside NBC News while Brian was talking about his experiences in the field,” she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Saturday, three days after he apologized on his newscast, Mr. Williams announced that he was temporarily stepping aside from his show because he had become “too much a part of the news.” A day earlier, NBC started an investigation into Mr. Williams and his reporting. That investigation is continuing.“This has been a painful period for all concerned, and we appreciate your patience while we gathered the available facts,” Mr. Burke said.Mr. Williams’s departure further diminishes the vaunted standing of the nightly network news anchor; last year ABC News chose to keep its chief anchor, George Stephanopoulos, as the co-host of “Good Morning America,” and elevate David Muir to the evening anchor chair. And Mr. Holt, 55, while widely respected, is not as famous a figure at NBC as Matt Lauer, the co-host of the “Today” Show.The scandal is also a stinging blow for the NBC news division under its new chief, Ms. Turness, and Pat Fili-Krushel, chairwoman of NBCUniversal News Group. When Comcast acquired NBC Universal in 2011, Brian Roberts, Comcast’s chief executive, called the news division “the crown jewel” of his giant media group. At the time, “Nightly News,” the “Today” show and “Meet the Press” all ranked at the top of the ratings charts. Since then, “Today” has fallen behind its ABC rival “Good Morning America,” “Meet the Press” has suffered severe ratings declines, and now the network’s evening newscast is in disarray.Mr. Williams, who succeeded Mr. Brokaw in 2004, transcended the news division, and had ambitions beyond the anchor chair. About five years ago, as NBC was contemplating who would eventually replace Jay Leno as host of “The Tonight Show,” he told top NBC executives that he was interested in becoming a late-night host, possibly succeeding Mr. Leno. They called the idea ridiculous, telling him that he was a journalist, not a comedian, and to stick to the news department, according to two industry executives with knowledge of the discussions.That did not suppress his enthusiasm for the late-night circuit. It was an appearance on David Letterman’s show in 2013 — during which he exaggerated the account of being on a helicopter that was shot down in Iraq — that helped put him at the precipice of losing his job.If Mr. Williams does not return, finding a permanent successor will be a major problem for the network, which was not anticipating having to replace him. In December, Mr. Williams signed a new five-year contract reported to be worth $10 million a year. Mr. Holt, who had been the weekend anchor for NBC, was not previously considered a likely replacement.AdvertisementMr. Williams’s downfall began when he appeared at a New York Rangers game with an Iraq veteran in a tribute to a retiring command sergeant major. Mr. Williams subsequently suggested on his newscast that the sergeant had protected him from a dangerous situation in Iraq, when “the helicopter we were traveling in was forced down after being hit by an R.P.G.,” referring to a rocket-propelled grenade. “Our traveling NBC News team was rescued, surrounded and kept alive by an armor mechanized platoon from the U.S. Army 3rd Infantry,” he said.The military publication Stars and Stripes was tipped off that the account was inaccurate and contacted Mr. Williams, who admitted that he was not on the helicopter that was forced down. “I would not have chosen to make this mistake,” Mr. Williams told Stars and Stripes. “I don’t know what screwed up in my mind that caused me to conflate one aircraft with another.”Travis J. Tritten, the Stars and Stripes reporter who broke the story about Mr. Williams’s exaggeration, said he did not get any satisfaction from seeing Mr. Williams suspended. “Like the vets I spoke with,” he wrote in a Twitter post after the suspension was announced, “I just wanted to set the record straight.”David Carr contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Williams Suspended, at Low Point in His Career.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.