AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — Wholesale inventories barely rose in December, the latest suggestion that economic growth in the fourth quarter was even slower than initially thought.Still, the economic outlook remains buoyant, with other data on Tuesday showing job openings in December vaulting to their highest since early 2001.“The labor market is shifting into overdrive with jobs out there for nearly everyone,” said Chris Rupkey, chief financial economist at MUFG Union Bank in New York. “The litmus test for whether or not the expansion is on track and a solid one is always jobs creation.” Wholesale inventories gained 0.1 percent as lower crude oil prices depressed the value of petroleum stocks in December, the Commerce Department said. It reported an advance of 0.8 percent in November.Inventories are an important component of gross domestic product changes. The component that goes into the calculation of G.D.P. — wholesale stocks excluding autos — edged up 0.1 percent. But data last week, showing a 0.3 percent fall in manufacturing inventories in December, suggested the increase to G.D.P. growth from restocking in the fourth quarter was probably not as large as initially thought. Economists said the data in hand suggested that contribution could be cut by at least five-tenths of a percentage point, lowering the fourth-quarter G.D.P. growth rate to 1.7 percent.The government will publish its revised G.D.P. growth estimate later this month. In a separate report on Tuesday, the Labor Department said job openings surged to 5.03 million in December, the highest since January 2001, from 4.85 million in November.Hiring jumped to a seven-year high, while the number of job seekers for every open position — a key measure of labor market slack — fell to 1.73 in December, the lowest since 2007.Government data last Friday showed the economy added more than a million jobs over the past three months, a feat last achieved in late 1997.“Between the solid growth in labor demand and what we view as little remaining labor market slack, we expect that a modest pickup in wage growth will give Fed policy makers the confidence in the inflation outlook needed to move toward an initial rate hike by midyear,” said Jesse Hurwitz, an economist at Barclays in New York.Advertisement