William A. Ackman, the billionaire hedge fund manager, was trying hard not to talk about himself.Mr. Ackman, on stage at a hedge fund industry conference in Manhattan on Thursday, was interviewing a fellow hedge fund titan, Ray Dalio, who runs the giant Bridgewater Associates. But scarcely had Mr. Dalio answered the first question — how do you do what you do? — than he turned the tables.“I wonder how you do it,” Mr. Dalio said. “Do you wonder about bear markets? How do you not deal with that macro thing?”Mr. Ackman, whose investing style is to make far more concentrated bets than the broad-based wagers orchestrated by Mr. Dalio, was game, at least initially.“That’s an interesting interviewee approach,” Mr. Ackman said, drawing laughter from the audience, before explaining how he looks for high-quality companies to invest in. But Mr. Dalio wasn’t finished asking questions.The session — at the Harbor Investment Conference 2015, a charity event of which Mr. Ackman is a co-chairman — soon became an unusual colloquy between two hedge fund managers who have both achieved great success but who each seemed more than a little bewildered by the other. It was nothing like the usual format for these talks, in which a hedge fund luminary (Mr. Dalio, in this case) shares an investing idea that the audience can take home. Mr. Dalio refused to play ball.“Where would you put your money?” Mr. Ackman asked, trying in vain to wrest a headline from the talk. “Let’s say you were to buy one asset, or one stock, or one market, or one currency.”There was a pause.“I don’t do that,” Mr. Dalio said.“O.K,” Mr. Ackman said.“I’m sorry,” Mr. Dalio said.The Bridgewater founder, who has a penchant for expounding at length on arcane financial topics, explained to Mr. Ackman what his 300 investment employees spend their days doing. It involved much use of computers and “artificial intelligence” to find possible investments. All Mr. Ackman could do was marvel at how different that data-driven strategy was from his more qualitative approach, which involves, for example, investing behind a chief executive whose leadership qualities he trusts.The conversation wasn’t just about money. The two men seemed to be sizing each other up on a more fundamental level.“How did you choose your wife, by the way?” Mr. Ackman asked.“Passion,” Mr. Dalio replied.“Have you quantified it?” Mr. Ackman said.“I’ve thought about it,” came the reply.“Is she a computer?” Mr. Ackman said.At one point, Mr. Ackman seemed to get defensive. Mr. Dalio was pressing him on how he could be so comfortable with such concentrated bets on stocks.Mr. Ackman said he invested in “durable businesses” that would weather downturns, and then Mr. Dalio asked him about selling companies short, or betting against them.“We are principally net long,” Mr. Ackman said, a touch of annoyance in his voice. “We have been for 11 years.”That made Mr. Dalio back off.“I didn’t mean to actually even talk about your business, per se,” he said.The back-and-forth wasn’t quite what Mr. Ackman had in mind. But he was a good sport about it.“This is one of the more interesting conversations I’ve ever had,” he said.