Clad in snug black pants and his signature untucked shirt, the Greek finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, sauntered into a conference room in the Berlin headquarters of the German finance ministry.Seated in a wheelchair awaiting him was Germany’s dour and all-powerful finance chief, Wolfgang Schäuble. The personification of fiscal discipline, Mr. Schauble was flanked by several officials, dossiers at the ready.With Greece about to run out of money and in need of German support for emergency funds, Mr. Varoufakis appeared to be outmanned and outgunned. Nonetheless, he was the one who delivered the ultimatum in the meeting: Renegotiate Greece’s €240 billion bailout deal or risk a mutually destructive disaster.Mr. Schäuble’s answer was a firm “no.” Greece must follow the rules. It was a response repeated by eurozone finance ministers during tense debt talks in Brussels this week, a showdown that will continue on Monday.The stakes are high. While Greece’s debt woes pose less of a threat to Europe than they did two years ago, an abrupt default would rattle markets and complicate efforts to kick-start growth in the region.As they face off, Greece, Germany and Europe are all making the same bet: The other side will blink first.“It’s a poker game right now,” said Steve Keen, an economist and debt specialist. There may be a method to Mr. Varoufakis’s madness.He calls himself an “erratic Marxist,” and is putting his extensive study of game theory to the test in the real world. With a “nothing-to-lose” approach, he is wagering that Germany and the rest of Europe will eventually make concessions, rather than risk a Greek departure from the euro and a new wave of contagion.As Mr. Varoufakis, a trained economist, has written, “it may be rational to act irrationally.”For now, his strategy has been stymied by the three officials who control Greece’s purse strings. They just aren’t willing to engage Mr. Varoufakis.Mr. Schäuble is sticking steadfastly to the position that Greece must adhere to its bailout terms, like spending restrictions and reforms. This view is echoed by Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the puritanical finance chief from the Netherlands who represents the eurozone. The head of the European Central Bank, Mario Draghi, holds the fate of the troubled Greek financial system in his hands.As the main guardians of the euro, these officials are loath to bend the rules for Greece, lest a troubling precedent is set for other nations that might want to ditch their own austerity programs. Still, they fear a messy Greek departure from the euro and the effect it would have on the common currency zone.“What I worry about is that rumors, misinformation, misunderstandings are driving markets reactions,” said Sony Kapoor, an analyst at Re-Define, a research organization. “There can be an element of panic that will shorten the decision timetable.”After his party’s electoral victory in late January, Mr. Varoufakis, 53, started a campaign to drum up political support for Greece’s plan. In the course of a week, he hit five cities, meeting with central bankers, finance ministers and skittish hedge fund investors. Severely sleep deprived, he resorted to catnaps on planes and trains, putting an end to his frenetic blogging although weighing in with the occasional pointed post on Twitter.Among Greece’s creditors, he first met with Mr. Dijsselbloem.In his precise Dutch manner, Mr. Dijsselbloem, 48, subscribes to the notion that “whatever is not a duty is a sin,” as the philosopher John Stuart Mill said about Calvinism. The Dutch finance chief had flown to Athens to make sure that the new Greek government was going to stick to its own duty by following the bailout program.Instead, Mr. Varoufakis said he would break off talks with the country’s three primary creditors — the European Commission, the central bank and the International Monetary Fund, the so-called troika — and push for a better deal. Mr. Dijsselbloem’s reaction was immediate. He whispered a sharp admonishment in the ear of the startled Mr. Varoufakis and marched off the stage.As befitting a central banker, Mr. Draghi avoided the fireworks, meeting behind closed doors with Mr. Varoufakis several days later at the central bank headquarters in Frankfurt. It was cordial, as Mr. Varoufakis tried to persuade Mr. Draghi to keep funding Greece’s troubled banks during the negotiations.Mr. Draghi, 67, is perhaps the shrewdest player in this bureaucratic poker game. He deftly fought back German opposition to his sweeping stimulus plan, forging alliances with the many countries in Europe who feared continued stagnation.But Mr. Draghi’s central priority has always been financial stability. He has never shown sympathy for countries that ask for money outside of a formal rescue program, as he demonstrated when he finally cut off funding to Cyprus banks in 2013.Greece is getting similar treatment. Just hours after meeting with Mr. Varoufakis, Mr. Draghi sent a strong message, by pulling a major source of inexpensive lending to Greek banks.The most important meeting came the next day with Mr. Schäuble. A fixture of German politics for decades, Mr. Schäuble, 72, has carried out much of his career from a wheelchair after an assassination attempt in 1990 left him partly paralyzed. His doggedness, along with his gravelly voice, make him an intimidating figure. Mr. Varoufakis has long argued through his blog that the real cure for Europe’s ills is not fixing Greece, but getting Germany to invest more. Now, he could make the case to Mr. Schäuble in person.Mr. Varoufakis is an effective charmer. He has said publicly that Mr. Schäuble is “probably the only European politician with intellectual substance.” He also took care to refer to Mr. Schäuble, who has doctoral degree in law, as doctor.But his steely German counterpart resisted the blandishments: There would be no money for Greece if it dropped the existing bailout program. Just as Mr. Draghi had done 24 hours earlier, Mr. Schäuble was calling Greece’s bluff, firm in his belief that the region could withstand a default on the country’s debt and an exit from the euro.In Germany, the view now is that such a situation does not pose a broad financial danger. Following the debt restructuring in 2012, 80 percent of the Greek debt is owned by public sector creditors, with banks and investment funds having a small exposure by comparison.“The biggest difference now is that the firewall has been constructed,” said Stefan Keitel, chief investment officer at Berenberg, a German private bank. “The financial contagion is well under control.”A growing number of analysts think that Mr. Schäuble, Mr. Dijsselbloem and Mr. Draghi are advancing a combined strategy that aims to wait Greece out.The thinking goes like this. Say “no” politely, but repeatedly, to Greece’s request for a financial rescue package. As conditions deteriorate, cut off access to emergency loans for the bank’s troubled financial institutions.If that happens, Greece would have to impose capital controls to help prop up the banks, leading to economic disarray and prompting a public outcry. The Greek government would then be forced to accommodate Europe.“Game theory only works if the other side wants to keep playing with you,” said Adam Lerrick, a sovereign debt expert.Under this theory, Greece does not leave the euro, Mr. Lerrick said. A majority of Greeks reject such an outcome.Instead, the country becomes quarantined within Europe, with Greeks prohibited from removing large sums from banks and sending cash abroad. Such was the case with Cyprus in 2013.Confidantes of Mr. Varoufakis say that, all along, he has been wary of such an approach — which is why he is pushing so hard for a €10 billion lifeline. With the money comes breathing room to put his government’s plan to work. “Time is our most precious commodity,” he has said repeatedly.The question is how much time is left. The bailout is set to expire at the end of the month.Europe seems unwilling to give in to Greece’s demands. “You make compromises when the advantages outweigh the disadvantages and Germany is ready for this,” the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, said at a news conference Thursday at the European Summit in Brussels. “But one must add that Europe’s credibility depends on sticking to the rules and that we are reliable for each other.”The previous night at the finance ministers’ meeting, Mr. Varoufakis, working on two hours of sleep and flashing a Burberry scarf, refused again to renew its bailout contract.“It’s a madman’s game theory,” said Stavros Zenios, an economist and member of the board at the central bank of Cyprus. “Don’t press us too much or we will jump off a cliff and take everyone with us.”Alison Smale contributed reporting. A version of this article appears in print on 02/13/2015, on page B1 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Awaiting a Decisive Move .