Updated, 9:16 p.m. | In the battle over ride-hailing services, Lyft is preparing a counterpunch against Uber, its much bigger rival.Lyft is in talks to raise about $250 million in new financing, putting a value for the three-year-old start-up at $2 billion, people briefed on the matter said on Thursday.If it closes the round, that would be a second wind of fresh capital for Lyft, which says it experienced rapid growth in 2014. John Zimmer, Lyft’s co-founder and president, said in an interview last month that the company’s revenue grew fivefold last year, though he did not give specific figures.Some of the new capital is expected to come from existing investors like the Alibaba Group of China, though the round has not been completed, according to the people, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of ties to the company. Alibaba itself was not expected to lead the round and would contribute a relatively small portion of the new money.Depending on investor interest, Lyft could seek to raise up to $500 million.A $2 billion valuation would be more than double what it got in its last round of financing last year. But raising capital has been much harder this time, as Lyft battles Uber. That much bigger rival has previously tried to persuade venture capitalists not to invest in Lyft, Uber’s chief executive, Travis Kalanick, has acknowledged.Moreover, some investors and analysts have questioned whether Lyft can continue to draw new interest as a clear but distant No. 2 competitor in its industry.If the round closes, Lyft plans to use the capital to continue its rapid expansion, growing beyond the 60 American markets in which it currently operates. The company would probably use the capital to step up its marketing. It has already begun to take out advertising to reach new customers on Facebook and Twitter, as well as via radio.It would also probably prolong deeply discounted fares in new cities, a tactic long employed by both Uber and Lyft to attract new riders to their services. Last year, Lyft cut its fares by as much as 20 percent across all its markets.And some of the new money would also probably flow to lobbying efforts that the start-up is undertaking with city and state governments across the country.Even with any new funding, Lyft has its work cut out for it. The company is dwarfed by Uber, which operates in about 250 cities and 54 countries.Uber’s coffers are also much deeper. The company has raised more than $4 billion from major institutional firms, and is valued by investors at over $40 billion.Uber’s investors are hoping that it will go public within the next few years, in what would be one of the most anticipated stock market debuts of that time.Lyft, by contrast, has raised a fraction of what Uber has reaped, collecting just over $300 million.In the past, Lyft has acknowledged the financial handicap it has compared with its competitor. But Lyft has pointed out that it is currently focused only on growing in the United States, a strategy that the company says will be much less capital-intensive than expanding its service abroad.“Capital is important, but strategy is also very important,” Mr. Zimmer, Lyft’s co-founder, said in an interview in January. He said that Lyft’s business model was leaner than Uber’s. That, he pointed out, includes using fewer full-time employees to recruit new drivers. A spokeswoman for Lyft declined to comment.A version of this article appears in print on 02/13/2015, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Lyft, Uberu2019s Smaller Rival, Is Said to Be in Talks to Raise $250 Million.