AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinOn Sunday, “CSI,” the CBS drama starring Ted Danson, quietly ended its 15-year run with a two-hour series finale. Next year, “American Idol,” the talent competition that has been on the air since 2002, will end after years of declining ratings.In television, even the most popular shows have expiration dates. But while these two juggernauts from the early 2000s are finished, there is one franchise player from that era that continues to defy time and seismic shifts in the television industry. The CBS show “Survivor” enters this television season, its 16th year on the air, still locked in on Wednesdays at 8 p.m., and still winning that time slot.The reality show — featuring more than a dozen “castaways,” weekly fireside ceremonies that popularized the phrase “voted off the island” and a $1 million prize — made its season premiere last week. Once again it captured the best ratings of the night from 8 to 9 p.m. (Its premiere was 90 minutes, but the Fox hit “Empire” came on at 9 and conquered all competition.) The mettle of “Survivor” is surprising enough that CBS executives have taken to calling it the “miracle show” and the “marathon show.”“The old dog’s still got some fight left in it,” said Kelly Kahl, a senior executive vice president for prime time at CBS.As television viewing habits change and ratings decline, network executives are scrambling for attention-grabbing shows (ABC brought back “The Muppets”) and are sparing no expense in promoting them (Fox unleashed a seven-month marketing blitz in the run-up to its new show “Scream Queens”). In that programming environment, a graybeard like “Survivor” provides a welcome respite for CBS. Its ratings are numbingly consistent; in the last three years, the show has averaged 11.5 million viewers, according to data provided by Nielsen. The show’s season premiere brought in almost exactly that number, 11.4 million, according to same-day and three-day Nielsen figures. Episode 2 airs on Wednesday night.The “Survivor” strategy is simple, said Jeff Probst, who has hosted the show since its first season: Appeal to your audience, and you do not need to do a whole lot more than that.“I’m not going to lie and say I wouldn’t love for more people to start watching ‘Survivor,’ but I’m not making it to attract a new viewer,” Mr. Probst, who is also an executive producer, said in an interview. “I’m making it for the people who have kept us on the air.”“We have this amazing format that we never deviate too far from,” he said. “We create the scenario, and that’s contrived. You aren’t really shipwrecked. But beyond that, it’s their story.”Reality shows are generally less expensive to produce than scripted shows, so “Survivor,” which airs two seasons each year (fall and spring) provides CBS with a ratings magnet at a relatively low cost. And its stability affords CBS network executives the room to look for other hit shows, knowing that “Survivor” will take care of itself. (CBS is known for its stability, having ranked as the most viewed network for 11 of the past 12 years.)“It’s the greatest gift you could ever have as a scheduler,” Mr. Kahl said. “It’s the greatest source of comfort knowing you do not even need to worry about it, and it’s that that show still wins its slot in viewers and the demo.”“Survivor” is hardly the only veteran reality show that is still delivering. “The Amazing Race” also on CBS, has been on for 14 years and continues to collect Emmy nominations, but it is slowly losing viewers, particularly since the network moved it from Sunday night to the relative backwater of Friday night. (It finished its most recent season with fewer than eight million overnight viewers.) ABC’s 10-year-old “Dancing With the Stars” still delivers close to 15 million viewers twice a week, though it has shown signs of fatigue in the 18-to-49-year-old demographic critical to advertisers.“Survivor,” on the other hand, has been consistent not only in its viewership totals but also among people younger than 50. It has scored ratings between 3.1 and 3.5 in that demographic since the beginning of 2012. The most recent episode of “Dancing With the Stars” scored a 2.1 in that age group; “Survivor” got a 3.1. (The rating, in this case, is the percentage of people from 18 to 49 years old who are tuned into that program. Each national ratings point represents a little more than one million households.)The stamina of “Survivor,” especially in recent years, is all the more surprising because, much like “American Idol” and “CSI,” it showed signs of gradual buckling. Its viewership started to plunge, as did its rating in the demographic. Then, suddenly, the decline stopped.The show’s pluckiness is especially gratifying to Mr. Kahl because it is such an important part of Leslie Moonves’s 12-year tenure as chief executive of CBS. When it aired for the first time in 2000, its status as an instant runaway hit signaled that the network was about to climb out of the cellar.Mark Burnett, the reality show impresario and an executive producer of the show, recalled an event where he promoted “Survivor” with Mr. Moonves in its early days.“I said, ‘This is amazing. Season 3, can you believe it?’ ” Mr. Burnett said. “Les turned and looked at me and said, ‘Season 3? We’ll be having this conversation in Season 23.’ It sounded so crazy at the time.” Years later, though, the show was drifting, Mr. Probst said; he said the low point was Gabon, which was broadcast in 2008. He said he felt burned out and was also a little self-conscious about being known as the “Survivor” guy.“My Achilles’ heel for a lot of my life was that nobody saw me as a storyteller, that they saw me as a white guy with dark hair who was just a game show host,” Mr. Probst said. “And that in terms of my own self-image was the thing that could gut me. It was like a kidney punch.”The frustration and exhaustion were enough that in 2009, Mr. Probst went to Mr. Moonves and quit, he said.Mr. Moonves told him to take a break, and Mr. Probst took a few months off, returning to the show re-energized. Some changes were made to the production team, he said, and then he focused squarely on the show’s success formula: serving the loyal audience and not worrying about doing more than that.This season, Mr. Probst and “Survivor” have taken their strategy to perhaps its most extreme. The show features former cast members, but instead of the reality show trope of offering up so-called all-stars, this season’s contestants include many also-rans, people who played previously but did not win. “Survivor” allowed fans to vote for the entire cast this season, after creating a pool of contestants from which to choose. “When I told some producer friends what we were doing, almost every one of them said, ‘You mean pick one contestant?’ ” Mr. Probst said. “I said, ‘No, the entire group.’ They said, ‘You’re trusting an entire season to the fans?’ The answer’s yes, because our fans get it. They’re a part of our longevity.”If Mr. Probst once had some self-consciousness about being the “Survivor” host, it is long gone.“I feel like I’ve been given the greatest gift and no one really realizes it,” he said. “Mark and CBS have given us this great franchise, and they let us go make it. And then we bring them back episodes and they say, ‘Great, go make it again.’ ”Advertisement