By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONOCT. 12, 2015
Fortress Investment Group will close down its $1.6 billion flagship hedge fund following heavy losses and investor withdrawals, according to two people briefed on the matter.Michael Novogratz, a former wrestler and one of Wall Street’s most outspoken traders, ran the hedge fund and is expected to leave the firm, the people said. The move follows several departures at the top of the hedge fund division earlier this year, including Jeff Feig, who was briefly co-chief investment officer, and Stuart Bohart, who was president of the hedge fund unit.The flagship fund, which made bets on shifting macroeconomic trends, had lost investors more than 17 percent so far this year, as of the end of September. Fortress has received requests for hedge fund redemptions totaling more than $1 billion in the past year.Shares of Fortress, a $72 billion investment manager, fell over 5 percent in after-hours trading.Fortress is the latest asset manager to shutter its hedge fund and its move comes on the heels of news last week that Bain Capital, the private equity giant, was liquidating its multibillion-dollar Absolute Return Capital hedge fund.AdvertisementBoth funds deployed a macro investing strategy, which can include taking bets on when and what direction a currency will go, how central banks will act or economic trends.AdvertisementSuch hedge funds have been hit hard by surprise moves on the part of central bankers around the world, including a move by the Swiss central bank to remove a cap on its currency in January, and a decision by the Chinese central bank in August to devalue its currency, the renminbi.The industry as a whole has had a tough go of it, with some of Wall Street’s best-known investors reversing the year’s gains in August and September.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While the firm had notified investors about large outflows from its hedge funds in recent earnings calls, Mr. Novogratz’s expected departure would come as a surprise. A former United States army helicopter pilot, Mr. Novogratz gained attention for his quips at conferences and his often unusual attire. At one hedge fund conference several years ago in Las Vegas he wore an all-white suit, standing apart from the sea of uninspired black and navy blue suits.Mr. Novogratz joined the firm in 2002 after working at Goldman Sachs for 11 years. Under his stewardship, the Fortress hedge fund grew to more than $8 billion in assets under management. For years, the returns in his flagship fund outpaced the industry, but last year it lost 1.6 percent.He quickly gained a reputation for being a bold investor.“He’s been more of a gunslinger,” said an investor who owns Fortress shares and who spoke on condition of anonymity. “He’s a huge risk-taker.”The flagship fund currently manages $1.6 billion of assets under management, according to the most recent figures, down significantly from $3.2 billion at the start of the year as the hedge fund division has faced a steady flow of requests from investors for their money back. Today, the hedge fund division accounts for just 3 percent of the overall firm’s assets under management.Fortress has been hit with a series of departures at its hedge fund unit. Mr. Feig, the co-chief investment officer of the macro fund, left after less than a year in July. And Maggie Arvedlund and David Markus, two other managing directors, also left.Mr. Bohart, president of the hedge fund unit, exited the firm in September.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Fortress Investment’s Flagship Fund Is Said to Be Closing .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.