LONDON — The British infrastructure investor John Laing Group was flat in early trading on Thursday after pricing its initial public offering at the bottom of its expected pricing range.John Laing is the latest company to come to market as I.P.O. activity in Europe this year is off to its best start since the financial crisis, with more than half a dozen companies floating since last Friday.In a news release, John Laing said its stock was priced at 1.95 pounds a share, valuing the company at £715.5 million, or about $1.1 billion. The company had expected to price its offering at £1.95 to £2.45 a share.The company will raise gross proceeds of £130 million in the offering, while the asset manager Henderson Global Investors, its owner, expects to receive £118.9 million from the sale.Henderson agreed to acquire John Laing in 2006 for £887 million and took the company private in early 2007. The John Laing Infrastructure Fund and John Laing Environmental Assets Group were later spun off as their own publicly traded companies.John Laing sold 127.6 million shares in the offering on Thursday, representing 34.8 percent of its share capital. Its shares were trading at the offer price of £1.95 in conditional trading on the London Stock Exchange after moving as high as £2 a share earlier in the day. Unconditional trading in the company’s stock is expected to begin on Feb. 17.“We are delighted with the strong interest from investors,” Olivier Brousse, John Laing’s chief executive, said in a news release. “The success of this I.P.O. represents a clear endorsement of our leading brand and the prospects of our business. We look forward to delivering the next stage of the group’s growth and value to shareholders.”Founded as a construction company in 1848, John Laing invests in and manages infrastructure projects. Since 2002, the company has not been involved in building and construction, after selling its construction and property development businesses.Barclays and HSBC served as joint sponsors and global co-coordinators for the offering.