PARIS — Société Générale, one of France’s largest banks, reported a fourth-quarter profit on Thursday that was almost triple the year-earlier level as its global markets business bounced back from a loss.Société Générale reported net income of 511 million euros, or about $578 million — about 2.7 times the €191 million it posted in the same period in 2013. Revenue rose 7.5 percent from a year earlier to €6.1 billion.Its global markets business posted a profit of €215 million, reversing a loss of €182 million a year earlier, which bolstered results even as its French retail banking business struggled. Still, Société Générale’s profit was short of the roughly €560 million analysts had expected.For all of 2014, the bank reported net income of €2.7 billion on revenue of €23.6 billion. The annual results were hurt by a write-down, announced last May, on its Russian business. Financial uncertainty caused by the crisis in Ukraine led Société Générale to mark the book value of the Russian business, largely the Moscow-based lender Rosbank, to zero, cutting 2014 profit by €538 million.Frederic Oudea, chief executive of one of France’s largest banks, says it is “difficult to entertain” the possibility of cancelling Greece’s debt because it could lead to contagion.Société Générale said it had cut €600 million of funding in euros for the Russian units last year, moving toward funding them in the Russian currency. To that end, it raised 71 billion rubles, or $1.1 billion, on the Russian bond market in 2014, it said.The French bank said it was adding another €400 million to its provisions for settling “litigation issues,” raising its total provision to €1.1 billion. The bank is facing investigations on a variety of issues, including in the United States, where it is suspected of having violated sanctions on business with blacklisted countries.Like its larger rival, BNP Paribas, which last week reported a strong fourth quarter, Société Générale is faced with a stagnant domestic economy and interest rates that put pressure on lending margins. Eurozone gross domestic product is expected to have grown just 0.8 percent in the fourth quarter on an annualized basis, official figures are expected to show on Friday, and economists do not expect a major acceleration this year.Considering the “challenging and unstable environment,” Frédéric Oudéa, the chairman and chief executive of Société Générale, said in the earnings statement that the bank had “posted a good business performance.” He promised a strict focus on holding costs down as the bank works to improve profitability.Mr. Oudéa is to give up his role as chairman as the bank moves to comply with European regulations, the bank said last month. Assuming shareholders agree, the top board supervisory role will be given to Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, a prominent Italian economist who has previously served as a top official of the European Central Bank.Last year was notable for reviews of the bank’s loan book and financial resilience by the European Central Bank. The French lender passed the tests.It said on Thursday that it had raised its common equity Tier 1 ratio, a measure of its cushion for economic and financial shocks, to 10.1 percent at the end of December, up 0.1 percentage point from the end of September.The bank’s shares were up 1.3 percent by midday in Paris, giving the company, whose shares are down nearly 20 percent over past year, a market capitalization of about €29 billion.