
 Even as it swung to a profit in the fourth quarter from a year earlier, Credit Suisse on Thursday announced cost cuts and pay reductions as it deals with a stronger Swiss franc and the fallout of legal settlements.The bank reported fourth-quarter profit of 921 million Swiss francs, or about $993 million, in contrast to a loss of 476 million francs in the period a year earlier. Revenue rose 8 percent, to 6.38 billion francs. The most recent results exceeded analysts’ expectations.The year-earlier period in part reflected an $885 million settlement to resolve claims that the bank had sold questionable loans to the mortgage finance giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in the prelude to the financial crisis. The period also reflected additional legal provisions, primarily related to inquiries into wealthy Americans avoiding taxes by hiding assets overseas.“Our solid results for the fourth quarter demonstrate consistency in our performance amid a challenging market environment with increased volatility,” Brady W. Dougan, the Credit Suisse chief executive, said in a news release.Credit Suisse’s fourth-quarter performance, however, came before the Swiss National Bank abruptly abandoned a cap on the franc against the euro, causing the value of the franc to surge. Mr. Dougan estimated that as a result, 2015 earnings would be reduced by about 3 percent, and Credit Suisse said it planned several measures this year to offset the appreciation of the currency and the effect of low interest rates, including about 200 million francs in cost reductions.Mr. Dougan said the bank expected to more than offset these factors by the end of 2017.

Video

Credit Suisse Returns to Profit


Brady Dougan, chief executive of Credit Suisse, says that the bank will take a hit from the Swiss National Bank’s move to end the Swiss franc’s euro peg, but will be able to mitigate this.

                By CNBC on                                                    Publish Date February 12, 2015.
                            

                                    Photo by Arnd Wiegmann/Reuters.
                                







embed











Credit Suisse also said that executive bonuses for 2014 were cut by 9 percent and that the board of directors and executive board had agreed to sharp cuts in their compensation in light of the bank’s settlements with United States authorities. Brady Dougan, chief executive of Credit Suisse, says that the bank will take a hit from the Swiss National Bank’s move to end the Swiss franc’s euro peg, but will be able to mitigate this.In May, the Swiss bank agreed to plead guilty to criminal wrongdoing and paid about $2.6 billion to end inquiries in connection with its role in helping Americans hide assets in secret Swiss accounts. It paid $2.8 billion in total in 2014 to settle the cross-border tax inquiries.Directors collectively took a 25 percent pay cut, and bonuses for the members of the executive board were lowered 20 percent. The company said the moves “reflect the collective institutional responsibility these bodies bear in safeguarding the long-term reputation and professional integrity of the group’s businesses globally, regardless of which individuals serve as directors or officers within these bodies at any given time.”The bank’s quarterly results and assessment of the future cheered investors, who pushed its shares up 9 percent.Credit Suisse, based in Zurich, has been emphasizing its wealth management business even as that operation wrestles with low interest rates.Pretax income in private banking and wealth management more than doubled, to 882 million francs, from 424 million francs in the fourth quarter of 2013. Average assets under management in the division rose 6.9 percent, to 1.38 trillion francs.In the investment bank, Credit Suisse reported pretax income of 12 million francs in the fourth quarter, in contrast to a loss of 564 million a year earlier.