AdvertisementSupported byBy Lorne ManlyJon Stewart’s announcement that he will give up his anchor chair on Comedy Central’s “The Daily Show” by the end of the year reverberated on Wednesday through the corridors of power in Washington, New York publishing houses and most important, the network’s parent company, Viacom. Mr. Stewart’s departure, after a 16-year run skewering the foibles of a self-impressed news media and political class, presents Viacom with the delicate decision of finding a replacement for a show that, along with “South Park,” defines Comedy Central. And it means the cable network will enter the 2016 election year without two of its signature late-night personalities — Mr. Stewart and Stephen Colbert, who is taking his talents to CBS. Viacom executives learned only recently that Mr. Stewart had definitively decided to leave the show he joined in 1999 and they have not settled on a successor. But they understand the need to tread carefully so as not to disturb the show’s successful concoction of current events and pointed satire. “We’re not interested in doing a celebrity show,” said Doug Herzog, president of the Viacom Entertainment Group. However Viacom executives proceed, a lot of money rides on their choice. “ ‘South Park’ and ‘The Daily Show’ are the foundations on which Comedy Central was built,” said Mr. Herzog. Though Viacom doesn’t break out revenue numbers for its media networks, SNL Kagan reports that Comedy Central took in $780.4 million in 2014 (behind Nickelodeon and MTV), and has been steadily rising each year. In the last three years, Comedy Central has nearly doubled the number of its original shows; with the rise of Netflix and Amazon, not to mention increased competition from other TV networks, it cannot rely as much on movies and repeats of old sitcoms. Shows like “Broad City,” “Inside Amy Schumer” and “Key & Peele” have received much critical acclaim. Larry Wilmore, a “Daily Show” alum, recently moved into Mr. Colbert’s old time slot with his own late-night show. This spring, Comedy Central will delve into the serial genre with “Big Time in Hollywood, FL” from Ben Stiller’s production company. And later this year comes “Another Period,” a mash-up of “Downton Abbey” and “Real World.” “Comedy Central has always been in the business of finding new voices,” said Mr. Herzog. “The water is always a little cold when you jump in, but we can swim. We’re really good swimmers.”Still, the importance of “The Daily Show” to the network is unquestioned. For the current television season, “The Daily Show” has averaged slightly more than 2.1 million viewers, which places it fourth among late-night talk shows, according to Nielsen. (The offerings from three broadcast networks — “The Tonight Show,” “Jimmy Kimmel Live” and the “Late Show With David Letterman” — lead the pack.) But among adults 18-34, prime bait for advertisers, the show rises to No. 2. And among men 18-24, the most elusive audience for television networks as they increasingly forsake watching shows at their appointed times, it is No. 1.Overall ratings, however, have slipped 18 percent from the same period last season. (Viacom executives point out that the figure does not include online viewing on platforms including Hulu and Facebook.)Brian Hughes, senior vice president for audience analysis at Magna Global, said a study his company conducted when John Oliver filled in for Mr. Stewart in 2013, when he was filming his feature directorial debut, “Rosewater,” offers some encouraging tea leaves for a post-Stewart “Daily Show.”Ratings for Mr. Oliver’s 31 first-run episodes among adults 18-34 were only slightly below those of Mr. Stewart in the comparable period the previous year.“With the right host in place, there’s no reason to think that audiences will scatter,” he said. “The brand of ‘The Daily Show’ is still strong.”Advertisers, however, may take more of a wait-and-see approach. Though Comedy Central does not allow advertisers to cherry-pick an individual show in which to place their commercials, there may be some clients who do business with the network mainly because of Mr. Stewart’s program.Envisioned by Mr. Herzog back in the 1990s as Comedy Central’s version of ESPN’s “SportsCenter,” the basic premise of “The Daily Show” is to give the network’s viewers its take on the day. With its original host, Craig Kilborn, the show took delight in mocking celebrities, as well as local news and the explosion of network newsmagazines which trafficked in exposés like “Your Mattress: What You Don’t Know Can Kill You.” When Mr. Stewart took over in 1999, he switched gears.“What Jon did brilliantly was pay attention to how the media landscape had changed” with the growth of Fox News and MSNBC,” said Lizz Winstead, the co-creator and former head writer of “The Daily Show.” “He was our voice,” she added, ringmaster to the stable of correspondents who satirized the tropes of the news media. “I don’t envy the next people who sit in the chair,” Ms. Winstead said.Whoever the new host, the sharp-toothed political satire will remain. “Someone’s going to bring something different to it than Jon Stewart did,” Mr. Herzog said. “But it’s hard to believe that taking a look at politics in general is not going to be a big part.”Other people watching with great interest are publishers. Not since Oprah Winfrey’s original book club has a TV program had the sales impact on as many books as Mr. Stewart’s show. Jonathan Karp, publisher of Simon & Schuster, witnessed that power most recently this past week, when Bill Browder, the author of “Red Notice,” a nonfiction account of an American businessman’s taking on the corruption of Vladimir Putin’s Kremlin, appeared on “The Daily Show.”The book immediately jumped into the top 50, and it will land at No. 11 on The New York Times hardcover nonfiction list for the week that ended Feb. 7. “ ‘The Daily Show’ put it over the top, no doubt about it,” said Mr. Karp.He attributed that influence to the trust the audience placed in Mr. Stewart’s endorsements. “He only looked in the camera and said this is a great book sparingly,” Mr. Karp said, adding “The ability to mix humor and gravitas in an entertaining way is rare, and maybe unique.” That’s a sentiment Mr. Herzog can agree with.“Make no mistake about it,” he said. “These are gigantic shoes to fill. He is the undefeated champion of a weight class he created.”Advertisement