By RACHEL ABRAMSFEB. 11, 2015
Sales at Whole Foods Market stores rose 10 percent to $4.7 billion in the most recent quarter as the upscale grocery chain drew more customer traffic, the company announced on Wednesday.Investors have worried that Whole Foods, which operates 408 locations in the United States, Canada and Britain, was beginning to lose some of its edge among a sea of health-conscious competitors.On Wednesday, the company said new digital and branding initiatives had helped attract shoppers.“We attribute our broad-based sales momentum to our customers’ positive response to our many strategic initiatives, along with improving consumer confidence,” Walter Robb, Whole Foods’ co-chief executive, said in a statement announcing the results. “Changing technology has fundamentally altered how and when customers choose to connect with us, and we are rapidly building out an extended experience beyond the four walls of our stores.”Same-store sales rose 4.5 percent in the company’s first financial quarter of 2015, which ended Jan. 18. Profit rose to $167 million, or 46 cents a share, up from $158 million, or 42 cents a share, in the same period last year.AdvertisementWhole Foods has struggled to increase sales in recent years, although it has remained a leader in the natural and organic food industry. Its reputation for higher prices has not helped in a postrecession economy, and the company’s stock fell more than 30 percent in 2014 before rebounding toward the end of the year.“It was probably overblown six to eight months ago,” said Brian Yarbrough, a consumer research analyst at Edward Jones. “I think most people thought the pressure was way worse than it was.”AdvertisementThe chain also faces more competition from giant retailers like Walmart, which have made moves into the healthy food market at lower prices.To help fend off competition, Whole Foods has cut prices on some products and tried to make it easier for its customers to shop as well as to take social and environmental considerations into account.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It formed a partnership with Instacart, a start-up based in San Francisco that lets customers browse food catalogs online. Late last year, it introduced a produce-rating program that gives consumers more information about their foods’ environmental impact and the treatment of farm workers.On Tuesday, the Agriculture Department said Whole Foods would recall more than 33,000 pounds of products because a spice supplier notified a plant that cumin used in some chili products might have been contaminated with peanut allergens.Shares of Whole Foods rose over 2 percent in after-hours trading.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Sales Increase at Whole Foods, and Shares Follow.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.