By REUTERSFEB. 11, 2015
Time Warner reported a better-than-expected quarterly profit, helped by higher subscription fees for channels under its Turner Broadcasting and HBO units.Revenue from Turner, which owns channels like CNN, TNT and Cartoon Network, rose 2.3 percent in the fourth quarter. Revenue from HBO, whose popular shows include “Game of Thrones” and “True Detective,” increased 6.2 percent. The two businesses together account for more than half of Time Warner’s total revenue.The company’s shares ticked up less than 1 percent, to close at $81.01.“Subscription revenue growth will slow materially this year before re-accelerating well into the double digits in 2016 and beyond,” the chief financial officer, Howard Averill, said in a conference call, adding that a stronger dollar would be a factor, too.Time Warner cut jobs in its Turner unit last year to reduce costs and spun off its publishing business, Time Inc., to focus on its more profitable broadcasting businesses.AdvertisementTime Warner is now a “much leaner, faster, quicker organization,” David Miller, a Topeka Capital Markets analyst, told Reuters on Wednesday.AdvertisementAs a result, the company’s margins are expected to grow through 2016, he said. Time Warner reported margins of 23.4 percent for 2014, adjusting for the separation of Time, compared with 24.3 percent for 2013.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The  company forecast adjusted profit of $4.60-$4.70 a share from continuing operations for 2015. Analysts were expecting earnings of $4.66 a share, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.Net income attributable to Time Warner shareholders fell 27 percent to $718 million, or 84 cents a share, in the quarter ended Dec. 31. Excluding items, the company earned 98 cents a share.Revenue fell 1 percent to $7.53 billion, mainly because of a 4.5 percent fall in revenue in its Warner Bros. movie studio business.Analysts on average had expected earnings of 93 cents a share and revenue of $7.55 billion.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Cable Subscription Fees Bolster Time Warner’s Profit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.