

 David Carr
 

THE MEDIA EQUATION
FEB. 11, 2015
Other than timing, Jon Stewart’s triumphant retirement and Brian Williams’s public and humbling disenfranchisement would seem to have little in common.But begin with the fact that both men went to high school in New Jersey and both began their adult lives without much going for them, other than a sense that the island with all of the tall buildings in the distance suggested there was more to life than volunteering as a firefighter (Mr. Williams) or tending bar (Mr. Stewart).Both men made up for lost time once they got into their careers. Mr. Williams churned through assignments and assumed an anchor chair on MSNBC and at NBC on the weekends while he was in his 30s, and slid into the big chair in 2004 by the time he was 45. Mr. Stewart ground it out in stand-up, working almost nightly at the Comedy Cellar, then landed some TV gigs here and there. After blowing up large on the “Late Night With David Letterman” in 1993, he was thought to be a favorite to replace him, but that job went to Conan O’Brien. It was only when he got his hands on the wheel of “The Daily Show” that he found his sweet spot and opened up a singular vein in American comedy.Both men spent more than a decade on top of their businesses for good reasons. Mr. Stewart had a remarkable eye for hypocrisy, found amazing writers and executed their work and his own with savage grace, no small feat. Mr. Williams managed to convey gravitas and self-awareness at the same time while sitting atop one of the best television news operations in the business. They were kings of their respective crafts.AdvertisementBut now they are both done, at least for the time being. Mr. Stewart, who said Tuesday he would leave “The Daily Show’’ sometime this year, leaves on top, on his own terms. For all the cynicism assigned to his approach, Mr. Stewart is at heart a patriot and an idealist. Again and again, his indictment of politicians and media figures was less about what they were and more about what they failed to be.AdvertisementIt is telling that when he did take time off from hosting his show, he did so to make a feature film called “Rosewater,” about Maziar Bahari, an Iranian journalist who was imprisoned shortly after appearing on “The Daily Show.” His subject was, in essence, being punished for an act of speech and Mr. Stewart, in spite of his nightly beatdowns of the press, admires the profession. You got the feeling after a while that he had grown tired of pointing out the foibles of the press and the politicians he covered. His version of the news may have started as fake, but it was seeming more and more real all the time.Oddly, Mr. Stewart will leave his desk as arguably the most trusted man in news. And Mr. Williams will find his way back to his desk only if he figures out a way to regain the trust he has squandered. Mr. Williams is now all but locked in his own home — he might as well have an ankle monitor on. There is no playbook on how to come back from such a fall. Stephen B. Burke, the chief executive of NBCUniversal, said everyone deserved a second chance. I very much agree. I just can’t figure out how that second chance comes at NBC. What is the path to that? At what point will the tabloids and blogs take their boot off his neck and allow him to go to the gym, take a walk, have dinner with friends, let alone begin to resume a kind of active rehabilitation — whatever that looks like — in the public eye?When news of his untruths first broke, I think it was commonly believed that Mr. Williams was too big to fail. He seemed to think he would find a way to thread the needle and keep his job. But after a week of management miscues, aided by Mr. Williams’s ham-handed apology and misguided self-exile, NBC executives took firm control of what they came to see as an existential threat to the credibility of their news operation and suspended him.It is difficult to surmise what Mr. Stewart will do next — he has been plain about the fact that he isn’t sure himself — in part because his next step is not a natural one. His talents do not fit easily into that of a generic talk show host. His interview skills are intermittent and his interest in that kind of thing would seem to be low.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While Mr. Stewart is adept at live television, you get the feeling that his need for its blandishments have diminished over time. He may be that odd celebrity who says he is taking time off to spend with his family and actually means it. “I’m going to have dinner on a school night with my family, who I have heard from multiple sources are lovely people,” he said in his announcement, which was a surprise in terms of timing, but not in terms of intention. We all knew he was getting close to done.Mr. Williams is another matter. I visited him at his apartment in 2011 when he was doing promotion for “Rock Center,” a newsmagazine that did not pan out. He made the source of his happiness plain.“When you see me on television, I am there,″ he said. “That is where I am.” Gesturing toward the big flat panel on the wall of his apartment, he added, “I am a creature of live television.”Still, it was not enough for him to be the No. 1 anchor of the No. 1 news program in America. Perhaps he sensed that he was king of an entropic kingdom imprisoned by incontinence and cholesterol ads. As the ever more manic news cycle whirred around his evening newscast, it would be hard not to feel a little beside the point.AdvertisementAnd so came the serial talk show appearances on “Late Night With Jimmy Fallon” and “Late Show With David Letterman.” He appeared several times on “30 Rock,” often as a version of himself, and hosted “Saturday Night Live.” He was good at all these things, good enough so that when NBC was thinking about a successor for Jay Leno, Mr. Williams raised his hands, a gesture that went over like a box of rocks with his overseers. And, of course, there were appearances on “The Daily Show,” including a very funny few minutes in August 2012.Mr. Stewart was mocking something that had been on the NBC newscast, and Mr. Williams mentioned that sometimes when he is writing the show, he actually thinks of what Mr. Stewart will do with the same material.“You don’t write any of that stuff,” Mr. Stewart said, laughing as he said it. “They take you out of the vegetable crisper five minutes before the show and they put you in front of something that is spelled out phonetically. I know how this goes.”So, everyone is in on the joke. It’s all knowing winks and fake attacks on confected news read by people who are somewhat bored by what they do. It just seems less funny now.Email: carr@nytimes.com; Twitter: @carr2nA version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Kings of Their Crafts, but on Divergent Paths.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »