By JACK EWINGFEB. 11, 2015
FRANKFURT — UniCredit, Italy’s largest bank by assets, said on Wednesday that it had returned to profit in the last quarter of 2014 as it cut costs and set aside less money to cover problem loans.But in a reminder that the Italian banking system still has a long way to go to get back to normal, Monte dei Paschi di Siena, the country’s third largest bank, reported a loss of 4.2 billion euros, or $4.7 billion, as it recognized greater losses from problem loans. The bank, the world’s oldest, is considered one of Europe’s most troubled lenders.UniCredit, based in Milan, reported a profit for the quarter of 170 million euros, or about $192 million, compared with a loss in the year-earlier period of €15 billion. A year ago, UniCredit booked huge losses after revaluing its holdings in Eastern Europe and greatly increasing the amount of money it set aside to cover loans that are unlikely to be repaid in full.But UniCredit shares fell 3.5 percent after the company, which has major operations in Russia, said it had suffered losses caused by the decline of the ruble.AdvertisementFor the full year, UniCredit said it had a net profit of €2 billion, compared with a loss of €14 billion for all of 2013.AdvertisementThe bank said that problem loans, which have plagued almost all banks in Italy because of the struggling economy, appear to have peaked in 2014.“We have successfully completed the turnaround in Italy,” Federico Ghizzoni, the UniCredit chief executive, said in a statement.If Mr. Ghizzoni is right, it would be a relief for the Italian economy, which has suffered from the weakness in the banking industry and a lack of credit for businesses and consumers.Years of recession or slow growth, coupled with high unemployment, have left many borrowers unable to repay their debts. The burden of problem loans is one of the main reasons nine out of 15 Italian lenders flunked a review by the European Central Bank last year, which examined whether they had enough capital to withstand economic shocks.UniCredit passed the central bank’s review, but it remains vulnerable to the weak Italian economy as well as to problems in Eastern Europe and Russia, where it has large holdings. UniCredit said on Wednesday that it had a sharp decline in revenue in its Russia business because of the devaluation of the ruble.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Profit from Russian operations fell 7 percent during 2014, to 354 million euros, the bank said. Mr. Ghizzoni said UniCredit was still committed to Russia despite problems there. The Russian economy is in steep decline because of Western sanctions and a plunge in oil prices.“Russia remains one of our key markets,” Mr. Ghizzoni said.There have been other tentative signs recently that Italian banks are gradually recovering, raising hopes that they could begin lending more to businesses for expansion and hiring.Intesa Sanpaolo, the country’s second-largest bank, said on Tuesday that it had returned to profit in the fourth quarter. Net income in the last three months of the year was €48 million, compared with a net loss of €5.3 billion in the same quarter a year earlier.AdvertisementUnder pressure from regulators, Italian banks have begun dealing more decisively with their problems.The €4.2 billion loss reported by Monte dei Paschi, compared with a loss of €916 million a year earlier, was the result of acknowledging that the number of problem loans was greater than the bank had earlier reported.The bank was responding to new standards set by Europe’s central bank, which took over bank supervision late last year and has been less lenient on lenders than some national regulations had been. Monte dei Paschi, which was ordered by the central bank to raise new capital, said it would increase the size of a planned issue of new shares to €3 billion from €2.5 billion.Monte dei Paschi, considered one of the most troubled banks in Europe, was weakened largely by an ill-timed acquisition and the struggling Italian economy. The central bank review in October concluded that Monte dei Paschi had a capital shortfall of €2.1 billion, the largest of any lender in the eurozone.In December, Monte dei Paschi sold €380 million in troubled loans to the Fortress Investment Group, an American private equity firm. By doing so, it freed up capital it could use to lend to new customers.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: UniCredit Bank of Italy Reports a Return to Profit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.