A stalemate in the bitter dispute over Argentina’s bonds looks set to drag on, even after a ruling on Friday in an English court gave one side a small victory.A New York federal judge has for months blocked Argentina from making payments on most of the bonds that is has issued in foreign markets, greatly frustrating investors who hold the bonds.Some of those bonds were issued under English law, which prompted investors who hold the debt to pursue their case at the England and Wales High Court, Chancery Division, in London. Judge David Richards, in his ruling, agreed with the investors’ assertion that 225 million euros ($257 million) set aside to pay the bonds is governed by English law. But the judge did not rule that the bank that handles the bond payments was free to pass the money to the bondholders.“This clarifies that the money belongs to them,” said W. Mark C. Weidemaier, an associate professor at the University of North Carolina School of Law, “but it does not do much to advance the ball to getting the money in their hands.”The wider dispute over the bonds, which pits prominent hedge fund managers against each other, and which is changing the way the vast international bond markets work, stems from Argentina’s default in 2001 on nearly $100 billion of debt.After the default, Argentina cut deals with it creditors, issuing new bonds worth much less than the original securities. Some investors, known as holdouts, refused to accept the new, so-called exchange bonds and later sued Argentina for a full repayment. Judge Thomas P. Griesa of the Federal District Court in Manhattan, sided with the holdouts and ruled three years ago that Argentina could not make payments on the exchange bonds without also making the holdouts whole.Argentina refused to comply with Judge Griesa’s order. Argentina’s president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, has often taken a vitriolic approach to the debt fight, recently calling the hedge fund holdouts “vulture funds” and “economic terrorists.”But Judge Griesa’s order was able to stop the payments because it was written in such a way that any bank passing on money from Argentina to the exchange bondholders would be in contempt of his court.Holders of the English law exchange bonds include Kyle Bass’s hedge fund Hayman Capital Management  and Soros Fund Management, the family office of George Soros. The holdout camp contains Paul Singer’s Elliott Management and Aurelius Capital Management.The holdouts remained defiant on Friday after the ruling. “Exchange Bondholders cynically went to the U.K. court seeking relief that they had already been denied in the U.S. courts,,” Robert Cohen, a lawyer representing NML Capital, a subsidiary of Elliott, said in a statement. “That effort failed.”Legal specialists say that the exchange bondholders may have come away with something small. The bondholders, they said, might decide to take Judge Richards’ declaration that the money set aside is covered by English law to Judge Griesa. But such an action, they added, would almost certainly not persuade him to change his order that bars payments to the exchange bondholders.The order effectively shuts Argentina’s government out of the international debt markets. But that is not necessarily a bind, since the government seems able to finance its spending without tapping global bond investors. The case, as it lingers, may, however, deter foreign investment in private Argentine entities.The holdouts may be hoping that a new Argentine government, looking for ways to clear the economic clouds over the country, will compromise and pay them in full. Argentina’s next general elections, which include a vote for a new president, take place in October. After winning two elections, in 2007 and 2011, Mrs. Kirchner is not eligible to stand again.