In a speech at Stanford University, President Obama introduced an executive order that will promote more information sharing to combat cyberthreats.It is not too hard to get a crowd of corporate security executives to come together to talk about cyberattacks and what to do when one happens, given the spate of recent big data breaches at Anthem, Sony, Staples and JPMorgan Chase.So it did not take much for the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Secret Service to quickly pull together an all-day conference in New York on Friday that was attended by more than 200 people,  including information technology specialists from companies as diverse as Bloomberg, Citigroup, Deloitte, First Data, IAC/InterActiveCorp, IBM and Mohegan Sun, as well as a number of lawyers from big law firms. More than two dozen local agents for the F.B.I. and the Secret Service who are dedicated to investigating cybercrime also attended the daylong event.The impetus for the conference — held at IAC’s corporate offices, a sleek building designed by Frank Gehry — was President Obama’s speech at Stanford University on the need for greater private sector participation in thwarting cyberattacks. Mr. Obama’s speech, delivered before an audience of Silicon Valley corporate executives, was streamed live on a giant wall at the conference site.By NICOLE PERLROTH and DAVID E. SANGERThe president signed an executive order urging companies to exchange data on cyberthreats and receive classified information from the government.But Mr. Obama was not the star of this event, which was one of 18 “open houses” sponsored by the F.B.I. and the Secret Service in cities across the United States. The other events, like the one in New York, were intended as an opportunity for corporate executives to get to know some of the local law enforcement authorities specializing in cyberattacks. In short, the events are intended to break down some of the mistrust companies might have about law enforcement and to allay the fear that disclosing information about a breach would be used against them by regulators or civil litigants.It is all part of a message that federal officials, including Mr. Obama, have been preaching for several months, which is that the best way for companies to beat hackers is to quickly cooperate with law enforcement.Tate Jarrow, a special agent with the Secret Service, suggested that companies begin developing a rapport with law enforcement before a breach occurs. He said it was easier to develop a working relationship before a hacking.Serrin Turner, a federal prosecutor in Manhattan who specializes in cybercrime, said his office was looking to pursue cases that would send a message to the hacking world. “We pursue impact litigation,” said Mr. Turner, who just secured the conviction of Ross W. Ulbricht, the founder of Silk Road, a notorious online marketplace for drugs and other illegal products.Also joining in the panel discussion were an F.B.I. special agent, Joe Lawlor; Evan Norris, a federal prosecutor in Brooklyn; and Elizabeth Roper, a cybercrime prosecutor in the Manhattan district attorney’s office.Austin Berglas, the assistant special agent in charge of the F.B.I.’s cyber branch in New York, who moderated the law enforcement panel, encouraged the corporate executives in attendance to introduce themselves to the agents and prosecutors. He said it was a rare opportunity for security specialists from the corporate world and the top law enforcement authorities in the field to be in one place.“This is the best panel,” Mr. Berglas said.