Italy’s bad bank is a good idea. Rome wants to set up a vehicle to sweep up banks’ toxic loans. It’s risky; government-funded bad banks can wind up losing taxpayers’ money. Yet it could also help lending and even spur consolidation in Italy’s fragmented banking system.About 17 percent of Italian bank loans — 333 billion euros — are nonperforming, according to the International Monetary Fund. Italian tax and fiscal incentives, and banks’ low profitability, encourage delays in provisions against realized losses. Long domestic bankruptcy processes make it hard for banks to dispose of bad debts. The consequence is weak lenders, higher lending costs and a misfiring economy.The single biggest thing Italy’s prime minister, Matteo Renzi, could do would be to improve Italy’s bankruptcy process. Investors stepping in to buy nonperforming loans — like Fortress’s acquisition on Thursday of a UniCredit bad loan portfolio — would pay twice as much for a loan recovering, say, 40 cents on the euro if they could discount that recovery over two rather than seven years. The government is trying, but progress is slow.In the meantime, Mr. Renzi’s bad bank idea is a decent stopgap. A bad bank centralizes expertise and resources for loan workouts and can avoid lenders’ crystallizing such big capital holes through fire sales. Yet competition authorities frown at the subsidy because the state’s lower cost of capital enables lenders to shift assets at nonmarket prices. The danger is the state ends up absorbing losses if assets aren’t valued properly. That’s what happened in the 1990s, when Italy lost money through a bad bank structure at Banco di Napoli.Italy’s peculiarities compound the issues. The country’s larger banks are already recapitalized and selling loans. That makes it harder to argue to European competition authorities that Italy’s nonperforming loans are a source of instability that justify state aid, like Spain’s or Ireland’s. Bad loans are a big problem for the country’s smaller lenders, but many lie outside the jurisdiction of Europe’s single supervisor, increasing the risks of a botched job.A bad bank could help Mr. Renzi kill two birds with one stone, though. His government hopes to reform the country’s mutual banks, ending their one shareholder-one vote governance that leaves power in the hands of local interests. Transferring their bad debts to a bad bank – at conservative valuations — would help them consolidate. It may also create capital holes, forcing the weakest players to be broken up. That could give Mr. Renzi leeway to shake them up.Neil Unmack is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.