Salix Pharmaceuticals, a maker of gastrointestinal drugs that played a role in last year’s takeover battle between Valeant Pharmaceuticals and Allergan, is once again a potential takeover target. Valeant, which failed in its attempt to acquire the Botox maker Allergan last year, is in talks with Salix, according to a person briefed on the matter. Shire, the British drug maker, is also considering an acquisition of Salix, this person said, but added that the talks with Valeant were more serious. Talks between Salix and both companies were ongoing and could still fall apart, said this person, who was not authorized to speak about the matter. Salix, based in Raleigh, N.C., has a market value of nearly $10 billion, with its stock up 50 percent in the last three months on speculation about a deal. Its sales have been growing rapidly, and the company is estimated to have had about $1.5 billion in 2014 sales. It was only last year that Salix was a thorn in Valeant’s side. Last fall, as Valeant pressed the hostile takeover of Allergan, it was Allergan that nearly bought Salix.Doing so could have made Allergan too large for Valeant to easily acquire. But talks between Allergan and Salix broke down, and Allergan was eventually acquired by Actavis for $66 billion. Now, having lost out on the race to acquire Allergan, Valeant has set its sights on Salix. Valeant is a serial acquirer of companies, having already absorbed big names like Bausch & Lomb. Instead of investing heavily on research and development, Valeant seeks to buy companies with stable businesses that it can push through its large sales pipeline. Shire, the other potential acquirer of Salix, was also part of a botched deal last year. AbbVie, the big American drug maker, had agreed to acquire Shire in what would have been the year’s biggest deal. But after the Treasury Department changed rules on inversions — deals where American companies acquire foreign competitors to reduce their tax bills — AbbVie walked away from the deal, paying $1.635 billion in what was one of the largest breakup fees ever. Bloomberg and Reuters reported earlier that Salix was in talks with Valeant and Shire. 