AdvertisementSupported byBy Landon Thomas Jr.James E. Staley, a former senior investment banker at JPMorgan Chase, has emerged as a leading candidate to take the top job at British banking giant Barclays, people briefed on the bank’s plans said.Tapping Mr. Staley, a career investment banker who has worked at a hedge fund for the past two years, would appear to be a controversial choice, given the many run-ins that Barclays has had with regulators over its risky banking style — along with the fact that he is an American.Three years ago, the bank’s board, under severe public pressure from British regulators for the bank’s role in the interest-rate-fixing scandal, forced its chief executive at the time, Robert E. Diamond Jr., to leave the bank.Mr. Diamond was a hard-charging investment banker, trained in the United States, who, in building the bank up to become one of the largest in the world, had instilled within it a Wall Street-style culture that rewarded high risk with high compensation.Mr. Diamond’s successor, Antony Jenkins, was the polar opposite: a mild-mannered Briton whose corporate successes were in the bank’s consumer division. Promising to change the way the bank did business, Mr. Jenkins laid off hundreds of traders and investment bankers.But a turnaround proved elusive and Mr. Jenkins was forced out in July. Mr. Staley, 58, spent much of his career at JPMorgan, rising from junior investment banking jobs in the bank’s offices in Latin America to lead JPMorgan’s huge investment bank.At one point, he, along with another longtime JPMorgan banker, William T. Winters, were deemed among the top prospects to succeed the bank’s chief executive, Jamie Dimon.Neither man, however, was allowed to enjoy this status for very long. Mr. Winters, who was hired to run the British bank Standard Chartered earlier this year, left JPMorgan in 2009. Mr. Staley followed him in 2013 to join the hedge fund BlueMountain Capital Management.Smooth and quietly ambitious, Mr. Staley, known to all as Jes, had made it clear to friends and associates that at some point he would like to return to a leadership post at a large financial institution.While BlueMountain is a respected hedge fund, with $22 billion under management, it did not come close to providing Mr. Staley the public platform that he enjoyed at JPMorgan.In May, Mr. Staley was elected to the board of UBS, the Swiss investment bank — a post he will have to abandon if he takes the Barclays job.Running Barclays, even in its diminished state, would be a fitting capstone for Mr. Staley. It would also mean that two of the most prominent contenders for Mr. Dimon’s throne would be running two of the largest banks in Britain. People briefed on Barclays’ plans, but not authorized to speak publicly about them, said the announcement of Mr. Staley’s selection was several weeks away. British regulators would have to sign off on the choice. The Financial Times reported earlier on Monday that Mr. Staley’s appointment would be announced in the next two weeks.While both are American investment bankers, there remain some important differences that distinguish Mr. Staley from Mr. Diamond. Mr. Diamond was a bond expert who focused on building the bank’s bond-trading businesses. Mr. Staley, by comparison, spent much of his time at JPMorgan overseeing the bank’s fast growing — and less risky — asset management unit.Many banks these days are moving away from the bond trading activities favored by Mr. Diamond to more predictable fee generating businesses such as asset management.Mr. Staley would also not be a stranger to Barclays. Following Mr. Diamond’s departure in 2012, Mr. Staley had discussions with the British bank about assuming the top job, according to people knowledgeable about the discussions.In the end, the Barclays board opted for Mr. Jenkins, finding him to be the safer, more publicly palatable choice.Chad Bray and Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting.Advertisement