By JULIE CRESWELLFEB. 13, 2015
Harvey J. Goldschmid, an expert on corporate law who, as a member of the Securities and Exchange Commission, was a strong advocate of making public corporations responsible to shareholders, died on Thursday in Manhattan. He was 74.His death, of complications from pneumonia, was confirmed by Columbia Law School, where he was the Dwight Professor of Law.Mr. Goldschmid, a Democrat, was named to the commission by President George W. Bush in 2002, just after the president had signed one of the most sweeping federal securities laws ever enacted, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.Passed after the collapse of the energy company Enron and the telecom giant WorldCom, the law was meant to overhaul corporate financial reporting.AdvertisementThe architect of Regulation FD, for fair disclosure, a rule that prohibits companies from disclosing material information to select clients, Mr. Goldschmid could be sharp with his criticism when he felt the agency had failed common shareholders.“The commission’s inaction to this point has made it a safer world for a small minority of lazy, inefficient, grossly overpaid and wrongheaded C.E.O.s,” he declared in a speech in 2004, after a proposal that would have given shareholders greater say in selecting corporate board members stalled at the commission.Harvey Jerome Goldschmid was born on May 6, 1940, in the Bronx, where his father worked as a furrier and a postal worker. Mr. Goldschmid said in an S.E.C. Historical Society interview that he knew he wanted to be a lawyer from the time he was 12.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An alumnus of Columbia College and Columbia Law School, Mr. Goldschmid joined the law school faculty in 1970 and became the Dwight Professor of Law in 1984.He served as general counsel of the S.E.C. from 1998 to 1999 and as a special senior adviser to the chairman, Arthur Levitt Jr., in 2000. He was a commissioner from 2002 to 2005.After he returned to Columbia Law School to teach antitrust and corporate and securities law, Mr. Goldschmid was also a consultant to several agencies on policy making.AdvertisementMr. Goldschmid’s three sons, Charles, Paul and Joseph, all followed in his path as law graduates of Columbia. They survive him, as does his wife, Mary.In the years after the financial crisis that helped fuel the Great Recession, Mr. Goldschmid was among the champions of the creation of a stand-alone systemic risk agency that would have sweeping oversight of the financial sector.In 2012, he was named to the resulting body, the Systemic Risk Council.An obituary in some editions on Friday about Harvey J. Goldschmid, an expert on corporate law and a former member of the Securities and Exchange Commission, misstated the day he died. It was Thursday, not last Wednesday.A version of this article appears in print on February 14, 2015, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Harvey Goldschmid, 74, Shareholders’ Advocate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.