AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioIn the latest plagiarism scandal in journalism, Mic, a news site intended for the so-called millennial generation, has fired its news director after numerous examples surfaced showing that he had lifted material from other sources without proper attribution.Jared Keller, the news director, was dismissed a day after Gawker, the media news and gossip site, collected some 20 examples of his work on Mic in which passages had been copied or liberally borrowed from outlets including The Atlantic, Vox and Reuters. In some cases, material was republished with no credit at all, while other articles by Mr. Keller made passing reference to outside sources but failed to give proper credit when passages were taken verbatim or with minor changes. After Gawker posted the findings on Wednesday, Mic said it had begun an investigation, and on Thursday, Jake Horowitz, Mic’s co-founder and editor in chief, said in a statement that Mr. Keller was no longer employed there.Mr. Keller, who joined Mic less than a year ago after working at Bloomberg, Al Jazeera America and The Atlantic, wrote on Twitter on Thursday afternoon: “I want to apologize to my colleagues, friends, family and every hard-working journalist out there. There’s no excuse for my sloppiness.” In a message to The New York Times, he declined to comment further.Mic, founded in 2011 under the name PolicyMic as a news outlet for readers under 35, is the latest publication to face accusations of plagiarism or other journalistic lapses. Last year, BuzzFeed fired one of its writers, Benny Johnson, after finding 41 examples of copying. In 2012, the New Yorker writer Jonah Lehrer was found to have fabricated quotes attributed to Bob Dylan, and recycling old articles for New Yorker blog posts. These cases and others have prompted debate about what proper attribution means for a new generation of media outlets that often rely heavily on aggregation of content from other sources. But in his statement on Thursday, Mr. Horowitz, Mic’s editor, made it clear that a line had been crossed.“Plagiarism is unacceptable in any form and our editorial policies make that very clear,” Mr. Horowitz said. “We appreciate Gawker bringing these issues to our attention, and as we continue our internal review, we’ll be transparently updating any story that violates our standards.”By Thursday afternoon, many of the posts highlighted by Gawker had been updated with attribution to other sources, with boldface editor’s notes appended acknowledging the changes.Advertisement