By KATIE THOMASFEB. 12, 2015
The federal government on Thursday announced that it was changing the way it measures nursing homes, essentially adjusting the curve that it uses to rate homes to make it more difficult for them to earn coveted four- and five-star government ratings.Under the changes, scores are likely to fall for many homes, federal officials said, although they did not provide specific numbers. Facilities will see a preview of their new scores on Friday, but the information will not be made public until Feb. 20.“In effect, this raises the standard for nursing homes to achieve a high rating,” said Thomas Hamilton, the director of the survey and certification group at the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, which oversees the ratings system.Nursing homes are scored on a scale of one to five stars on Nursing Home Compare, the widely used federal website that has become the gold standard for evaluating the nation’s more than 15,000 nursing homes even as it has been criticized for relying on self-reported, unverified data.AdvertisementIn August, The New York Times reported that the rating system relied so heavily on unverified information that even homes with a documented history of quality problems were earning top ratings. Two of the three major criteria used to rate facilities — staffing levels and quality measures statistics — were reported by the homes and not audited by the federal government.In 2011, Ken Chandler brought his elderly mother to a nursing home that had Medicare’s seal of approval, a five-star rating. After a series of troubling events there, Mr. Chandler now feels misled.In October, the federal government announced that it would start requiring nursing homes to report their staffing levels quarterly — using an electronic system that can be verified with payroll data — and that it would begin a nationwide auditing program aimed at checking whether a home’s quality statistic was accurate.AdvertisementThe changes announced on Thursday were part of a further effort, officials said, to rebalance the ratings by raising the bar for nursing homes to achieve a high score in the quality measures area, which is based on information collected about every patient. Nursing homes can increase their overall rating if they earn five stars in this area. The number of nursing homes with five stars in quality measures has increased significantly since the beginning of the program, to 29 percent in 2013 from 11 percent in 2009.Representatives for nursing homes said on Thursday that they worried the changes could send the wrong message to consumers. “We are concerned the public won’t know what to make of these new rankings,” said Mark Parkinson, the president and chief executive of the American Health Care Association, which represents for-profit nursing homes. “If centers across the country start losing their star ratings overnight, it sends a signal to families and residents that quality is on the decline when in fact it has improved in a meaningful way.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But officials said that the changes would be explained on the consumer website, and that the public would be cautioned against drawing conclusions about a home whose ratings recently declined. Still, Mr. Hamilton said scores would not decline across the board.“Some nursing homes, even when we raised the bar, continued to perform at a level much higher than the norm,” he said in a conference call Thursday with nursing home operators. “We want to still recognize them in the five-star category.”The updated ratings will also take into account, for the first time, a nursing home’s use of antipsychotic drugs, which are often given inappropriately to elderly patients with dementia.A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: Government Will Change How It Rates Nursing Homes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.