AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromConsumers continued to shun cereal and its snack bar derivatives, causing steep losses at the Kellogg Company at the end of last year.Kellogg reported on Thursday that it lost $293 million, or 82 cents a share, in the fourth quarter that ended Jan. 3, in contrast to profits of $819 million in the same period the previous year.Stripping out a long list of costs associated with currency fluctuations, restructuring, adjustments to pension liabilities and other charges, Kellogg would have earned 86 cents a share, the company said.Sales were flat at $3.5 billion, and the company reduced its expectations for this year, saying that it did not expect sales to improve much and that its operating profits would be lower.“One of the key targets of success, I think, is targeting realistic goals, which can be achieved over the long term,” John A. Bryant, chief executive of Kellogg, said in a conference call with investment analysts on Thursday. “We think low-single-digit top-line growth for the total business is an achievable goal.”Some of the analysts, however, sharply questioned what was happening to the money being saved through the company’s restructuring plan, known as Project K. “Where’s all the money going?” asked David Driscoll, who follows the company at Citi Research.“We’re not relying on Project K to drive bottom-line results,” Mr. Bryant said. “We’re investing Project K back into the business — we’ve got to get this business back to growth.”In a rare departure from the usual deference shown to management on such calls, Jason English, an investment analyst at Goldman Sachs, pointedly asked why the company was “rebasing” incentive compensation at a time of lagging performance. Kellogg said on Thursday that the change would reduce operating profits this year by as much as 4 percent.“It kind of surprised me, given that you’ve taken so many efforts to shrink your employee population,” Mr. English said, referring to cutbacks taking place over several years.Mr. Bryant said that incentive payments given to employees last year were “below target rates” and noted that the company’s incentive program extended well beyond the executive suite. “It’s just a reflection of underperformance in 2014 and going back to targets in 2015,” he said.Kris Charles, a company spokeswoman, said that at the beginning of each year, Kellogg sets aside a budget for bonuses for that year, planning to pay all of it out. “As the year progresses, the total percentage payout may change based on the performance of the business,” Ms. Charles said.In 2014, she said, Kellogg paid less in bonuses than it had anticipated because the business had not performed well. “So the headwind in 2015 is caused by resetting the incentive compensation budget to 100 percent, assuming that we pay out at target levels this year,” Ms. Charles said.Mr. Bryant cited weakness in sales of Special K brand products, noting a shift in consumers away from foods promoted as “diet” in favor of what the industry is calling “functional” foods, products with fewer ingredients, added protein and other features that are perceived as healthy rather than simply lower in calories. “Simple food, clearly less refined, if you like, that’s what I think consumers are looking for, as well as satiation,” he said.Kellogg’s Kashi brand, which includes GoLean and is another big part of its portfolio, also continued to stumble, the company said. Mr. Bryant said Kellogg was working to source more ingredients that have not been genetically modified and wants to make more of the Kashi line organic.On Thursday, Kellogg’s shares closed down 3 percent, at $63.30.Advertisement