
Common Sense By                     
 JAMES B. STEWART
 
FEB. 12, 2015
To the growing list of Robert Iger’s accomplishments during his near-decade tenure as Disney’s chief executive, add succession planning.Last week, Disney announced that Thomas Staggs had been named Disney’s chief operating officer, ending a five-year face-off with James Rasulo, his chief rival to succeed Mr. Iger, who has said he will step down when his contract expires in June 2018.At companies in less ego-driven industries than media and entertainment, the orderly naming of a longtime insider (Mr. Staggs has been with Disney for 25 years) as chief executive-in-waiting might not warrant headlines. But at Disney, Mr. Iger’s predecessor, Michael Eisner, elevated and discarded some prominent candidates to succeed him — Jeffrey Katzenberg and Michael Ovitz, in particular — in a multiyear drama that eventually led to a shareholder revolt and Mr. Eisner’s ouster.At other major entertainment companies, Sumner Redstone, 91, still controls Viacom and CBS and has feuded publicly with Shari Redstone, his daughter and presumed heir apparent. Rupert Murdoch, 83, is chairman and chief executive of both News Corporation and 21st Century Fox and has sent shifting signals as to which, if any, of his six children might succeed him.Advertisement“These are hard jobs to leave,” said Michael Nathanson, a veteran Hollywood analyst and partner at MoffettNathanson. “Look at Disney’s peer group among big media companies. Most of them had chief executives that didn’t leave by choice and didn’t leave when they were as young as Bob.” (Mr. Iger is 64.) “He’ll go out on top, and he’ll go out on his own narrative. He deserves a lot of credit for that.”AdvertisementFor many chief executives, the ability to exit gracefully while anointing a strong successor is one of the most important but least appreciated qualities of leadership, according to David Larcker, a professor at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and an expert in corporate governance. “It’s very difficult,” he said. “Look at Ovitz at Disney. That was a monumental disaster. And the transition from Eisner was awkward, to put it mildly. You have to admire Iger, who recognized that he’s done what he came to do and it’s time for new blood. From the outside, this appears to be going very smoothly. Disney has successfully avoided any public spectacle.”Five years ago, Mr. Iger had Mr. Staggs and Mr. Rasulo switch jobs, naming Mr. Staggs head of Disney’s theme parks and resorts, and Mr. Rasulo chief financial officer. Mr. Staggs worked at Morgan Stanley before joining Disney in 1990 in strategic planning, but lacked operational experience. Mr. Rasulo also started in strategic planning in 1986 after working at the Marriott Corporation, and ran the troubled Disneyland Paris before becoming chairman of parks and resorts. He was seen as needing Wall Street exposure.Judson Green, who worked closely with both men during his 10 years of running Disney’s parks and resorts division, said both were strong candidates. “Bob had an embarrassment of riches,” he said, and still has three years to make a final decision. But of the two, “Bob may have felt that Tom is a little more polished, a little more charismatic. He has great presentation skills and is a little more Disney-like than Jay.” At age 54, Mr. Staggs is also a few years younger.A current Disney executive said people inside the company were enthusiastic about Mr. Iger’s choice, with the exception of some loyalists to Mr. Rasulo, and were glad the contest was over. “It was awkward and sometimes tense,” said this person, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Mr. Staggs “is very artist-friendly. He’s a musician. He’s warm and friendly, and he’s got a gorgeous family.” (People told me Mr. Staggs is an accomplished trumpet player.)Mr. Staggs is also popular on Wall Street and was repeatedly named by Institutional Investor magazine as the entertainment industry’s top chief financial officer.In a statement, Mr. Staggs said he was “honored and humbled” by the opportunity. A Disney spokeswoman said he and Mr. Iger were traveling and unavailable for further comment.Mr. Staggs’s biggest problem may be an enviable one: How can he improve on Mr. Iger’s record? “Whoever takes over will have big shoes to fill,” said Doug Creutz, a media analyst for the Cowen Group. “Bob took over a company that, in the aftermath of Eisner’s last five years, was pretty much broken. And just about every problem they had has been fixed.”AdvertisementIf anything, that might be an understatement. Last week, Disney reported first-quarter earnings of $2.2 billion, a 19 percent increase over the previous year, on revenue of $13.4 billion, up 9 percent. Last week, the stock hit a record high of $102, and it is up more than 30 percent over last year.Profits at the parks and resorts segment, which Mr. Staggs oversees, rose 20 percent from a year earlier to $805 million, on higher profit margins, which helped vindicate Mr. Iger’s choice. But the studio entertainment division’s 33 percent gain and the closely related consumer products earnings increase of 46 percent were even more impressive because of Disney’s remarkable series of hit feature films. These include the Avengers movies and several other Marvel franchise action films, the live-action “Maleficent,” and the animated blockbuster “Frozen,” which resurrected the Disney animation studio and has been a consumer products bonanza.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The movie studio, especially, has been on an incredible roll,” Mr. Creutz said. “Disney has had the best 18 months of any studio in the history of the business.”Mr. Nathanson was similarly effusive. “I don’t make it my business to flatter chief executives,” he said, “but Bob has done an amazing job.“ Citing Disney’s acquisitions of Pixar, Marvel, Lucasfilm and big capital investments in the theme parks, he said Mr. Iger “made acquisitions that were bets on global content.” He went on: “Almost every other company had stopped making deals in the aftermath of the financial crisis. At the time, Disney was paying prices that looked very aggressive, but it’s turned out to be wonderful. Bob kept investing, and it’s paying huge dividends.”Mr. Green mused: “The problem, if there is one, is how big can Disney get? How do they keep the growth rate? The person who takes over isn’t going to make the theme parks significantly better. You can’t fundamentally change the product. The same with ESPN. It’s dominant.”That might also be said of the film business. This year seems just as promising as the last two, with another Avengers installment, two Pixar releases and the first Star Wars release under Disney’s ownership. Still, the movie business has been notoriously unpredictable and unprofitable.Disney aside, Professor Larcker noted that the track record for handpicked successors who follow highly successful chief executives isn’t encouraging. In a recent research paper, “The Handpicked C.E.O. Successor,” he found that the share price of companies run by chief executives who were selected by their predecessor tends to underperform the Standard & Poor’s 500, sometimes by large percentages.Some prominent examples he cites are General Electric’s choice of Jeffrey Immelt to succeed Jack Welch (G.E. shares underperformed the S.&P. 500 by 121 percent as of last November, he found); Microsoft’s choice of Steven Ballmer to succeed Bill Gates (Microsoft has underperformed by 61 percent); and Citigroup’s choice of Charles Prince to succeed Sanford Weill (Citigroup has underperformed by 71 percent). A notable exception is Tim Cook, Steve Jobs’s chosen successor at Apple (whose shares have far outperformed the S.&P. 500).Why this would be the case is not entirely clear, but one possibility is what is known as the Mini-Me syndrome, in which chief executives gravitate toward people who are similar to them. Mr. Iger was certainly a contrast to Mr. Eisner, who in his later years firmly resisted the kind of expensive acquisitions subsequently championed by Mr. Iger.AdvertisementOf course, Mr. Staggs hasn’t received the top job yet. He has three years to prove himself and to solidify his position with the board, which will ultimately make the decision. But he has clearly emerged victorious over any internal competition. (Mr. Rasulo hasn’t announced his plans and is not under any immediate pressure to leave, but his contract coincidentally expired in January, and he hasn’t renewed it.)That means Mr. Staggs’s primary competition, if any, would come from someone outside the company. Several people said the ideal outside candidate might be a woman, with proved success in Internet and digital media businesses and familiarity with Disney’s culture and values.Disney would not have to look far: Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook’s chief operating officer, sits on Disney’s board.A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Tackling Succession At Disney .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »