AdvertisementSupported byBy Danny HakimLONDON — Volkswagen’s top executive in Britain said Monday that the car company was taking a different approach to fixing its vehicles in Europe than in the United States, raising new questions about the manufacturer’s response to its emissions testing scandal and highlighting gaps in trans-Atlantic regulations.Paul Willis, general manager of Volkswagen Group UK, said that repairs for diesels sold in Europe will not involve the installation of a new emission filtration system using urea as an additive, as is expected in many vehicles in the United States, which has tougher pollution standards.His comments came during testimony Monday before Parliament’s Transport Committee, the latest public airing of the Volkswagen scandal. The company’s top U.S. official, Michael Horn, faced harsh questioning before Congress last Thursday.Volkswagen, which has admitted to installing software to cheat emissions tests on 11 million diesel vehicles worldwide, is now facing investigations across the globe and a crisis that threatens much more than its standing as the world’s largest automaker.Roughly 1.2 million Volkswagen diesel vehicles are affected by the scandal in Britain, more than twice the number in the United States. The cars have been sold in the country since 2008.Mr. Willis said Monday that in addition to making a software adjustment, Volkswagen would replace fuel injectors installed in more than 400,000 of its vehicles in Britain, a more complex strategy that had not been previously mentioned.Volkswagen admitted that 11 million of its vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat on emissions tests. This is how the technology works and what it now means for vehicle owners.Recalls of the vehicles, which also include the company’s Audi, Seat and Skoda brands, will begin in Britain in the first quarter of next year.Last week, Mr. Horn said that cars in the United States would require a “major fix” that might not start until next year. Volkswagen has until Nov. 20 to submit a plan to California regulators, which must then be approved.“First of all, I would like to apologize sincerely and unreservedly that Volkswagen has significantly let down its customers and the wider public,” Mr. Willis said. “We recognize that we have fallen short of the standards expected of us, and we will take all the necessary steps to regain trust.”Policy makers in Britain were as skeptical as their American counterparts. Mark Menzies, a member of the Conservative Party, said the company had treated its customers “like fools.”“What compensation are you seeking to give to people who bought your cars in good faith and were sold a pack of lies?” he asked.Patrick McLoughlin, Britain’s transport secretary, said Volkswagen “behaved in an appalling way.”“It is fairly unbelievable to think a company the size and reputation of VW have been doing something like this and finding ways around regulations,” he added during his testimony. “I think they are going to suffer very substantial damage as a result of it.”Like Volkswagen’s top American executive, Mr. Willis said he learned of the actions that led to the scandal only recently. An initial internal inquiry has focused on a small group of engineers in Germany, but there has been wide skepticism that there was not more awareness within the company of such an ambitious strategy to cheat emissions tests. The company’s recently departed chief executive, Martin Winterkorn, was an engineer known for micromanaging details.“If you ask me questions — who did what — I would be guessing,” Mr. Willis said. “I find it absolutely implausible that senior people of the company would have known of these issues with regard to the testing regime.”The scope of Volkswagen’s problems continues to swell.Volkswagen said over the weekend that a second computer program, which is now a subject of inquiry by regulators in Washington and the state of California, was used while its cars were warming up. The warm-up phase is of particular concern for regulators because emissions can sometimes be substantial, though it is not clear what effect the software had.Volkswagen also announced a recall of nearly 2,000 vehicles in China, which has a small diesel market, amid an investigation there. Singapore suspended sales of Volkswagen diesels. So far, the company has set aside about $7.3 billion to deal with the scandal. But few believe that will be enough, including its new chief executive, Matthias Müller.A number of participants in the hearing Monday, including a representative of an auto industry trade group, said that Europe’s current laboratory tests were not working, viewing plans to create new European tests to measure emissions on the road as critical. Automakers have been lobbying aggressively, however, to weaken the forthcoming road tests.The scandal has opened a debate about Europe’s approach to regulating cars, and there is discomfort that it took United States regulators to begin an investigation into cheating. The revelation that Volkswagen is not taking a consistent approach in applying repairs to its cars is likely to further that debate.“There is a different technical engine configuration in the United States, there’s a different testing regime, and there’s different regulations,” Mr. Willis said. “So I think it’s different for the United States, and I think that will be a different cost as well.”Advertisement