By IAN AUSTENFEB. 12, 2015
OTTAWA —  The chief executive of the aircraft and railway equipment maker Bombardier, Pierre Beaudoin, will step down, as the company announced dismal earnings and the need to raise additional capital.The surprise move is the latest in a series of management shake-ups at the company, which has faced a number of setbacks.Repeated delays in a new airliner have caused anxiety among investors, sending the company’s shares tumbling this year. Last month, it suspended development of a new Learjet business plane, which led to 1,000 layoffs. The company said the decision was expected to result in a $1.4 billion charge.The C.E.O. change will end the direct management involvement of the Beaudoin family, descendants of the company’s founder, Joseph-Armand Bombardier, and the controlling shareholders. A former executive at United Technologies, Alain Bellemare, will take the reins.AdvertisementAs part of the changes, Mr. Beaudoin, 52, will replace his father, Laurent, 76, as the company’s executive chairman.AdvertisementThe moves follow the company’s weak performance.On Thursday, Bombardier announced a loss of $1.59 billion for the fourth quarter, in contrast to a $97 million profit in the same quarter a year earlier. Sales rose to $5.9 billion, from $5.3 billion in the year-earlier quarter.For the full year, the loss was $2.2 billion compared with profit of $1.4 billion in 2013. Revenue was $20 billion compared with $18 billion a year earlier.Aviation was not the company’s only trouble spot. Mr. Beaudoin said that increased spending on research and product development as well as some contract issues will crimp profits at its railway equipment unit, which is the largest passenger train maker in the world.The company said on Thursday that, pending shareholder approval, it would raise about $600 million by selling new stock and that it would borrow an additional $1.5 billion. Mr. Beaudoin said that his family, whose control rests on special voting shares, would be among the investors in the new stock.In a conference call with reporters, Mr. Beaudoin said the leadership overhaul was not set off by criticism from some analysts and investors. Rather, he said, it was prompted by the decision of Mr. Bellemare to resign last month as president and chief executive of the United Technologies propulsion and aerospace systems group, which includes the aircraft engine maker Pratt & Whitney.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I felt there was a great opportunity and it’s the right thing for Bombardier to do at this time,” Mr. Beaudoin said.An unusually quiet and fuel-efficient new engine from Pratt & Whitney was a key selling point for Bombardier’s new CSeries airliners, which would directly compete with Boeing and Airbus planes. But the new engine also contributed to the delays in the planes’ release and was a factor in the company’s loss during the final quarter.Flight tests to certify the plane were suspended for five months last year after one of the Pratt & Whitney engines exploded and damaged a test plane. The cause was ultimately traced to a minor lubrication problem.AdvertisementThe company said on Thursday that the development costs for the airliner now total $5.4 billion.Mr. Bellemare, who starts his new job on Friday, is from Quebec, where Bombardier is a major economic and employment force. He was noncommittal about his plans for Bombardier, saying that he first needed time to study its operations from the inside.Mr. Beaudoin said that he intended to continuing working full time. But he will restrict himself to exploring merger and takeover possibilities, as well as the company’s high-level finances.“Alain has the full mandate of C.E.O.,” Mr. Beaudoin said. “There’s no co-C.E.O.”The change did not seem to immediately reassure investors. Bombardier’s shares fell 11.5 percent in trading on Thursday.“The change in leadership ultimately will prove to be a positive thing,” said Chris Murray, an analyst with AltaCorp Capital in Toronto. “With Mr. Beaudoin where were some issues around whether he had the confidence of the investment community.”But Mr. Murray said that he was frustrated that Bombardier had not “added a tremendous amount of clarity as to where the company is going.”A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Chief Will Step Down at Bombardier, Ending Family’s Role at Helm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.