By JENNY ANDERSONFEB. 12, 2015
LONDON — Consumer prices in Britain will continue to fall this year, with the possibility of inflation dipping into negative territory, the Bank of England said on Thursday.After its anemic 0.5 percent rise in December, inflation is expected to decline to zero percent in the second quarter of 2015, and will most likely dip below zero briefly in the second half of the year, the central bank said in its quarterly inflation report.The prospect of falling inflation means the market expects that interest rates, which remain at a low of 0.5 percent, will not increase until 2016, to 0.8 percent, and to 1.1 percent in 2017, the report said.The possibility of declining inflation in Britain has different contours than the tumbling prices in Europe. Prices in Britain are falling because of a crash in oil prices and because of supermarket wars, which have driven down food and gas prices.AdvertisementThe British economy, said Mark J. Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, is strong.“Output growth remains solid and domestic demand growth robust,” he said at a news conference.AdvertisementThe report highlights Britain’s divergence with central banks in Europe that are cutting interest rates into negative territory and embarking on so-called quantitative easing, or asset purchase programs, to stimulate the economy.Britain put quantitative easing into effect in March 2009 and has maintained 0.5 percent interest rates since then. If economic growth remains strong, it is expected to raise rates rather than cut them in the near future.Mr. Carney said that lower gas and food prices were “unambiguously positive” for the British economy, which grew at a healthy clip of 2.6 percent last year, as consumers had more money to spend.The Bank of England inflation report forecasts British unemployment to fall, to 5.4 percent in 2015, from 5.7 percent last year, unlike in Europe, which faces high unemployment and low growth. It will dip again to 5.2 percent in 2016, the central bank said.Mr. Carney said he would “look through” the immediate effect of the fall in oil prices to broader economic forces like wages and productivity when contemplating when to raise rates.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The report predicts slack in the economy — the difference between what the economy can produce and what it is producing — to be about 0.5 percent, down from 1 percent last quarter. It expects slack to be eliminated by mid-2017.Some economists worry about deflation, a state in which consumers delay purchases because they think goods and services will be cheaper in the future. But the inflation report anticipates healthy growth in real post-tax household income of 3.5 percent in 2015, and 3 percent in 2016.As expected, Mr. Carney wrote a letter to the chancellor of the Exchequer on Thursday, explaining why inflation was more than one percentage point from target, which is 2 percent.Advertisement“The most important single reason for below-target inflation over the past year is the unexpected and sharp drop in energy prices,” the letter said.In the letter, he outlined scenarios under which inflation could rise faster than expected or fall further. For example, he said, if employers see inflation falling and refuse to raise wages, that could depress growth.Though Mr. Carney sounded bullish on Britain’s prospects, he made clear that he would be willing to cut rates or increase the size of its quantitative easing if needed.This is a deviation from the past, when the central bank’s Monetary Policy Committee said it would not lower rates because of weakness in the banking sector. “Reductions in the bank rate are therefore less likely to have undesirable effects on the supply of credit to the U.K. economy than previously judged by the M.P.C.,” the letter said.Economic projections are notoriously volatile, however, subject to assumptions about often-unforeseeable events. For example, few people saw oil prices’ dropping as quickly as they did.A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: As Global Oil Prices Decline, British Consumer Prices Follow.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.