By STANLEY REEDFEB. 12, 2015
LONDON — Total, the Paris-based oil giant, on Thursday reported a loss of $5.7 billion for the fourth quarter of 2014 as it struggles with the deep slump in oil prices.Write-downs of about $6.5 billion, mostly on Canadian oil sands projects, shale gas operations in the United States and European refining businesses, contributed to the loss, the company said.With oil prices’ having slumped sharply since June, Total's chief executive, Patrick Pouyanné, finds himself, as other oil company leaders are, trying to pare costs without hurting the company’s long-term outlook.“We have to react but not overreact,” he told reporters in London on Thursday. Mr. Pouyanné became chief last year after the death of Christophe de Margerie, whose private jet hit a snowplow in Moscow.AdvertisementMr. Pouyanné implied that oil prices would eventually recover ground. He said that high-cost oil from shale deposits, tar sands and other projects that cost around $90 a barrel to develop would eventually be needed to supply growing global demand and to make up for the natural decline in oil fields. There is fundamental support for high long-term prices, he said.AdvertisementTotal will impose a hiring freeze, leading to the reduction of 2,000 jobs by the end of this year through attrition. Mr. Pouyanné said that the company did not want to lay skilled people off and waste the time and money it had put into their training.As the price of crude oil fluctuates, why some countries are faring much better than others.Net income adjusted for inventory changes and one-offs, a measure closely watched by industry analysts, fell 17 percent in the quarter compared with the same period a year earlier, to $2.8 billion. For the year, adjusted net income fell 10 percent to $12.8 billion on revenue of $236 billion.While quarterly adjusted earnings beat analysts’ expectations, the performance of the company’s core exploration and production division fell 48 percent. Total’s stock price was up about 1 percent.Oil prices have plunged roughly 50 percent since the summer, amid a glut of supply and slowing demand. Brent crude, the international benchmark, was trading around $56 a barrel on Thursday, well below the level of about $110 a barrel in June.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Oil companies are now finding that their investments are either not viable or not worth as much as they had estimated when oil prices were higher. Other companies, like BP and Tullow, an explorer based in Britain, have taken write-downs in the fourth quarter. Analysts say that many other companies will need to follow suit.Mr. Pouyanné established a reputation for cutting costs in his previous role as head of Total’s marketing and refining operations, having negotiated the closing of some plants with European unions. Pressured by the drop in oil prices, he is trying to broaden cost-cutting to the rest of the company, including the core exploration and production unit.Total also said that it would trim investment to $23 billion from $26.4 billion, partly by stopping projects that have become less profitable. It said it would accelerate the sale of some assets, echoing plans announced by other companies.Total also said it would continue to address the issue of too much capacity in Europe by shutting down some parts of its Lindsey refinery in Britain with the loss of about 180 jobs. The company said a new plan for its refineries in France would be presented in the spring.Despite the loss, analysts at Bernstein Research in London told clients on Thursday that they “like the company’s response” to low prices. The Bernstein analysts said that Total had the best performance of the major oil companies on its return on capital, at 11.1 percent for 2014. Total also beat its peers by replacing 100 percent of the reserves that it produced in 2014.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.