AdvertisementSupported byBy Clifford KraussHOUSTON — The global benchmark price for oil rallied above $60 a barrel on Friday for the first time in 2015, but analysts warned that growing stockpiles were hanging over the market and could easily force prices back down.Traders bid up both the global Brent and American benchmarks about 3 percent after reports of moderately improving economic growth in Europe. An increase in oil demand in Europe, where the economy has languished, is considered essential for bolstering oil prices, which remain at their lowest levels since the economic downturn in 2009.On the supply side, traders have gained confidence by the announcements virtually every day of oil companies reducing their investments in exploration and production as much as 40 percent.The rig count in the United States has declined steadily since the beginning of the year to a nearly four-year low, as more executives have decided to leave oil in the ground until prices rebound.The Baker Hughes service company reported on Friday that the United States rig count declined 84 this week to 1,056, from a peak of 1,609 in October. The latest major American producer to announce cuts was the Apache Corporation, which said on Thursday that it would cut its investments 60 percent this year. Apache said the number of rigs it operates onshore in North America would fall to 27 by the end of this month from 91 in the fall. “We cannot predict nor control the length or depth of this oil price correction or the timing and extent of the rebound,” John J. Christmann IV, Apache’s chief executive, said in a conference call, reflecting the uncertain sentiments voiced by many oil executives lately. “We have therefore acted quickly and decisively regarding the things we can control: our activity levels and cost structure.”The price of oil fell nearly 60 percent from June to late January. It began recovering somewhat in recent weeks as traders became increasingly optimistic that oil companies were quickly decommissioning rigs and cutting investments in exploration and production at a rate not seen since the oil price slump in the 1980s.Gasoline prices have been edging up for motorists. The average national price for a gallon of regular was $2.24 on Friday, 12 cents more than a month ago. But consumers are stilling paying nearly $1.10 less a gallon than a year ago.The question remains whether the cuts producers are making will be enough to bring supplies into balance with demand; the global market has an excess of 1.5 million to two million barrels a day. That oil has been flooding into storage tanks in Cushing, Okla., around the Gulf of Mexico and on tankers around the world.The inventory of crude stocks in the United States alone reached a record this week of 413 million barrels, according to a report released on Friday by Bank of America Merrill Lynch. And with onshore storage filling quickly, the bank estimated that by summer, 50 million to 100 million more barrels could be in floating storage on supertankers.At some point, unless global demand for oil suddenly picks up, producers will have no place to put their oil — forcing them to lower their prices and eventually stop producing.“In our view, global inventory dynamics could continue to deteriorate in coming weeks, leading to renewed selling pressure in the oil markets,” the Bank of America Merrill Lynch report concluded.But analysts are divided over when the storage tanks in the United States will be filled. Some say maximum storage capacity will not be reached until the middle of summer, depending on how much consumers take advantage of declining gasoline prices to drive long distances on their spring and summer vacations.Oil production from new American wells fell to 525,000 barrels a day in January from 600,000 in May, according to a report by Rice University’s Baker Institute for Policy Study released this week. Still, overall production in the United States continued to increase, and government and energy experts estimate that it will take at least until the second half of the year for the growth in production to stop.The Energy Department noted this week that American crude oil production was 9.2 million barrels a day in January and estimated that it would average 9.3 million barrels a day for the year. That is a steep decline in growth from the last three years, when average daily production rose at least a million barrels each year.Brent crude settled on Friday at $61.52 a barrel, up $2.24, in London, and the American benchmark, West Texas Intermediate, at $52.78, up $1.37, on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Advertisement