By ANN CARRNSFEB. 13, 2015
THERE’S still time to get health insurance this year under the Affordable Care Act. But you’ll have to be quick.The deadline for coverage in 2015 is midnight Sunday. Those who miss the cutoff won’t be able to enroll in a plan this year and will have to pay a penalty, unless they qualify for certain exemptions under the law.In the first open enrollment period, from late 2013 to early 2014, government health insurance exchanges were flexible and extended the deadline for many people. That was largely because of technical problems that slowed down online applications. But the second time around, systems have run more smoothly.People whose applications are pending when the midnight deadline hits should be able to complete them, Andrew Slavitt, a deputy administrator at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said in a call Wednesday with reporters.AdvertisementStill, it’s best to start the enrollment process as soon as possible to meet Sunday’s deadline.Federal officials said that as the deadline approaches, traffic is increasing at Healthcare.gov, the federal marketplace, and at the exchange’s call centers. Despite the increase, however, they said the website and call centers were operating with minimal wait times.AdvertisementFrom the start of open enrollment, on Dec. 15, through Feb. 6, federal officials said, 7.75 million people have either selected a plan or been automatically re-enrolled in one through Healthcare.gov; that figure does not include those using state-run exchanges.An estimated 30 million adults in the United States remain uninsured, however, and almost half would qualify for premium tax credits under the law or for Medicaid, according to research from the Kaiser Family Foundation.Help is available for those who are not sure how to proceed. “Some who are uninsured are unfamiliar with the process, and they really want to sit down with an expert and talk to someone,” said Anne Filipic, president of Enroll America, a nonprofit health insurance advocacy group. The group’s website offers a “Get Covered Connector” tool that lets consumers search by ZIP code to find local help; they can call to make an in-person appointment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Assistance is available by phone and in person over the weekend. However, Ms. Filipic cautioned that time was short and consumers should be realistic: “There probably won’t be appointments available at 11 p.m. on Sunday night,” she noted.Those who are unhappy with their coverage can also switch plans by Sunday. In most cases, existing plans have been automatically renewed for those who were covered last year, but did not actively re-enroll. If they qualified for a subsidy last year, it was included for this year. They can change insurance plans if they act by Sunday.“You can still switch plans,” said Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow at the Kaiser Family Foundation. Even if you don’t plan on switching, it’s a good idea to log on to the exchange and update your financial information by Feb. 15, to make sure your subsidy is based on your most recent income.Here are some questions and answers about open enrollment:■ If I sign up by Sunday, when will my coverage begin?Your plan will become effective March 1.■ What is the penalty for going uninsured in 2015?The penalties for remaining without coverage increase this year, to $325 per adult from $95 in 2014.■ When will the next open enrollment period begin?The window is likely to be shorter now that users are becoming more familiar with the process. It is expected to begin in October and may end in December, rather than extending into 2016.Email: yourmoneyadviser@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on February 14, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Health Insurance Enrollment: Beating the Deadline.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.