By STANLEY REEDFEB. 13, 2015
LONDON —  The world’s largest steel maker, ArcelorMittal, reported on Friday a $955 million loss for the fourth quarter, showing how difficult it is to make money in slumping commodities businesses like steel and iron ore.The company’s large mining operations were hit by the sharp fall in iron ore prices, while its North American steel unit also slowed. The Luxembourg-based steel maker’s write-off of $621 million on its investment in China Oriental, a Chinese steel business, was another big contributor to the loss.Also on Friday, ThyssenKrupp of Germany, another steel maker, reported a modest profit of 43 million euros, or about $48.8 million, for the quarter, in contrast to a loss of €70 million a year earlier.ThyssenKrupp, based in Essen, is benefiting from getting out of steel operations in the United States and paring its units in Europe, while investing in capital goods businesses, like elevators, factory design and auto components, that are less vulnerable to commodity price cycles.Advertisement“The economic environment remains uncertain and the geopolitical risks high,” Heinrich Hiesinger, the company’s chief executive, said in a statement. “That is why we are continuing to concentrate on the things that we can influence ourselves.”AdvertisementIn a telephone interview, Guido Kerkhoff, ThyssenKrupp’s chief financial officer, said that despite negative sentiment about the European economy, the company was experiencing growth in demand for products like auto components. He said that the nearly 20 percent fall of the euro against the dollar since last spring, making German exports cheaper abroad, was aiding its industrial activities in Germany and elsewhere in Europe.ArcelorMittal also reported a 5 percent decline in earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization — a closely watched measure in the steel industry — to $1.8 billion. The company did manage to cut debt by $2 billion, to $15.8 billion, during the quarter.“Although operating conditions remain tough, we expect steel markets to continue to improve,” ArcelorMittal’s chief executive, Lakshmi N. Mittal, said in a statement.Despite Mr. Mittal’s cautious optimism, the company forecast that its adjusted earnings before interest and taxes would be $6.5 billion to $7 billion this year compared with $7.2 billion for 2014.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A big moneymaker before the onset of the financial crisis in 2008, ArcelorMittal continues to struggle to regain its footing. After years of painful cost-cutting, ArcelorMittal’s European steel business is now profitable.But being in the commodities business is a recipe for frustration these days. ArcelorMittal’s heavy recent investments in mining are being undercut by the plunge in iron ore prices over the last year. Prices have been slammed by the combination of slowing demand in China and huge increases in mining capacity by companies like Rio Tinto.ArcelorMittal’s mining unit reported a 60 percent fall in profit for the quarter. Profit also fell sharply in North American steel.ArcelorMittal reported a $1 billion loss for 2014, after a $2.5 billion loss in 2013.A version of this article appears in print on February 14, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: ArcelorMittal Reports $955 Million Loss; ThyssenKrupp Ekes Out a Small Profit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.