
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

OCT. 12, 2015
Investors in EMC, the data-storage-based tech conglomerate, have received a $67 billion ticket out of trouble.Michael Dell, his company, the private equity firm Silver Lake and others are paying $33.15 a share, by their reckoning, for EMC. Most of the premium on the offer comes as a flaky tracking stock in an EMC subsidiary, VMware. But the deal beats the feasible alternatives.EMC’s businesses, which it calls a “federation,” are a mishmash. Its core enterprise storage unit’s revenue grew 19 percent in 2010. In the most recent quarter, though, the top-line growth was only 1 percent from a year earlier. VMware, the server virtualization company, is doing better, which is why EMC’s stake of roughly 80 percent accounts for almost half its market capitalization. Pivotal, a cloud-software unit, is promising, but young and tiny.Investors including the activist fund Elliott Management have expressed skepticism that EMC’s bosses can run all of these units well, and the company has been plagued by a conglomerate discount. The parts might be worth $35 to $38 a share separately, according to FBR & Company, against an average closing stock price last month of just over $24.AdvertisementThat breakup tally is higher than the Dell offer, more so after discounting the headline value for the fall in VMware’s stock price since the headline price was calculated and because a tracking stock, which reflects an indirect interest and raises legal risks, is likely to trade at a discount. But even an offer worth, say, $30 a share would probably compare favorably, given the risks involved in splitting up EMC, which would take months — with success far from assured.It’s also hard to see other companies paying up for EMC. Some have already passed. Meanwhile, Dell’s target has also proved unable to engineer succession at the top, with EMC’s longtime boss, Joseph M. Tucci, still there after postponing his retirement several times.AdvertisementAll this presumably explains why Elliott has gone public in support of the sale to Dell. Even if the ersatz VMware paper isn’t worth as much as Dell says, the cash component alone is about equal to EMC’s undisturbed stock price. Throw in the tracking stock, and much of EMC’s conglomerate discount goes away. In a business that’s on the verge of turning down, investors should take the money and run.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »