AdvertisementSupported byApplied ScienceBy Matt RichtelGreat news for employers: A blizzard is coming!When bad weather hits, workers get more productive. That’s the finding of new research that marries real world and laboratory data to show that the mere prospect of frolicking in the sun — even when workers stay at their desks — interrupts focus, slows task time and leads to greater error rates.“The greater the amount of rain, the better you are at completing a task,” said Jooa Julia Lee, a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard Law School who conducted the research with scholars from the business schools at Harvard and the University of North Carolina. The productivity pattern holds for snow, too.The research, published last year in The Journal of Applied Psychology, drew partly from data generated over two and a half years at a midsize Japanese bank in Tokyo. The study looked at 111 workers performing various data-entry tasks, generally menial, allowing researchers to capture the precise time it took the workers to finish a job and move to the next.The researchers matched individuals’ performance against Tokyo’s weather conditions and discovered a clear connection. As precipitation rose, task time fell, such that an inch of rain correlated with a 1.3 percent increase in productivity. For each individual worker, this is not a huge effect, the researchers acknowledged, but they also said it would add up; over a year, bad weather would be a productivity boon of $937,000 for the company and, extrapolated over the economy, hundreds of millions of dollars for Japan. (With bad weather, Dr. Lee inadvertently punned, the gains “snowball.”)To support the findings, the researchers conducted an online study involving 329 participants who were asked to spend 30 minutes finding and correcting spelling errors in a short essay. The researchers then matched performance — speed and accuracy — against each subject’s local weather (as determined by ZIP code), and found that bad weather correlated with more efficiency and accuracy.To better understand the counterintuitive findings — conventional wisdom holds that bad weather leads to depressed moods and hampers performance — the researchers conducted several additional lab experiments on a rainy day. Study subjects were shown pictures of outdoor activities, asked to imagine themselves having fun and then given data entry tasks.Despite the bad weather outside, task performance fell for subjects who looked at pictures of fun-in-the-sun activities. This result told researchers that the mere idea of good weather led to distraction and falling productivity.But Dr. Lee doesn’t think the results mean that good weather is bad news for companies. Rather, she says, they might be able to capitalize on this research. For instance, they could offer flexible work schedules. Such a policy would allow workers to skip out in good weather rather than sit idly while distracted, but also recognize that they will most likely spend more time at the desk when skies darken.This research seems to apply to more menial tasks rather than creative ones, Dr. Lee said. In fact, she conjectured that good weather — by creating better moods and freer-flowing thoughts — might prompt employees “to think more outside the box.”In short, the research suggests, when the weather’s bad, employees should hunker down with those long-ignored expense reports. And the researchers offered a last bit of counsel:“Holding all other factors constant,” the research concludes, “locating operations in places with worse weather may be preferable.”Advertisement