By CLAIRE MARTINFEB. 14, 2015
If you’ve heard of Freezy Freakies gloves, Hans and Karl Reichstetter know this about you: You were probably born in the 1970s or early 1980s and you probably spent your childhood in the Northeast.“That was the epicenter of Freezy Freakdom,” Hans Reichstetter said. Children liked their Freezy Freakies gloves because colorful unicorns, hearts, robots and other objects sprouted on them as if by magic when the weather turned frosty.The Swany America Corporation, based in Johnstown, N.Y., started making the gloves in 1980, selling them mainly in department stores and children’s clothing stores for more than a decade. The gloves were also very popular in Chicago.In 1981, the Reichstetters, who are twins, were born into Freezy Freakdom — specifically, Larchmont, N.Y. Recently their apparel company, Buffoonery Factory, based in San Francisco, licensed the brand to make adult versions of the gloves. Their company is one of two with licenses to make Freezy Freakies gloves, and their story offers lessons on the challenges of reviving an old product.AdvertisementThe Reichstetters sought the license partly because they had fond memories of the gloves and wanted to wear them again.“These were hot the same time that the Cabbage Patch doll was out and Transformers were out,” said Bruce Weinberg, who oversaw sales and distribution for Freezy Freakies gloves and is a vice president of Swany America.Freezy Freakies gloves were made with thermochromic ink, which remains translucent in high temperatures and turns bright colors in the cold. At the time, technology was beginning to enter homes in the form of video games and desktop computers. The gloves were an early example of high-tech apparel.During the height of Freezy Freakies’ popularity in the late 1980s, sales topped 300,000 pairs annually, Mr. Weinberg said. The gloves accounted for roughly 20 percent of Swany America’s sales, and they were so trendy that the company briefly considered changing its name to Freezy Freakies, he said.The gloves’ popularity waned in the 1990s. During that time Swany granted a license to a company that briefly made Freezy Freakies jackets. By the next decade, glove sales had dwindled to just a few hundred pairs a year, Mr. Weinberg said.AdvertisementBut even after buyers lost their zeal for Freezy Freakies, the thermochromic ink survived. These days, Coors Light cans are emblazoned with it; the ink shines blue when the beer is cold and fades to white when it becomes warm.When the Reichstetters decided they wanted to revive Freezy Freakies, they weren’t quite sure where to start.“We couldn’t figure out if people were still making them or selling them,” said Hans, who is based in New York. His brother, Karl, who has a full-time job at a tech company and does Buffoonery Factory projects on the side, lives in San Francisco. Their company’s best-known creation is the Griz Coat, a bear costume for adults that became a hit with millennials.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Finally the two tracked down Swany America, which still specializes in gloves, including high-performance ski gloves. After they approached the company in 2013 to request a licensing agreement, a business contact helped them find a glove manufacturer and a company making thermochromic ink.As it turned out, they weren’t the first ones with the idea of licensing the Freezy Freakies brand. Mr. Weinberg said a few companies had approached Swany America over the previous 10 years, but it wasn’t interested.“We didn’t think it was the right time to do it,” he said.But when the Reichstetters called him, the pop-culture mood was finally right. “A lot of ’80s items are coming back,” Mr. Weinberg said, pointing to the current popularity of Underoos, the superhero-themed underwear from the 1980s that was reintroduced recently.The Reichstetters weren’t the only ones with Freezy Freakies on the brain. Michael Brett, executive vice president and head of licensing for Fantasia Accessories of Manhattan, had repeatedly approached Swany America about licensing the brand and the original designs for children. Last fall, Swany agreed.Mr. Brett, like the Reichstetters, had grown up in Freezy Freakdom. In fact, his parents had done sales for Swany America on the original product. “I had Freezy Freakies before they were even in the market and the stores,” Mr. Brett said.Swany America wanted a three- to five-year commitment from its licensees. If they hit certain sales targets, the contract will automatically renew; if they don’t, it will not.AdvertisementBuffoonery Factory sold 1,900 pairs of adult gloves in four of the original designs through a Kickstarter campaign that concluded this month, and it will continue selling gloves on its website.Fantasia will begin selling children’s hats and gloves this fall, and ski gloves this fall in stores and through its website and retailers’ sites. Mr. Brett said the company planned to use the original Freezy Freakies designs as well as new ones. But in an era when tech gadgets are ubiquitous, will children experience the same sense of wonder at the sight of unicorns materializing on and vanishing from their hands?Seth Godin, an entrepreneur and author who has written books on marketing and how ideas spread, is skeptical. “You’re wearing them because you’re making a statement about your past, not your future,” he said. “With most resurrected brands, that’s all they’re able to do.”“The question I would ask is, do they expect when these wear out that people will reorder more?” Mr. Godin said.Mr. Brett, whose company also has licensing agreements with Disney and Nickelodeon, says he is convinced that the answer is yes. And that’s because “the whole retro ’80s trend is really just so hot,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2015, on Page BU5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Colorful Blast From Winters Past.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.