AdvertisementSupported byBy Paul J. LimThroughout the last year, frustrated investors who have sought to increase their income through alternative investments have been warned about adding risk to their portfolios.Now comes another downside: tax headaches.As yields on 10-year Treasury notes have drifted down from 3 percent at the start of 2014 to 2 percent today, billions of dollars have flowed out of traditional fixed-income funds, much of it going into more exotic fare. This includes master limited partnerships, real estate investment trusts and foreign bonds — investments that are yielding 3 to 6 percent.Financial advisers often give several standard warnings about such investments. “Generally speaking, it’s a bad idea to load up on high-yielding securities for income because you’re taking on more risk than you should,” said Gregg S. Fisher, founder of the investment management firm Gerstein Fisher. Then “there’s the ‘pain in the neck’ factor to consider,” he said.Nowhere is this more evident than with master limited partnerships.These publicly traded investments are, for the most part, involved in the storage or transport of commodities and energy resources, which makes them sensitive to shifts in oil prices. For example, as crude oil prices sank by more than 50 percent starting last June, the Alerian M.L.P. index lost 12 percent of its value, after gaining nearly 40 percent in the previous two years.Investors in these partnerships now face the additional annoyance of handling the tax paperwork.The partnerships have some tax advantages. These investments are largely “pass-through entities,” which means the partnership itself is not taxed on the income it generates, as long as that income is passed on to the underlying partners, who may be liable for tax.Moreover, much of that distribution to shareholders will be considered a return of capital and will not be taxed until the partnership units are sold. And when they are sold, they are likely to be subject to capital gains taxes, which are capped at 20 percent for those in the highest income tax bracket, versus 39.6 percent for ordinary income. In addition, there is a 3.8 percent surtax from the Affordable Care Act.That’s the good news.The bad is that investors who own partnership shares directly, and not through a fund, will receive complicated K-1 forms instead of the basic 1099 forms that come with a traditional bond fund. K-1 forms are not just more complex. They are often mailed later than 1099s, which might keep an investor from filing taxes by the April 15 deadline.What’s more, investors may have to file multiple nonresident tax returns. “If you’re dealing with an M.L.P. with wells or pipelines in a number of states, you will probably have to file in several states,” said Gregory K. Hinkle, treasurer of the T. Rowe Price funds. “Most states will then allow you, on your resident tax return, to file for a credit on the tax you paid to those other states,” Mr. Hinkle said. But that is yet more paperwork.Investors who are frustrated by the tedium of taxes on master limited partnerships may decide to try to avoid it by gaining exposure to the partnerships through a fund. This creates further complications, however: Funds with more than a 25 percent weighting in master limited partnerships (or other qualified publicly traded partnerships) will most likely have to be structured as C corporations.And C corporation funds must pay taxes on whatever distributions are made by the underlying partnerships in their portfolios. Furthermore, the taxes a fund pays at the corporate level are then reflected in a lower net asset value, which means they are a drag on performance.“In effect, the corporate level tax is a convenience fee for avoiding a tax headache,” Mr. Hinkle said.Yet that could be a hefty fee. Over the last three years, Alerian M.L.P. E.T.F. has returned 6.8 percent annually, more than three percentage points less a year than the average energy limited partnership, according to Morningstar.Like master limited partnerships, REITs are pass-through entities, though the tax treatment for REIT payouts is much simpler.Most of the distributions that a REIT pays to shareholders are likely to be treated as ordinary income, which is less appealing than long-term capital gains.In this regard REITs are tax disadvantaged and therefore are better held in tax-deferred accounts, like 401(k) retirement plans.Yet while bond funds are available in virtually all 401(k) plans, REITs are available in only about one-third of such accounts.Individual Retirement Accounts, or I.R.A.s, may not be a sufficient alternative because the government limits deductible I.R.A. contributions. The limit is $5,500 a year for qualified taxpayers, those with earned income and, if they participate in a workplace retirement plan, whose modified adjusted gross income is $61,000 or less for singles in 2015 or $98,000 for married couples filing jointly. For those qualified taxpayers who are 50 and older, the limit is $6,500. As a result, investors may be advised to use their taxable accounts to house some of their REIT holdings.Foreign bonds pose problems of their own. Typically, investors are advised to hold their bonds in tax-deferred accounts because bond income is treated as ordinary income. But this is not so with foreign bonds, said Lewis J. Altfest, chief executive of Altfest Personal Wealth Management.He noted that the income paid by foreign bonds might be subject to withholding taxes from foreign governments. For instance, Britain withholds 20 percent in taxes on interest, as does Indonesia and the Philippines.American investors have a couple of options to avoid being taxed twice on this foreign bond income. If the bonds are held in a taxable account, they can claim a foreign tax credit or deduct the withholdings. While taking a deduction is easier, going with the tax credit will ensure a dollar-for-dollar reduction in the investor’s tax obligation. “Yet you cannot do either if the foreign bonds are held in your tax-deferred retirement account,” Mr. Altfest said.But if investors keep their foreign bonds in a taxable account, another wrinkle arises. Those who own foreign bonds directly and sell their securities at a gain must separate that increase into two portions: the part that comes from market shifts and the part attributable to currency fluctuations.Why? While the part of the sale attributable to the market will be assessed as a capital gain, at a favorable tax rate, the part that is tied to currency fluctuations will be treated as ordinary income. Note that this is different from the sale of foreign equities, where the Internal Revenue Service does not require a separate accounting for market and currency fluctuations.“If you are buying and selling foreign bonds directly, you have to do that yourself,” Mr. Hinkle said. “But in a mutual fund that’s taken care of for you.”Francis M. Kinniry Jr., a principal in Vanguard’s investment strategy group, said that the various risks and tax inconveniences associated with seeking out higher-yielding alternatives were good reasons for investors to simplify their approach. Instead of reaching for yield, he suggested taking “a total return perspective.” In other words, rather than thinking of dividends and bond yields as separate sources of wealth, and the capital gains in an investment portfolio as another separate source, just worry about the combined total return of all of these sources. If, for instance, a portfolio yields less than expected this year but grows in value because of a rising market, nothing is wrong with taking some profits from the capital gains and leaving the income strategy alone.He counseled investors to settle on an asset allocation approach that suits them and then, if income needs arise, to be willing to sell part of their diversified portfolio. This can be done in a tax-efficient manner, he said, by selling shares of losing securities to avoid capital gains.Another benefit of this approach has nothing to do with taxes.“What most people don’t understand is that most of these high-yielding assets — M.L.P.s, REITs, high-yielding debt — are correlated much more closely to the equity markets than are traditional bonds,” Mr. Kinniry said.Over the last six years, that has been fine for investors because stocks have been rising. But if equities have a protracted decline, he said, taxes are likely to be the least of the worries of investors who are reaching for yield.Advertisement