By JOHN SCHWARTZFEB. 14, 2015
Our good friends at the Internal Revenue Service are offering a bit of sober advice as tax season comes around again. They say it is a very dangerous time of year.It’s not just that we have to fill out those pesky tax forms and then dig into our pockets to pay whatever outrageous sums the agency demands.Sure, the agency wants us to do that. But in a news release in January, the I.R.S. commissioner, John Koskinen, warned that there were people who do not work for the I.R.S. who also want to slip a hand into your wallet. “Every filing season, scam artists lure victims in by promising outlandish refunds,” he said.“So don’t be an idiot.”Wait. He didn’t actually say that last part about being an idiot, at least not in those precise words. I.R.S. commissioners don’t talk like that. Instead, he told people in measured language to be wary of tax preparers who ask them to sign a blank return, “promise a big refund before looking at their records, or charge fees based on a percentage of the refund.”AdvertisementSee? Same difference. Because what idiot doesn’t know that if a tax break sounds too good to be true, it probably is? It’s not as if you’re General Electric.AdvertisementStill, Mr. Koskinen plodded on, following up with a series of news releases, describing the kinds of frauds that are out there — in fact, a “Dirty Dozen” list compiled and circulated each year by the agency. They include improper use of offshore bank accounts, getting tricked into making contributions to bogus charities, and falling for preparers who promise the moon.Here’s where kindly Mr. Taxman took the iron fist out of the velvet glove: “The I.R.S. reminds all taxpayers that they are legally responsible for what’s on their returns even if it was prepared by someone else.” In other words, they play, you pay. Fraud can cost you federal benefits like Social Security, low-income housing assistance and veterans’ benefits, even if you don’t get a dime from the chicanery.The dishonest preparer — let’s call him Mr. 10-faux-ty — might not even give clients copies of their tax returns, the I.R.S. warns, and often will have the big refund deposited into his own account, taking a chunk before passing along the rest to you. You can’t check his work, but you’ll pay the price.The I.R.S. encourages all of us to help fight these multifarious, nefarious perpetrators of fraud by reporting them to the agency. All you have to do is fill out Form 3949-A — because, after all, who among us doesn’t want to fill out more I.R.S. forms? But that isn’t the form to fill out if you think your preparer stole your refund. That’s Form 14157. Identity theft? No, that’s Form 14039.The I.R.S., as we know, is all about making things simple.Some of the warnings are the kinds of things that happen year round, like identity theft, but the I.R.S. issues the bulletins at this point because they have a quota on news releases. No, that’s not it. It’s because tax time is a good time to remind people that it is a perilous world, and there are lots of people worse than employees of the I.R.S. No, silly, it’s because warning people to avoid risk is the right thing to do.The I.R.S. warns that these filing pirates “use fliers, advertisements, phony store fronts and even word of mouth to throw out a wide net for victims.” That’s all fine, as far as it goes. But how are we to know we’re in the embrace of a bunco artist?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The I.R.S. provided examples, but frankly, they lacked zing. So I came up with some clues for you. No need to thank me.■ If you ask your tax preparer how much your refund will be, and instead of hitting keys on the calculator he looks around shiftily and says, “How much do you want it to be?” you might not be in the hands of a true professional.Advertisement■ If, when you ask how big the refund will be, if the preparer puts his pinkie to his lips and says, “One million dollars,” your tax preparer is doing a bad Dr. Evil impression. Even if it’s a joke, you need to find someone with a less cheesy sense of humor.■ If your tax preparer suggests raising the number of dependents to enough people to field a high school football team, both offensive and defensive squads, there could be a problem.■ Many small-scale tax preparers might meet you in a Starbucks. That’s not a sign of trouble, since office space is expensive. But if your preparer demands that you meet him in a quiet corner of a parking garage at the dog track, you might have cause for suspicion.■ If your preparer offers to throw in a discounted washer-dryer that “fell off a truck” as an inducement to use his services, you might be dealing with a less-than-upright character.■ If your preparer offers big refunds on education credits and the only tests you’ve taken lately are those Facebook quizzes asking which Harry Potter character you most resemble, hop on your broomstick and hie yourself out of there.■ If your tax preparer suddenly shifts from asking about medical deductions to questions like “When did you last sing to yourself? To someone else?” he may be reading a guide to falling in love with a random stranger instead of his tax software program. He is too disorganized for you, and apparently very lonely.I could go on. But my editor tells me that I already have.So with these caveats in mind, go with confidence into tax season. Enjoy! April 15 will be over before you know it. In the meantime, might I interest you in some lovely deductions? I have a special in tax-free climate-change bonds. There’s an area that’s bound to heat up.A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2015, on Page BU11 of the New York edition with the headline: Another Reason to Detest Tax Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.