AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan WeismanWASHINGTON — President Obama’s education proposal was intended to be the essence of policy elegance, simplifying a tangle of tuition aid programs and targeting assistance to families with the greatest need.But the plan, unveiled on Jan. 17 and abandoned 10 days later, accomplished little more than angering thousands of people. Why? It would have rolled back the tax exemption of 529 education accounts, which are widely used by affluent parents to save money for their children’s college educations.That debacle sent an ominous message to policy makers as they set out yet again to overhaul the tax code: Each wrinkle of complexity in the tax rules has a constituency that is likely to fight for it.“If some special interest feels like their ox is being gored, they’re going to go online, and within 60 minutes, they’re going to flood you with people saying ‘Western civilization is going to collapse,’ ” said Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Finance Committee.That is why it is too soon to say that help is on the way for taxpayers struggling through another difficult season. For politicians in Washington, how to accomplish a major improvement in the byzantine tax code is not obvious — but important people appear to be trying. The new leaders of tax-writing committees in Congress say they are committed to the reform cause.“What we’d like is comprehensive tax reform, corporate, business, individual,” said Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, a Republican and the new chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee. “We want to do the whole code.”All sides agree on some indisputable matters. Foremost among them is a consensus that the corporate portion of the tax code is a dysfunctional mess. The official corporate income tax rate is 35 percent, the second-highest rate in the developed world, behind only France. But there are so many loopholes and dodges built into the tax code that the effective average tax rate is about 27.9 percent, according to the World Bank.It is much lower than that for many of the biggest companies. A study by the Government Accountability Office of profitable United States corporations with at least $10 million in assets put their tax rate at 12.6 percent in 2010. Many companies pay zero or close to it.This lack of uniformity is a big problem: Any two corporations are likely to pay very different tax rates, depending on the sophistication of their tax lawyers and the nature of their businesses.Another fact is clear: As corporations become more adept at shrinking their tax bills, the burden shifts to ordinary people. The Congressional Budget Office projected in January that corporate tax receipts would shrink to 1.8 percent of the economy in 2025 from 2.3 percent in 2016 and that individual income taxes would rise over that time to 9.5 percent from 8.7 percent.Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew has said Washington should keep its focus on the corporate tax code, with perhaps some broad breaks for small businesses that pay taxes through the individual tax code.The Treasury Department has been focused of late on stopping American companies from buying smaller foreign companies, then proclaiming their headquarters to be in a country with lower taxes. Treasury officials are now going after a longstanding escape hatch that has permitted hedge funds to transfer taxable assets to the Bahamas, in a game of loophole whack-a-mole. In February, the Obama administration proposed permanently changing the tax code to allow small businesses to write off up to $1 million of investment expenses a year and to simplify accounting rules for businesses with less than $25 million in gross receipts.But Mr. Lew has said that any effort to simplify the individual tax code runs the risk of muddling the income tax system’s progressivity, which the administration bolstered when Congress allowed the top tax rate to revert to 39.6 percent in 2013. Under the current system, the more you earn, the higher your tax rate, in theory, at least. There are plenty of loopholes, but once the individual tax code is up for grabs, it is quite possible that richer people will secure more benefits at the expense of the poor.Senator Wyden, on the other hand, insists the tax code can be made both simpler and more progressive, by aiming at tax breaks that help the rich, like mortgage interest deductions for second homes and state and local tax deductions over a certain threshold. The senator speaks of the hardware store test: If a politician cannot walk into a locally run store and say that the tax legislation will help shoppers as well as those running the business, he is not going to push for it.Some senior White House aides indicated privately that they would like to try a broad tax overhaul. But those advisers were the very ones burned by the 529 fiasco, and they are not eager to repeat the experience.The education proposal, which was included in President Obama’s State of the Union address, was intended to be innocuous, as far as current college savers go. It would not have affected the contributions now sitting in 529 college savings accounts, which are allowed to accrue investment gains and withdrawals without taxation. It would have ended the tax break for future account contributions, however — saving the Treasury about $1 billion over 10 years.That money would have provided part of the financing for a $50 billion expansion of other college affordability proposals, especially an expanded American Opportunity Tax Credit, aimed squarely at middle-class parents.But the education tax proposal foundered after affluent people, and their representatives in Congress, opposed it.“The administration has no plans or proposals in the 529 space,” Jason Furman, chairman of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, told reporters on Feb. 2 while outlining the president’s budget for the fiscal year that will begin in October.After the 529 experience, the White House is not likely to push hard for a broad tax overhaul, but if Republicans and Democrats on the tax-writing Finance and Ways and Means committees can come to a broad agreement, the Obama administration could go along, lawmakers in both parties say. But Congress’s commitment to reforming the personal side of the tax code may be waning.In a lengthy interview, Mr. Ryan said tax relief for individuals is needed. Much of the growth in the tax code’s complexity has come on the individual side of the ledger, he said. Attention has been focused on corporations in large part because they lobbied for a corporate tax fix aimed at lowering their tax rates. But, Mr. Ryan said, “families are hurting as well.”That does not mean help is coming, though. Mr. Ryan hinted that he would be satisfied if so-called pass-through entities that pay taxes through the individual code — small businesses, partnerships and limited liability companies — received assistance, in the form of simpler and lower taxes.It is not that he is against changes in the tax code for individuals, he said. “We would like to do comprehensive. We want to make that point very clear,” he said. But he added, “If they don’t want to do comprehensive, meaning individual and business, then we have to find a way of helping small businesses as well.”It is possible that comprehensive change in the tax code will still occur during the Obama presidency. But don’t count on it. The tasks of pruning and paring the tax code and eliminating its most egregious loopholes may well be waiting for the next president.Advertisement