With operations in more than a dozen countries and a market value topping $40 billion, Liberty Global, the international cable and wireless operator, is hardly a start-up. Assembled by the media mogul John C. Malone, its chairman, the company quietly exerts its influence across a vast portion of the European media business.But Michael T. Fries, the company’s chief executive, sees himself as an underdog taking on entrenched European telecommunications giants.“It’s the David-and-Goliath theme,” he said. “We are the small attacker at some level, coming in to stimulate competition and drive the incumbents to invest to catch us.”This strategy has been so successful that after several acquisitions, Liberty Global itself is reported to be a takeover target. Any such deal would cost tens of billions of dollars and would reshape the global telecommunications landscape. It also would require the blessing of Mr. Malone, who controls the voting shares.Liberty Global is the largest international cable television company in the world, and has growing operations in Internet, mobile phone and business services. Annual revenue tops $20 billion, and its customers exceed 27 million. Its brands include Virgin Media in Britain and Unitymedia KabelBW in Germany.For all its size and growing clout, however, Liberty Global has largely flown under the radar in the eyes of consumers and analysts. Its disparate brands prevent it from being viewed as a monolith, and it does not advertise itself in a united way as one European behemoth.But recent developments have made it harder for Liberty Global to remain in the shadows. Acquisitions have exponentially increased the company’s size and clout. Rumors that Vodafone was considering it a takeover target have intensified interest in the company.By MARK SCOTTAfter years of focusing heavily on its cellphone business, the British telecom giant Vodafone is concentrating on high-speed broadband.While that deal may not happen, analysts speculate that a larger company — perhaps even Comcast or AT&T — could make a play for Liberty Global in several years. “I don’t think Liberty Global has any interest in selling right now,” said Jeffrey Wlodarczak, an analyst and chief executive of Pivotal Research Group. “But if Vodafone makes a high enough bid, Malone may take it. And if not, it could be Comcast’s target in a few years.”For Mr. Fries, 51, who has spent the bulk of his career in the European cable business, Liberty Global’s prominence is a validation of a counterintuitive choice to focus his efforts abroad. For Mr. Malone, 73, who is known as the “King of Cable” for his early successes in the American cable television market, the company’s success is proving to be a powerful, and lucrative, second act.The company they built through a series of acquisitions is now one of the most formidable players in its industry.Beyond the nuts and bolts of running a cable business that spans the Continent, one of the things that distinguishes Mr. Malone’s companies is creative financial engineering. Like Liberty Media and Liberty Interactive, which Mr. Malone also leads, Liberty Global regularly takes on debt, and uses the leverage to buy back stock.When done carefully, this approach keeps steady upward pressure on Liberty Global’s stock price. And the stock has appreciated steadily since the company was established 10 years ago.“We believe in leverage,” Mr. Fries said. “We have conviction around our buyback program.”Now, after years of assembling a pan-European cable portfolio, Liberty Global is starting to become more like an American one-stop-shop cable company. It is bundling high-speed Internet with its television packages, paying top dollar for the rights to broadcast live sports and gradually increasing the cost of cable subscriptions.“Malone invented the model over here,” Mr. Wlodarczak said, referring to the United States, where he is based. “Now he’s doing it over there, quite successfully.”Nowhere is this strategy more evident than in London, where Liberty Global acquired Virgin Media in 2013 for $16 billion, its biggest deal. That deal thrust Liberty Global into competition with BT, the former state monopoly, and Sky, a satellite provider.Soon after the deal closed, Tom Mockridge, a former News Corporation executive, was installed as chief executive of the unit.Mr. Mockridge set about streamlining the company, leading to significant layoffs. Consultants from McKinsey & Company were brought in to do further cost-cutting, ultimately leading to $350 million in savings.All the media buying for Virgin Media and Liberty Global were given to the same big advertising firm, Omnicom, saving millions of dollars more. The enlarged customer base made it easier to negotiate deals with hardware vendors. And Liberty Global is even moving its London headquarters from the expensive Knightsbridge neighborhood to the Virgin Media offices in West London.And now, in London, Virgin Media is taking its fight to BT, the big cable and wireless operator, embodying the same upstart philosophy that characterizes Liberty Global as a whole.“Why do we have to consider that BT will always remain as dominant as it is?” Mr. Mockridge asked. “There’s every reason that we can continue to grow.”But even as Virgin Media tries to compete with BT and other big providers like Sky, the company is introducing top-tier Internet service in London and gradually increasing the fees users pay.“They’re kind of reaching the holy grail where they’re starting to take price more aggressively,” Mr. Wlodarczak said.This playbook — creating an insurgent company that competes with the incumbents, then adding products and raising prices — is familiar to longtime watchers of Mr. Malone.“It’s ultimately a culture of John Malone,” Mr. Mockridge said. “I worked for Rupert Murdoch for many years, and the two of them respect each other greatly. There’s a few people in the world that out-achieve others. That’s the nature of human life. He’s one of them.”But after years of deal making, Liberty Global may be constrained. Cable assets in Scandinavia are prohibitively expensive. Buying into France is virtually impossible for regulatory reasons. No good fits exist in Italy. Eastern Europe remains politically unstable and not lucrative enough to warrant investment. And analysts have questioned whether its main focus on cable could leave it out of step with rivals, many of which are expanding to also offer high-speed mobile contracts.But the company is still finding ways to deliver for shareholders. As part of its deal to acquire Virgin Media, it struck an inversion — reincorporating the company in London instead of the United States, and reducing its tax bill.Because the company operates almost entirely in Europe, executives say the move made sense. But Mr. Fries and several other executives remain based in Denver, where Mr. Malone also is based.“Denver is where it all began for the cable industry,” Mr. Fries said. “It’s the birthplace of cable and broadband. Denver is still the cultural heartbeat of the company.”Mr. Malone and Mr. Fries exhibit similar financial skill. In the days before Liberty Global reincorporated in Britain, Mr. Malone transferred $600 million of his shares in the company to a personal trust and tapped another loophole, avoiding paying $200 million in taxes, according to Bloomberg.Mr. Fries, meanwhile, is one of the best-paid chief executives in the country, making $45.5 million in 2013. Mr. Malone, as chairman, also makes millions each year.Despite potential interest from Vodafone, Liberty Global is likely to remain an independent company for years, Mr. Fries said. “Our first instinct and our preferred path is to continue building this company,” he said. “There’s no plan to sell.”But a senior banker who specializes in global telecommunications companies contends that before long, Liberty Global will be too enticing for others to resist. “In a year or two, it will be the must-have asset,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on 02/17/2015, on page B1 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Liberty Global, Becoming a Big Fish, Risks Attracting the Eye of a Shark.