AdvertisementSupported byBy Hilary StoutMichele Ferrero, widely regarded as the richest man in Italy and — a distinction more notable to lovers of sweets everywhere — the creator of Nutella, died on Saturday at his home in Monte Carlo. He was 89.His death was announced on the website of his company, the Ferrero Group. The cause was not disclosed, but reports in the Italian news media said he had been ill for several months.Mr. Ferrero presided over a vast international confectionary empire; he was sometimes referred to as a real-life Willy Wonka. He ranked 22nd on the most recent Forbes list of billionaires, with an estimated net worth of $26.5 billion. The magazine stated the source of his wealth simply: “chocolates.”Actually, it was more than chocolates; Ferrero products include fruity and minty Tic Tacs, as well as Ferrero-Rocher candies and Kinder snacks. The company, which Mr. Ferrero’s father, Pietro, started in a Piedmont pastry shop in the 1940s, grew under the younger Mr. Ferrero’s leadership into a worldwide powerhouse, rivaling Mars, Nestlé and Hershey. Its sales in 2014 totaled about $10 billion.It was Nutella, a thick spread of chocolate and hazelnut, that truly captivated the world’s taste buds.“World’s flags should be at half-mast: Nutella owner has died,” read one of the many posts on Twitter after Mr. Ferrero’s death — which poetically enough came on Valentine’s Day — was reported.Though considered delectable by generations of children and adults, Nutella actually began as a shrewd business move. Pietro Ferrero was looking for a way to cut costs at a time when cocoa was expensive and still under wartime ration. Hazelnuts, however, were abundant, so he came up with the idea of developing a less expensive sweet by mixing them with cocoa.The concoction he created came in a loaf, wrapped in tinfoil. It was called Pasta Gianduja, named after a famous regional carnival character.After Michele Ferrero took over the company, he transformed the product into a creamy spread in 1964 and named it Nutella. Last year the Italian postal service issued a commemorative stamp to honor Nutella’s 50th anniversary.In 1983, the company began exporting Nutella to the United States, where it has enjoyed enormous popularity. At Columbia University a couple of years ago the university said students were consuming more than 100 pounds of it a day.Mr. Ferraro took over the business after his father’s death in 1949 and presided over its rapid global growth, opening the first international plants in Germany. Today it operates in 53 countries.But the company remains privately held and a family endeavor. In 1997 Mr. Ferrero turned over the daily running of the company to his two sons, Pietro and Giovanni. Pietro died while bicycling in South Africa in 2011; Giovanni remains chief executive of the company.Mr. Ferrero continued to be involved in the business into his 80s. He traveled by helicopter from his home in Monte Carlo to the company’s main factory in the Italian town of Alba almost daily until a few years ago.Michele Ferrero was born on April 26, 1925, in Dogliani, Italy, to Piera and Pietro Ferrero. In addition to his son Giovanni, survivors include his wife, Maria Franca Ferrero. Complete information on survivors was not immediately available.Mr. Ferrero, who often wore dark glasses in public, was said to be intensely private and to never give newspaper interviews. But in 2011, a reporter for the British newspaper The Guardian was allowed into the company’s Alba headquarters and wrote about the experience. His article noted, among other details, that Mr. Ferrero visited the shrine of the Madonna of Lourdes every year and that every Ferrero plant and office in the world had a statue of the Madonna.Advertisement