AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week.MEETING ON GREECE Finance ministers from countries using the euro will meet Monday for the second time in less than a week to discuss how to fund Greece as it seeks to revise the terms of a huge bailout. The other 18 members of the currency group are pressuring Greece to ask to extend its current bailout rather than let the European portion of the program expire at the end of the month. Renewing the program would diminish the risk that Greece would destabilize the wider economy.But the leadership in Athens has rejected that approach. It came to power vowing to scrap key requirements of the bailout it describes as a national disaster. That has raised the prospect of a new-look bailout for Greece that would be the country’s third. Technical staff members from Greece and its main international creditors on Friday began assessing where the current bailout program and the plans of the new government overlap. The idea is to lay the groundwork for a possible interim compromise at the Monday meeting, which is scheduled to begin midafternoon and expected to run late into the night. JAMES KANTERG.M. LIABILITY HEARING  General Motors’ efforts to shut down hundreds of lawsuits over a defective ignition switch linked to at least 52 deaths enters a critical phase on Tuesday in a court hearing in Manhattan. Judge Robert E. Gerber of the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York will hear oral arguments over G.M.’s request that he enforce a provision of the company’s July 2009 bankruptcy agreement that shields G.M. from liability for accidents before that date.Lawyers representing plaintiffs in both economic loss and personal injury cases argue that G.M. misled the bankruptcy court when it negotiated its original agreement because it did not reveal the potential for large numbers of claims stemming from the defect. G.M. disclosed the defect in February 2014 when it began recalling 2.6 million cars for the problem, but officials have acknowledged that some engineers, lawyers and others in the company knew about the problem years earlier. HILARY STOUTFED MINUTES The Federal Reserve would like to start raising its benchmark interest rate this summer, so long as economic conditions cooperate. Until then, Fed officials are just killing time. They held a regularly scheduled meeting in January and issued a placeholder statement. On Wednesday, the Fed will release an account of the meeting that is likely to be equally bland. The message is simple: The Fed hasn’t made any decisions yet. Check back after the snow melts. BINYAMIN APPELBAUMAIR FRANCE-KLM RESULTS On Thursday, Air France-KLM reports its earnings for 2014, a year in which a crippling two-week strike by the company’s French pilots in September cost more than $400 million and curtailed plans to create a European low-cost subsidiary.The struggling French-Dutch group is pressing ahead this year with a scaled-back low-cost expansion that has the blessing of its unions. But management has already warned of the need for further cost cuts and the elimination of several hundred more jobs. The carrier has already cut 8,000 jobs over the past three years as part of a broad-based restructuring. NICOLA CLARKWALMART EARNINGS Walmart, the world’s largest retailer, reports fourth-quarter earnings on Thursday, and its bottom line is likely to have received a boost from the recent rebound in jobs and consumer sentiment. Lower gas prices are also leaving more change in consumers’ pockets and making it cheaper for shoppers to drive to Walmart’s discount superstores.Investors will look for signs that new strategies introduced last year by the chief executive, Doug McMillon, are gaining traction: a shift in investment from brick-and-mortar stores to e-commerce, a focus on improving the fresh foods and groceries business, and an overhaul of inventory and stocking methods after widespread complaints of out-of-stock goods at Walmart’s 4,400 stores across the United States.Walmart is also looking to build smaller neighborhood stores to make up for sluggish sales at its supercenters. A strong dollar, which deflates earnings from Walmart’s 6,200 or so stores worldwide, could weigh on the company’s bottom line, however. And as a discount retailer, Walmart remains vulnerable to the economic health of the country’s lowest-income households, which have struggled to gain a fair share of the economic recovery. HIROKO TABUCHIE.C.B. RELEASE The European Central Bank on Thursday will for the first time publish an account of the proceedings of the Governing Council, which sets monetary policy. As it happens, the first internal debate to be disclosed under a new policy was also one of the most momentous. On Jan. 22 the central bank decided to begin buying 60 billion euros of government bonds and other debt a month in an effort to raise inflation from levels considered toxic for growth.But some analysts are skeptical whether the account — which the central bank is not calling “minutes” — will be all that enlightening. The account will not give any vote tallies and will not say which council members took which positions. The central bank plans to continue publishing accounts of monetary policy meetings four weeks after they occur. JACK EWINGAdvertisement