By JONATHAN SOBLEFEB. 15, 2015
TOKYO —  Japan emerged from recession at the end of 2014, government data showed on Monday, though the economic growth — the country’s first since early last year — was weaker than experts had forecast.In a preliminary report, the Cabinet Office said gross domestic product expanded at an annualized rate of 2.2 percent in the quarter through December. The economy had contracted in each of the two previous quarters, a downturn widely blamed on higher taxes.The return to growth was less decisive than experts had predicted, however, and may fail to erase concerns that the economy remains fragile, despite a two-year stimulus campaign initiated by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe. Economists surveyed by news agencies had forecast an expansion of 3.7 percent on average.Since he returned to power at the end of 2012, Mr. Abe has been trying to inject life into the economy through a set of pro-growth policies known as Abenomics. Much of the work has been carried out by the Bank of Japan, the central bank, which is creating money on a vast scale by buying government bonds and other assets.AdvertisementThe bank’s measures are keeping borrowing costs extremely low — an invitation for more spending and investment. They are also holding down the yen’s exchange rate, which helps big manufacturing companies like Toyota and Hitachi that sell large quantities of their products in foreign markets. The stock market is up, and corporate profits are at record highs.Advertisement“Consumer confidence appears to be improving, and looking ahead I think we can be hopeful,” Economics Minister Akira Amari said at a news conference.The Nikkei 225 share average was up 0.66 percent through midday trading here following the economic growth report. The yen fell back slightly against the dollar.Given the support provided by Abenomics, that Japan nonetheless fell into recession last year was a surprise and a worry. A long-planned increase in the national sales tax, carried out in April, hit consumers harder than the government and most economists had expected, calling the effectiveness of Mr. Abe’s approach into question. Wages are still falling, adjusted for inflation, and many workers feel left out.The economy did not grow at all in 2014, with two quarters of recession almost exactly canceling out two quarters of expansion, according to Monday’s report. Growth in the two years since Mr. Abe began his campaign has added up to a modest 1.6 percent, slightly less than the 1.8 rate recorded in 2012, the year before he took office. But economists say 2015 could be a more forgiving year for Abenomics. Mr. Abe has postponed a second increase in the sales tax, hoping to avoid a fresh blow to consumer confidence.And the weaker yen has begun to spur domestic manufacturing by increasing the demand for exports from Japan. Tourism, too, is booming, as once prohibitively expensive Japanese cities start to look cheap to travelers from countries with stronger currencies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Going forward, we expect the Japanese economy to trace a moderate recovery path,” said Naohiko Baba, the chief Japan economist at Goldman Sachs.Cheaper oil is also working in Japan’s favor, with one drawback. The slide in oil prices since the middle of last year is lowering costs for households and businesses in an economy that is largely dependent on imported energy. But it is threatening another goal of Abenomics: that of keeping consumer prices rising modestly, instead of falling as they have done for much of the last two decades.The trade-off worries officials at the Bank of Japan, since a slide back into deflation would bring pressure to expand even further the scale of the bank’s bond-buying program. At 80 trillion yen a year, or close to $700 billion, it is already uncomfortably large for some on the bank’s policy board.Consumer spending and business investment grew fractionally in the quarter to December, Monday’s report showed, while exports increased at their fastest pace since early 2014. But housing investment continued a decline that began after the tax increase in April.AdvertisementAs growth rates under Mr. Abe have been volatile, an important question is how long the latest resurgence will last. Many economists are forecasting that growth will settle into a more modest but still positive trend, expanding perhaps 1.5 or 2 percent this year and next.A version of this article appears in print on February 16, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Japan’s Economy Expands, but Less Than Expected.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.