AdvertisementSupported byGlobal ManagerBy Sonia Kolesnikov-Jessop Philippe Guettat has been chairman and chief executive of Martell Mumm Perrier-Jouët since 2012. Q. Tell me about the first time you managed a team.  A. It was when I arrived in Singapore back in 1992, as a marketing manager for Pernod Ricard’s very small subsidiary there at that time. I was 28 and I had joined Pernod Ricard the year before in Cognac [France], managing Asia on my own from there. In Singapore, I had a tiny team of two people, but quickly I started to look after the sales team, which was also small. I was not officially in charge, but the company spirit was very entrepreneurial and pioneering — it was really about doing things, empowering people. At the time our brands weren’t known in the region and it was really about making things happen, discovering the market and the way of doing business, trying to create an impact, even on a small scale. Q. What do you remember most clearly about the experience?  A. Discovery, pleasure — in terms of emotions. Nothing looked impossible. Even if it was difficult with limited resources, we did things collectively with a strong team spirit. I remember that in the morning, I would be briefing the sales team on the commercial plans, then going afterward to negotiate directly with the buyer from large retailers, then going to the Hilton for a wine tasting to get a contract signed, then in the evening going to karaoke trying to negotiate promotions for our cognac. Very diverse, very exciting. Q. That wasn’t the first time you were taken out of your own culture, was it?  A. No, I’d already spent some time regularly in Asia, coming to Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand, three weeks at a time, five times a year for a job at Yoplait. For that, I remember taking a course about Japanese etiquette and I also took some lessons in Japanese. We were working with a union of agricultural cooperatives, a very traditional Japanese company, and there were a lot of dos and don’ts. It was critical to get the etiquette right and we would rehearse ahead of time, with my boss. I read a lot of books about Japanese culture. The industry I now work in is more modern, but what I’d learned has helped me a lot. Q. You’ve also spent eight years in China. Do you think it’s important for a foreign chief executive going there to study the culture?  A. It’s vital, and I see it has a matter of respect. You need to understand the people you’re dealing with, and it’s a point of conversation. This willingness to learn more and better will help you at a later stage to shape your approach to situations and people. Q. What did you learn in China?  A. Respect, curiosity, attention to detail, and the capacity to listen to others and display real genuine interest. You have to be true to yourself. There is always this need for the Chinese to really know the people they’re dealing with, and they’re very good at finding that out. In fact, it will be much easier to work when they understand you and the way you function. So it’s really about being sincere, simple and approachable. There is a lot of resistance in Asia, and in particular China, when you are too distant or seem arrogant. You need to show you can have fun, too, and you’re a human being. Q. Part of the Chinese culture of doing business is often around a drink. Any advice?  A. Yes. Do entertain, it’s important, but you need to remember while you are there, it’s a business relationship, even if you can have fun. Q. In your industry do you require certain qualities to succeed?  A. You need to be able to embody the brand and its values. With us, it’s very much about conviviality. We’re selling drinks but also the happiness of sharing great moments in a group. You need to like that and be able to personify it in order to be a role model. Secondly and deriving from this, you need to like people, because it’s a people business — not just consumers but clients as well. It’s about personal relationships. Q. What makes a great leader?  A. It’s clear you need to have the fundamentals, good strategic thinking, strong analytical skills and the capacity to implement and execute. But before that, what is quite critical is also the dimensional vision. The vision as a concept is not always easy to understand, so I’ve tried to conceptualize it. It’s a kind of sense of idealism: This is what we’re doing and this is where we want to go, and then you start shaping the belief that this can be achieved and how to get there and how to take the whole team on that journey. It can be extremely powerful and it’s very much about the willingness to create, growing the business, growing people, growing brands. And I think it’s also important to be willing to create and to be generous, in terms of giving your time to explain where you want to go, to convince people of the validity of your purpose. Q. What qualities do you look for in your top team?  A. First of all and as much as possible, always work with people who are already in place. But when I have to hire someone, I’m very keen on selecting people who abide by the values of the group. That includes entrepreneurship, people who can function on their own and have a drive to do, who have a sense of conviviality, the ability to interact with others, a strong professionalism but at the same time a kind of informality and being quite relaxed in your way of dealing with each other.Advertisement