AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Tuesday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Wednesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.01 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.07 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: TUESDAYAldine, Tex., Independent School District, $50 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Florida Board of Education, $250 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New Mexico, $150 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYFairfax County, Va., $230 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Lexington County, S.C., School District No. 1, $56 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Maryland, $95.1 million of university revenue bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYSuffolk County, N.Y., $56.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAlaska Municipal Bond Bank, $58.1 million of debt securities. RBC Capital Markets. Scottsdale, Ariz., $160.4 million of general obligation bonds. Wells Fargo Securities. California, $130 million of tax allocation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. California, $75 million of community college general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley. Conroe, Tex., Independent School District, $111.6 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Houston, $127.7 million of special revenue and refinancing bonds. Hutchinson, Shockey, Erley. Hutto, Tex., Independent School District, $79.8 million of school refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Irvine, Calif., Unified School District, $100 million of special tax refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Jackson State University, Miss., $69.5 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Kentucky Higher Education Student Loan Corporation, $134 million of student loan asset-backed notes. Bank of America.Louisiana Local Government Environmental Facilities and Community Development Authority, $62.5 million of health care facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler. Michigan, $63.7 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Montgomery County, Pa., Industrial Development Authority, $125 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray. New York City Municipal Finance Water Authority, $490 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Oak Grove, Calif., School District, $57.6 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Pennsylvania, $91.9 million of hospital system revenue bonds. BB&T Capital Markets.Osceola County, Fla., $57 million of sales tax revenue bonds. Raymond James. State College, Pa., Area School District, $70 million of college general obligation bonds. Bank of America.Scottsdale, Ariz., $116.6 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Texas, $200 million of University of Texas refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Tulsa, Okla., $76.4 million of general airport revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Advertisement