TOKYO — Japan’s national postal service is buying the largest private package and freight delivery company in Australia, Toll Holdings, for 6.5 billion Australian dollars, the two groups said on Wednesday.The roughly $5.1 billion acquisition is the biggest ever for Japan Post Holdings, and marks an ambitious new push into overseas markets.It comes as Japan Post — a state-owned company that is also one of the world’s largest financial institutions, with nationwide banking and insurance operations — prepares to list its shares on the stock market in a partial privatization this year.Japan Post is paying a generous premium to acquire Toll. Its offer was 49 percent above the Australian group’s last closing share price before the deal was made public. It will pay 9.04 Australian dollars per share, compared with Tuesday’s closing price of 6.08 dollars.“Together, this will be a very powerful combination and one of the world’s top five logistics companies,” Toll’s chairman, Ray Horsburgh, said in a news release.At a news conference in Sydney, Toru Takahashi, the head of Japan Post’s parcel business, said Japan Post would pursue more deals as it sought to extend its global reach.“Toll’s experience expanding in Asia, Europe and North America is extremely important,” he said in comments carried by NHK, Japan’s national broadcaster. “We want to become a leading player through more acquisitions and investments.”Indeed, with its home market in Japan shrinking, Japan Post has laid out a vision for itself as an international delivery company, a possible future competitor to FedEx or UPS. To that end, last year it entered a joint venture with the French group GeoPost and the Hong Kong-based Lenton Group to create the beginnings of a global network.Japan Post’s initial public offering this year is expected to be one of the largest ever in its home market. Government officials have suggested that they hope to raise the equivalent of around $30 billion by selling shares in Japan Post’s banking and insurance subsidiaries, which operate out of the group’s 24,000 post offices.The banking arm alone holds deposits of about 177 trillion yen, or $1.5 trillion.Toll, which is based in Melbourne, has suffered from the recent slowdown in Australia’s mining industry, a major source of freight-delivery business. Net profit fell 22 percent to 136.6 billion Australian dollars in the first half of its business year, it said in a separate news release on Wednesday.Japan Post’s future has been the subject of a long and sometimes bruising political debate in Japan. The government has used the postal bank as a source of funds for favored projects, an arrangement that critics say encourages wasteful spending.Junichiro Koizumi, the prime minister from 2001 to 2006, made privatizing Japan Post the centerpiece of his efforts to introduce market-oriented reforms. He transformed what had been a government agency into a semi-autonomous corporation. But the change was controversial, and the next step — selling Japan Post’s shares to outside investors — has been slow in coming.