Updated, 6:48 p.m. | One of the longest-running lawsuits related to a merger was settled on Tuesday  when Boston Scientific agreed to pay Johnson & Johnson $600 million in connection with an 11-year-old deal gone awry.While that is a substantial payment, it is far less than the more than $7 billion in damages that Johnson & Johnson sought in relation to its botched acquisition of Guidant, a medical device company, in 2004.After nearly a decade of inaction on the issue, the case resurfaced last year, with Johnson & Johnson suing the smaller Boston Scientific, seeking damages that would have equaled nearly half of Boston’s Scientific’s market value.The legal wrangling dates back to 2004, when Johnson & Johnson agreed to acquire Guidant for $25.4 billion.Before the deal was completed, Guidant recalled products, leading Johnson & Johnson to renegotiate the deal. The new price was $21.5 billion, and the merger agreement contained a clause that prohibited Guidant from seeking a higher offer, although it could entertain an unsolicited one.Months later, before Johnson & Johnson closed the deal, Boston Scientific made a public offer of $25 billion for Guidant. To appease antitrust regulators, Boston Scientific said it would divest itself of Guidant’s vascular business. Searching for a buyer for the vascular business, Boston Scientific found a willing suitor in Abbott Laboratories.Johnson & Johnson, however, was still interested in Guidant and raised its offer twice. Boston Scientific won with a bid of $27 billion, and Johnson & Johnson walked away.But by allowing Abbott to conduct some financial research on the vascular business, Johnson & Johnson claimed, Guidant violated its merger agreement. Johnson & Johnson contended that without being able to examine Guidant’s books, Abbott would not have agreed to buy the vascular business. And sharing that information, the argument went, constituted seeking a higher offer.Boston Scientific contended that Abbott was actually a joint bidder, so it should have had access to some shared information. But in an opinion last year that paved the way for the settlement on Tuesday, a federal judge sided with Johnson & Johnson.“We feel this settlement is in the best interests of the company and its shareholders,” Tim Pratt, Boston Scientific’s general counsel, said in a statement. “We are pleased to end this longstanding litigation between Guidant and Johnson & Johnson and to continue focusing on delivering innovative products and solutions to physicians and patients.”Ernie Knewitz, a spokesman for Johnson & Johnson, said: “This case was about playing by the rules, and today’s $600 million settlement, which was reached after all of the evidence was presented at trial and before the court rendered its decision, reflects how important it is for parties involved in merger agreements to fully live up to their obligations.” Including a $705 million breakup fee that Guidant previously paid, he said, “Johnson & Johnson has now received total payments of $1.305 billion in regard to this matter.”A version of this article appears in print on 02/18/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Guidant Suit Settled.