Updated, 3:49 p.m. | The “burning bed” is flaring up again. The investment firm H Partners, complaining of a dormant stock price at Tempur Sealy and private equity directors asleep on the job, wants the top executive replaced and a seat on the board. A torturous financial history suggests it’s probably time to shake up the mattress company and the industry again.Sealy earned its place in Wall Street lore a quarter century ago when banks couldn’t redeem the junk bonds used in a leveraged takeover of Sealy’s predecessor, Ohio Mattress. That all but ended the buyout boom of the 1980s. First Boston got stuck holding the interim loans it provided for the leveraged buyout, which led to the firm’s rescue by Credit Suisse. The whole debacle became known as the “burning bed.”Another conflagration engulfed Sealy years later — after Bain Capital had made a bundle on the company when it sold the company to another private equity firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and a team of Sealy’s managers. In 2012, H Partners challenged K.K.R., which owned nearly half of Sealy, when the shares had tumbled by 90 percent. Tempur-Pedic International would eventually buy Sealy for a bargain price, but the combined company also then suffered.In fact, almost the whole bedding business has had a troubled history of deal making. Though some investors have made money by selling the companies after piling on debt and stripping out the somewhat steady cash flow, the strategy inevitably fares poorly. Simmons, a rival brand, changed hands seven times in just over two decades before filing for bankruptcy in 2009. Since then, it has had two more owners.That backdrop alone is enough to warrant a hearing for H Partners. The fund, a 10 percent owner in Tempur Sealy, raises reasonable questions about why two representatives from private equity firms that sold out of the company years ago remain on the board. The chief executive, Mark Sarvary, also should have to defend missing earnings estimates all but once over the last seven quarters and stock that has lagged the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index by 93 percent over three years. In mattress investments, where there’s smoke, there tends to be fire.Stephanie Rogan is research assistant for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.