

Related Links


Greek Bureaucracy, Not Just Austerity, Is an Economic Drag 

Greece desperately needs a quick fix. Time is running so short that a deal is needed in the next few days to stop Athens from going bust. That will be, at best, a short-term patch while a long-term solution is worked out.Compromise is needed by both Greece’s radical new leftist government and its eurozone creditors to avoid a disaster. It won’t be easy. Greece will default on its debts in about a month unless it can find a new source of cash to repay loans owed to the International Monetary Fund. Meanwhile, the banks, which are relying on emergency liquidity assistance from the country’s central bank, are at risk of deposit flight.Athens and its creditors are so far apart on how the economy should be managed that there is no hope of rapidly reaching a new long-term deal. The top priority is to find a way of getting over the immediate hump.There was a glimmer of hope that this might be possible last week when Alexis Tsipras, Greece’s prime minister, agreed that representatives from the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the I.M.F. could come to Athens to identify areas of common ground. This group, formerly known as the troika, is now called the institutions because the Greeks are hostile to the troika, for which they blame much of their misery.It seems that the meetings with the three “institutions” merely identified how big a gap there was between the two sides. The new government wants to reverse labor reforms, cancel the agreed privatization program and reduce the planned budget squeeze. The only workable way forward is to extend the current bailout program, which terminates at the end of the month. The snag is that this is anathema to Mr. Tsipras and his Syriza party, which detest the program as much as they do the troika. Still, extending the program seems to be the only game in town, and some way must be found of bridging the gap.One option could be to revive the idea of a “moratorium,” which was floated in a Greek paper close to Syriza a week ago. This would involve Mr. Tsipras’ promising to neither reverse the previous reforms or press ahead with controversial measures of his own while talks on a longer-term deal continue. Because Athens wouldn’t be carrying out the current program, it would not receive any more cash from its creditors until a long-term deal was reached. But it would be allowed to sell a few more billion euros of treasury bills to its banks  to avoid default. At the same time, the E.C.B. would restore its safety net to Greek banks so that they no longer have to rely on liquidity assistance. That would diminish the risk of a bank run.Such a moratorium wouldn’t satisfy the extreme left wing of Syriza, as it would be seen as a partial capitulation. But Mr. Tsipras may be able to overrule the extremists, arguing that his promises have not been abandoned, only shelved for the time being.Hard-line European finance ministers would also find it hard to swallow a moratorium because Greece wouldn’t be following through on the previous government’s promises. But at least it wouldn’t be moving backward. What’s more, it is only reasonable to allow the new government time to see if it can strike a new deal. So hopefully some short-term fix can be agreed.Even if some breathing space is found, negotiators face an Olympian task to secure a long-term deal. If all Greece needed was some relief on its huge debt mountain, it wouldn’t be so hard to reach an agreement. Athens could be given an even longer grace period before it had to start repaying loans to other eurozone countries.Unfortunately, Greece also needs new cash to repay some bonds held by the E.C.B. and the loans it owes the I.M.F. And the eurozone countries and the I.M.F. won’t lend it more money unless it comes up with a viable economic plan.Indeed, it is hard to see the eurozone pumping in more cash if Athens cancels the privatization program that is supposed to fill part of its funding gap — or if Mr. Tsipras unwinds the labor reforms that have started to restore Greece’s competitiveness — or if he spends large sums of money to fulfill his election promises.The talks will be particularly difficult because the Greek economy has started to suffer again and tax receipts have fallen because of the political uncertainty. So even if Athens and its partners get over the immediate hump, Mr. Tsipras will in a few months again face a choice over whether he wants to perform a U-turn or suffer a bankruptcy that could drive Greece out of the euro.The good news is that the prime minister is so popular that he might be able to sell such a somersault (or what the Greeks call a “kolotoumba”) to the voters, perhaps by holding a referendum or a second election. But Mr. Tsipras’ popularity cuts both ways. He might also feel strong enough to sell his supporters a policy of quitting the euro.By LIZ ALDERMANMany business owners say relief from austerity measures imposed by foreign creditors will not be enough to reinvigorate growth.Hugo Dixon is co-founder of Breakingviews and editor-at-large at Reuters News. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.
