As the battle over DuPont’s board drags on, the chemical maker is stepping up its attacks on the activist investor leading the fight.In a letter to shareholders on Tuesday, DuPont sought to rebut several claims that the billionaire Nelson Peltz made questioning the company’s strategy and claiming credit for improvements in the conglomerate’s stock price.The letter stressed that the chemical manufacturer — formally E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company — had more than 20 discussions with Mr. Peltz’s Trian Fund Management about the investment firm’s concerns. And on Tuesday, the company publicly told its side of the story about its appointment of two new directors, neither of them on Mr. Peltz’s slate of four candidates. DuPont said that its management team reached out to meet the investor and discuss a settlement, but Mr. Peltz cut off the talks by contending that if he would not be allowed to join the board, he would not interested in discussions.(One of the new directors that DuPont installed, James Gallogly, had been courted by Mr. Peltz for his own slate, people briefed on the matter have said.)“While your board and management team have been executing a thoughtful and strategic plan that is delivering value for all shareholders, Trian appears intent on running a proxy fight at all costs,” DuPont wrote in the letter.In a section of its letter called “Trian’s Myths vs. the Facts,” the company argued that Trian was taking credit for matters in which it had no claim. The investment firm tried, for example, to claim responsibility for the pending spinoff of a performance chemicals division, but DuPont said that the move had been in the works “well before” Mr. Peltz’s involvement.DuPont also argued that several of Trian’s arguments about the company’s expenses and financial performance were based on what management contended were arbitrary time periods or analyses. Meanwhile, the company continued to insist that further breaking up DuPont, a once central theme of Trian’s push, was “high risk.”And the company noted that on the day Trian announced its proxy fight, DuPont’s shares fell 1 percent. The stock rose 3 percent on the day that the company rejected Mr. Peltz’s campaign.A representative for Trian was not immediately available for comment.