LONDON — Asset managers are no longer the unappreciated, underpaid stepchildren in finance, and may soon overtake “average” investment bankers in pay, according to a new report on banker and fund management pay from Britain.Pay at investment banks has fallen by more than a quarter since before the financial crisis, and more than 40 percent in inflation-adjusted terms. During the same time, pay for asset managers – who have benefited from the central banks’ aggressive flattening of interest rates – has risen by 20 percent.Here are some numbers:In 2006, compensation cost per employee, a crude metric that is used because banks don’t disclose much else, the average investment banker made $386,00 and the average fund management employee made $216,000.By 2013, that banker’s pay had fallen to $286,000 while the asset manager’s pay had increased to $260,000. That means the gap, at least among averages, is closing. In 2006, fund managers made about 56 percent of what bankers made. In 2013, the money managers were closing in, taking home 91 percent of the bankers’ total.The report comes from New Financial, a British think tank founded by William Wright, the former editor of Financial News.By crunching available data for 12 investment banks, including Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase and Barclays, and 18 asset managers, including BlackRock Aberdeen Asset Management and T. Rowe Price, Mr. Wright calculated some gems of information on pay, a particularly hot button issue in Britain where a panoply of regulators are battling to reform pay practices.Among his conclusions are that asset managers are far more productive than they used to be and bankers are a little bit more productive. And though asset managers are making more money, they are getting roughly the same proportion they always have.  Their companies are just managing a lot more money (thank the central bankers for that). Bankers, on the other hand, used to lay claim to 56 percent of net revenue for their paychecks in 2007; in 2013, they got only 39 percent.“At investment banks, staff are taking a shrinking portion of a shrinking pot,” he wrote. “At asset managers, they are taking a constant portion of a growing one.”There were some interesting facts in the report. For example, Goldman Sachs pays better than everyone else – no surprise there – and pay at the bank has fallen more drastically than at any of its peers.From 2007 to 2014, compensation costs per employee have fallen 42 percent at Goldman – more than Credit Suisse, which is down 21 percent and UBS, down 22 percent. But in 2014, average pay at Goldman was still $384,000 compared with $320,000 at Credit Suisse’s investment bank and $202,000 at JPMorgan’s.Fanning the flames of inequality inside investment banks, Mr. Wright highlighted just how well the executives at the top were doing. On average, between one quarter to one-third of the bonus pool at investment banks is paid to just 1 percent of the staff.Pay continues to be controversial topic in Britain as regulators, politicians and pundits debate how much compensation contributed to reckless activities and the ensuing financial crisis. Many bankers quietly complain that they are being overly regulated, making profits hard to eek out. But Jon Cunliffe, deputy governor for financial stability at the Bank of England , said at a speech at Chatham House last year that banker pay had not fallen nearly as much as bank profits.He noted that before the crisis, profits to shareholders at global banks totaled about 60 percent of banks compensation bill, and 75 percent in Britain. In 2013, shareholders were getting a meager 25 percent of that bill and 2 percent in Britain.Mr. Wright tackles the same question. Averaging figures from 2012 to 2014, Mr. Wright looked at how revenues were divided between pay, other costs and pretax profits (the idea being that shareholders get some of those pretax profits). Only six firms in the sample gave more to shareholders in the form of pretax profits than they paid to their staff, the report said.The average investment bank allocated 40 percent to pay, leaving 27 percent for pretax profits compared with the average asset manager, who used 34 percent for pay employees and 32 percent for pretax profits.UBS was among the most generous to employees and the least generous for shareholders, with 52 percent of revenue going to pay and 11 percent for pretax profits. At the other end, T. Rowe Price used 34 percent of revenue for pay and 49 percent for pretax profits.“There is significant scope for further reductions in pay and staffing, and for sharing some of the efficiency and scale gains of the past decade with clients in the form of lower fees,” Mr. Wright said in the report.Bankers need not fret too much, however. Average pay for code staff increased by 6 percent in 2013 from the year before.And Mr. Wright noted that even though average pay per employee across the industry had fallen 27 percent from 2007 to 2014, in absolute terms – stripping out social security and other costs — actual pay of $245,00 for the nearly 200,000 employees in the survey still qualify for Britain’s 1 percent.