Updated, 1:34 p.m. | An activist investor is taking it to the mattresses.The investment firm H Partners Management, which says it is the largest shareholder of Tempur Sealy International, has sent a letter to the board of the mattress company calling for a shake-up in the company’s management.In a letter dated Tuesday, H Partners said the board “must immediately replace current C.E.O. Mark Sarvary due to his consistently poor performance and failure to deliver on his promises to shareholders.”The letter contends that the performance of Tempur Sealy’s stock price has sharply underperformed its rivals and the market over all. It also says that the company combined operating margin has shrunk under Mr. Sarvary’s leadership.The hedge fund, which oversees over $1 billion in assets, also called for revamping the board, which it argues does not include any representatives for current shareholders.In response, the mattress maker said that it was “disappointed to see that H Partners has chosen a public forum to advance an agenda that appears to be nothing more than baseless personal attacks and self-promotion.”“Despite its two years as a Tempur Sealy shareholder and numerous meetings with members of the board and management team, the first time H Partners raised concerns regarding Mark Sarvary’s role as C.E.O. or the board’s oversight was within the last 10 days.” Tempur Sealy said in a statement.The investment firm said it had tried to communicate its concerns to Tempur Sealy’s chairman, P. Andrews McLane, for nearly two years.H Partners is also calling for the resignation of the board of Mr. McLane of TA Associates and Christopher Masto of Friedman Fleischer & Lowe. The two joined the firm when their private equity firms invested in Tempur Sealy, although neither investment concern currently owns a stake in the company.“We are puzzled why employees of TA Associates and Friedman Fleischer cannot understand the concept that when an investor sells out of his business interest, that investor must hand over the reins to new shareholder representatives,” H Partners said.Tempur Sealy said in its statement Mr. McLane “brings more than 40 years of business and leadership experience to the Tempur Sealy board” and that Mr. Masto has “more than 20 years of strategy, finance and investing experience.”H Partners is threatening to lead a campaign among shareholders to withhold their votes for board members, but the hedge fund cannot actively put up a slate of alternative directors, because it missed the window for nominations.H Partners disclosed on Feb. 10 that it had increased its stake in Tempur Sealy to 9.97 percent, saying that the shares were undervalued.Shares of Tempur Sealy are up 1.3 percent so far this year. The company is holding an investor day in New York on Wednesday.Bank of America Merrill Lynch and the law firms  Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom and Morgan, Lewis & Bockius  are advising Tempur Sealy.A version of this article appears in print on 02/18/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Bedroom Battle.