MADRID — Caixabank of Spain issued a takeover bid on Tuesday for BPI, a Portuguese bank in which it was already the largest investor, in the latest chapter in the shake-up of Portugal’s banking sector.The cash offer values BPI at 1.94 billion euros, or $2.21 billion, meaning that the takeover would be worth €1.08 billion if Caixabank ends up with 100 percent of the equity. The bid represents a 27 percent premium over the Portuguese bank’s closing share price on Monday. Caixabank is offering €1.329 a share for the 55.9 percent of BPI that it does not already own.Caixabank said in a statement that its offer was conditional on its securing at least 50 percent of the total equity and BPI shareholders accepting to remove a restriction on shareholder voting rights. At present, BPI’s rules limit the voting rights of any individual shareholder to 20 percent of the share capital.In 2011, the Portuguese banking sector was allocated €12 billion of a €78 billion international bailout negotiated by Portugal, after the country found itself on the front line of the European debt crisis and unable to meet its debt repayment obligations. The Portuguese banking sector ended up requiring only half of that rescue recapitalization, but it was then hit last summer — only a few months after Portugal exited its bailout program — by the collapse of one of its biggest institutions, Banco Espírito Santo, which was part of a family-controlled group.Portugal is expected to have selected a list of bidders by late March for the auction of Novo Banco, which was formed last August to salvage the healthy assets of Banco Espírito Santo. Analysts have been speculating that BPI would be a front-runner in the auction of Novo Banco.The takeover of BPI would consolidate Caixabank’s position as one of the three big institutions in the Iberian Peninsula, alongside its Spanish rivals Banco Santander and BBVA. While Spain’s economic woes also forced the government in Madrid to negotiate a banking bailout to keep afloat Bankia and other savings banks crippled by mortgage defaults, Caixabank was among the institutions that managed to emerge from the crisis with a reinforced domestic market share. In December, Caixabank also completed the takeover of the Spanish operations of Barclays, the British bank, in a deal worth €820 million.Caixabank, which is based in Barcelona, has been a shareholder since 1995 in BPI, which has about 1.7 million clients. Even though its offer is for full control of BPI, Caixabank said it hoped to keep the Portuguese bank as a listed company. It also said it would keep BPI’s current management team.A version of this article appears in print on 02/18/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Offer for Bank.