
On the Road By                     
 JOE SHARKEY
 
FEB. 16, 2015
IN 2014, reported incidents of so-called unruly passengers were at the lowest level in 20 years, down 60 percent from the high of 310 in 2001, according to new data from the Federal Aviation Administration.But to quote the immortal entreaty of the estimable Chico Marx in the 1933 movie “Duck Soup”: “Who are you gonna believe, me or your own eyes?”So yes, let us note the government’s sanguine numbers, reflecting the decrease in reported incidents under a catchall law covering passengers who “assault, threaten, intimidate or interfere with a crew member in the performance of the crew member’s duties aboard an aircraft.” But let’s also consider a view through the eyes of Heather Poole, one of my go-to flight attendants for actual observations from the galley. Ms. Poole, the author of a funny 2012 book called “Cruising Attitude: Tales of Crashpads, Crew Drama and Crazy Passengers at 35,000 Feet,” tends to speak in long sentences punctuated by rueful laughter.“I don’t believe at all that it’s on the decline,” she said. “It’s not being reported as much because it’s so much trouble to make a report, especially if your job is to keep the cabin calm, which means you’re not doing your job if you report an incident. And besides, just who am I going to report this to? I don’t have a supervisor on board, so let’s say I get to Tulsa and I’ve been flying four legs a day, and my layover is eight hours. Am I going to spend an hour of my layover time doing paperwork when all I want to do is get to my room and go to sleep?”AdvertisementShe goes on: “Some people on airplanes really overreact to minor things. Like I was walking down the aisle and somebody whacked me on the butt. I look and I see it’s this woman who’s freaking out because I stepped on her toe. Well, I didn’t lean into her row to step on her toe, you know. Her toe was in the aisle, and I accidentally stepped on it, and she smacked me. Where else but on an airplane can you smack someone in the butt and think that’s O.K.?”Most passengers, Ms. Poole agrees, are civil and cooperative. And incidents of violently disruptive or shocking air rage are in fact infrequent — though when they do occur they tend to be aggressively reported by crew members, by the news media and by social media, where any interesting in-flight disturbance is captured on video.“That’s another thing to worry about,“ Ms. Poole says jokingly. “As soon as something starts going wrong on a flight you have to make sure your hair and makeup look good because you know it’s going to be a viral sensation.”AdvertisementOf course, violent incidents in the confined spaces of an aircraft, often perpetrated by passengers who are mentally disturbed or in alcohol- or drug-induced rages, are no joking matter. On Jan. 27, a passenger who began screaming on a US Airways flight that had just left the gate at Charlotte Douglas International Airport punched and beat two flight attendants who tried to calm him, sending one to a hospital.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the past, flight attendant unions in the United States have campaigned to ease reporting procedures for crew members, and to stiffen penalties for passengers who cause flight disruptions of all sorts. And declines in reports of unruly passengers in the United States notwithstanding, the International Air Transport Association, a global aviation trade group, expressed concern in a resolution last June that incidents of unruly behavior and air rage had risen sharply around the world in recent years.In China, where commercial aviation has grown sharply, aviation officials alarmed about big increases in unruly behavior recently said they were considering compiling a blacklist to prevent passengers who have caused disturbances from flying. In China, aviation officials have said, millions of new passengers have never flown previously, and are less likely to understand in-flight behavior protocols.Here and abroad, one big underlying problem is that fliers frequently are irritated, from those knee-crushed for hours in uncomfortable coach seats to frequent travelers frustrated by declining service and, at least in the United States, sharp reductions in schedules as airlines pare their routes to concentrate on international travelers who provide the most revenue.Related to that is an issue of definition of terms. We all know what true air rage is, but given sometimes tense relations between customers and crew members who are the face of the airline business, the official definition of “unruly behavior” can be arbitrary. Sure, it definitely includes refusal to follow a crew member’s orders — but does it also include “annoying behavior” or “verbal confrontation”? The International Air Transport Association, in its current guidelines, says it does.Ms. Poole, 43, a flight attendant for more than 15 years, sees another underlying problem as an occasional lack of civility among strangers, crew members and passengers alike, in a crowded, confined environment.“Some passengers don’t communicate till they’re absolutely angry,” she said. “I might get passengers coming to me yelling things like, ‘Can you tell that passenger in front of me to put his seat back up?’ And I’m like, why can’t you do that? They’re tattling on each other — to the point where I feel like a grade-school teacher.”Email: jsharkey@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on February 17, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Numbers May Not Give a Complete Picture of Passenger Unruliness.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »