By CLIFFORD KRAUSSFEB. 16, 2015
HOUSTON —  After five tumultuous years at the helm, Steven L. Newman, the chief executive of Transocean, a leading offshore drilling service company, has abruptly stepped down.The company said late Sunday that the decision was agreed to by Mr. Newman and the company board. Ian C. Strachan, the company chairman, is taking over as interim chief executive while the board searches for a permanent successor.Transocean’s business and stock price are suffering because of the 50 percent drop in the price of oil since June, which is slowing expensive deepwater drilling. The company is still recovering from the 2010 Deepwater Horizon rig explosion that left 11 workers dead.Transocean operated the rig for BP, the operator of the ill-fated well exploration in the Gulf of Mexico that spilled millions of gallons of oil into the sea and soiled hundreds of miles of beaches. A federal judge last year found Transocean to have been negligent, sharing the blame for the accident with BP and Halliburton, another oil services company.Advertisement“As chief executive, Steven has capably guided Transocean over the last five years, demonstrating outstanding leadership through what was unquestionably the most challenging period in its history,” Mr. Strachan said in a statement that appeared on the company website.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Transocean is well positioned to weather the current industry downturn and emerge even stronger,” he said.Transocean is evaluating the competitiveness of its fleet. It is scrapping seven older rig vessels, and has suggested that more of its fleet may be sold once oil prices revive.AdvertisementThe company lost $2.2 billion in the third quarter of 2014, including write-offs, and Fitch Ratings recently downgraded its outlook to negative.A version of this article appears in print on February 17, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Transocean Chief Steps Down Suddenly With Company in Doldrums.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.