Investors in private equity funds typically have to wait as long as a decade to get their money back. But many are now cashing out ahead of schedule by selling their investments into a secondary market, reflecting the buoyant state of private equity.These so-called secondary sales of stakes in funds — including private equity funds, venture capital funds and real estate funds — totaled $47 billion in 2014, an increase of roughly 80 percent from the previous year, according to new research by the investment bank Evercore. The deal volume was higher than at any point since the financial crisis, the research shows. The soaring stock market in recent years, combined with low interest rates and other factors, have helped bolster the value of private equity funds, which invest in privately held companies or take companies private through leveraged buyouts. Many investors are apparently seizing an opportunity to take cash now, rather than wait for the funds to mature.Evercore, whose private capital advisory group surveyed more than 70 large investors, found that roughly half the sales were motivated by “active portfolio management,” as opposed to regulatory pressure or a state of distress. In 2013, active portfolio management was the motivation for just 27 percent of sales.What’s more, it appears the deals are set to continue. Buyers of stakes in these funds had roughly $55 billion of available capital to spend, known as dry powder, as of the end of last year, Evercore said. These buyers aim to raise an additional $32 billion of capital this year, according to the report.Sellers may be hoping to cash out, but buyers have different priorities. An existing stake in a private equity fund can have a more predictable outcome than a new investment, though the returns may be lower. The majority of the buyers in 2014 were large investment vehicles, with more than $4 billion in capital, Evercore found.“The ability to evaluate assets makes secondaries lower risk than investing in a classic fund-raising, where you commit to a blind pool that as yet holds no assets,” Antoine Dréan, the founder of the placement agent Triago, said in an email.“Buying older funds in the secondary market becomes an even more attractive diversification proposition at a time when people fear newer funds are paying excessively high prices for assets,” he added. These fund stakes often sell at a discount to their estimated value. In the six months through January, funds in the secondary market traded at a 6 percent discount on average, according to Triago. But a select group of funds commands a premium, reflecting the robust demand for them. In that six-month period, Triago says, the large American buyout funds traded for an average premium of 1 percent. A version of this article appears in print on 02/19/2015, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Secondary Sales Jump.