“Let Bartlet be Bartlet” was the title of a stirring episode of the progressive wish-fulfillment television series “The West Wing.” In the episode, staff members struggle to be taken seriously on Capitol Hill, working in the shadow of the timid and ambivalent president, Josiah Bartlet. In the face of falling job approval ratings, the chief of staff, Leo McGarry, challenges the president to be true to his values and take the staff off the leash. Mr. McGarry asks the staff members if they are ready for the fight. Each responds, “I serve at the pleasure of the president.”It’s as if a similar moment took place in the real White House recently. President Obama’s State of the Union address revealed a streak of assertiveness and defiance that had been sorely lacking in the tax policy world. The budget proposal for the 2016 fiscal year is a work of ambition and resolve, laying down important markers in anticipation of negotiating an overhaul of the business and international tax code provisions. Mr. Obama’s plan to tax capital gains at death, for example, is an important move to address wealth inequality, one that has not been considered seriously for more than a generation. His blueprint for a minimum tax applied to American multinational corporations is, I think, the framework most likely to prevail in the years to come. Of course, not every idea will work. The proposal to restrict the tax benefits of new 529 college savings plans, for example, was quickly retracted in the face of widespread opposition. But so what? The president has nothing to lose and everything to gain by allowing his staff to identify specific ideas to match his soaring rhetoric. Democrats in Congress need focus and motivation, and that is hard to find when the party’s economic priorities are vague.As long as the dogs are off the leash, the president could ask the Treasury Department to close some tax loopholes that survive mainly by virtue of congressional gridlock. Although the power to tax originates in Congress, the Treasury Department and the Internal Revenue Service have broad legal authority to act when the statutory language lacks a plain meaning. And anyone who has spent any time at all with the Internal Revenue Code knows that plain meaning is in short supply. There are real limits on the Treasury Department’s authority, but as long as its interpretation of the language is reasonable and consistent with the congressional purpose of a particular provision, it has the legal authority to close loopholes that Congress did not intend.I offer eight suggestions for the Treasury Department to act on. There are dozens of possibilities, but I focus on proposals that are of interest to DealBook readers and are consistent with President Obama’s renewed interest in business tax policy. (Other proposals, like the minimum tax on multinational corporations, would require legislative action.)The Treasury Department and the Internal Revenue Service may not be able to accomplish all of these. But there’s value in the fight.1.  Close the carried interest loophole. Managers of private equity, venture capital and other private investment funds receive a share of the profits, known as carried interest, in exchange for the services they provide. The Treasury Department could use its legal authority under Section 707(a)(2)(A) of the tax code to tax income from carried interest as ordinary income. I wrote a DealBook column on carried interest, How Obama Can Increase Taxes on Carried Interest.2. Disallow fee waivers.When fund managers waive management fees in exchange for additional shares of the profits of the fund, they usually do so in a way that involves little risk of nonpayment. Even under current law, these arrangements should give rise to ordinary income, not capital gains. The I.R.S. could act more aggressively to enforce the law in this area and seek clarifying regulations under Section 707, if necessary.3. End the practice of disguising nondeductible dividend payments as deductible service fees. Companies owned by private equity funds, sometimes known as portfolio companies, often pay fees for a kind of management consulting service provided by an affiliate of the private equity fund sponsor. Those fees, also known as monitoring fees, are properly deductible by the portfolio company. But sometimes, “fees” are paid to investors who provide no services and the payment is better characterized as a return on capital investment, not a payment for services. The practice of disguising nondeductible dividend payments as deductible service payments could be reviewed when appropriate.Gregg Polsky has written about this, fee waivers and other tax strategies in “A Compendium of Private Equity Tax Games.” 4. End carried interest valuation abuse.The White House proposal to limit contributions to tax-favored retirement accounts, while sound, misses one important issue. Some investment fund managers contribute carried interest, “cheap stock” or other investment securities at artificially low values to retirement plans to avoid contribution limits, as highlighted in a report by the Government Accountability Office. The Treasury Department could require greater disclosure of valuation methods for non-publicly traded assets and draft guidance that describes acceptable and unacceptable valuation methods.5. Close the hedge fund reinsurance loophole.Some hedge funds have established a foreign reinsurance company in an offshore tax haven to take advantage of an exception in the passive foreign investment company rules for active insurance companies. The hedge fund sponsor and investors capitalize the reinsurance company, which then invests its assets much like a regular hedge fund. By stapling a small active insurance business to the asset management business, managers and investors can defer income offshore and sometimes convert ordinary income into capital gains. The Internal Revenue Service has been mulling this over since it issued a cautionary notice in 2003. Twelve years is long enough.6. Define real estate as real estate.In a series of administrative rulings, the I.R.S. has expanded the definition of real estate, making it easier for private prisons, casinos, data storage companies, telecommunications companies and others to convert into real estate investment trusts and avoid paying corporate tax. The Treasury could write regulations that more narrowly define qualifying real estate income.I have also written about this in an earlier Dealbook column, “Defining Real Estate Broadly to Avoid Corporate Taxes.”7. Define energy as energy.Similarly, the I.R.S. has expanded the definition of energy to include various services that are only indirectly involved in the energy business. That has allowed more businesses to qualify as master limited partnerships, which pay no corporate tax. And I’ve written about this in a Dealbook column, “How the I.R.S. Encourages Oil and Gas Spinoffs.”8. Address earnings stripping.Treasury Notice 2014-52 addressed some of the methods that companies moving their headquarters overseas use to get access to deferred offshore earnings. The Treasury Department has been working to extend the proposal to address the stripping of earnings out of the United States tax base. I recommend that it Issue that guidance soon.