Many law firms have been seeking new ways to keep themselves financially sound as their clients become more cost conscious. Now, a founder of a major litigation finance company, who is also a law professor at Georgetown University, is urging a more radical step: Abandon the partnership structure. Instead of having partners provide equity, which can be withdrawn when they leave or retire, said Jonathan T. Molot, firms should go public and receive funding from outsiders so they have the cash to invest in areas like lawyer training and technology.Mr. Molot is a co-founder of Burford Capital, which finances litigation in return for a share of the winnings, He made his suggestion this week in an article in  The Southern California Law Review, the law journal of the University of Southern California Gould School of Law. “Clients feel overcharged and underserved and are constantly searching for a better deal from a different firm,” Mr. Molot said.The idea of allowing alternate business structures for law firms was rejected by the American Bar Association in 2000, and again two years ago, with the lawyers’ group blocking non-lawyer involvement on grounds that it could interfere with a lawyer’s professional judgment.“We’d like to see more of a track record of client protection being paramount so there are no divided loyalties,” said William C. Hubbard, president of the A.B.A. The association monitors developments in Britain, Australia and other countries where firms have begun to be publicly traded. The only exceptions in the United States are firms in Washington with lobbying practices, which can have non-lawyers as principals. Such practices are yet to be allowed by states, which oversee law firms. Despite the constraints, there is a need for firms to have longer-term investment in technology “to deliver better, faster and cheaper legal services in the future,” said William Henderson, a law professor at Indiana University’s Maurer School of Law.“We already have accepted that doctors go into business with hospitals, and impose cost controls, but we haven’t reached that point with lawyers yet,” he said.A rush of lateral hires, where successful lawyers are poached from other firms, and the single-minded focus on driving up billings have eroded the bonds of partnerships and caused more money flow issues.At the same time, the traditional practice of lockstep compensation has given way to rewarding “rainmaker” partners with big client lists. And that paves the way for partners to jump ship for more lucrative offers from other firms. When they depart, they leave with their capital contribution, which only leads to more uncertain law firm finances, Mr. Molot noted.The law firm focus on revenue generation to increase their annual “profits-per-partner” figures, which are a key metric in their national rankings, erodes firm camaraderie and loyalty, Mr. Molot said. Typically, equity partners receive a “draw,” which is a split of the year’s profits, with lawyers who attract the highest-paying clients receiving the largest portion.Instead of concentrating on generating current billings, law firms relying on longer-term financing “would have every incentive to win and retain their clients’ continuing loyalty, even if that means accepting alternative billing arrangements and lower current billings,” he said.Such investment in the firm’s future would make partners more like shareholders who own the firm and benefit over the long term from its success, Mr. Molot said.But it is unlikely that an existing firm would switch from a partnership to a public traded entity, he acknowledged“It would really work,” Mr. Molot said, “if there were to be a new law firm formed, or if a London firm were to take outside investment and have an office in Washington, D.C. since that jurisdiction already allows non-lawyers as owners.”  