LONDON — Tesco, the embattled British retailing giant, said on Thursday that John Allan, a deputy chairman of the electronics company Dixons Carphone, would take over as chairman on March 1.The appointment comes at a crucial juncture for Tesco, the largest retailer in Britain, which has been mired in investigations concerning a £263 million, or $404 million, overstatement of profit, and which has been steadily losing market share.Tesco is being investigated on several fronts, including by the Serious Fraud Office, the Financial ­Reporting Council and the Groceries Code Adjudicator, which regulates deals between big supermarkets and their suppliers.Mr. Allan will take over from Richard Broadbent, who announced his resignation in October as a result of the firestorm over the company’s accounting irregularities.Dave Lewis, formerly of Unilever, took over as Tesco’s chief executive in September, a month earlier than expected. Mr. Lewis has announced sweeping changes at the company, including closing more than 40 stores; shuttering the head office in Cheshunt, England; cutting thousands of jobs; and selling noncore assets.The efforts may be starting to turn things around. Recent data from Kantar Worldpanel, a consumer research group, showed that Tesco’s sales grew 0.3 percent in the 12 weeks to Feb. 1, while those of its competitors lagged. The company still lost 0.2 percent of market share, however, and controlled 29 percent of the market at the end of the period.The Tesco share price, which was less than half what it was a year ago, has been rising this week. The trend continued in early afternoon trading on Wednesday in London, with shares rising 0.49 percent to £2.45.The four-month search process for a new chairman was closely watched in Britain.Mr. Allan will be paid £650,000 a year for three years, Tesco said in a news release. He will step down from the boards of Dixons Carphone and Royal Mail but will remain chairman of Barratt Developments, a property company, and the payment processing company WorldPay.“I’m very pleased to be taking on this role at such a critical moment for the business and look forward to working with the new executive team and the board,” Mr. Allan said.Local news reports cited prominent Tesco shareholders as saying they were hoping that the veteran retailing executive Archie Norman, the chairman and chief executive of Asda from 1991 to 2000, would become chairman of their company.But Patrick Cescau, senior independent director at Tesco, said that Mr. Allan “was the right candidate to chair Tesco at this important time.”Mr. Allan has extensive experience in integrating companies. He spent eight years with Fine Fare, a subsidiary at the time of Associated British Foods, where he was retail director for marketing, buying and retail operations. He then served as chief executive of the freight company Ocean Group, which became Exel, from 1994 to 2000. When Exel was acquired by Deutsche Post in 2005, he joined the enlarged group as finance director until 2009.Mr. Allan became chairman of Dixons Retail in September 2009 and a deputy chairman and senior independent director of the enlarged group after its merger with Carphone Warehouse last year.Clive Black, an analyst with Shore Capital, lamented the missed opportunity of a “dream team” that could have included Mr. Norman, but said that Tesco was moving forward.“And so with another box ticked off the company’s lengthy to-do list, Tesco continues to make steps forward with its recovery,” Mr. Black wrote in a note to clients, “although how many more baked beans and loaves a new chair will add to the tills is a debating matter.”