By ANDREW POLLACKOCT. 12, 2015
Eli Lilly said on Monday that it was halting development of a drug for cardiovascular disease because the drug was not likely to be found effective in preventing heart attacks and strokes.The move is a blow for Lilly; the drug, evacetrapib, was in the final stage of clinical trials and was expected to become a blockbuster had it reached the market.It is also the latest disappointment for this class of drugs, known as CETP inhibitors, which can raise the levels of so-called good cholesterol while lowering the levels of bad cholesterol.Pfizer halted a late-stage study of its CETP inhibitor, torcetrapib, in late 2006, when the drug, despite raising good cholesterol levels as intended, was found to increase the risk of death and heart problems in a clinical trial. Roche gave up on its candidate, dalcetrapib, in 2012, after a trial suggested the drug was not effective.AdvertisementMerck is continuing to study a similar drug, anacetrapib, which is in late-stage trials. And Amgen announced just last month that it would pay at least $300 million to buy Dezima Pharma, a privately held Dutch company that has a CETP inhibitor ready to enter the final stage of clinical testing.AdvertisementLilly said in a news release on Monday that a safety monitoring committee that was reviewing interim results of its Phase 3 trial had recommended the trial be stopped because the drug was unlikely to be shown to be effective in reducing the risk of heart problems, including heart attack, stroke and death from cardiovascular causes. Lilly said the trial, which had 12,095 patients in 37 countries, was not halted for safety reasons.“We’re obviously disappointed in this outcome, as we hoped that evacetrapib would offer an advance in treatment for people with high-risk cardiovascular disease,” David Ricks, senior vice president of Lilly and president of its biomedicines division, said in a statement.Lilly’s shares were down almost 8 percent on Monday. Merck’s shares closed down just under one-half of 1 percent.Dr. Steven E. Nissen, the academic chairman of the halted study, said he had had high hopes for evacetrapib despite the failure of the two previous products in the same class.“Torcetrapib was toxic; dalcetrapib was weak,” he said. “We thought we had a good chance.”Dr. Nissen, who is chairman of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic, said that in earlier studies, evacetrapib had reduced low-density lipoprotein, or LDL, the so-called bad cholesterol, by 30 to 35 percent. It had raised high-density lipoprotein, or HDL, the so-called good cholesterol, by at least 100 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The results show that improvements in biomarkers like LDL and HDL do not always translate into a clinical benefit. Still, Dr. Nissen said different drugs to raise HDL might ultimately show a benefit.While statins like Lipitor are the mainstay drugs for lowering bad cholesterol, doctors say additional types of drugs are needed to further prevent heart attacks and strokes.This summer, two new drugs that can sharply lower LDL won approval from the Food and Drug Administration. They are Repatha from Amgen, and Praluent from Sanofi and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals.AdvertisementBut it is not clear yet whether those drugs, known as PCSK9 inhibitors, reduce the risks of heart attacks and strokes. Also, those drugs are given by injection, which could make them unattractive for some people.By contrast, the CETP inhibitors like evacetrapib are taken orally. CETP stands for cholesteryl ester transfer protein.Merck said in a statement on Monday that it “continues to believe that anacetrapib has the potential to be an important treatment.” Its study is expected to have final results in early 2017, with an interim analysis expected by the end of this year.Lilly said the decision to abandon evacetrapib would result in a fourth-quarter charge of up to $90 million pretax, or about 5 cents a share.Jeffrey Holford, an analyst at Jefferies, called the discontinuation of evacetrapib a “major blow” for Lilly, “as it was probably the most significant near-term pipeline opportunity in our view.” He said, however, that the failure might not automatically doom Merck’s drug, which was being studied in a slightly different patient population.With evacetrapib out of the picture, investors in Lilly might focus even more on solanezumab, the company’s late-stage drug for Alzheimer’s disease, which is also considered a risky gamble but potential blockbuster.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Lilly Drops Heart Drug in Last Stage of Its Trials.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.