By HILARY STOUTFEB. 17, 2015
In the fraught summer of 2009, the federal bankruptcy judge Robert E. Gerber proved to be a crucial figure in General Motors’ struggle for survival. With the economy in deep recession and the once-dominant automaker bleeding red ink, he presided over a fast-track bankruptcy process that allowed G.M. to remake itself — with the help of $49 billion from federal taxpayers — as a new company free of onerous liabilities.On Tuesday, lawyers representing the reborn, and profitable, G.M. were back in Judge Gerber’s Manhattan courtroom seeking his assistance once again. They were asking him simply to uphold a key provision of the bankruptcy agreement, but the judge’s response is less certain this time.The occasion was a day of oral arguments over whether a provision of the July 2009 sales order that shielded the “new G.M.” from most legal claims involving vehicles that were manufactured before that date should be allowed to stand. The company is trying to shut down scores of lawsuits, many of them seeking class-action status, over economic losses, injuries and deaths from a defective ignition switch that has been linked to hundreds of accidents and at least 56 deaths.G.M. began recalling millions of older-model cars for the defect a year ago, but it has acknowledged that some engineers, lawyers and others in the company were aware of the problem for more than a decade earlier, a delay that has prompted several investigations, including a federal criminal inquiry.AdvertisementJudge Gerber is not expected to rule for weeks, or longer, but he opened the hearing with some stern words about the automaker’s conduct.Advertisement“I’m prepared to assume that there was enough to require a recall well before June 2009,” he said, though he invited G.M. lawyers to dispute that statement, “and that old G.M. acted very badly with respect to a delay.”“But,” the judge continued, “I want to focus on the legal issue” involving the bankruptcy sale agreement.The session held none of the theater that played out in Congressional hearings last spring, when G.M.’s chief executive, Mary T. Barra, endured scalding criticism and angry questions from lawmakers. Then, relatives of people who had died in accidents involving the recalled cars looked on from the back of the packed hearing room, holding photos of their lost loved ones.Tuesday’s courtroom session had plenty of empty seats and focused on technical points of law, though Judge Gerber’s ruling has the potential to have a far-reaching impact on G.M.Lawyers representing plaintiffs in ignition switch lawsuits argued that their clients’ due process was denied during the 2009 bankruptcy proceedings because the company did not inform them individually — either of the bankruptcy proceedings or that they might have potential claims against the automaker. Had they known, said Ed Weisfelner, the lead plaintiff’s lawyer, they would have protested and could possibly have changed the final agreement.“These were known creditors that weren’t given any semblance of due process,” Mr. Weisfelner argued.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lawyers for G.M., led by Arthur Steinberg of King & Spalding, said that it was not clear to G.M. that these car owners were known creditors. Mr. Steinberg noted that none of the named plaintiffs in the cases had filed a complaint against the company to that date. He said that vast media coverage of the bankruptcy was enough notice for any car owners that their right to file a claim on any issue could potentially be in jeopardy.Moreover, Mr. Steinberg argued that even if the company had issued the detailed notices that plaintiffs’ lawyers were now seeking, it is doubtful that their protests would have changed the sale order, given the economic urgency at the time.AdvertisementUnder the bankruptcy agreement the federal government essentially purchased the moneymaking assets and formed a new company (which it has subsequently sold its stake in). “You couldn’t tell the purchaser you have to take these liabilities,” he said.Today, G.M. has so much cash — $25.2 billion at year’s end — that it has not only been able to absorb almost $3 billion in costs associated with a record number of safety recalls last year, but has also been able to hand union members a bigger bonus than required under their contract. And now it is fending off a possible proxy fight over demands from a group of hedge fund investors that it use some of its ample cash to return $8 billion to shareholders through a stock buyback.But the ignition switch issue still hovers over the company. A number of potential plaintiffs have waived their right to sue over personal injuries and deaths by accepting payments from a victims’ compensation program independently run by the lawyer Kenneth R. Feinberg. The automaker has set aside at least $400 million to pay those claims. But those who opt not to take Mr. Feinberg’s offers may still try to seek justice in the courts.Whatever Judge Gerber rules — the arguments will continue on Wednesday morning — the losing side will almost certainly appeal. But the judge also held out the potential that he could find a third way.“Don’t rule out the possibility that any final order might not entirely agree with either side in full,” he told the lawyers.An earlier version of this article misspelled the name of the firm of the lead lawyer for General Motors. It is King and Spalding, not King and Spaulding.A version of this article appears in print on February 18, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Hears G.M.’s Case in Recalls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.