Compiled by THE NEW YORK TIMESOCT. 12, 2015
The economics prize was established in 1968 in memory of Alfred Nobel, to celebrate the 300th anniversary of Sweden’s central bank, the world’s first. Below is a complete list of winners, according to Nobelprize.org:2017Richard H. Thaler“For his contributions to behavioral economics.”2016Oliver Hart and Bengt Holmstrom“For their contributions to contract theory.”2015Angus Deaton“For his analysis of consumption, poverty and welfare.”2014Jean Tirole“For his analysis of market power and regulation.”2013Eugene F. Fama, Lars Peter Hansen and Robert J. Shiller“For their empirical analysis of asset prices.”2012Alvin E. Roth and Lloyd S. Shapley“For the theory of stable allocations and the practice of market design.”Advertisement2011Thomas J. Sargent and Christopher A. Sims“For their empirical research on cause and effect in the macroeconomy.”Advertisement2010Peter A. Diamond, Dale T. Mortensen and Christopher A. Pissarides“For their analysis of markets with search frictions.”2009Elinor Ostrom“For her analysis of economic governance, especially the commons.”Oliver E. Williamson“For his analysis of economic governance, especially the boundaries of the firm.”2008Paul Krugman“For his analysis of trade patterns and location of economic activity.”2007Leonid Hurwicz, Eric S. Maskin and Roger B. Myerson“For having laid the foundations of mechanism design theory.”2006Edmund S. Phelps“For his analysis of intertemporal trade-offs in macroeconomic policy.”2005Robert J. Aumann and Thomas C. Schelling“For having enhanced our understanding of conflict and cooperation through game-theory analysis.”2004Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott“For their contributions to dynamic macroeconomics: the time consistency of economic policy and the driving forces behind business cycles.”2003Robert F. Engle III“For methods of analyzing economic time series with time-varying volatility (ARCH).”Clive W. J. Granger“For methods of analyzing economic time series with common trends (co-integration).”Advertisement2002Daniel Kahneman“For having integrated insights from psychological research into economic science, especially concerning human judgment and decision making under uncertainty.”Vernon L. Smith“For having established laboratory experiments as a tool in empirical economic analysis, especially in the study of alternative market mechanisms.”2001George A. Akerlof, A. Michael Spence and Joseph E. Stiglitz“For their analyses of markets with asymmetric information.”2000James J. Heckman“For his development of theory and methods For analyzing selective samples.”Daniel L. McFadden“For his development of theory and methods for analyzing discrete choice.”1999Robert A. Mundell“For his analysis of monetary and fiscal policy under different exchange-rate regimes and his analysis of optimum currency areas.”1998Amartya Sen“For his contributions to welfare economics.”1997Robert C. Merton and Myron S. Scholes“For a new method to determine the value of derivatives.”1996James A. Mirrlees and William Vickrey“For their fundamental contributions to the economic theory of incentives under asymmetric information.”1995Robert E. Lucas Jr.“For having developed and applied the hypothesis of rational expectations, and thereby having transformed macroeconomic analysis and deepened our understanding of economic policy.”Advertisement1994John C. Harsanyi, John F. Nash Jr. and Reinhard Selten“For their pioneering analysis of equilibria in the theory of noncooperative games.”1993Robert W. Fogel and Douglass C. North“For having renewed research in economic history by applying economic theory and quantitative methods in order to explain economic and institutional change.”1992Gary S. Becker“For having extended the domain of microeconomic analysis to a wide range of human behavior and interaction, including nonmarket behavior.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.1991Ronald H. Coase“For his discovery and clarification of the significance of transaction costs and property rights for the institutional structure and functioning of the economy.”1990Harry M. Markowitz, Merton H. Miller and William F. Sharpe“For their pioneering work in the theory of financial economics.”1989Trygve Haavelmo“For his clarification of the probability theory foundations of econometrics and his analyses of simultaneous economic structures.”1988Maurice Allais“For his pioneering contributions to the theory of markets and efficient utilization of resources.”1987Robert M. Solow“For his contributions to the theory of economic growth.”1986James M. Buchanan Jr.“For his development of the contractual and constitutional bases for the theory of economic and political decision making.”1985Franco Modigliani“For his pioneering analyses of saving and of financial markets.”1984Richard Stone“For having made fundamental contributions to the development of systems of national accounts and hence greatly improved the basis for empirical economic analysis.”Advertisement1983Gérard Debreu“For having incorporated new analytical methods into economic theory and for his rigorous reformulation of the theory of general equilibrium.”1982George J. Stigler“For his seminal studies of industrial structures, functioning of markets, and causes and effects of public regulation.”1981James Tobin“For his analysis of financial markets and their relations to expenditure decisions, employment, production and prices.”1980Lawrence R. Klein“For the creation of econometric models and the application to the analysis of economic fluctuations and economic policies.”1979Theodore W. Schultz and Sir W. Arthur Lewis“For their pioneering research into economic development research with particular consideration of the problems of developing countries.”1978Herbert A. Simon“For his pioneering research into the decision-making process within economic organizations.”1977Bertil Ohlin and James E. Meade“For their pathbreaking contribution to the theory of international trade and international capital movements.”1976Milton Friedman“For his achievements in the fields of consumption analysis, monetary history and theory, and for his demonstration of the complexity of stabilization policy.”Advertisement1975Leonid V. Kantorovich and Tjalling C. Koopmans“For their contributions to the theory of optimum allocation of resources.”1974Gunnar Myrdal and Friedrich August von Hayek“For their pioneering work in the theory of money and economic fluctuations and for their penetrating analysis of the interdependence of economic, social and institutional phenomena.”1973Wassily Leontief“For the development of the input-output method and for its application to important economic problems.”1972John R. Hicks and Kenneth J. Arrow“For their pioneering contributions to general economic equilibrium theory and welfare theory.”1971Simon Kuznets“For his empirically founded interpretation of economic growth, which has led to new and deepened insight into the economic and social structure and process of development.”1970Paul A. Samuelson“For the scientific work through which he has developed static and dynamic economic theory and actively contributed to raising the level of analysis in economic science.”1969Ragnar Frisch and Jan Tinbergen“For having developed and applied dynamic models for the analysis of economic processes.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.