AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicola ClarkPARIS — Kering, a French luxury and lifestyle conglomerate, said on Tuesday that its net profit fell in 2014, reflecting lackluster demand for accessories and clothing at Gucci, its flagship high-end label, and despite initial signs of a turnaround at Puma, its struggling sportswear brand.Kering, formerly known as PPR, reported an operating profit of 1.66 billion euros, or about $1.9 billion, down 5 percent from €1.75 billion in 2013. Revenue rose 4 percent to €10 billion, bolstered by strong growth at the fashion brands Yves Saint Laurent and Bottega Veneta. Net profit from recurring operations fell 4.4 percent to €1.2 billion.In an effort to halt the slump at Gucci, which accounts for 79 percent of the group’s revenue, Kering late last year announced the departure of its top two executives. Kering hopes the new management, led by Marco Bizzarri as chief executive and the designer Alessandro Michele as creative director, will revive the brand, whose profit slid nearly 7 percent last year to €1 billion, on sales that were nearly flat, at €3.5 billion.Revenue at Gucci has stalled in recent years as luxury consumers, particularly in China, have turned away from the brand’s signature logo-emblazoned handbags toward subtler fashion statements.Leather goods make up about two-thirds of Gucci’s sales. The brand has recently responded to customers’ logo fatigue by increasing more discreet branding among its products. Items without logos now represent more than 60 percent of its goods.While operating profit across all of Kering’s luxury brands fell 1 percent, a number of its smaller labels experienced strong growth. Sales at Yves Saint Laurent jumped 27 percent last year compared with a year earlier, while profit rose 37 percent to €105 million. Earnings at Bottega Veneta, known for its woven-leather handbags, climbed 8 percent to €357 million, on sales of €1.1 billion.Over the past two years, Kering, which is based in Paris, has sought to transform itself into a so-called pure apparel and accessories group. In 2013, Kering changed its name from PPR — an abbreviation of Pinault-Printemps-Redoute — as it sought to focus its business around two core brands: Gucci, in luxury goods; and the German sportswear brand Puma. PPR acquired a 27 percent stake in Puma in 2007 and now owns 86 percent of the company.Revenue at Kering’s lifestyle and sportswear brands rose 3.5 percent in 2014 from a year earlier, to €3.2 billion, representing about a third of group sales.Under the leadership of its new chief executive, Bjorn Gulden, Puma has restructured its global retail network, narrowed its product range and sought to inject new buzz into the brand, which remains a distant third behind its rivals Nike and Adidas.But those efforts have been slow to bear fruit. While Puma’s sales rose 3.5 percent last year, to €3 billion, that growth was outpaced by the group’s smaller sportswear brands, including Volcom and Electric. Puma’s operating profit fell 33 percent to €128 million, reflecting turnaround and marketing costs.Speaking with reporters in Paris, François-Henri Pinault, Kering’s chairman and chief executive, dismissed recent speculation that the group was considering disposing of Puma to streamline its global portfolio of more than 20 brands.“Puma is a brand with phenomenal potential,” Mr. Pinault said. Citing fast-rising sales of athletic shoes and clothing in emerging markets like Asia and Africa, he said, “we are convinced that, structurally, this is a growth market.”That said, he confirmed that the group was taking a closer look at some of its smaller, underperforming fashion brands, including Sergio Rossi, an Italian shoe label that the group acquired in 1999. Mr. Pinault said Kering was considering “all strategic options” for Sergio Rossi, including a possible sale, but declined to provide further details.Last month, Kering appointed Giovanni Giunchedi, a former director of sustainability at Bottega Veneta, to lead Sergio Rossi. He replaced Christophe Mélard, who stepped down as the brand’s chief executive in September.In a bid to revive Puma’s image, Kering in December named the American pop music star Rihanna as creative director and “global ambassador” for its women’s wear collections. The move is a departure for the brand, which has traditionally focused on its sports heritage and opted for more conventional sponsorship deals, including with the German tennis star Boris Becker and the Olympic champion sprinter Usain Bolt of Jamaica.Last year, Puma replaced Nike as the uniform sponsor for Arsenal, the English Premier League soccer team.Advertisement