By DAVID JOLLYFEB. 17, 2015
PARIS — The European car market maintained its modest upward momentum in the first month of the year, industry data showed on Tuesday, with sales gaining for a 17th straight month. But the market is still far below where it was before the 2008 global financial crisis.Registrations of new passenger cars in the European Union, a proxy for sales, rose 6.7 percent in January from a year earlier, the European Automobile Manufacturers’ Association reported from Brussels. That brought the monthly sales figure to 999,157 units.Sales have been slowly fighting their way back for nearly a year and a half. But analysts do not expect the market to return to the levels reached before the financial crisis until at least the end of this decade. The European market has been hurt by high unemployment and economic stagnation, and younger people do not seem to have the same interest in owning a car as their parents’ generation.Sales bottomed out in the summer of 2013, but more than six years after the financial crisis, the market has not regained its 2007 peak of nearly 16 million new passenger vehicles. Last year, the market expanded by 5.7 percent, sending sales of new passenger cars to about 12.6 million vehicles; that was the first annual expansion since before the crisis.AdvertisementThe rising tide did not help all of Europe. Sales of Volkswagen Group, the biggest European automaker, rose 6.8 percent in January from a year earlier, while sales of Renault, the French company that ranks No. 3 in Europe, rose 10 percent. But PSA Peugeot Citroën, the second-largest European carmaker, fell 1.4 percent.AdvertisementFiat Chrysler’s sales rose 7.1 percent, including a 183 percent gain in sales of Jeep models, albeit from a low base.Ford Motor sales gained 5.1 percent, while sales at the Opel Group of General Motors fell 2.8 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BMW posted an 8.6 percent rise in sales. Daimler, its rival and the maker of Mercedes-Benz cars, had a 15 percent gain.For many of the companies, manufacturer incentives, which erode profit margins, and government rebate programs in some countries helped lift sales, adding to demand from car owners seeking to trade in older models.Carlos Ghosn, who fills the top roles at Renault and Nissan Motor and serves as president of the automakers’ association, said this month that while the steady comeback was welcome, “our optimism about this early sign of recovery must be tempered with caution, given the economic uncertainties still facing many countries.”The automakers’ association expects the market to grow again this year, but with the pace slowing to about 2 percent over the 2014 level, bringing sales close to three million units.Spain, which has a government-backed trade-in program, was by far the strongest European Union market, with sales rising nearly 28 percent in January from a year earlier. The British, French and Italian markets were also strong, and sales rose 2.6 percent in Germany, the bloc’s largest economy.A version of this article appears in print on February 18, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Car Sales in Europe Up 6.7% in January.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.