AdvertisementSupported byBy David Jolly and Neil GoughPARIS — European stocks fell early Tuesday, then recovered by midday despite weakness in Athens, as investors reacted to news that Greece and its European creditors appeared to have reached a fresh stalemate over whether to continue with a bailout that expires at the end of the month.The blue-chip Euro Stoxx 50 index fell 0.1 percent in afternoon trading, while shares in Athens dropped 2.1 percent. Stocks were flat at the opening bell in New York.The euro was 0.5 percent stronger at $1.1414.Eurozone officials issued an ultimatum to Greece on Monday, asking it to agree by Friday to continue with its existing 240 billion euro, or $273 billion, bailout program — a demand that was immediately rejected by Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras and Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis. Mr. Tsipras rose to power last month on a pledge to fight the austerity measures that Greece’s creditors had imposed on the country.The tone of the negotiations has grown increasingly tough, and Greece needs to reach a deal quickly if it is to unlock the €7 billion in funds it needs to meet its financial obligations.“We will not seek an extension to the memorandum, even with a gun to our head,” a Greek government spokesman, Gavriil Sakellaridis, said Tuesday morning on Greek television.“The pressure, the anxiety about what is going to happen exists on the other side, too,” he said. “We are sure of this.” He added that Greece would continue negotiations to find a solution.A failure to reach an agreement could lead to a default and to the country’s exit from the eurozone, an outcome that would have uncertain, but potentially dire, consequences for the currency union.Nevertheless, most investors seem to be betting that a compromise will eventually be reached.“Europe wants Greece to stay and is ready to be flexible,” Holger Schmieding, chief economist at Berenberg Bank in London, wrote in a research note. “We continue to expect Europe to offer face-saving compromises. But in return, the Greek government has to play by the rules. It has to realize that it cannot make the Greek economy less competitive through large-scale reform reversals and expect other European countries, some of them poorer than Greece itself, to fund such follies.”Still, Mr. Schmieding said he had estimated the odds of a Greek exit from the eurozone at about 35 percent before the standoff on Monday, and that the risk of that happening “has not receded, to put it mildly.”Stocks in Asia were little changed, with the benchmark Nikkei 225 index in Tokyo slipping 0.1 percent from a Monday close that was the highest level in more than seven years. Australia’s main share index fell 0.5 percent, while the Hang Seng Index fell 0.2 percent in Hong Kong.The uncertain situation in Europe recently pushed up Greek government debt yields, which move in the opposite direction of prices, in a reflection of falling market confidence. On Tuesday, Greek 10-year bonds were trading to yield 9.84 percent, up from their closing level of 9.31 percent on Monday.David Jolly reported from Paris, and Neil Gough from Hong Kong. Niki Kitsantonis contributed reporting from Athens.Advertisement