BRITAIN TO EXAMINE COMPETITION IN BANKING  |  The Financial Conduct Authority of Britain said on Thursday that it planned to review whether competition was working properly in the corporate and investment banking sectors, DealBook’s Chad Bray reports. The regulator conducted a similar review of so-called wholesale securities and investment markets last year, and plans to consider looking at the asset management sector this year.The examination of competition in the wholesale financial markets found that limited clarity on the price and quality of services could make it difficult for clients to determine whether they were getting value for their money, and that cross-selling of services could make it difficult for new entrants or smaller firms to challenge existing players. The authority released a summary of its findings this month.The regulator said it intended to seek information for the banking study from inside the industry, trade groups and clients. The feedback received by the agency so far includes concerns about transparency, conflicts of interest and the impact of bundling services on competition, particularly on the ability of new firms to enter the market, the regulator said.GREECE REQUESTS BAILOUT EXTENSION  |  Greece formally submitted its request for a six-month extension to its eurozone loan agreement on Thursday as it seeks to secure a new financing deal before its bailout program expires in a little more than a week, Reuters writes. Under its current bailout program, the country has received 240 billion euros, or about $274 billion, in exchange for pursuing various economic overhauls. Greece is proposing that the terms be different from its current bailout obligations, the official said.Jeroen Dijsselbloem, president of the group of finance ministers from euro area countries, confirmed that the request had been received. Senior eurozone officials are expected to hold a teleconference on Thursday to discuss the Greek request. If they are satisfied, then Eurogroup finance ministers will hold a conference call on Friday to conclude an agreement, eurozone sources said.The Greek situation continued to agitate investors on Thursday, with markets in Europe falling back from seven-year highs before rebounding on hopes of a Greek deal. Stocks in Asia closed mostly higher on Thursday, with Japan’s Nikkei 225 index ending the day up 0.36 percent and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index up 0.19 percent.SPOTLIGHT ON SECRETIVE BANKING FAMILY  |  Two recent deals ‒ for a London office tower known as the Gherkin and for Chiquita Brands International, the banana producer ‒ have drawn unusual attention to the Safra Group, the investment arm of a financial family that strives for secrecy, David Gelles and Dan Horch report in DealBook. In addition to the family’s vast and growing real estate holdings, its fortune is bolstered by a network of international banks, including Safra National Bank of New York. In total, the family and its banks have more than $200 billion under management, and stockholder equity of more than $15 billion.“With the latest deals, the Gherkin became the face of a Safra real estate portfolio, which includes over 100 properties around the globe, including the 660 Madison Avenue office complex in Midtown Manhattan, and several prime locations in SoHo in Lower Manhattan,” Mr. Gelles and Mr. Horch write. “In Chiquita, the Safra Group saw the opportunity to diversify its revenues with a similarly long-term, and public, bet.” By joining with the Cutrale Group, owned by a Brazilian family, Safra was able to branch out without taking on too much risk.Despite the family’s prominence, Joseph Safra ‒ who runs the Safra Group and is the last surviving son of the patriarch who built the family’s initial fortune ‒ and his relatives “are resolutely private,” Mr. Gelles and Mr. Horch write. “He does not appear in gossip columns and his name has not been associated with politicians or celebrities. In contrast to Brazil’s casual customs, he always wears a suit. Observant of his Sephardic Jewish roots, he keeps a strict kosher diet.” No member of the Safra family or its companies would comment for this article, following a longstanding policy of not speaking to the news media or making public appearances, they add.ON THE AGENDA  |  Weekly jobless claims are out at 8:30 a.m. The index of leading indicators is released at 10 a.m. The European Central Bank publishes an account of the proceedings of its Governing Council, which sets monetary policy.UBER EXPANDS FINANCING ROUND  |  Facing overwhelming demand from institutional investors, the popular ride-sharing start-up Uber has expanded its Series E round of venture financing by $1 billion, bringing the total capacity for the round to $2.8 billion, Mike Isaac writes in DealBook. The move, outlined in documents filed on Wednesday with the Delaware secretary of state and confirmed by Uber, occurred just weeks after the company closed a $1.2 billion round of financing. At the time, Uber said it had left capacity for about $600 million in additional strategic investments.“The appetite for a piece of Uber has proved to be greater than the company had imagined,” Mr. Isaac writes. The $600 million was quickly oversubscribed, and Uber decided to raise the amount. Baidu, the Chinese Internet giant, accounts for part of the additional investment beyond the $1.2 billion round. The most recent expansion is on top of some $4 billion Uber raised, including a recent $1.6 billion round of convertible debt financing from the clients of the private wealth arm of Goldman Sachs, the investment bank previously confirmed. Uber’s $40 billion valuation remains unchanged since the company announced the first part of the round in December.  |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mailRexam Board to Recommend Investors Accept Ball Takeover Offer  |  The deal would combine two of the world’s largest makers of drink cans in a merger expected to result in $300 million in annual cost savings by 2018.
DealBook »Samsung Buys LoopPay, a Competitor to Apple’s Mobile Wallet  |  Samsung announced on Wednesday that it had acquired LoopPay, a mobile payments company, just months after the release of Apple Pay, Apple’s mobile payments product, the Bits blog writes.
 NEW YORK TIMES BITS Actavis Changing Name to Allergan  |  The pharmaceutical company Actavis said on Wednesday that it planned to change its name to Allergan, the moniker of the Botox maker it has agreed to acquire, The Wall Street Journal writes.
 WALL STREET JOURNAL Germany’s Mahle to Buy Delphi’s Thermal Unit for $727 Million  |  The auto-component maker Mahle of Germany has agreed to buy Delphi Automotive’s thermal business for about $727 million in cash to expand its technology offerings for combustion engines, electric cars and fuel-cell vehicles, Bloomberg Business writes.
 BLOOMBERG BUSINESS Japan Post Paying a Rich Price to Show Global Expansion  |  But the acquisition of Toll Holdings will help spruce up Japan Post’s upcoming initial public offering ‒ and fuel further deal-making, Peter Thal Larsen of Reuters Breakingviews writes.
Reuters Breakingviews »Priceline Said to Plan Rocketmiles Acquisition  |  The Priceline Group is said to be planning to buy the hotel-booking start-up Rocketmiles for about $20 million through its venture unit, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.
 WALL STREET JOURNAL U.S. Said to Shift Focus in Inquiry on Morgan Stanley Breach  |  Federal authorities are said to be investigating whether a hacker is behind the online publication of Morgan Stanley ’s client data ‒ and not the financial adviser who was fired in connection with the breach, The Wall Street Journal writes, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.
 WALL STREET JOURNAL A Boom in Private Equity’s Secondary Market  |  Secondary sales of stakes in private equity, venture capital and real estate funds totaled $47 billion in 2014, roughly 80 percent more than in 2013, research by the investment bank Evercore found.
DealBook »Kenan Advantage Group Said to Explore Sale  |  Centerbridge Partners and the private equity arm of Goldman Sachs, which own a controlling stake in the Kenan Advantage Group, are said to be considering a sale or initial public offering of the trucking and logistics company, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.
 WALL STREET JOURNAL Loeb Pins Hopes for Fanuc Change on Abenomics  |  Daniel S. Loeb, who recently revealed that his hedge fund, Third Point, had taken a stake in Fanuc of Japan, the world’s biggest robotics company, is resting his hopes that Fanuc will change on Abenomics, The Financial Times reports.
 FINANCIAL TIMES A Call for Law Firms to Go Public  |  In a law review article, a founder of a major litigation finance company says law firms should abandon the partnership structure.
DealBook »High-Speed Trading Firm Virtu Said to Revive I.P.O. Plans  |  Virtu Financial, a high-frequency trading firm, is said to be revisiting plans for an initial public offering and is expected to file a revised I.P.O. prospectus with the Securities and Exchange Commission with days, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter.
 WALL STREET JOURNAL Pinterest Said to Seek $11 Billion Valuation  |  The image bookmarking site Pinterest is said to be in talks to raise $500 million in a round of financing that is expected to value the company at roughly $11 billion, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the situation.
 WALL STREET JOURNAL U.S. Announces Third Bitcoin Auction  |  The U.S. Marshals Service will auction another 50,000 Bitcoins seized in connection with the online marketplace Silk Road.
DealBook »Vice Media Chief Said to Pay $300,000 for Dinner for 30  |  Shane Smith is said to have bought the meal during the International CES trade show in Las Vegas.
DealBook »Fed Appears to Hesitate on Raising Interest Rate  |  Some officials were concerned that raising rates prematurely might threaten the apparent economic recovery, The New York Times reports.
 NEW YORK TIMES Women and Minorities Make Slight Gains at Law Firms  |  The percentage of associates at law firms who are women rose to just less than 45 percent in 2014, according to the National Association for Law Placement, while the percentage who are minorities climbed to 21.6 percent.
DealBook »Europe Proposes a Capital Markets Union  |  The move toward embracing deeper capital markets shows a sentiment in financial circles that regulators and policy makers should shift their focus to encouraging market growth, The New York Times reports.
 NEW YORK TIMES 8 Tax Loopholes the Obama Administration Could Close  |  The Treasury Department has the legal authority to close some tax loopholes that Congress did not intend, Victor Fleischer writes in the Standard Deduction column.
Standard Deduction »Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon. 