By RAVI SOMAIYAFEB. 18, 2015
Andrew Serwer, the longtime editor of Fortune magazine, will join Yahoo Finance as editor in chief, the company said Wednesday.Mr. Serwer, a 29-year employee of Fortune’s parent company, Time Inc., will start immediately, Kathy Savitt, head of media at Yahoo, said in a statement.Mr. Serwer said he planned to bring in “distinguished reporters and journalists to break news and do groundbreaking and award-winning stories both in text and video and on mobile.” He said the expansion would include live events. Ms. Savitt said that Yahoo also planned to increase its “commitment and focus on Yahoo Finance video programming.”Yahoo, in the midst of an effort to build out its editorial offerings under its relatively new chief executive, Marissa Mayer, has made a series of prominent hires in recent years. While the company still attracts a large audience for its websites, its advertising revenue has faced stiff headwinds. Ms. Mayer would like to halt that decline in part by turning the company into a media empire, with digital magazines on topics like food, technology, movies and travel.AdvertisementKatie Couric, a network news star, joined Yahoo last year as global news anchor, after working at ABC. Her ABC colleague Bianna Golodryga made the same leap shortly afterward. The investigative journalist Michael Isikoff also joined last year to help expand an investigations unit. David Pogue, technology columnist for The New York Times, joined Yahoo in 2013, as did Matt Bai, the chief political correspondent for The New York Times Magazine.Mr. Serwer left Fortune last year, after eight years as its editor, and was succeeded by Alan Murray, a former deputy managing editor at The Wall Street Journal.AdvertisementHe was one of a number of senior journalists, including Martha Nelson, the editor in chief of Time Inc. magazines, and Larry Hackett, the editor of People magazine, who left Time Inc. around the time it was spun off from the Time Warner media conglomerate as its own company last year. It departed with $1.3 billion in debt, including $600 million toward a one-time cash dividend to Time Warner shareholders.A version of this article appears in print on February 19, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Fortune Editor Joins Yahoo Finance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.