AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackAt a time of rising concern over the cost of medicine, a government-funded study has found that three drugs, ranging in price from $50 to $1,950 a dose, are equally effective in treating many cases of a common form of vision loss caused by diabetes.But the most expensive drug — Eylea, sold by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals — was more effective for patients who had poorer vision before starting treatment.“The results certainly seem to suggest here that if you have 20/50 vision or worse, you would certainly consider Eylea as the preferred drug,” said Dr. John A. Wells, a retina specialist in West Columbia, S.C., who was the chairman of the study, which was published online Wednesday by the New England Journal of Medicine.The other two drugs — Lucentis, which costs $1,200 a dose, and the $50-a-dose Avastin — are both made by Genentech. The study tested the drugs as treatments for diabetic macular edema, which affects about 750,000 Americans. That and other visual complications from diabetes are the leading cause of blindness in working-age people.The disease is characterized by a welling of the macula, the part of the eye responsible for sharp, straight-ahead vision, caused by fluid leaking from capillaries in the retina. The three drugs act in a similar manner to dry the leakage and are injected into the eye as frequently as once every four weeks. While Lucentis and Eylea are approved to treat macular edema, Avastin is a cancer drug used off label in tiny amounts to treat eye disease, which is why it costs so little.The study was sponsored by the National Eye Institute, part of the National Institutes of Health. Several years ago, before Eylea reached the market, the institute sponsored a similar study comparing Lucentis and Avastin as a treatment for a different eye disease that also involves leaky blood vessels, the wet form of age-related macular degeneration.That study showed that the two drugs were roughly equivalent, helping legitimize the off-label use of Avastin, which saves Medicare at least $1 billion a year. For macular degeneration, the dose of Lucentis is higher than for diabetic macular edema, costing about $2,000 per injection.But there might not be as much savings from this new study, which involved 660 adults. After one year, those randomly chosen to be treated with Eylea had an average improvement of 13.3 letters on an eye chart, compared with 11.2 for Lucentis and 9.7 for Avastin.For about half the patients, those with vision of 20/40 or better at the start of the study, all the drugs provided an average gain in vision of about 8 letters. But for the other half, with 20/50 or worse eyesight to start, the average improvement was 18.9 letters for Eylea compared with 14.2 for Lucentis and 11.8 for Avastin.Among these patients with worse vision, 67 percent in the Eylea group had an improvement of at least 15 letters, or three lines on an eye chart, a level experts say is clearly meaningful. Only 50 percent of those treated with Lucentis and 41 percent treated with Avastin gained that much vision.The study did find that patients getting Eylea needed slightly fewer injections and less of a backup treatment using lasers. That could help offset the higher cost per dose of Eylea.The authors said there were no significant differences in the safety of the three drugs. They said that a finding that suggested Lucentis might cause more cardiovascular problems “may be due to chance.”In a commentary also published in the journal, Dr. Daniel F. Martin of the Cleveland Clinic and Maureen G. Maguire of the University of Pennsylvania said that in everyday practice, three-quarters of patients start out with vision of 20/40 or better and should be treated with Avastin.“Because there were no significant differences in safety or efficacy” for those patients, “cost becomes a major consideration in choosing therapy,” they wrote. They said that for those with 20/50 eyesight or worse, Eylea should be the first option, followed by Avastin.Dr. Frederick L. Ferris III, clinical director of the National Eye Institute and a study co-author, said the paper showed that all the drugs were effective but the results would “help guide medical care in an evidence-based way.”Genentech, a unit of Roche, said that this was only one study and that the results “for the small group of worst-seeing patients” needed further evaluation.On Wall Street the share price of Regeneron — which announced in October that Eylea had proved superior, though it did not provide much of the data — rose 0.4 percent, to $405.80.Despite the competition from the cheaper Avastin, both Lucentis and Eylea had sales exceeding $1.7 billion in the United States in 2014. Eylea is also known as aflibercept, Lucentis as ranibizumab and Avastin as bevacizumab. Advertisement