AdvertisementSupported byBy Niki Kitsantonis and James KanterATHENS — Greek officials are planning to submit a proposal to eurozone finance ministers for breaking the impasse in debt negotiations between the new government in Athens and Greece’s European creditors.Athens on Thursday will propose an extension of several months to the current bailout program, a government spokesman, Gavriil Sakellaridis, said on Wednesday. He declined to discuss specifics, including the length of the extension being sought, citing the delicacy of the negotiations.But in email comments sent to reporters, the government indicated that Greece would seek a four-month extension of the current program, under which the country has received 240 billion euros, or $272 billion, in exchange for pursuing various economic overhauls.Perhaps crucially, Mr. Sakellaridis said the proposal to extend the bailout program would not include a commitment to continue honoring the terms of the memorandum underlying the loan program, which a former Greek government signed as part of the bailout in 2012. Many Greeks see the memorandum as a contract binding the country to the austerity conditions they blame for undermining the economy and raising unemployment to its current level of 25 percent.If European officials interpret Greece’s new proposal as seeking additional funds without agreeing to continue making economic changes, it might go no further than previous compromise efforts in the last two weeks.An additional loan disbursement of €7.2 billion, or about $8.2 billion, hangs in the balance — money the Greek government needs to meet debt obligations. Without an extension, the program will expire at the end of the month.The email sent to reporters on Wednesday said Greece would adhere to “the terms of its loan agreement to all our creditors.” The only condition from the Greek side would be that “we should not be asked to impose measures that are recessionary,” like cuts to pensions or increases in sales taxes.Until a formal proposal is submitted, and the wording examined, it is hard to predict whether it will prove satisfactory to the group of eurozone finance ministers, called the Eurogroup, that on Monday gave Greece until Friday to reach an agreement.Chief among those ministers is Wolfgang Schäuble of Germany, which is the eurozone’s richest member.In a news briefing in Berlin on Wednesday, Martin Jäger, a spokesman for Mr. Schäuble, gave no indication that Germany had shifted from its position that Greece must not renege on the terms of its bailout program.While Germany may be as intent as any other eurozone country to come to terms with Greece, officials know that any agreement must be one they can sell to the German Parliament, where many lawmakers are reluctant to give more taxpayer money to Athens.In a Brussels news briefing on Wednesday, Valdis Dombrovskis, who helps oversee eurozone affairs for the European Commission, declined to speculate on how a new proposal from Athens might be received.“We first really need to see on paper what exactly the Greek government is requesting,” said Mr. Dombrovskis, a vice president at the European Commission. The commission is the European Union’s administrative branch and helps monitor whether Greece is living up to its bailout conditions.“The approach in the Eurogroup was very clear, that the most realistic way forward is extension of the current program,” Mr. Dombrovskis added.On Wednesday, the United States Treasury Secretary, Jacob J. Lew, in a phone conversation with the Greek finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, urged Greece to reach a deal with its international creditors, Reuters reported.Speaking outside the Greek Parliament Wednesday evening, Mr. Varoufakis voiced optimism about the new debt proposal, which he said would be “written in such a way so as to satisfy both the Greek side and the president of the Eurogroup.” He predicted it would be approved by Friday.On Wednesday night Parliament elected Prokopis Pavlopoulos, a former interior minister, as the country’s new president, a ceremonial but symbolic post.A moderate conservative, Mr. Pavlopoulos has expressed skepticism about austerity in Greece over the years. His political career has not lacked controversy. Hiring in the public sector increased sharply during his term as interior minister between 2004 and 2009, when Greece’s debt soared.Mr. Pavlopoulos was also widely condemned for failing to curb two weeks of rioting that broke out in December 2008 after the shooting of a teenager by a policeman, although some in leftist circles credited his lack of intervention with averting a backlash by the police.Niki Kitsantonis reported from Athens and James Kanter from Brussels. Alison Smale contributed reporting from Berlin.Advertisement