By MICHAEL CIEPLYFEB. 18, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  At the Academy Awards on Sunday, Fox Searchlight Pictures will have two films in the running for top honors: Alejandro G. Iñárritu’s “Birdman” and Wes Anderson’s “The Grand Budapest Hotel.”It might have been three.The producers of Richard Linklater’s “Boyhood,” also a nominee for best picture, once hoped to land that movie with an awards-savvy distributor. And they figured Fox Searchlight, the small-films unit of 21st Century Fox, was the best option, according to people briefed on the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of confidentiality strictures.At least twice, “Boyhood” was offered to Fox Searchlight. But the much-lauded coming-of-age drama was turned down, leaving IFC Films, which has had far fewer Oscar contenders, to distribute it.You can’t win them all, but Fox Searchlight has been winning more than its share of late.With just 70 employees and a release schedule that already included “Wild,” for which Reese Witherspoon and Laura Dern are Oscar nominees, the studio would have been hard-pressed to add another contender in a year in which it secured 20 nominations, more than any competitor.AdvertisementEvery year in the last five, Fox Searchlight has had one or more best picture nominees, including last year’s winner, “12 Years a Slave.” It is a feat matched only by Warner Bros., which is much larger, and the Weinstein Company, which is overseen by the awards master Harvey Weinstein. But even with their built-in advantages, those studios each had only six nominated pictures in the last five years, while Fox Searchlight had eight.AdvertisementMore impressive, the Fox unit’s consistency on Oscar night has often been matched by the type of box-office success that does not always go hand-in-hand with awards.Three times in 10 years — with “Black Swan,” “Juno” and “Slumdog Millionaire” — Fox Searchlight has pushed best picture candidates past $100 million in domestic ticket sales, marking them as genuine blockbusters on the art film circuit.While superheroes and animated fantasy drive the global marketplace, Hollywood’s boutique operations still move the culture with films about race, redemption and the endless complexity of human psychology. Among those smaller studios, Fox Searchlight has made an especially strong mark.For five years running, it has edged Sony Pictures Classics, which had 18 Oscar nominations this year, including a best picture nod for “Whiplash,” and it has been beaten only once in that period by Focus Features, a Universal unit that this year has “The Theory of Everything” in contention.The Weinstein Company typically releases about twice as many pictures, including pop hits like “Paddington” from its Dimension unit, and has drawn a larger market share.“They understand the marketplace perfectly,” said Scott Rudin, a producer of “The Grand Budapest Hotel,” of Fox Searchlight.“They also have enough irony about the process emotionally not to make the competition a misery from start to finish,” Mr. Rudin added, describing Fox executives in an email last week: “They work incredibly hard to win, but they know it’s an awards campaign and not a hostage rescue in Iran.”AdvertisementThough 21st Century Fox does not separately report revenue and profit numbers for Fox Searchlight, the small-films unit had about $150 million in domestic box-office revenue in 2014 and is said by people briefed on its books to be generally profitable, though performance swings considerably with each year’s slate.Nancy Utley and Stephen Gilula, who have been co-presidents of Fox Searchlight, declined last week to discuss their films or awards operation. They are constrained, in part, by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, whose campaign-season rules make it virtually impossible to speak about a matter like having passed on “Boyhood” without the risk of penalties.“Every year we sweat bullets as we try to tailor our process to each film’s strengths and that year’s unique film landscape,” Michelle Hooper, an executive vice president who oversees marketing and publicity, said of the Fox Searchlight approach. She declined to comment further.A representative of IFC similarly declined to comment.But this year, unusually close competition among films that have split pre-Oscar honors — most prominently, “Birdman” and “Boyhood” — has brought Hollywood table talk about subtle maneuvers and well-managed serendipity that have made Fox Searchlight the company to beat.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some of the tighter maneuvers have surrounded “Birdman,” whose full title is “Birdman or the Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance.” An insider’s film, it is about a Hollywood actor seeking salvation on the New York stage, seemingly shot in one take, with a drum-heavy score. In August, Fox Searchlight executives were still debating whether it was too esoteric to become a candidate for best picture.Ms. Utley, who came up through marketing, thought it had Oscar potential. But Mr. Gilula, with a background in distribution, was not sure, according to people briefed on the discussions. Their preferred debut had been an opening night premiere at the New York Film Festival, where a Manhattan audience might embrace the film’s theater-world setting.That spot went to “Gone Girl,” from 20th Century Fox, however. So Fox Searchlight accepted a less attractive closing night slot, but first showed “Birdman” on the Aug. 27 opening night of the Venice Film Festival. There, it won the first of a string of awards that have set it up as a leading contender for top Oscar honors.Trickier was “The Grand Budapest Hotel.” The studio introduced it at the Berlin Film Festival in early February, too late for the 2014 Oscars, and set its commercial release soon afterward. That was in keeping with Mr. Gilula’s insistence that a film, once teased before critics, should soon meet the public.“You can’t give a surprise party twice,” an associate recalls him saying of that stance.When the awards season arrived in September, “The Grand Budapest Hotel” was gone from theaters. But Oscar voters, many catching the film on DVD or online, brought it back with nine nominations, including best picture and best director.AdvertisementBy contrast, Jean-Marc Vallée’s “Wild” has been a mild disappointment. Once seen as a best picture nominee, as was Mr. Vallée’s “Dallas Buyers Club,” from Focus, last year, it received only those two acting nominations, and has taken in just $35 million at the domestic box office since its commercial release in more than 1,000 theaters in December.“Wild” first screened at the Telluride Film Festival in late August, and was caught between Mr. Gilula’s preference for rapid commercial follow-up and wariness of the fall logjam, as dozens of awards-hungry films hit theaters.But, as of last week, it was still selling tickets in almost 300 theaters and has far outpaced, say, “Whiplash,” which has taken in only about $9.6 million since its release in October.While squeezing dollars out of “Wild,” Mr. Gilula, Ms. Utley and their cohort were preoccupied last month with the Sundance Film Festival. There, they bought the rights to “Me and Earl and the Dying Girl,” a teenage dramedy.(Fox Searchlight buys roughly half its annual output of seven to 10 films, and makes the rest. In doing both, it coordinates global distribution with the parent studio, support that is lacking at the smaller independents like IFC, Magnolia Pictures and A24.)“Me and Earl” could be a crowd pleaser, like “The Fault in Our Stars,” a similarly themed hit from 20th Century Fox last year. Or it might have Oscar potential, as did Fox Searchlight’s “Juno” and “Little Miss Sunshine” — rare comedies to make the list of nominees for best picture.But that is a problem for the next awards season, when Mr. Gilula and Ms. Utley will presumably honor what associates say is their often-repeated maxim about prize contenders: “They reveal themselves.”A picture caption on Thursday with an article about Fox Searchlight Pictures’ success in the annual Oscars competition misidentified, using information from Fox Searchlight, one of the people shown from the cast of “The Grand Budapest Hotel.” The actor on the left is Larry Pine, not Tom Wilkinson.A version of this article appears in print on February 19, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Fox Searchlight Outshines Rivals in Oscar Hunt.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.