AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsRichard Meryman, a former Life magazine writer and editor who conducted the last interview with Marilyn Monroe, wrote an intimate portrait of the reclusive artist Andrew Wyeth, collaborated with Joan Rivers on a memoir about her quest for stardom and recounted a wrenching emotional journey after his first wife became fatally ill, died on Feb. 5 in Manhattan. He was 88.The cause was pneumonia, his wife, Elizabeth, said.Mr. Meryman credited an adventure story he shared at his first job interview with Life as the reason he was hired as a novice writer in 1949. He had just returned from a cross-country trip with two college friends — one was Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the future senator — that began in a 1935 Packard hearse. Thwarted by a broken axle, fired on the first day of a backbreaking job at the Hungry Horse Dam in Montana, and broke, they never made it to their destination, Alaska. Instead they hopped freight trains back home. He went on to become the magazine’s first human affairs editor, writing profiles of extraordinary people in everyday life, including a struggling family on Chicago’s South Side and a single mother giving up her baby for adoption. Though the magazine’s original emphasis was on photojournalism, Mr. Meryman armed himself with a tape recorder. He interviewed, among others, Ingmar Bergman, Charlie Chaplin, Marilyn Horne, Paul McCartney, Laurence Olivier and Elizabeth Taylor. His interview with Monroe appeared in Life on Aug. 3, 1962, two days before she died at 36. The tapes he recorded of their eight-hour conversation at her home in Brentwood, Calif., became the basis of a 1992 HBO program titled “Marilyn: The Last Interview.” “I hope you got something here, but please don’t make me look like a joke!” Monroe pleaded, even though she had demanded to see the questions in advance and to have veto power over the edited version. She “looked great, but was clearly troubled,” Mr. Meryman recalled, saying he detected no hint of impending suicide, which was the official cause of her death. Richard Sumner Meryman Jr. was born in Washington, where his father was a landscape painter and portraitist and director of the Corcoran Gallery’s art school. His mother, the former Dorothea Bates, taught kindergarten.After the family moved to New Hampshire, Mr. Meryman graduated from Phillips Academy and Williams College and did graduate work at Harvard. He was an all-American lacrosse player and served as a Navy ensign during World War II. His first wife, Hope Brooks, an artist and illustrator whom he married in 1953, died in 1975. In 1980 he married Elizabeth Burns, an art consultant. She survives him, as do two daughters from his first marriage, Meredith Landis and Helena Meryman; two stepsons, Ned and Christopher Burns; and six grandchildren. Mr. Meryman worked for Life until it ceased publication as a weekly in 1972, then focused on books. He worked on the biography “Andrew Wyeth: A Secret Life” for more than three decades before it was published in 1996. He first interviewed the Wyeths in 1964, and his family and theirs were shortly united by tragedy. On a visit to the Wyeth home with their newborn daughter, the Merymans laid the baby to sleep in the living room and she choked to death. “Mr. Meryman’s story of the life, nurture and care of an artist and of an eccentric, individualistic American family is a fascinating, informal historical document,” Barbara MacAdam, a senior editor of ARTnews, wrote in The New York Times. In 1986, he responded to what he called a “sneering” review in The Times of “Enter Talking,” his collaboration with Joan Rivers, writing that the memoir described her “search for the stage character who brought her success” and “turned out to be the one that the entertainment establishment still mistakes for the true person and scorns.” Mr. Meryman also wrote biographies of the screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz and Louis Armstrong. Another book,  “Broken Promises, Mended Dreams,” was a fictional account of a middle-class woman’s struggle to overcome alcoholism.In 1973, Mr. Meryman’s first wife, Hope, was admitted to St. Vincent’s Hospital, near the Greenwich Village home they shared with their two young daughters. The diagnosis was malignant melanoma. He chronicled what he called the ritual of illness, death, mourning and survival in “Hope: A Loss Survived,”  published in 1980.“I realized that part of The Ritual is that you have to cry, and you let yourself cry, and you drink your grief to the dregs,” he said. “Because if you don’t experience it, then you’ll carry it in you, always.”Advertisement