By ANDREW POLLACKFEB. 19, 2015
The genetic testing company 23andMe on Thursday took a step toward being able to offer consumers health-related information again, winning approval from the Food and Drug Administration for a test for mutations that cause a rare disease.The company, a pioneer in offering genetic tests direct to consumers from a sample of spit, stopped doing health-related testing in late 2013 after the F.D.A., in a scathing warning letter, said that such tests required the agency’s approval before they could be marketed. 23andMe had been operating under the principle that consumers had the right to get information from their own DNA.On Thursday, the F.D.A. approved a test from 23andMe that would be administered to prospective parents to see if they carry mutations that could cause a rare disorder called Bloom syndrome in their children.The agency also said that, in general, such so-called carrier tests would no longer need to be approved in advance before being marketed. It also voiced support for allowing consumers in some situations to have direct access to genetic testing, without a doctor being involved.Advertisement“The F.D.A. believes that in many circumstances it is not necessary for consumers to go through a licensed practitioner to have direct access to their personal genetic information,” Alberto Gutierrez, director of the regulator’s office in charge of diagnostic tests, said in a statement.AdvertisementAnne Wojcicki, the chief executive of 23andMe, said the approval was a first step for her company and the government.“It shows the F.D.A. is willing and supportive of crafting the direct-to-consumer path,” she said in an interview. “It’s a very reasonable first step. I would go so far as saying it’s a very generous first step.”She said that she believed it was the first time that the F.D.A. had approved a genetic test to be offered directly to consumers. There are other types of tests, like pregnancy tests, that are sold directly to consumers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Wojcicki declined to say when 23andMe would start offering health information again, but said it would probably be this year. However, it would most likely be limited to a suite of carrier tests.“We want to be back on the market with meaningful information as soon as possible,” she said.The company was most known for giving customers information about their risk of getting various diseases. Executives said those tests would take more time to gain approval. But having achieved approval of one test, they said, the company now better understood what it would need to do to win clearance of other tests.The company, based in Silicon Valley and financially backed by Google, says more than 850,000 people have used its service, which costs $99. After it stopped providing health-related information, it continued to offer ancestry information. It is also offering drug companies and others access to its data for research, signing deals with Pfizer and Genentech.Carrier tests are for diseases — cystic fibrosis being the most well known — in which two copies of an abnormal gene, one from the father and one from the mother, are necessary for someone to be sick. People with one normal copy and one abnormal copy are carriers and generally healthy. But if two carriers mate, their children have a chance of inheriting two abnormal copies and getting the disease.Bloom syndrome is characterized by short stature, skin redness, distinctive facial features and increased susceptibility to cancer. Many people with the rare condition are Ashkenazi Jews.Ms. Wojcicki said she was a carrier for that disease.To gain approval of its Bloom syndrome test, 23andMe conducted two studies demonstrating that it could accurately detect carrier status. It did other studies demonstrating that consumers could follow directions for providing saliva samples and understand the results of the test.A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: F.D.A. Eases Access to DNA Tests of Rare Disorders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.