By ANDREW POLLACKFEB. 19, 2015
The French pharmaceutical giant Sanofi on Thursday named Olivier Brandicourt, a top executive at Bayer, as its new chief executive, replacing Christopher A. Viehbacher, who was fired in October.Mr. Brandicourt, 59, will be faced with restoring growth in Sanofi’s important diabetes franchise, introducing a new insulin product and a powerful cholesterol-lowering drug, and restoring investor confidence that was shaken after the abrupt ouster of Mr. Viehbacher.A physician by training, Mr. Brandicourt has been in the pharmaceutical industry for 28 years, mainly with Warner-Lambert and Pfizer, where he rose to become a senior executive. He was recruited to Bayer only 17 months ago as chief executive of the company’s health care division.“Sanofi undertook a rigorous selection process to identify the right person to lead Sanofi forward at an important time,” Serge Weinberg, the chairman of Sanofi, said in a statement. “Olivier Brandicourt’s strong experience combined with his international profile, deep knowledge of U.S. and emerging health care markets, and his capability to unite teams will provide new dynamism to Sanofi’s strategy of diversification and innovation.”AdvertisementThe likely appointment of Mr. Brandicourt, who will assume his new office on April 2, had been reported by Bloomberg and some French news media outlets.AdvertisementMr. Viehbacher was dismissed last October, a day after he announced in an earnings call that sales of the company’s diabetes drugs, its biggest-selling product category, were not expected to grow this year because of discounting. Its long-acting insulin Lantus accounts for nearly 20 percent of company revenues, far more than any other product.Mr. Weinberg, Sanofi’s chairman, cited what he said was Mr. Viehbacher’s lack of communication with the board of directors. There was also dissatisfaction in the ranks at Sanofi that Mr. Viehbacher, a citizen of Germany and Canada, was moving some of the company’s business out of France, contributing to job losses there. Mr. Viehbacher himself moved to the Boston area, where Sanofi gained a hub after it acquired the biotech company Genzyme.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While Mr. Weinberg, who has been the acting chief executive, said the company was not looking necessarily for a French chief executive, Mr. Brandicourt is French.Timothy Anderson, a pharmaceutical analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Company, wrote in a note to clients Thursday that the appointment was “likely to be viewed as a moderately positive catalyst for Sanofi as it resolves the uncertainty around not having a permanent C.E.O.”However, Mr. Anderson wrote, “Investors will naturally wonder how much power Brandicourt will have given his predecessor’s tussle with the board of directors.”Sanofi is expected to win approval this year for some products that are crucial to its future.One is Toujeo, a successor to Lantus, which is losing patent protection. Another is Praluent, a powerful cholesterol-lowering drug the company is developing with Regeneron Pharmaceuticals.Sanofi is also introducing Afrezza, an inhaled form of insulin it licensed from MannKind. In his time at Pfizer, Mr. Brandicourt had been involved with marketing Exubera, a previous type of inhaled insulin that flopped.Bayer said that Werner Baumann, 52, would take over as chairman of its health care business.Mr. Baumann has been a member of Bayer’s board of management since 2010 and in October was appointed chief strategy and portfolio officer, responsible for corporate development and mergers and acquisitions.A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: After Shake-Up Last Year, Sanofi Names New Chief.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.