By RAVI SOMAIYAFEB. 19, 2015
The New York Times Company announced two new nominees for its board, Dara Khosrowshahi, the chief executive of Expedia, and Rebecca Van Dyck, a Facebook executive, on Thursday.The two will formally stand for election at the annual meeting of stockholders on May 6, the company said.Mr. Khosrowshahi, 45, has been president and chief executive of Expedia since 2005, and was previously president and chief executive of IAC Travel, a division of IAC/InterActiveCorp, the media conglomerate led by Barry Diller.Ms. Van Dyck, also 45, has been the global head of consumer and brand marketing at Facebook since 2012. Before that, she held similar roles at Levi Strauss & Company, and Apple.Advertisement“Rebecca’s extensive knowledge of digital consumer brand marketing and management and Dara’s comprehensive digital and international experience, as well as significant financial expertise, will add more depth and breadth to our outstanding board of directors,” said Arthur Sulzberger Jr., the publisher of The Times and the chairman of The New York Times Company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.David Liddle, a partner at U.S. Venture Partners, a Silicon Valley-based venture capital firm, who has been a board member since 2000, will retire from the board at the same meeting, the company also said Thursday. “We thank David profoundly for his many years of wise counsel, support and service to our board during a transformative period,” Mr. Sulzberger said. “We will miss him.”The remaining board members, the company said, will stand for re-election. Another board member, Thomas Middelhoff, a former chief executive of the media conglomerate Bertelsmann, stepped down last year, and was subsequently sentenced to three years in prison in Germany for embezzlement and tax evasion.AdvertisementThe Times Company has been remaking itself in recent years, as the industry has shifted away from printed publications and into a more unpredictable life on the web. It has shed many of its outside assets to focus on its core brand.A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Times Company Announces Board Nominees With Web Credentials.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.