By JENNY ANDERSONFEB. 19, 2015
LONDON — As the chief executive of Allianz Global Investors, one of Europe’s biggest money managers, Elizabeth Corley is familiar with suspense.And that’s not just for having navigated her company through the nail-biting global financial crisis. She has also written five psychological thrillers about a string of dark kidnappings and murders in West Sussex, England.The sixth novel, however, is currently set aside as she turns her attention to helping the British government fix the huge, sprawling and scandal-plagued fixed-income, currency and commodity markets.“I write whenever time permits, and with the review I am not writing,” she said in an interview in her office in the heart of the City, London’s financial district.AdvertisementThe review she is referring to is the Fair and Effective Markets Review, announced by the chancellor of the Exchequer in June and aimed at assessing potential and existing problems in the wide-ranging wholesale markets — where pension funds, governments and companies do business with banks — and coming up with solutions before any more major scandals hit.AdvertisementIt is the latest in a long line of British government panels aimed at addressing pervasive misconduct in a wide variety of financial markets.Ms. Corley was picked by the chancellor and the governor of the Bank of England to be chairwoman of the industry group that has acted as a sounding board to the review panel and will on Friday contribute recommendations to it.The task, financial executives say, is not small.“This could fundamentally change how some of the largest markets are regulated,” said one senior British executive at a global lender who is finishing his bank’s submission but is not authorized to talk about it. “We are paying very close attention to this.”The review will examine whether the enormous — and traditionally lightly regulated — fixed-income, currency and commodity markets are fair and functioning well for the players and the customers involved. In those areas where they are not, the Bank of England, the British Treasury and the Financial Conduct Authority, which are running the review, will propose changes.A string of scandals in these markets has rocked the financial industry here, leading to management upheaval and billions of dollars in fines at a number of banks.Authorities in Britain, like those in the United States, have been frustrated in trying to root out the problems. Increasingly they are focusing on the grayer area of corporate culture.Huw van Steenis, head of European banks equity research at Morgan Stanley, said the most recent foreign exchange investigation, which showed instances of market rigging and collusion, was the latest event prompting regulators to act.Advertisement“The aftershocks of forex are making everyone look at market structure,” he said, referring to the foreign exchange inquiry.Enter Ms. Corley, a kind of stateswoman of finance with 40 years of experience and the unflappable mien required to get bankers, hedge funds, asset managers, pension funds and corporations from a range of global organization to agree on what is broken, and how to mend it. Individual organizations can also respond to the consultation, but Ms. Corley’s group is meant to coordinate the disparate businesses views.“Everyone recognizes that something went wrong and needs to be fixed,” she said. “The frustration that comes through is that despite huge focus and attention and expenditures and fines and consequent actions by the regulators, there’s still a sense that the fixing hasn’t finished yet and that it’s not reaching down to the grass roots of some organizations.”The review tries to get at why that is. The 69-page document proposing questions for the review asks what is a fair or unfair market, whether current markets are functioning and providing the necessary liquidity to allow the allocation of risk capital, and what penalties should be put in place to act as deterrence against wrongdoing.The questions are divided in two sections with equal weighting: issues with structure and those of conduct.Ms. Corley’s group — which includes senior executives from institutions like Goldman Sachs and Deutsche Bank — will most likely focus on conduct more than structure, and how to set standards. In foreign exchange markets, for example, there are at least a half-dozen different sets of standards around the world, none of which appear to have prevented large-scale wrongdoing.Another question will be whether a body should be formed to oversee these standards, or whether an existing group could take on such a task. A possible model is the asset management industry, which has a chartered financial analyst certification and an industry body to promote ethical standards and professional qualifications.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.British regulators have noted that the banks in the past had what they wanted in the wholesale arena: little oversight.The governing principle, said Andrew Hauser, director of markets strategy at the Bank of England, was buyer beware since the players were sophisticated. That principle did not work out so well.AdvertisementIt now remains to be seen whether regulators will trust the industry to set its own standards, given recent history.Financial service executives say Ms. Corley was a good fit to head the industry group because she has long championed the importance of culture as it relates to the bottom line.Allianz Global Investors has not been caught in regulators’ cross hairs. The firm is an asset manager, not a bank, and some of its policies mirror exactly what regulators have aimed to do.(Allianz Global Investors is one of two investment companies owned by Allianz, the global German insurer. The other investment company is Pimco, the bond fund giant where William H. Gross was a co-founder.)For example, half of the asset manager’s bonuses for senior executives are deferred for three years, with 50 percent subject to the company’s three-year return and the other half put into Allianz Global Investors funds.“I can’t see anything wrong with deferral,” she said. “It makes people more thoughtful and it makes them focus more on the long term.”Unlike many of those who dominate the senior ranks in the City, Ms. Corley is not a graduate of Oxford or Cambridge. In fact, she refused to go to college at all and took a job in finance — as a filing clerk at an insurance company, Sun Alliance — only after her parents pointed out that selling shoes might not have great long-term prospects.She worked her way up through Sun Alliance to deputy head of sales for Britain, attending night school, and eventually moved to a global consulting firm. In 1993, she joined Mercury Asset Management where she thrived under the leadership of the fund manager Carol Galley. (Ms. Corley has said she admired how Ms. Galley “got on with it.”)AdvertisementIn 1998, when Ms. Corley’s stepdaughter got older and her weekends freed up, she started to write.“I love doing it,” she says of writing. “It’s a huge release.” (Her standard response to “How do you have enough time?” is that she does not play golf).She can write a chapter in a couple of hours, and does not seem to be plagued by writer’s block. Only regulatory reviews and financial crashes have stopped her.After Merrill Lynch bought Mercury, Ms. Corley stayed on for seven years. But when her husband retired early, she decided to join him.Retirement didn’t completely suit her, however, and when a recruiter for Allianz Global Investors called her in 2005, she leapt at the opportunity to run the European asset management arm of Allianz. In 2012 she was made chief executive.Her mission seems to be to embed a culture of accountability and helping clients — and figuring out how to get employees and clients geared toward longer-term outlooks.“If you rely on that second line of defense — compliance — however big it is, it is not big enough,” she said.The success of the review will be measured by what it produces in terms of reforms. Already there is a laundry list of efforts underway or completed; some are skeptical about yet another.“It’s a good step for the government and regulators to understand how these things work,” said Peter Hahn, senior lecturer at Cass Business School and a former investment banker. “On the other hand, the markets are changing to a point that they will be different when they are done in a year or two.”A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Chief, and Novelist, Helps to Fix Britain’s Troubled Financial Markets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.