By IAN AUSTENFEB. 19, 2015
OTTAWA —  SNC-Lavalin, the Montreal-based engineering company, and two of its units were charged on Thursday with fraud and bribery in relation to their dealings with the regime of Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan dictator.The Royal Canadian Mounted Police accused the company of paying 47.7 million Canadian dollars in bribes “to one or several public officials of the ‘Great Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.’ ” The police claimed that the Canadian company also defrauded the Libyan government and several of its agencies of 129.8 million Canadian dollars.A spokeswoman for the police declined to describe the nature of those frauds.The case adds to the scrutiny of SNC, Canada’s largest engineering firm.In 2012, Pierre Duhaime stepped down as chief executive after an internal report found that he had approved 56 million Canadian dollars in improperly documented payments to unidentified people. Mr. Duhaime, who was later arrested, currently faces bribery and other charges in Canada, along with another former company executive.Last October, Riadh Ben Aissa, the former head of global construction, was convicted by a Swiss court of paying bribes in Libya. An SNC contract employee in Mexico was arrested in 2012 over a plot to smuggle Mr. Qaddafi’s son into that country.AdvertisementSNC-Lavalin said in a statement that the latest charges by Canada against the company are “without merit.”Advertisement“These charges relate to alleged reprehensible deeds by former employees who left the company long ago,” SNC-Lavalin said in a statement. “If charges are appropriate, we believe that they would be correctly applied against the individuals in question and not the company.”SNC-Lavalin said that the charges will not interfere with its ability to bid on contracts. If the prosecution is successful, however, it would be barred from bidding on Canadian government projects, a major source of its business.The company has faced similar setbacks in the past. In 2013, the World Bank suspended SNC-Lavalin from participating in any of its projects for 10 years, as part of the settlement of a corruption investigation related to the company’s activities in Bangladesh.A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Canada Charges Montreal Engineering Firm in Fraud.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.