AdvertisementSupported byBy Aaron M. KesslerGeneral Motors named a new top lawyer on Thursday to succeed its embattled general counsel, Michael Millikin, who faced scathing criticism on Capitol Hill after the company’s ignition switch scandal.Craig B. Glidden, a veteran of the oil and chemical industries, will take over G.M.’s sprawling legal department on March 1, the company said. Mr. Glidden comes from LyondellBasell Industries, one of the world’s largest plastics, chemicals and refining companies. He previously served as general counsel of Chevron Phillips Chemical Company, a joint venture of the oil giants Chevron and Phillips 66.Mary T. Barra, the chief executive of G.M., praised him in a statement on Thursday for his “distinguished career managing complex legal issues around the world.”The New York Times has exposed missteps and delays by automakers and federal safety regulators in responding to deadly defects in automobiles during what became a record year for recalls.Legal experts said that Mr. Glidden faced a daunting task at G.M., which was reshaping its legal department and safety practices while dealing with a tidal wave of litigation, including a criminal inquiry by the Justice Department.“He’ll have to hit the ground running; there are a lot of moving pieces at General Motors right now,” said Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond in Virginia. “I don’t think anyone would envy him.”By the time Mr. Glidden takes over, G.M. could have a better sense of how successful its compensation fund has been in sidestepping litigation with ignition victims, Mr. Tobias said. Victims who do not sign up for the compensation fund, or who are denied, will most likely wind up as part of separate, consolidated litigation working its way through the courts.This week, the company was back in federal bankruptcy court in Manhattan, arguing that victims with cases that occurred before its 2009 bankruptcy filing should continue to be barred from filing lawsuits. Plaintiffs lawyers have petitioned Judge Robert Gerber to remove the ban on lawsuits against G.M., arguing that the company denied the plaintiffs due process and committed fraud, and should not be allowed to shield itself through the bankruptcy code.“It’s going to be a big challenge for a general counsel coming in, especially since the company’s legal department itself is under such a microscope for its own past behavior,” Mr. Tobias said.As awareness of the defective ignition switch grew within G.M. for more than a decade, the company’s legal department aggressively fought claims made against G.M. and declined to tell regulators when asked if it knew the cause of crashes. At least 56 deaths have been tied to the defective switch, which can suddenly turn off, shutting off the engine and disabling key systems like airbags and power steering.The company’s internal report criticized G.M.’s legal team for failing to act properly, and of 15 people fired by the automaker after the report’s release, at least five were lawyers who worked for Mr. Millikin.Mr. Millikin, who joined G.M. in 1977, has said that he did not know the details of the ignition defect problems until early last year, when G.M. began recalling 2.6 million older cars.More vehicles, including old models, have been recalled in the United States in 2014 than ever before. Explore the size and scope of the recalls, and find out if your car has been affected.Members of Congress, though, were harshly critical of Mr. Millikin and the legal department’s behavior. In a particularly pointed congressional hearing in July, lawmakers called for Mr. Millikin to be dismissed.Ms. Barra defended Mr. Millikin, saying she had faith in his service and described him as someone of “high integrity.” In October, she announced he would leave the company. G.M. maintained at the time, and has since, that he was not being forced out.Mr. Millikin will remain at G.M. until July 1 to help work with Mr. Glidden on the transition, according to a G.M. spokesman, Patrick E. Morrissey.After that, Mr. Millikin’s contract lasts through the end of the year, and he will remain as a consultant, Mr. Morrissey said. Advertisement