By JOHN HARWOODFEB. 19, 2015
WASHINGTON —  President Obama on Thursday stepped up his efforts to define which economic problems need urgent attention — and what kind of attention would work — if not under his administration, then the next.The 2015 Economic Report of the President released Thursday focuses squarely on the challenges of rising income inequality and stagnant wages for average families. The need for “middle-class economics,” not any near-term push to shrink government debt and deficits, dominates its 414 pages.The report offers prescriptions that Mr. Obama has made familiar, even as Republicans block some, like spending programs financed by tax increases on the affluent, while Democrats object to others, like new international trade deals.But with an eye toward shaping debate through the 2016 presidential campaign and beyond, it offers an expanded rationale for those steps in light of what White House advisers call three distinct phases of recent economic history.AdvertisementThe first, from 1948 to 1973, they call “The Age of Shared Growth.” Innovations that emerged from the great mobilization required by World War II made worker productivity soar.AdvertisementIncome inequality shrank, in part, as Mr. Obama argued in one recent interview, because labor unions were stronger and corporations felt greater commitment to community. It was also an era when the American economy faced almost no international competition.A surge of working women expanded the labor force. All of those changes made incomes grow fast enough to double in 25 years.The second, from 1973 to 1995, they label “The Age of Expanded Participation.” While productivity growth slowed, profits flowed increasingly to the highest earners. But an even-faster flow of women into the work force lifted family incomes enough to obscure those developments.The third, from 1995 to 2013, they call “The Age of Productivity Recovery.” Thanks to Silicon Valley, technological change accelerated output per worker once again. But the benefits were offset by continued income inequality, driven partly by rising rewards for the best-educated workers and falling rewards for the least-educated.At the same time, the increase in women entering the work force stalled while “labor force participation” by men continued its long-term decline. The reduction in workers — which holds down family incomes and the economy’s potential at the same time — threatens to grow worse as more baby boomers retire, stop paying income taxes and draw Social Security and Medicare benefits.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is the big-picture challenge we’re trying to overcome as an economy,” said Jason Furman, who is chairman of Mr. Obama’s Council of Economic Advisers.The White House argues that recent improvements in growth (to 2.8 percent from 2.1 percent over the last two years), hiring (average monthly job gains of 260,000 jobs in 2014, up from 199,000 the year before) and budget deficits (reduced to 2.8 percent of the gross domestic product in 2014, from 9.8 percent in 2009) make a focus on “middle-class economics” possible.To sustain productivity growth, the report prescribes increased government spending on education and infrastructure, as well as the approval of broad new trade agreements with Pacific Rim nations and Europe. To curb inequality, it calls for cutting taxes on families with modest incomes and raising them on high earners. To safeguard the supply of “prime-age” workers, it reiterates Mr. Obama’s insistence on new immigration policies.AdvertisementRepublicans embrace, in concept if not detail, the report’s call for “business tax reform” that cuts the top rate on corporate income to 28 percent from 35 percent. They oppose most of its other recommendations, arguing that higher taxes on the affluent would hamper growth and that spending programs would be wasteful.On the other end of the political spectrum, Democrats and their labor union allies threaten to block the report’s call for broad new trade deals. Fueling their ire is the belief that past deals, like the North American Free Trade Agreement, have driven wages down and jobs overseas.In the report, Mr. Obama’s advisers insist such developments result from the broader trend toward globalization, not from trade deals themselves. To the contrary, they argue, such deals can expand middle-class incomes by increasing hiring among United States-based exporters who pay higher-than-average wages.By requiring higher labor and environmental standards among trading partners — as United States negotiators vow to do in the pending Trans-Pacific Partnership — the administration aims to avoid downward wage pressure on other American workers.“Labor and environmental protections in trade agreements, in particular, would likely push in the opposite direction of globalization-driven increases in inequality,” the report says.A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Economic Report From Obama Focuses on Income Inequality.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.