By DAVID GELLESFEB. 19, 2015
The Federal Trade Commission filed suit on Thursday to halt the proposed merger of Sysco and US Foods, contending that the deal would inflict higher prices and worse service on restaurants, hospitals, hotels, schools and other food service customers.The lawsuit comes more than a year after the $3.5 billion deal was announced and just weeks after Sysco proposed a new set of asset sales it hoped would appease antitrust regulators.However, that most recent offer, to sell 11 facilities to a smaller rival, the Performance Food Group, was not enough to convince Washington officials that the deal should be approved.Instead, the F.T.C. maintained that a takeover of US Foods by Sysco would create an uncomfortably dominant force in the so-called broadline food service market, which encompasses big providers of supplies and ingredients to industrial kitchens.Advertisement“This proposed merger would eliminate significant competition in the marketplace and create a dominant national broadline food service distributor,” Debbie Feinstein, the director of the F.T.C.’s bureau of competition, said in a statement. “Consumers across the country, and the businesses that serve them, benefit from the healthy competition between Sysco and US Foods, whether they eat at a restaurant, hotel or a hospital.”AdvertisementSysco’s shares fell more than 3 percent on Thursday. US Foods is owned by the private equity firms Clayton, Dubilier & Rice and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts.In its challenge, the F.T.C. said the combination of the companies would violate national antitrust laws and significantly reduce competition in 32 markets in particular. A combined company would control 75 percent of the broadline market, the F.T.C. said.In a statement, Sysco said it would contest the F.T.C.’s effort to block the deal.”The facts are strongly in our favor, and we look forward to making our case in court,” Bill DeLaney, Sysco’s chief executive, said in the statement. “Those of us who work in this industry every day know it is fiercely competitive.”Even with Sysco’s proposed disposal of 11 facilities, the F.T.C. determined that competition would remain weak.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The commission also charges that the proposed sale of 11 US Foods distribution centers to Performance Food Group would neither enable P.F.G. to replace US Foods as a competitor nor counteract the significant competitive harm caused by the merger,” the F.T.C. said in the statement.The agency said it had authorized its staff to seek a court order temporarily blocking the merger as it pursues its challenge.The F.T.C. said the vote to seek the preliminary injunction was 3 to 2, suggesting that some commission members did not believe the think the merger would be too anticompetitive.After the suit was announced, Joshua Wright, one of the commissioners, took to Twitter to announce he had not voted to block the dealAdvertisement“I have no reason to believe the proposed Sysco/US Foods transaction violated the Clayton Act,” he wrote, referring to the antitrust legislation.Sysco noted what it called the “slim margin” and said it believed the F.T.C. was misinformed.“The narrow vote demonstrates a lack of consensus within the commission that the proposed merger could be viewed as harmful to competition under the law,” Sysco said in its statement.Taking issue with the F.T.C.’s analysis, Sysco said that many large customers rely on local distributors in addition to national distributors like itself and US Foods. In local markets, Sysco said it also faced competition from big box stores like Costco.An administrative trial is scheduled to begin on July 21.A version of this web log appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Merger Challenged.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.