By HIROKO TABUCHI and ALEXANDRA STEVENSONFEB. 19, 2015
Mung beans, sticky rice and banana leaves. Confetti and little red envelopes for gift money.Essential items for the start of Chinese New Year celebrations on Thursday were in short supply across the United States, an example of the widening and sometimes unexpected fallout from the gridlock at seaports on the West Coast.The impasse, caused by a protracted labor dispute between the longshoremen’s union and ship owners, has brought crippling delays to sea freight in and out of the country and is wreaking havoc for retailers, food companies, farmers and manufacturers. For weeks, McDonald’s scrambled to address a global shortage of French fries, flying 1,000 tons of frozen fries to Japan to bypass the logjam.Now, as communities across the country welcome the Lunar New Year — a holiday period of shopping and festivities akin to Thanksgiving or Christmas — containers laden with trinkets and food and at least 100,000 bottles of soy sauce are languishing on freighters moored off California. The vast Los Angeles-Long Beach port complex, together with ports in Oakland, Calif.; Tacoma, Wash.; and Seattle, together handle half of the container traffic entering the United States.“There’s not enough sticky rice to make the dumplings. We don’t have holiday cookies or mung bean cakes. We’re running out of soy sauce,” said Jacklyn Sher, manager of H. C. Foods, a food importer in southeast Los Angeles, who said she was seeing worsening sea freight delays.AdvertisementH. C. Foods brings in 50 to 100 containers a month, she said. But over the last two weeks, the company received just one container, a shipment that was due six weeks ago. Almost 200 containers of goodies including rice, beans, soy sauce, coconut milk and banana, bamboo and lotus leaves are stranded off various West Coast ports.Advertisement“Everything is out there, on the water,” Ms. Sher said.In a bid to break the gridlock, Secretary of Labor Thomas E. Perez and Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker have been meeting this week in San Francisco with both sides of the dispute. Labor officials indicated few signs of a breakthrough late Wednesday, saying only that the Obama administration would continue to work with both parties on an agreement.Their visit came after owners suspended the unloading of container ships and other cargo vessels completely over the Presidents’ Day weekend because of what they called “a strike with pay.” The port owners imposed a similar two-day limit on work the previous weekend, a move port workers charged was a ploy to punish them and increase pressure to settle on a new labor contract after nine months of negotiations.Some of the country’s biggest retail brands are now working to reroute their wares. Christopher H. Peterson, chief financial officer of Ralph Lauren, said this month that the company airfreighted more products into the United States last quarter. “We also wound up routing a lot of product via water routing, so we shifted around the U.S. and received it in the East Coast ports,” he said.The National Retail Federation warns that a full strike or lockout at the West Coast ports costs the United States economy $2.1 billion a day in higher transport costs and missed sales. A similar, 10-day shutdown of West Coast ports in 2002 cost the economy about $1 billion a day.“The effects of the shutdown are starting to ripple through the economy, and there’s no end in sight,” said Tony McGee, chief executive of HNM Global Logistics, a freight forwarding company based in Orlando, Fla., and a member of a committee that advises the Department of Commerce on logistics.One of his client importers was initially worried about getting ski masks to market before the end of ski season, Mr. McGee said, but was now worrying about whether sunglasses would arrive before summer. His company routed some containers through Vancouver and Prince Rupert in Canada, and transported them by rail into the United States.Several weeks ago, however, “every other company caught on and started to do the same thing,” he said. “Now we’re starting to see backlogs in those ports.”AdvertisementThe stakes are high when Chinese New Year is involved.After almost two months of delays, Ben Tan, a manager at the Harmony Gift Center in New York’s Chinatown, resorted to using airfreight from China to fly in festive posters, confetti and the red-and-gold envelopes traditionally used to give money to family members and friends.But bulkier items, like new lion dance costumes that are custom-made of wood and silk in specialty craft shops in rural China, were too expensive to fly in, he said, and did not make it to America for the critical shopping period before the New Year.“Delay, delay, delay,” Mr. Tan said. “I missed the holiday season. I lost a lot of money.”Wellington Z. Chen, executive director of the Chinatown Partnership Local Development Corporation in New York, bemoaned what he called a “more spartan” Chinese New Year this year. Chinatown is planning a parade on Sunday, followed by lion dances in the street later this month.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We stopped manufacturing these things locally years ago, and everything is now from the Far East,” Mr. Chen said. “But this year, God knows how many lanterns are stuck out at sea.”Traders dealing in fresh produce are having an especially tricky time.Doungchai Kuramarohit, president of DP Trading, an import wholesaler in Los Angeles, said that she was most fearful for the organic ginger she imported from Thailand to sell at Asian and other independent supermarkets. Some wholesalers had received shipments of moldy ginger, she said. Her latest shipment, originally due on Jan. 7, is now unlikely to arrive until late March.“Ginger cannot last long,” Ms. Kuramarohit said. “By March, it will be fungus.”Taylor Chow, spokesman for the Oriental Food Association in the San Francisco Bay Area, said that Chinese communities across the country were dependent on food imported from Asia to the West Coast. His distribution company, American Tai Wah in Oakland, had almost 10 huge container cars full of soy sauce — about 100,000 bottles, he estimated — and vinegar, potato starch, noodles and canned foods sitting in freighters off the coast, he said.“Demand during the holiday season is double or triple of normal, and we’re supposed to be prepared with a full warehouse. But our warehouse is almost empty,” he said. The added costs and missed business will force him to cut hours soon for his seven employees, he said.“We don’t have any alternative beside ocean shipments. Our products are heavy. We can’t use airfreight. And the whole West Coast is shut down,” he said.“In the holiday season, we have a lot of family gatherings, a lot of banquets, and we go out to eat. But this year, the holiday atmosphere is weak. I personally don’t feel like it’s Chinese New Year.”AdvertisementThe disruptions extended to celebrations across the ocean in Hong Kong, the world’s fourth-biggest port, where revelers eagerly awaited tangerines and oranges, considered symbols of wealth and luck. Shoppers buy the fruit as gifts to give family, friends and colleagues for New Year.At a ParknShop supermarket in the North Point neighborhood of Hong Kong on Thursday, Peter Chan sifted through the two last boxes of Sunkist oranges. Ten boxes underneath were empty.“I went to another ParknShop and they said to come back tonight. They ran out of stock,” Mr. Chan said.Frustrated at delays in shipped goods from the United States, some have voiced their concern. “I’m getting a lot of phone calls from importers on this side,” said Peter J. Levesque, the chief commercial operator at Modern Terminals, a container terminal operator that processes one-third of all the containers that pass through Hong Kong.“What a lot of the carriers have been doing on this side is using smaller ships that can access the Panama Canal in order to get to the East Coast,” he said. But there is a catch. The freight rates for these shipments have gone up as much as 50 percent.In Los Angeles, Ms. Sher of H. C. Foods also said that extra costs were adding up, including rent for warehouses that sat empty for weeks because of unexpected shipment delays, payments to trucking companies to wait on standby and surcharge fees to the port. Her inventory costs have doubled over the last six months, she said.The worst part, she said, was that she had no idea which shipments would arrive when. The single container that came through last week, she said, contained a large consignment of fish sauce, but not much else.“It’s like a lotto. We just don’t know what’s going to get through,” she said. “But we are set for fish sauce.”An earlier version of this article misstated the surname of a merchant in New York’s Chinatown. He is Ben Tan, not Tay.Erik Eckholm contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: New Year Delights, Still at Sea.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.