AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinThere’s been little dispute that a former Morgan Stanley broker, Galen Marsh, violated the firm’s rules when he downloaded information about 350,000 customers onto his personal computer. But Mr. Marsh may not be responsible for posting that information online late last year and trying to sell it, people familiar with the investigation said on Thursday.Federal authorities are looking into the possibility that hackers, potentially from overseas, broke into Mr. Marsh’s laptop and took the customer information that was offered for sale online in December, said the people, who did not want to be identified because the investigation was not completed.Ever since  Mr. Marsh was fired by Morgan Stanley  in early January, his lawyer has insisted Mr. Marsh was not responsible for the online posting of personal information about some of the Wall Street bank’s wealth management customers. The lawyer, Robert Gottlieb, said on Thursday that he was increasingly confident that federal authorities were coming to that same conclusion.“Based on the facts as they are unfolding, there really is no longer a reason to consider Mr. Marsh as being responsible for the information being posted on the Internet,” Mr. Gottlieb said.Mr. Gottlieb said he had been in contact with federal prosecutors working for Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for Manhattan, but declined to comment on those conversations.The Wall Street Journal first reported that federal authorities were looking into the possibility that Mr. Marsh’s personal laptop could have been hacked.Mr. Marsh was fired by Morgan Stanley after he acknowledged taking the customer information, which did not include sensitive information like passwords or Social Security numbers. On Dec. 27, Morgan Stanley discovered that some of its customer information had been placed on Pastebin, a website for posting documents, and then traced the information back to Mr. Marsh, 30, a broker who had worked for the firm since 2008.Federal authorities began to suspect a hacker may have been responsible for the online posting after some of the information downloaded by Mr. Marsh continued to appear on other websites and advertised for sale on Twitter even after he had been fired, the people familiar with the matter said.Mr. Marsh’s personal laptop on which he downloaded the customer information has not been returned to him by federal authorities.A representative for Morgan Stanley said the firm did not know who uploaded the information to the Internet. The representative said the firm had taken steps to tighten its internal security and protect customer accounts after discovering that Mr. Marsh had taken the information and loaded it onto his computer.Morgan Stanley said it had yet to see any evidence of fraud involving the information of its customers. The firm is offering free identity theft protection to its customers.Advertisement