
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT COLE

FEB. 19, 2015
Rexam wants to go to the ball, but trustbusters might ruin the party.After a short flurry of talks, the board of the British beverage can maker Rexam is recommending that shareholders accept a 4.3 billion pound cash and stock offer from an American rival, the Ball Corporation. Small wonder, since the offer represents a full 40 percent premium to Rexam’s undisturbed market value. Add debt, and this equates to a generous-looking 10 times 2014 earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda.For Ball, the deal also looks financially sound. Three years after completion, Ball says, the merged entity would save about $300 million in annual operating costs. Taxed and capitalized, that roughly matches the deal premium. Implementation costs will come to roughly a year’s worth of savings. Strategically, sharing manufacturing and design expertise will also be useful.Competition problems, however, are daunting. It will probably take at least 12 months to get the required clearances. The two control about two-thirds of the market for metal drinks cans in Europe and North America. On the face of it, that’s an extraordinary concentration of market power, even if the analysis will differ market by market. So the deal could be blocked altogether, or only allowed to proceed with remedies that undermine the logic of the tie-up.A £302 million fee – payable by Ball if antitrust authorities block the merger — signals the American company’s confidence that the deal will go through. But it also suggests Rexam’s board has serious doubts and believes shareholders need insurance against a potential veto.The market clearly needs some further convincing. Rexam’s shares, as of early afternoon on Thursday, were trading roughly 10 percent below the implied offer price, which is 628 pence based on Ball’s Feb. 17 closing price.Given that consummation could take a year, Rexam’s shares would not be expected to hit the offer price now. But such a big gulf suggests success is not entirely assured.Robert Cole is assistant editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »