AdvertisementSupported byBy Hilary StoutA federal judge ruled on Thursday that a longstanding practice by American Express aimed at keeping customers from using other forms of payment violates United States antitrust laws.The fees that American Express charges merchants are routinely higher than those of Visa, MasterCard, Discover and other credit card companies. But Amex prohibits any merchant that accepts its cards from encouraging customers to pay with lower-cost cards.In a 150-page opinion, Judge Nicholas G. Garaufis of Federal District Court for the Eastern District of New York wrote that such a practice constituted “an unlawful restraint on trade.” He said he would determine a remedy later.The ruling was another setback in what is proving to be a bad month for American Express. Last week, it announced that its partnerships with JetBlue and the retailer Costco would be ending. Amex was the only card that Costco accepted beyond debit cards. American Express stock has suffered, and shares slipped 1.7 percent, to $78.40, after the announcement of Thursday’s ruling.Amex released a statement saying it was “disappointed” with the ruling and would appeal. The company said the disputed rules for merchants actually increase competition rather than stifle it by protecting Amex cardholders “from anti-consumer practices, including at the checkout counter, such as being told to pay with another card.”“Eliminating these protections,” the company continued “would inhibit consumers’ choice to pay with their preferred payment method and allow merchants who have agreed to honor our cards to then discriminate against them when our card members choose to pay with American Express.”Credit card fees are largely hidden from consumers, but they are incorporated into the prices of most goods and services. The result is a pricing system that many consumer advocates believe is unfair because it effectively forces poorer consumers, who pay with cash or “plain vanilla” cards to subsidize affluent holders of premium rewards cards.The inability of merchants to encourage lower-cost forms of payment, Judge Garaufis wrote, creates “an environment in which there is nothing to offset credit card networks’ incentives — including American Express’s incentive — to charge merchants inflated prices for their services. This, in turn, results in higher costs to all consumers who purchase goods and services from these merchants.”Merchants across the country express delight over the judge’s decision. “Today’s ruling is one step forward to bringing badly needed competition and transparency to the entire credit card industry,” the Merchants Payments Coalition, a group of retailers, restaurants, gas stations and other consumer businesses, said in a statement. “Allowing retailers to ask consumers to use a less expensive card will result in lower prices for consumers and a fairer market for the fees merchants currently pay to accept credit and debit cards.”Jeffrey I. Shinder, an antitrust lawyer who represented three retailers — Ikea, Sears and Crate & Barrel — that testified against Amex in the case, predicted that the decision would give merchants greater clout to negotiate more favorable agreements with Amex, including cheaper fees.“All consumers will benefit from that,” Mr. Shinder said.Some merchants, he predicted, might decide to offer discounts for paying with cheaper brands, like Discover, and in that way charge people paying with American Express a higher price.But whether businesses will want to risk alienating a subset of customers who are very attached to their rewards cards by introducing what might appear as a two-tier pricing system remains to be seen.“It is a good question as to whether merchants are going to do this or not,” said Mr. Shinder, managing partner of the firm Constantine Cannon’s New York City office. “But I can tell you that from Amex’s testimony, it has signaled that it is definitely afraid of the competitive pressure that this will put on its pricing model.”Thursday’s ruling stemmed from a lawsuit filed in 2010 by the Justice Department and attorneys general in 17 states after an inquiry of so-called anti-steering policies used by the major credit card companies. Visa and MasterCard fended off legal action by agreeing to a settlement that allowed merchants they do business with to use discounts and other incentives to coax customers to use lower-cost cards. But American Express chose to fight in court, arguing that such measures were discriminatory and could be devastating for its business.Though Amex has considerable clout — its generous rewards cards are popular with businesses and consumers willing to pay substantial membership fees — its market share pales next to MasterCard and Visa. The company’s chief executive, Kenneth I. Chenault, took the witness stand during the trial and tried to portray his company as a David trying to get a toehold against a “double chokehold” from the industry’s two Goliaths.Advertisement