AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — The European Central Bank conducted an exhaustive debate before deciding last month on measures to avert a catastrophic decline in consumer prices. But on Thursday the first glimpse ever into the deliberations revealed that, in effect, the decision had already been made.Statements by Mario Draghi, the central bank president, and other top officials had primed investors to expect a large-scale asset-purchase program that would include government bonds. The 25 members of the bank’s Governing Council were well aware that if they delivered anything less after meeting on Jan. 22, there might have been chaos in the financial markets.Recent gains in stocks, declines in market interest rates and a welcome fall in the value of the euro against the dollar — it might have all come undone. Or as the central bank put it in an account of the meeting, which was released Thursday: “The associated positive impact on the growth and price outlook could be unwound, and a higher degree of volatility or instability in the financial markets could create additional risks.”The narrative of the meeting was the first under a new central bank policy. Previously, Governing Council proceedings were a closely guarded secret. By coincidence, the inaugural account covered one of the most momentous meetings in the central bank’s 16-year history.At that meeting on Jan. 22, the Governing Council decided to begin buying government bonds and other debt at a monthly rate of 60 billion euros, or $68.3 billion, beginning in March. Such purchases are a standard method for stimulating inflation but had never been tried by the central bank.The account contained few major surprises, much less any sense of drama or conflict. If any members pounded on the table or hurled invective, it was not recorded. The main significance of the account may come from what it disclosed about the power of Mr. Draghi and a few other top officials to manage market expectations in a way that created almost irresistible pressure for the central bank to act.Mr. Draghi has denied that he makes public statements that do not reflect Governing Council sentiment. But for months before the January meeting, he had been warning of the dangers of very low inflation and hinting that large-scale bond purchases, or quantitative easing, were becoming more likely.When the Governing Council gathered on Jan. 21 for the start of the two-day meeting in Frankfurt, some members were still arguing that quantitative easing should be used only in a dire situation that had not yet arrived.These members maintained that “purchases of sovereign bonds should remain a contingency instrument of monetary policy, to be used only as a last resort in the event of an extremely adverse scenario, such as a downward deflationary spiral,” according to the account.But the wait-and-see faction was in the minority. Others heeded a warning from Peter Praet, a member of the central bank’s six-person executive board. “The risks stemming from not acting at the present meeting,” Mr. Praet said, according to a summary of his remarks, “might be higher than the risks stemming from acting.” Mr. Praet cited the heightened market expectations as one of the risks.“It was clear that the E.C.B. had become prisoner of the expectations it had created in December,” Peter Vanden Houte, an analyst at ING Bank, said in a note to clients on Thursday. “As financial markets had already strongly anticipated the announcement of a sovereign bond purchase program, failing to act could have created a dramatic market reversal.”The meeting account did not indicate which members of the Governing Council argued for delay, but one was almost certainly Jens Weidmann, president of Germany’s central bank. He has been vocal in his opposition to purchases of government bonds, the same method used by the Federal Reserve in the United States, the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan to pump money into the economy after official interest rates had been cut to close to zero.While members disagreed on the timing of government bond purchases, they agreed that they were a legitimate tool of monetary policy allowed by European Union law, according to the account. That is significant, because the council’s decision to begin buying government bonds is likely to face legal challenges from Germany and elsewhere.The Governing Council also agreed that the eurozone was not at imminent risk of deflation, even though inflation had sunk into negative territory for the first time since 2009. But many members worried that consumers and businesses were becoming accustomed to low inflation or even falling prices. In central bank jargon, inflation expectations were at risk of becoming “unanchored.”As a result, businesses would not be able to raise prices and wages might fall, symptoms of deflation, a condition associated with high unemployment and economic depression.Furthermore, previous action by the central bank, like purchases of private sector assets, “had clearly fallen short of initial expectations,” the account said.After listening to the arguments, Mr. Draghi “concluded that a large majority of voting members supported a decision to launch an expanded asset purchase program.”The members made one decision that surprised markets. “In order to accelerate the impact,” the Governing Council decided to increase the asset purchases to €60 billion a month instead of the expected €50 billion a month.By keeping the account of the debate largely anonymous, the council was trying to avoid subjecting members to pressure from their home constituencies. The 25 members of the council — the executive board members and the heads of the 19 national central banks in the eurozone — are not supposed to represent the interests of their home countries but rather the welfare of the currency bloc as a whole.The central bank plans to publish accounts of its monetary policy meetings four weeks after they take place. It does not plan to publish accounts of interim meetings, which deal with other matters. The monetary policy meetings are held every six weeks and are followed by a news conference with Mr. Draghi, the European Central Bank president.Advertisement