By JAMES KANTER and NIKI KITSANTONISFEB. 19, 2015
BRUSSELS —  Greece is headed toward a potentially destructive standoff with Europe after Germany rejected a last-minute request on Thursday to extend its loan program.Unless the two sides can bridge their differences, Greece could find itself cut off from its financial lifeline and facing insolvency. The country’s current bailout program is set to expire in little more than a week.Neither country seems willing to budge at this point.While Greece on Thursday formally requested a six-month extension of its loan agreement, it stopped short of explicitly agreeing to complete some of the more onerous terms of the bailout. In a two-page letter to eurozone officials, the Greek finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, said the goal was to ensure that “any new measures be fully funded while refraining from unilateral action that would undermine the fiscal targets, economic recovery and financial stability.”Germany, though, is insisting that Greece stick with the original commitments to push through deeper reforms. A German Finance Ministry spokesman, Martin Jäger, said in a statement that the letter from Athens was “not a substantial proposal to resolve matters.”AdvertisementThe impasse sets the stage for another tense round of negotiations on Friday at a meeting of eurozone finance ministers here.AdvertisementThe group typically operates by consensus. So if German opposition continues, a Greek deal may remain elusive without further concessions by Athens. Germany also has broad support from other eurozone nations.“The written document does not meet the criteria agreed in the Eurogroup on Monday,” Mr. Jäger said. He was referring to a meeting this week that ended in acrimony, with eurozone finance ministers giving Greece a deadline of Friday to come to an agreement or risk a cutoff of further loans.There were hints of the potential for compromise.The Greek prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, and Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany had a 50-minute telephone conversation on Thursday, which had a “positive tone,” according to Mr. Tsipras’s office. The office said that the two leaders showed “interest in finding a mutually beneficial solution for Greece and the eurozone,” but it provided no further details.Mr. Tsipras later spoke to the French president, François Hollande. The Greek prime minister noted on his Twitter account that the French leader “sincerely wants to find a mutually beneficial solution.”The differences between Germany and Greece are technical, but they also come down to questions of mutual trust.So far, the austere German finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, has shown little sympathy toward the claims of his Greek counterpart that the rigors of the bailout program are largely responsible for the country’s struggling economy and high unemployment.At a meeting of eurozone officials on Thursday, a German official described the Athens proposal as “a Trojan horse, intending to get bridge financing and in substance putting an end to the current program,” according to a Greek government official.AdvertisementResponding to the rejection of the loan extension, a Greek government official said that “a part of the German government is against the Greek people, and this is due to Mr. Schäuble.”Officials of the German Finance Ministry declined to comment.Atmospherics aside, the two sides are split over a very specific technical issue: how closely Greece is prepared to abide by the tough conditions underpinning its bailout loans, which total 240 billion euros, or $273 billion.Mr. Varoufakis’s letter, much of it written in legal language, indicated that Greece was willing to adhere to the general terms of the bailout loan agreement. One question left unanswered was whether that included adherence to a memorandum of understanding that contained crucial conditions for the country to receive loan payments.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many of those conditions, which include cuts in government spending, higher taxes and other economic changes agreed to by a previous government in 2012, are wildly unpopular in Greece. The leftist Syriza party of Mr. Tsipras was voted into power last month on an anti-austerity platform.The memorandum requires Greece to carry out reforms that the previous government had not yet put into effect, including changes in labor law that could make it easier for private companies to carry out mass layoffs.As a result, Mr. Tsipras’s government is treading a fine line, trying to come to terms with its European creditors while not seeming to give too much ground on his promises to Greek voters.The Greek proposal is for a six-month extension of the country’s loan agreement, but “under different terms,” said Gavriil Sakellaridis, a government spokesman.Another senior government official, Labor Minister Panos Skourletis, said on Greek television on Thursday that the country’s request for an extension to its loan program “in no way translates into an extension of the existing program, nor will it be accompanied by the known disastrous measures.”Unless Greece can come to an agreement with its European lenders, its current bailout program will expire at the end of the month. Without it, the government might soon not have enough money to meet its debt obligations.AdvertisementThe lenders are the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund. But the current negotiations involve only the European creditors, being represented by the Eurogroup of finance ministers. The group’s signoff would be required before any Greek proposal could move forward for final European approval.And Germany is not the only eurozone member indicating a reluctance to give Greece much of a break. Finland shares Germany’s reluctance to risk more of taxpayers’ money by lending it to Greece. Other countries like Ireland and Portugal, which have hewed to their own austerity-pegged bailout programs, want Greece to have to do the same.And inevitably in politically charged negotiations, there are differences of style and approach. Germans, in particular, have been alarmed by the confrontational attitude of the Greek delegation led by Mr. Varoufakis, who is unusually plain-spoken and telegenic. He represents a frontal challenge to the settled order of quiet, back-room negotiation that characterizes most European deal making.The chaotic meeting of the Eurogroup on Monday, which included a flurry of leaks, could have given the impression that “texts were being passed around under coats,” Michel Sapin, the French finance minister, told reporters the next day.Since that last acrimonious meeting, senior officials have suggested that Mr. Varoufakis circulated documents with the goal of portraying a split between the Eurogroup president, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, and Pierre Moscovici, the European commissioner for economic and financial affairs, who has been helping to broker the talks.“In a working process you have different documents circulating,” Valdis Dombrovskis, a vice president at the European Commission, said on Wednesday. “But at the end of the day the issue, which apparently was raised by Minister Varoufakis, was to try to find some divisions between the president of the Eurogroup and Commissioner Moscovici,” he said.“There are no divisions,” he insisted. “There is a common understanding from the institutions how to move forward.”James Kanter reported from Brussels and Niki Kitsantonis from Athens. Alison Smale contributed reporting from Berlin.A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Standoff Over Loans Bodes Ill for Greece.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.