By TARA SIEGEL BERNARDFEB. 20, 2015
One month into the tax-filing season, the federal government said it sent out incorrect tax forms to about 800,000 taxpayers who bought health insurance through HealthCare.gov.This means that some taxpayers — estimated at less than 1 percent — may need to wait to file their tax returns until they receive new forms. And the 50,000 taxpayers who already filed with inaccurate information are probably going to be required to amend their returns, tax experts said.This is the first tax season that households have been required to report on their tax return whether they had health insurance. There was some question about how smoothly this process would unfold, since it adds yet another layer of complexity to an already complicated tax system.“The unfortunate reality is that for many of these impacted taxpayers, the tax refund could be the single largest financial payout of the year,” said Mark Ciaramitaro, vice president of health care services at H&R Block. “For those who have not filed, through no fault of their own, they are being told to wait to file a tax return, further delaying access to their tax refund.”AdvertisementAt the same time, the government also said they would give taxpayers a second chance to buy health insurance during a “special enrollment period” around tax filing season — but this is supposed to apply only to people who did not realize they would face a penalty if they did not buy insurance.AdvertisementHere is what you need to do if you were affected:Q. What went wrong?A. Most of the 6.7 million people who bought insurance through the exchanges received subsidies — in the form of an advance payment of a tax credit — to help defray the costs of premiums. Those credits were based, in part, on how much they were expected to earn in 2014, as well as the cost of a “benchmark plan.” Since the credits were based on estimated income, taxpayers need to reconcile any differences against their actual 2014 income.To do this reconciliation, taxpayers must use data from a 1095-A form, which is sent from the marketplaces to all taxpayers who received subsidies. But the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services realized that it printed inaccurate data on the forms. Benchmark premiums were incorrectly reported on forms sent to 800,000 taxpayers, or about 20 percent of all the forms mailed out by the federal government.The government said taxpayers could expect to receive the updated forms in early March.Q. How do I know if I am affected?A. The government said it had already started notifying people by phone, mail and email. You can also look for a notice by logging onto your HealthCare.gov account and checking the “my account” section. (You can also call the Marketplace Call Center at 1-800-318-2596.)This affects only consumers who bought insurance through one of the 37 states using HealthCare.gov. Most people received accurate forms, and can file their taxes at any time.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This did not affect the actual tax credits. It was just an error printed on the forms.Q. What if I already filed my taxes using incorrect data?A. Though the Treasury and the I.R.S. said they were still reviewing the issue and would provide more guidance soon, tax experts said individuals who already filed would probably have to amend their returns. This means some taxpayers may have to pay money back, and others could receive a larger refund.Only about 50,000 people with the erroneous forms have filed their tax returns thus far, the government estimates, while 90 to 95 percent of taxpayers with those forms have not filed yet.AdvertisementIf you do have to file an amended return, H&R Block, Jackson Hewitt and TurboTax have all said they will not charge customers to amend returns already filed with them. TurboTax also said it had created an “express amend process” for people who received a corrected 1095-A.Q. What if I need to file my taxes now?A. If you can wait until you get the new form, you probably should. But if you cannot, you will need to find the correct amount of the “second-lowest-cost Silver plan” that applied to your household in 2014. You can use the tool on HealthCare.gov, or you can call the Marketplace for help. “If you have a more complicated living situation, using that tool is not straightforward,” said Roberton Williams of the Tax Policy Center.Q. How long do I have to sign up for coverage?A. The government also said on Friday that it would create a special enrollment period, which will run from March 15 to April 30, available to people in 37 states that use the federal insurance marketplace.The idea behind the special enrollment period is to help people who did not know they would owe a penalty avoid the sting of a second one in the coming year.State-run exchanges are free to follow federal policy, too. Minnesota, for instance, already said it would extend its enrollment period from March 1 to April 30. And Washington is creating a special enrollment period as well.A version of this article appears in print on February 21, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Do if You Got the Wrong Tax Forms.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.