AdvertisementSupported byBy Aaron M. KesslerWASHINGTON — The unusual case playing out in the United States Court of Federal Claims between the former top executive of the American International Group and the federal government took a new and significant turn this week as both sides feverishly prepared their voluminous final written arguments.The former A.I.G. executive, Maurice Greenberg, is suing the government over the 2008 bailout of A.I.G. at the height of the financial crisis, when the insurer’s bets on subprime mortgages threatened to take down the company, and possibly, the big banks and financial system along with it. The Federal Reserve stepped in with what ultimately became a $182 billion lifeline and took over much of the company’s equity.Mr. Greenberg, who is known as Hank, has since argued that the terms of the deal were too onerous for A.I.G.’s shareholders and that the government overstepped its authority in imposing the harsh terms. The federal government’s lawyers, meanwhile, point to the fact that A.I.G. ultimately reaped a nearly $23 billion profit from the deal. They also argue that Mr. Greenberg and his supporters should be grateful that the company did not go bankrupt.The documents, filed just before a deadline of midnight on Thursday, include, for the first time, an inside look at what lawyers hired by the Federal Reserve were saying to the Fed and one another in 2008 as the government was deciding whether to save A.I.G. from collapse.In an unusual ruling at the end of the trial in November, Judge Thomas C. Wheeler found that two attorneys from the law firm Davis Polk had waived their attorney-client privilege. That meant Mr. Greenberg’s lawyers got access to more than 30,000 documents, including internal correspondence, that were meant to be confidential.The government, which submitted hundreds of pages of its own to Judge Wheeler, has long maintained that everything done during the bailout of A.I.G. was legal and appropriate, given the dire circumstances at the time. Lawyers for the Justice Department have attempted to paint Mr. Greenberg as ungrateful for the fact that the government’s action saved A.I.G. from bankruptcy.The newly revealed documents, the plaintiffs argue, bolster their claim that the government and its advisers — including the attorneys — said one thing when talking among themselves, and another subsequently to the public, including during the recent trial.In one email from September 2008, for instance, a Davis Polk attorney, Randall D. Guynn, stated that “there is no express authority, which is one of the reasons Treasury and the Fed discussed their actions with congressional leaders of both parties.” The government, Mr. Guynn wrote, “is on thin ice and they know it.”“But who’s going to challenge them on this ground?” Mr. Guynn wrote, according to the court documents. “I’ll be interested in how creative the Treasury and Fed lawyers become on this issue.”Mr. Greenberg’s team also attempts to raise questions about the government’s insistence that bailing out A.I.G. back in 2008 was risky. The lawyers cite correspondence that suggests government officials and their attorneys believed the bailout loan could actually prove quite profitable.In a Sept. 23, 2008, email from another Davis Polk attorney, Marshall S. Huebner, to the New York Fed’s general counsel, Thomas C. Baxter Jr., Mr. Huebner wrote, “The real joy comes when we get back the $85, with $10 + + + in fees and interest, and make the Treasury tens of billions it deserves (and needs!) on the equity.” He was referring to the initial $85 billion government bailout of A.I.G.The government, meanwhile, accuses Mr. Greenberg’s legal team of engaging in “distractions” aimed at blurring the fact that A.I.G., without the bailout, would have surely collapsed.“A.I.G. faced imminent bankruptcy,” the government’s filing argues. “Most companies, and their shareholders, have to suffer the consequences of bankruptcy if they cannot find solutions to their financial problems. A.I.G., and its shareholders, did not.”In fact, far from not suffering, the government argues, Mr. Greenberg and other A.I.G. shareholders actually came out ahead, profiting from the deal that was struck during the company’s darkest hour. The deal, the government argues, was voluntary because A.I.G.’s board accepted the terms.“A.I.G.’s board concluded that the loan would be in the best interests of A.I.G. and its shareholders,” the government wrote. “For A.I.G.’s shareholders, owning 20 percent of something was better than 100 percent of nothing.”Because this is a bench trial, Judge Wheeler will rule on whether the government acted lawfully in a time of crisis, or whether officials crossed the line in an attempt to save A.I.G.In April, lawyers for both sides are currently scheduled to return to court to present their closing arguments. A ruling could come as soon as this summer.Advertisement