By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDFEB. 20, 2015
Last year, Mick McGuire and Daniel S. Loeb agreed on the same thing: Change was needed at Sotheby’s.Now Mr. Loeb sits on the company’s board after having all but won a bruising proxy fight. But Mr. McGuire remains unhappy with how Sotheby’s is being run.Mr. McGuire’s activist hedge fund, Marcato Capital Management, sent a letter to Sotheby’s board on Friday calling on the company to buy back $500 million worth of shares. The demand comes a week after the auction house announced plans to suspend some capital returns to shareholders while it searches for a new chief executive.The letter hints at a potential conflict between two of the busier activist investors. Both men had pressed Sotheby's to return more capital to investors, leading to Mr. Loeb’s bitter war against the company’s board and an eventual truce that gave him three board seats.AdvertisementYet in Friday’s letter, addressed to the company's lead independent director, Domenico De Sole, Mr. McGuire expressed frustration with what he called poor returns on the auction house’s capital.Advertisement“This willful neglect on the part of both management and the finance committee of the board must end urgently,” Mr. McGuire wrote. “Shareholders deserve leadership that combines sound business strategy with skilled financial management.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. McGuire also called for the dismissal of Sotheby’s chief financial officer, Patrick McClymont. Buttressing the demand are quotes from internal communications in late 2013 between Mr. McClymont, a Goldman Sachs banker at the time, and company executives disparaging Marcato’s motives.The emergence of Mr. McGuire’s demands poses yet another headache for Sotheby’s as it continues to search for a successor to William F. Ruprecht, the chief executive who was the object of attack by Mr. Loeb during the proxy fight last year.In response to Marcato’s letter, Sotheby’s issued a statement from Mr. De Sole. “The board welcomes shareholder views and suggestions,” he said, “but our immediate priority is selecting a new C.E.O. and determining a strategy to increase shareholder value. We will address capital allocation based on our strategy and the resulting capital needs. Further, good governance requires that the new C.E.O. be involved in something as important as our capital allocation policy.”News of the letter was reported earlier by CNBC.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.