AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jeffrey GoldfarbTime Warner Cable’s deal risk is going down to the wire.The $45 billion sale of Time Warner to its larger rival, Comcast, has already been under consideration for nearly a year by regulators. A Federal Communications Commission, preoccupied with its decision to treat the Internet like a utility, caused part of the delay. The agency’s decision to raise the standard for high-speed broadband also set off fresh concerns that it might influence the Justice Department’s analysis. The implied chances for success are now at 60 percent, close to the lowest in the market since the transaction was announced.That calculation assumes that Time Warner Cable’s share price would fall to about $121 if the deal fell through. That’s 18 percent below where it currently trades and builds in a 28 percent bump — roughly the broader market’s gain since the summer of 2013 — from when reports first surfaced that another rival, Charter Communications, might bid for Time Warner Cable. (It eventually did.) Consider the logic the other way around, however, using a Breakingviews calculator.Say an investor sees a 75 percent chance of approval. In theory, that would mean Time Warner Cable would trade at about $156 a share. That’s closer to the stock swap offered by Comcast, which is currently valued at $168. Conversely, presuming the odds of success at only one-third would mean the target’s shares should tumble below $137 from the $147 where they are currently trading.Even if the deal were to collapse, there may be more of a cushion for Time Warner Cable. Charter Communications, backed by the cable mogul John Malone, could return with its unsolicited bid. A defeated Time Warner Cable might even be more receptive to the overture than it was previously. Without Comcast as a partner, Time Warner Cable’s president, Robert D. Marcus, and its investors would be licking their wounds. The fact that they failed to secure any sort of breakup fee would add insult to injury.Jeffrey Goldfarb is United States editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement