AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko Tabuchi and Danielle IvoryIn an escalating standoff with Takata, federal regulators said on Friday that they would begin to fine the Japanese auto supplier $14,000 a day, saying it had not fully cooperated in an investigation into defective airbags.Takata has failed to respond “fully or truthfully” to two orders that it turn over documents and information related to the defect, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration wrote in a letter to the company. The company quickly disputed the assertions, saying that it was cooperating with regulators and was in regular communication.Takata’s airbag inflaters can explode violently when they deploy, spraying metal fragments. More than 18 million vehicles with the faulty airbags have been recalled in the United States, and at least six deaths worldwide have been linked to the defect.“Takata is neither being forthcoming with the information that it is legally obligated to supply, nor is it being cooperative in aiding N.H.T.S.A.’s ongoing investigation of a potentially serious safety defect,” the letter said.For example, the safety agency said that while the company had turned over 2.4 million documents, it had not helped regulators fully understand them.In a statement, Takata said that it was “surprised and disappointed” by the agency’s letter and that it disagreed with the agency’s characterization that it had not been cooperating with regulators.Takata said that it had produced the documents and had been in regular communication with agency officials.The company also said it was working with agency engineers to identify the cause of the ruptures and was keeping them informed on Takata’s testing.“We remain fully committed to cooperating with N.H.T.S.A. in the interests of advancing auto safety for the driving public,” the company said.Senators John Thune and Bill Nelson, members of the Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, urged Takata to step up its cooperation with the agency’s investigation. Mr. Thune, Republican of South Dakota, is the committee’s chairman, and Mr. Nelson, Democrat of Florida, is the ranking member.“We are extremely troubled by the Department of Transportation’s report that Takata is not fully cooperating with such a serious safety investigation,” they said in a joint statement.More vehicles, including old models, have been recalled in the United States in 2014 than ever before. Explore the size and scope of the recalls, and find out if your car has been affected.The fines are the latest event in what has become an increasingly tense showdown between Takata and the agency.In December, Takata defied an order by safety regulators that it expand recalls of driver’s-side airbags beyond certain geographic regions associated with high humidity. Most major automakers, including Honda, Chrysler, Ford and Mazda, have broadened the recalls to cover the entire country.Takata said the agency did not have the authority to compel it to expand the recall. And on Friday, Takata said that its research continued to support its view that age, as well as sustained exposure to heat and humidity, was a common factor in the ruptures.In a call with reporters, a spokesman for the agency, Gordon Trowbridge, said that it would file an order to ensure it had access to all of the data from Takata’s testing of its airbags. The order will also aim to ensure that private litigants will have access to airbag inflaters for their own independent testing, he said.The $14,000 fine stems from violations of two special orders from the agency. Each violation carries a fine of $7,000 a day, the maximum allowed.If the matter is not resolved quickly, the agency said, it will begin the process of deposing Takata employees in the United States and Japan. The agency also threatened to refer the matter to the Justice Department to compel Takata in federal court to respond fully to the orders for information and to pay the civil penalties.The New York Times has exposed missteps and delays by automakers and federal safety regulators in responding to deadly defects in automobiles during what became a record year for recalls.For Takata, the standoff carries risks, said Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond in Virginia. “The last thing Takata should want is a referral to D.O.J. and being in the cross hairs of N.H.T.S.A. and Justice,” he said.The agency, which has a new administrator, Mark Rosekind, has been under increasing pressure as the auto industry recalled a record number of vehicles last year.In January, the agency imposed a record $70 million penalty on Honda for grossly underreporting fatal accidents and injuries to the government. That was twice the $35 million fine levied on General Motors last year after the automaker failed to report a defective ignition switch for more than a decade.But some lawmakers have criticized penalties like the ones on Honda and Takata as far too low to have any effect. Takata, for example, had about $4.7 billion in revenue in 2014. Last May, Senator Nelson introduced legislation that would eliminate the cap on penalties like the ones levied on G.M. and Honda.Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx announced the Takata penalty on Friday in Richmond, Va., while promoting stronger auto safety rules.At the same event, Mr. Foxx also called on Congress to pass legislation that would force rental car companies and used-car dealers to fix safety defects before renting or selling vehicles that had been recalled.Though new cars under recall must be repaired before a sale, the United States does not have a federal law requiring the repair of used vehicles, including rental cars. What’s more, used-car dealers and rental car companies do not have to disclose that a vehicle is the subject of a recall.“It’s really historic for them to come out so strongly to close those auto safety loopholes for rental cars and used cars,” said Rosemary Shahan, president of Consumers for Auto Reliability and Safety, who also attended the Richmond news conference and supports the legislation. “That would be a major expansion of N.H.T.S.A.’s authority.”Advertisement