AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryThe chairman of Citigroup’s Mexico operations, Manuel Medina-Mora, is retiring in June, after a tumultuous year at one of the bank’s most profitable units.Mr. Medina-Mora, who joined Citigroup in 2001 when the bank bought the Mexican bank Banamex, rose through the ranks to become co-president and head of global consumer operations.But after a series of scandals rocked Banamex last year, raising concerns about lax controls in Mexico, Citigroup executives in New York began preparing for Mr. Medina-Mora’s departure.In a memo to staff on Friday, Citigroup’s chief executive, Michael L. Corbat, praised Mr. Medina-Mora, 64, for helping turn the bank’s hodgepodge of retail banks across the world into a cohesive global bank.“The turnaround has been impressive,” Mr. Corbat wrote in the memo.The bank said that a replacement for Mr. Medina-Mora would be named in the near future.The troubles in Mexico emerged nearly a year ago, when Citigroup disclosed that Banamex had been defrauded of about $400 million by an oil services company that had a long history of financial problems and questionable business practices.That fraud prompted an internal investigation that uncovered other problems at Banamex, including some at the bank’s private security unit. Employees of the unit were accused of taking kickbacks and purchasing recordings of personal phone conversations.Citigroup also disclosed that Banamex USA, a banking unit that operates out of California, is the focus of a federal investigation about potentially faulty anti-money-laundering controls involving cross-border transactions. High-ranking executives at Citigroup were concerned that Mr. Medina-Mora was given too much leeway in running the Mexico operation, said people briefed on the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Another worry was that Mr. Medina-Mora was stretched too thin overseeing Mexico and Citigroup’s sprawling global consumer business.Despite the problems, Mr. Medina-Mora is considered among the most influential bankers in Mexico, and his connections are invaluable to Citigroup’s continued success there.Even after he retires, Mr. Medina-Mora will serve as a nonexecutive chairman of Banamex.But Banamex’s chief executive, Ernesto Torres Cantú, will no longer report to Mr. Medina-Mora, but directly to Mr. Corbat, according to the internal memo.In a memo to bank employees on Friday, Mr. Medina-Mora said in his five years at the helm of the consumer business, he has worked to make Citigroup a “client-centric” bank.“Together, we have built a strong foundation — a simpler, safer, stronger consumer franchise for Citi,” he wrote.Citigroup also disclosed on Friday that Mr. Corbat received stock valued at about $3.5 million as part of his compensation for last year. With that award, Mr. Corbat stands to receive total compensation in 2014 of roughly $13 million, a significant cut from the roughly $14.5 million he was paid in 2013.Last year was a rough time for Citigroup. In addition to the Mexican scandals, the bank failed to pass the Federal Reserve’s annual stress test last March and paid $7 billion to settle accusations about its role in selling troubled mortgage securities in the lead-up to the financial crisis.Advertisement