By EMILY STEELFEB. 22, 2015
The Fox News host Bill O’Reilly has taken to the airwaves to fight back against accusations that he misled audiences with stories about his war reporting earlier in his career.Last week, the magazine Mother Jones published an article, written by David Corn and Daniel Schulman, that said Mr. O’Reilly exaggerated stories about his war reporting covering the Falklands war in 1982 and in El Salvador in 1980. The article said that while Mr. O’Reilly claimed to be in a war zone when he was a young correspondent for CBS News, no American correspondents ever reached the conflict area during the Falklands war. The story also claimed that a later description by Mr. O’Reilly of his El Salvador experience conflicts with his reporting there.The Mother Jones piece was titled “Bill O’Reilly Has His Own Brian Williams Problem,” a reference to the NBC News anchor Brian Williams, who was suspended for six months without pay this month after he was found to have embellished a story about being on a helicopter that was shot down in Iraq in 2003.Mr. O’Reilly has “bemoaned the supposed culture of deception within the liberal media, and he proclaimed that the Williams controversy should prompt questioning of other ‘distortions’ by left-leaning outlets,” the article said. “Yet for years, O’Reilly has recounted dramatic stories about his own war reporting that don’t withstand scrutiny — even claiming he acted heroically in a war zone that he apparently never set foot in.”AdvertisementMr. O’Reilly denied the charges leveled against him and countered critics during his show on Friday as well as on Howard Kurtz’s MediaBuzz show on Sunday, which is also broadcast on Fox News.AdvertisementFox News underscored that it is standing behind Mr. O’Reilly, one of the biggest personalities on the top-rated cable news network. “Fox News Chairman and C.E.O. Roger Ailes and all senior management are in full support of Bill O’Reilly,” a spokeswoman said in a statement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Friday, Mr. O’Reilly said that Mother Jones and other liberal websites “couldn’t care less about the truth.”“They are in business to injure,” Mr. O’Reilly added. “This is a political hit job.”Mr. O’Reilly said that he had been clear that he covered violent protests in Argentina in the aftermath of the Falklands War. “I never said I was on the Falkland Islands as Corn purports,” he said. “I said I covered the Falklands war, which I did.”“This is splitting hairs, trying anything they can to bring down me, because of the Brian Williams situation,” Mr. O’Reilly. “That is exactly what it is.”Mr. O’Reilly said he would settle the dispute on his show, “The O’Reilly Factor,” on Monday. He also has invited former CBS News employees to appear on his show to discuss the controversy.A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Fox News Host Rebuts Claims of Exaggerated War Stories.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.