By THE NEW YORK TIMESFEB. 22, 2015
Here are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week.• Probed Bank’s EarningsThe British bank HSBC will report its fourth-quarter results on Monday while still reeling from revelations about efforts by its Swiss private banking arm to help wealthy clients avoid taxes.Media reports, based on secret documents taken from the bank in 2007, showed that employees had reassured clients that HSBC would not disclose details of their accounts to tax authorities in their home countries and discussed options to avoid paying taxes on those assets.The data was turned over to French authorities by a former HSBC employee and has been used by governments since 2010 to seek back taxes and penalties against individuals. In Britain, more than 135 million pounds, or $208 million, in back taxes and penalties has been recovered based on the data.AdvertisementHSBC has said that its Swiss operations “have undergone a radical transformation” in recent years and that it has shrunk its Swiss banking client base by about 70 percent since 2007. Last week, local prosecutors in Switzerland searched the offices of HSBC’s Swiss private bank in Geneva as part of a new investigation into potential money laundering.AdvertisementThe bank, which also is facing investigations in Belgium, France and Argentina, said it continues to cooperate with Swiss authorities. Separately, the Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds Banking Group also will report their fourth-quarter results, with R.B.S. on Thursday and Lloyds on Friday. —Chad BrayUpdate: HSBC said on Monday that profit fell 15 percent in 2014. The bank again apologized for what it described as “conduct and compliance failures” in its Swiss unit and said it had overhauled its private banking business.• Comcast and Possible Impact of Cord CuttersComcast, the largest cable operator in the country, will report fourth-quarter earnings on Tuesday, and Wall Street will be looking for signs of progress on Comcast’s proposed $45 billion acquisition of Time Warner Cable, which remains in regulatory limbo a year after it was announced.Comcast’s business fundamentals also will be put under the microscope by investors, as some analysts recently have noted a rise of so-called cord cutting, where people cancel their pay television service in favor of cheaper streaming alternatives. —Emily Steel• Yellen Goes Before CongressJanet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, has not spoken in public since mid-December. She is scheduled to break that silence on Tuesday, when she appears before the Senate Banking Committee to testify about the economy and the course of monetary policy.She will repeat the performance on Wednesday before the House Financial Services Committee. The key question: Is the Fed still on track to raise its benchmark interest rate as soon as June, or is it increasingly inclined to wait at least a little longer? —Binyamin AppelbaumPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.• Retailers’ ResultsA number of retailers report earnings this week, including Macy’s, Home Depot and Office Depot on Tuesday; Target, Lowe’s and T. J. Maxx on Wednesday; and J. C. Penney, Kohl’s and Gap on Thursday. Results will be mixed, though most retailers should show that they are starting to benefit from the strong economic recovery, as well as lower prices at the gas pump, which could leave consumers with extra dollars in their pockets.The earnings also follow Walmart’s announcement last week that it will raise the pay of a half-million hourly wage workers. Retailers like Home Depot and Target, which together with Walmart are among the largest employers in the country, may also face pressure to raise wages, especially as the job market recovers and competition for workers intensifies. —Hiroko TabuchiAdvertisement• Questions for JPMorganJPMorgan Chase will hold its annual investor day on Tuesday. The bank’s executives, including Jamie Dimon, the chief executive, are expected to answer questions about the bank’s strategy at a time when regulators are pushing banks to get smaller.New capital requirements are expected to come down particularly hard on JPMorgan because of its size and complexity. A Goldman Sachs analyst recently noted that JPMorgan may be worth more broken up than whole. A JPMorgan executive told Bloomberg last week that the bank was looking at cutting back some of its trading operations. —Nathaniel Popper• Private Equity ShowcasePrivate-equity leaders from around the world will gather in Berlin beginning on Tuesday for SuperReturn International, a three-day showcase for the industry. The speakers include Leon Black, the founding partner of Apollo Capital Management; Steve Koltes, the co-chairman of CVC Capital Partners; James Coulter, the co-founder of TPG Capital; and Guy Hands, the chairman of Terra Firma.A recurring theme at last year’s conference was the need for the industry to better educate the public about how private equity firms help the companies they take over and generally benefit the economy, including investors like pension funds and sovereign wealth funds. —Chad Bray• F.C.C. Votes on Net Neutrality PlanThe Federal Communications Commission votes on Thursday on the plan of its chairman, Tom Wheeler, to issue strong utility-style rules to protect an open Internet. His net neutrality proposal would prohibit broadband services from offering fast lanes on the Internet for those willing to pay, among other practices. Approval is expected by a 3-2 vote, along party lines. Legal challenges will follow. —Steve Lohr• Revised Estimate of Economic GrowthThe Commerce Department on Friday will release its revised estimate of economic growth in the fourth quarter of 2014. Economists on Wall Street expect government statisticians to revise the growth rate in October, November and December of last year downward to 2 percent from their initial estimate of 2.6 percent, which was released in late January.Much of the anticipated drop comes from a weakening trade balance and slower additions to inventory by businesses than first thought. Final sales to domestic consumers remained healthy in the period, however, which augurs well for economic growth in the current first quarter.In addition, a slower inventory buildup last quarter could mean more stockpiling now, which also should help 2015 get off to a slightly healthier start. Economists are projecting economic output will grow at a rate of 2.5 percent in the first quarter of 2015. Friday’s figures for economic growth last quarter represent the second of three estimates the Commerce Department will make; the final one comes out on March 27. —Nelson D. SchwartzA version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.