FEB. 22, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.07 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.02 percent.The following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Board of Education, $230.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Oak Creek-Franklin Joint School District, Wis., $59.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYClark County, Nev., School District, $398.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Grand Prairie, Tex., Independent School District, $130 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementMecklenburg County, N.C., $100 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYNevada, $270.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAtlanta, $1.25 billion of water and wastewater revenue refinancing bonds. Loop Capital Markets.California, $113.8 million of local agency revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.West Contra Costa Unified School District, Calif., $85 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Fairfax County, Va., $230 million of public improvement bonds. Morgan Stanley.Florida, $74 million of capital improvement revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Hamden, Conn., $125 million of general obligation bonds. Raymond James.Jacksonville Electric Authority, Fla., $84.3 million of revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Louisiana Local Government Environmental Facilities and Community Development Authority, $62.5 million of health care facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler.University of Massachusetts Building Authority, $460 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Braintree, Mass., $67 million of general obligation bonds. Barclays Capital.Mississippi State University, $60 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Missouri Development Finance Board, $70 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank, $75 million of revenue bonds. Raymond James.AdvertisementNew Mexico Finance Authority, $60.3 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.New York City Transportation Finance Authority, $700 million of future sales tax debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.New York Public Library, $200 million of debt securities. Morgan Stanley.North Carolina Medical Care Commission, $64 million of debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.Mission Health System, N.C., $54.9 million of taxable revenue bonds, Wells Fargo Securities.Ohio, $110 million of debt securities. Huntington Investment.Palm Beach County, Fla., $224.5 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, $715 million of alternative minimum tax debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Pennsylvania Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $339 million of University of Pennsylvania revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Chartiers Valley School District, Pa., $68.7 million of general obligation bonds. Janney Montgomery Scott.Scago Educational Facilities Corporation, S.C., $255 million of installment purchase revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Southern California Public Power Authority, $118.1 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Sunrise, Fla., $70 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Texas State University, $230 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Eagle Mountain-Saginaw Independent School District, Tex., $64.7 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. First Southwest.AdvertisementTomball, Tex., Independent School District, $134.7 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Raymond James.A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.