
Political Economy By                     
HUGO DIXON | REUTERS

FEB. 22, 2015
Alexis Tsipras must keep his nerve. The new Greek prime minister has crossed a Rubicon in asking for an extension to the country’s hated bailout program while abandoning many election promises. Mr. Tsipras should realize there is now no turning back. But he can snatch victory from defeat if he embraces radical reforms with vigor.Mr. Tsipras blinked on Friday night when it became clear that a bank run was gathering pace and capital controls would be needed within days unless he made a deal with his eurozone creditors. The government itself would have gone bust in weeks. The misery inflicted on an already suffering people would have been terrible.The Greek prime minister had to accept virtually everything his creditors, led by Germany, demanded. Athens did secure a potentially important concession, however: it will be able to propose its own list of reforms.Mr. Tsipras had to swallow much bitter medicine. Not only did he have to ask for an extension of the program, he had to promise not to roll back the reforms introduced by previous governments or introduce any controversial measures of his own during the four-month period in which he will conduct negotiations on a new long-term deal.AdvertisementThe U-turn will infuriate the powerful hard-left faction of Mr. Tsipras’ own Syriza party. But it is in the interests of the Greek people.AdvertisementMr. Tsipras now has to present his own list of reforms by Monday evening. He must resist any temptation to come up with half-hearted proposals that might appease his extremist colleagues.Instead, Athens should propose radical reforms that the previous conservative-led government was too conflicted to embrace. It should surprise its eurozone partners with its zeal and so help restore their trust.Mr. Tsipras has long said he wants to combat tax evasion, corruption and special privileges, as well as rein in the oligarchs who control swaths of the economy and stifle enterprise. Now is his chance to prove he means business.At the top of Athens’ list should be the creation of a genuinely independent tax authority. The last government, led by Antonis Samaras, sacked the authority’s boss. Buttressing it with strong legal safeguards would show that Mr. Tsipras was serious about tackling tax evasion.The prime minister should also promise to remove tax and social security privileges enjoyed by the rich. For example, judges, generals and senior civil servants should have to wait for their pensions as long as ordinary people.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Similarly, the Greek Orthodox church should lose its exemptions from the country’s unpopular property tax. Nor should the government continue to pay for priests’ pensions and salaries. The church should offer to fund them itself.Mr. Tsipras should also revive an idea, discarded by Mr. Samaras, to tax the country’s rich ship owners. It is astonishing that they slip through the tax net.Next on Athens’ list should be liberalizing markets, which are still gummed up by restrictive practices. This would attract investment and give consumers a better deal.AdvertisementMr. Tsipras should also set up a “bad bank” along the lines of what Spain and Ireland have done successfully. Separating nonperforming loans would not just free the banks to provide credit to the economy, it could also help clear up corruption, as many of the bad loans are provided to oligarchs who are clever at pressuring the banks not to foreclose on them.There is understandably some fear that a bad bank could end up as a backdoor means of helping corrupt businesses, by writing down their loans while letting their current owners stay in control.Greece’s creditors have the country on a short leash. They have not said how they will provide Athens with the money to stop its going bust next month. They have dangled the possibility of relaxing the punishing fiscal austerity but haven’t said by how much.If Mr. Tsipras can surprise his eurozone partners with radical reforms, they will be more willing to find Athens the cash to avoid bankruptcy, probably by letting it sell more short-term treasury bills to its banks. They will be more likely to relax the fiscal squeeze, allowing the government to fund some of its more pressing antipoverty policies. They will also be more amenable to relieving Greece’s vast debt burden, an idea currently on the back burner.It will not be easy for Mr. Tsipras to do all this, both because of his far left colleagues and vested interests that support his party. But he is popular enough to do this, especially if he secures a new mandate with a referendum or a second election. Now is the time to break with factions and side decisively with the Greek people.Hugo Dixon is editor at large of Reuters News.A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »