AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromSodaStream, the once-hot device for do-it-yourself sodas, is betting on the growing thirst for bubbly water to bring some sparkle back to its business.And in an effort to tap into the interest for enhanced waters, the company last month unveiled a new line of fruit flavorings like pomegranate açaí, green tea lychee and yuzo mandarin that users of its machines can add to water during the carbonation process.“There is a blurring of the space between soda and water, and we’re in the perfect position to capitalize on that,” said Daniel Birnbaum, the company’s chief executive.Sales of water are increasing strongly, according to data from Beverage Digest. Sales of bottled flat water in supermarkets grew 11 percent in 2014, while sales of sparkling waters without any sweetener grew 20 percent.Still, even Coca-Cola and PepsiCo have struggled in the water business, where there are so many competitors selling bottled water, flat and sparkling, at cheap prices. And SodaStream’s canisters for carbonation are prohibitively expensive for many families and often cumbersome to recycle.Mr. Birnbaum is trying to restore his company’s sales in the United States, which have declined since reaching a peak in 2013. In a conference call with investment analysts last October, Mr. Birnbaum also warned of a similar pattern starting to infect SodaStream’s European business.Sales fell roughly 13 percent to $125.9 million in the quarter that ended Sept. 30, and sales of soda makers in the United States plunged 60 percent to just 160,000. Flavorings sales dropped 28 percent, and sales of the gas canisters used to aerate water were level.Profits peaked in 2012 at $43.9 million, and sales crested in the quarter that ended Sept. 30, 2013.SodaStream machines have been far more popular in Europe, particularly in Germany and Scandinavia, where soft drinks are expensive and consumers are much more attuned to the impact of packaging on the environment.In the United States, soft drinks are still cheap — and even so, are losing sales as a category as consumers here work to reduce sugar in their diets and have increasing concerns about aspartame and other artificial sweeteners used in low-calorie soft drinks. Investment and industry analysts say it is now clear that SodaStream will never go head-to-head with Coca-Cola and Pepsi.“I have never believed that SodaStream was going to be a soda company in the U.S.,” said John A. Faucher, an investment analyst at JPMorgan Chase.At a conference in December sponsored by Beverage Digest, Indra K. Nooyi, chief executive of PepsiCo, was asked whether she thought home dispensers like SodaStream would become a major source of beverage consumption. PepsiCo is doing a test in Florida that allows SodaStream users to make homemade versions of Pepsi and Sierra Mist.“When you go to ‘make your own,’ it’s very hard to replicate the taste of the original product,” Ms. Nooyi said. “And so what happens is people taste the products they make at home and say, ‘Hmmm, it doesn’t taste as good as Pepsi.’ ”Moreover, she added, “if it takes 45 seconds to make a Pepsi at home as opposed to three seconds to pop open a can, they think that’s 42 seconds wasted.”So much for the rumors that Pepsi is going to buy SodaStream. “Colas made on our machine are not as good as the real thing, so why am I trying?” Mr. Birnbaum said.And so in June, the company will begin selling its own fruit flavors, although it had paired with Crystal Light flavorings before. (It will continue to have a relationship with Crystal Light.) Some of the new offerings will be low in calories, others will have added vitamins, fiber and protein. Some will be sweetened with a combination of fructose and stevia, a natural low-calorie sweetener, while others will have no calories.“I don’t think we have it all figured out yet,” Mr. Birnbaum said. “We’re not perfect, but we’re on the right path.”He said, for instance, that the company had not yet settled on how to tell its new story — despite its knack for generating free publicity.It spent handsomely on a commercial for the 2013 Super Bowl, only to have CBS ban it, perhaps because the ad poked too much fun at Coke and Pepsi, which are major sponsors. CBS never commented.The same thing happened the following year, when SodaStream came up with a Super Bowl ad featuring its new spokeswoman, Scarlett Johansson. Fox, which broadcast the game, banned the ad, never commenting on its reasons for doing so.Then Ms. Johansson was forced to resign from the board of Oxfam, an international aid organization, because SodaStream had a factory in an industrial zone in the West Bank. The factory had long been the target of protesters who contended that it legitimized Israeli settlements in the disputed territory. Last fall, the company said it would close that plant and one other as part of a consolidation effort.“No more Super Bowl,” Mr. Birnbaum said. “We don’t belong there — or need one scandal after another.” He said the company had no plans for a major advertising campaign around its reintroduction as a sparkling water business and instead would rely on social media like Instagram and Facebook in hopes of reaching “influencers.”“I think it’s a sensible move for SodaStream,” said John Sicher, publisher of Beverage Digest. “It’s what they need to do if they want to have a chance to grow.”Mr. Faucher said he expected SodaStream’s social media campaign to do well. “But if you want retail support,” he said, “you’re most likely going to need something that revolves around more paid advertising.”The real challenge for SodaStream, analysts say, is selling more of its machines — and in turn, more of the canisters of carbon dioxide gas used to aerate water, where the real profits lie.“The broader issue for them is that our numbers show machines in about 2 percent of households in the U.S. — and that penetration has been stagnant for the last year and a half,” said Bill Schmitz, an investment analyst at Deutsche Bank.Consumers technically lease the canisters, called carbonators, from SodaStream, and the gross margin on them is about 90 percent, according Mr. Schmitz. A carbonator that will aerate 60 liters of water costs $15 on exchange.Although SodaStream pitches itself as an environmentally conscious way to liven up water, Mr. Schmitz and others say the system of exchanging used gas cartridges for new ones is cumbersome. Consumers here must return the cartridges to stores that sell SodaStream machines, like Bed Bath & Beyond and Williams-Sonoma, whereas in some European countries, they can be exchanged in the checkout lines of grocery stores.American consumers also can take spent carbonators to Walmart, Target, Costco and several regional groceries like Hy-Vee and Meijer — where they can also buy bottles of flavored sparkling water or flavor drops, like Mio, to add to their own water.“It’s a huge hassle,” Mr. Schmitz said, “and the alternative is so cheap — I can buy a liter of sparkling water for 89 cents.”The beverage industry is buzzing with rumors that Keurig Green Mountain, the coffee company in which Coca-Cola has a minority stake, is on the verge of unveiling a machine that makes both single-serve hot drinks and carbonated cold drinks. In December, Keurig bought the rest of Bevyz, which held a patent for such a hot-cold machine. (It previously had a 15 percent stake in the company, which officially was named MDS Global Holding.)“I think many people aren’t going to want two machines, one for hot, one for cold, on their countertops,” Mr. Sicher said. “I think a hot-cold combination machine from Keurig is inevitable.”Advertisement