By DAVID GELLESFEB. 22, 2015
J. Michael Pearson says that the acquisitive Valeant Pharmaceuticals truly believes in innovation, but that “life would get boring” without deals.Salix Pharmaceuticals, a maker of gastrointestinal drugs that has been courted by at least four potential suitors over the last year, has finally found a buyer.Valeant Pharmaceuticals, the acquisitive Canadian pharmaceutical company, has agreed to pay $10.4 billion for Salix, or $158 a share in cash. Including debt, the transaction is valued at about $14.5 billion.The deal is a turning point for both companies.For Valeant, which spent the better part of last year unsuccessfully trying to acquire Allergan, the maker of Botox, the acquisition represents a return to form for the company and its chief executive, J. Michael Pearson.Valeant is known as an aggressive buyer of smaller drug companies, and failing to secure Allergan, even with the help of the hedge fund billionaire William A. Ackman, was a rare defeat.AdvertisementAnd for Salix, which has been courted by Allergan, Actavis and Shire in recent months, the sale to Valeant will put an end to constant deal speculation.AdvertisementSalix’s share price has risen steadily as speculation of a deal intensified, jumping more than 50 percent in the last three months alone. Sales of the company’s more than 22 drugs, which include Xifaxan, Uceris, Relistor and Apriso, have been growing rapidly. Revenue for 2014 is expected to exceed $1.4 billion.But Salix, based in Raleigh, N.C., has also had trouble with overstocked inventory for its drugs in recent months. Valeant believes it can manage the issues once it owns the company.By acquiring Salix, Valeant gains another set of products it can plug into its expanding sales pipeline. Valeant is known for acquiring products and expanding their sales, instead of spending billions on research and development in hopes of discovering lucrative new drugs.Among the deals that have given Valeant a market value of more than $58 billion was the acquisition of Bausch & Lomb, the eye care company, in 2013 for about $8.7 billion.This deal is an unusual turn of events for Valeant. Last year, as Valeant was pressuring Allergan to agree to a deal, Salix nearly played spoiler. Allergan almost acquired Salix late in the summer, a deal that would probably have made Allergan too expensive for Valeant.Allergan never bough Salix, however, agreeing to sell itself to Actavis for $66 billion and leaving Valeant on the sidelines during a banner year for health care deal making.Valeant’s deal for Salix came together a little more than three weeks ago, Mr. Pearson said, when he was approached by one of Salix’s bankers and informed that the company was up for sale.AdvertisementValeant executives and advisers then traveled to Raleigh and began negotiating the terms of a deal.There was also competition. As recently as a week ago, Shire, a British drug maker, was seriously considering a takeover of Salix, according to people briefed on the matter.But Shire has already made one multibillion-dollar deal this year, acquiring NPS in January. And it was only last year that Shire agreed to sell itself to AbbVie, an American pharmaceutical giant, only to see the deal fall apart after the Treasury Department changed the rules on overseas acquisitions.Moreover, Valeant was prepared to announce the deal within weeks of beginning talks.“This happened all quite quickly,” Mr. Pearson said in an interview on Sunday. “One of the reasons we were able to get this deal done is because we were prepared to move fast.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The companies said the combination would lead to cost savings of at least $500 million within six months, mostly through reducing corporate overhead and research and development spending. They expected the deal to close in the second quarter of this year.Though some jobs will be in jeopardy at Salix, Valeant said it did not plan any immediate reductions to Salix’s specialty sales force.Mr. Pearson also said Valeant would save money by reducing Salix’s tax rate. Valeant has an effective tax rate of just 4 percent.In a conference call with analysts and investors scheduled for Monday morning, Valeant executives will discuss its fourth-quarter and full-year results and the deal.Thomas W. D’Alonzo, the chairman of the board and acting chief executive at Salix, called Valeant “a logical partner.”“Combining Salix’s leading market position in gastroenterology with Valeant’s scale and resources will create a stronger and more diverse business committed to providing better health solutions to health care providers and their patients,” Mr. D’Alonzo said in a statement.AdvertisementReflecting on the attempt to buy Allergan, Mr. Pearson said he was not surprised that Actavis was able to walk away with the maker of Botox.“Last year we attempted to do something that we thought would create a lot of shareholder value if we could consummate a deal with Allergan,” he said. “We always knew that if someone else came in they would probably pay more than we would.”But he also said that many of the claims leveled by Allergan about Valeant — namely that its business model was unsustainable — have been proved wrong in recent months.“Since dropping the Allergan deal, the true colors of our business have come out,” he said.Valeant reported organic growth of 16 percent for the most recent quarter, with revenues and earnings above analyst expectations. It is telling analysts and investors to expect similar growth for the next quarter.“What we have shown is that our business is just fine,” Mr. Pearson said, adding that Valeant would report Salix’s financial results separately after the deal was completed, so investors could observe how the business fared in Valeant’s hands. “Our organization feels that a lot of the allegations that were made were just not true.”Valeant has arranged financing from a group of lenders including Deutsche Bank and HSBC.Deutsche Bank and HSBC advised Valeant, and Sullivan & Cromwell provided legal advice. JPMorgan and Centerview Partners advised Salix, and Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft provided legal advice.A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Spurned Last Year, Valeant Resumes Deal-Making.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.