AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily Steel and Ravi SomaiyaThe Fox News host Bill O’Reilly on Monday stepped up his defense against reports that he embellished stories about his war reporting earlier in his career, while some former colleagues continued to say he had exaggerated his experiences.Mr. O’Reilly is contesting an article in the magazine Mother Jones and subsequent interviews with former journalists at CBS News that accuse him of misrepresenting his coverage of the Falklands war in 1982 as a young correspondent for CBS News.The central dispute is whether Mr. O’Reilly reported from active war zones, as he has repeatedly said on the air and in his 2001 book, “The No Spin Zone: Confrontations With the Powerful and Famous in America.”Mr. O’Reilly has said that he had never claimed he reported from the Falkland Islands, where the fighting occurred. “I said I covered the Falklands war, which I did,” he said last Friday. He went on to describe his coverage of protests in the aftermath of the war on the streets of Buenos Aires, some 1,200 miles from the Falklands.On Monday’s show, Mr. O’Reilly played CBS News footage from 1982 that showed the violent protests and quoted other correspondents describing the scene. He also included an interview with Don Browne, a former NBC News bureau chief who oversaw coverage of Latin America, who said there were tanks on the streets of the Argentine capital. “It was a real country at war,” Mr. Browne said. “It was a very intense situation where people got hurt.”Mr. O’Reilly’s efforts to refute the claims by Mother Jones and some former CBS News colleagues occurred both on the air and off on Monday. During a phone conversation, he told a reporter for The New York Times that there would be repercussions if he felt any of the reporter’s coverage was inappropriate. “I am coming after you with everything I have,” Mr. O’Reilly said. “You can take it as a threat.”David Corn, one of the reporters on the Mother Jones piece, said that the issue was not whether Mr. O’Reilly had reported on a violent protest, but whether Mr. O’Reilly had reported from a war zone.Former CBS News staff members said on Monday that Mr. O’Reilly’s account of his reporting on the protests in Argentina was flawed. Eric Engberg, a correspondent for CBS News for 27 years, reported on the same riot near the presidential palace in Buenos Aires in June 1982 as Mr. O’Reilly. He said in an interview that several CBS News camera crews were sent out to cover the angry crowds, who had heard that Argentina surrendered the disputed Falkland Islands to Britain. Though the crowd was unruly, Mr. Engberg said, the rest of the CBS News crew, which included veterans of war zones, thought “it was the chummiest riot anyone had ever covered.”Mr. Corn said the video released by CBS News proved nothing. “The protest had a violent component that is not in doubt, our original piece reported that extensively,” Mr. Corn said. “The question is whether Bill O’Reilly was stating the truth when he repeatedly said that Argentine soldiers used real bullets and fired into the crowd of civilians and many were killed.”The controversy comes less than two weeks after NBC News suspended its anchor, Brian Williams, for six months without pay after he was found to have falsified a story about being on a helicopter that was shot down in Iraq in 2003.The two news networks have taken different approaches in responding to the similar controversies engulfing their biggest stars. After military veterans complained about Mr. Williams’s story about the episode in Iraq, NBC News started an internal investigation into Mr. Williams before removing him from broadcasts. Fox News executives, in contrast, have defended Mr. O’Reilly, combating the Mother Jones report and other critics. “Fox News Chairman and C.E.O. Roger Ailes and all senior management are in full support of Bill O’Reilly,” a spokeswoman said in a statement.That aggressive defense fits a broader strategy at Fox News, which consistently swings back against rival media outlets, journalism observers said.“Fox News Channel is news for people who don’t trust the rest of the news media,” said Jay Rosen, a journalism professor at New York University. “They actually want the controversy because it fits this strategy.”The viewership of Mr. O’Reilly’s show on Fox News drew an average of nearly three million viewers over the last month, compared with the 9.7 million viewers who watched NBC’s “Nightly News,” according to Nielsen data provided by Horizon Media.Mr. O’Reilly disputed the comparison between the two controversies, and said on his show last week that “Corn was trying to take the Brian Williams situation and wrap it around my neck for ideological reasons.”On Monday, there was also a back and forth over Mr. O’Reilly’s use of a New York Times article from 1982 reporting on the protests in Buenos Aires during an interview on Sunday’s Media Buzz show on Fox. Mr. O’Reilly faced criticism for cutting out a key phrase when he read excerpts from the Times article to back up his assertions that he was reporting from a war zone. The article read: “One policeman pulled a pistol, firing five shots over the heads of fleeing demonstrators.” Mr. O’Reilly left out that the shots were “over the heads of fleeing demonstrators.”Rich Meislin, the Times reporter who wrote the article, said on Facebook that as far as he knew no demonstrators were shot or killed by police that night. On Monday, Mr. O’Reilly said he was just reading clips from the piece during the Media Buzz interview and that official reports on casualties there were difficult to obtain.Mr. Engberg, the former CBS News correspondent, also strongly disputed Mr. O’Reilly’s claim that he had rescued an injured cameraman while being chased by the Argentine army. “Nobody reported a cameraman being shot or injured,” he said. His account was supported by a senior member of the CBS News management team, with close knowledge of the events that night, who said that nobody was reported injured, and no request for medical attention was made to CBS News’s local medical team.Another CBS News correspondent on the ground, Charles Gomez, said in an interview that though he likes Mr. O’Reilly and was surprised by the accusations, his memories matched those of his former colleagues.“I do remember that there was tension between the authorities and the crowd,” he said, but added that he “did not see any bloodshed.” No cameraman was injured, he said, to the best of his recollection. Mr. Gomez, who covered wars in Nicaragua and other conflict zones, said he would not describe the events that night as war.“What was happening on the Falkland Islands was a war zone,” he said. “What was happening in Buenos Aires was unrest.”Mr. O’Reilly had invited several former CBS employees to appear on his show, including Mr. Engberg, the anchor Dan Rather and Van Gordon Sauter, who was president of CBS News.Mr. Engberg said he declined to defend his account on Mr. O’Reilly’s show because “if he wants to present a different view or version of reality, I am not going to stand around and debate it.” He also said he was familiar with the way Mr. O’Reilly ran his show. “Nobody gets a fair shake,” Mr. Engberg said. “He just wants to beat them up, call them names.”Mr. Rather and Mr. Sauter also did not appear on the show.On Monday’s show, Mr. O’Reilly ended his segment about the controversy saying he hoped to move past the dispute. “I want to stop this now,” he said. “I hope we can stop it. I really do.”Advertisement