AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter Eavis and Ben ProtessTheir legal careers, and by extension their marriage, are the stuff of lore. Mary Jo White leads the Securities and Exchange Commission; her husband, John, practices law at an old-guard firm as elite as the corporations it represents. Together, they are a legal power couple that straddles Wall Street and Washington like few others.Their careers, however, can at times collide, generating headaches for the S.E.C. as it pursues wrongdoing in the nation’s financial markets, according to interviews with lawyers and a review of federal records. In the nearly two years since Ms. White took over the agency, she has had to recuse herself from more than four dozen enforcement investigations, the interviews and records show, sometimes delaying settlements and opening the door, in at least one case, to a lighter punishment.The interviews and records detail for the first time the extent of Ms. White’s recusals and the implications of her absence. When ethics rules force her out of cases, the S.E.C. loses her expertise as a former federal prosecutor who has pledged a tough line on Wall Street, underscoring the unintended consequences of recruiting government officials from the small world of the legal elite.Ms. White has sat out of cases that involve Debevoise & Plimpton, where she worked as a defense lawyer, and her clients there, which included JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America’s former chief executive. Those restrictions, which account for most of her recusals, end in April.But in a surprising twist, Ms. White will have to keep sitting out cases that involve her husband’s firm, Cravath, Swaine & Moore. So far, she has had to recuse herself from at least 10 investigations into clients of Cravath, interviews and records show, including some that came before Ms. White joined the agency and at least four that involved Mr. White himself. Because of ethics rules that Ms. White follows, she must leave all Cravath cases in the hands of the commission. Without Ms. White, some cases have split the agency’s four remaining commissioners, pitting two Democrats who have endorsed the public uproar over financial wrongdoing against two Republicans who have expressed reservations about levying big corporate fines. Ms. White, a former United States attorney in Manhattan who promotes big fines and admissions of wrongdoing, would otherwise provide the deciding fifth vote. The prospect of a party-line stalemate without her has helped shape a case against the Computer Sciences Corporation, a large technology company suspected of accounting irregularities. Knowing that they faced a split commission, S.E.C. enforcement officials discussed the case with at least one Republican commissioner, focusing on the size of the financial penalty. After those discussions and negotiations with Cravath, the officials agreed to settle for $190 million, tens of millions of dollars less than the agency originally pressed for, according to lawyers briefed on the matter who spoke on the condition that they not be named.A penalty of $190 million looks large by the standards of recent accounting cases, and the S.E.C. often begins negotiations with an inflated demand that it eventually lowers. Still, the lawyers briefed on the matter said that some S.E.C. officials felt that Ms. White’s recusal made it harder to secure an amount that they thought was warranted. The interviews with the lawyers and the review of the federal records not only capture the drawbacks of such recusals, but also offer a window into the inner workings of the white-collar legal bar, an extended group of family and friends who alternately police and defend the nation’s biggest corporations. To identify potential recusals, The New York Times reviewed hundreds of court records, staff memos and vote tallies. Although The Times found about four dozen recusals, the findings are incomplete. The S.E.C. discloses vote tallies only in cases before its own administrative court — about 1,100 since Ms. White took over — not when it files in federal court, as it often does. The agency, which declined to comment, does not publicly provide a list of its recusals. Of course, Ms. White is not alone in facing recusals. Last year, she participated in far more votes on enforcement actions than nearly all her fellow commissioners, The Times’s review of records show. Every S.E.C. commissioner has to sit out on agency business at times, as does Andrew Ceresney, the agency’s head of enforcement, who worked alongside Ms. White at Debevoise.Private sector experience like hers sharpens the prosecutorial acumen of the agency, Ms. White’s supporters say. And they note that the S.E.C. last year announced a record number of enforcement actions, including actions she supported against Morgan Stanley and Credit Suisse.Yet her recusals remain an important issue for the agency. Enforcement staff members have expressed concern that companies facing S.E.C. investigations might choose to hire Cravath to neutralize Ms. White. (While companies might be tempted to do so, it has not become a widespread pattern, records show.)Cravath did represent the cosmetics company Avon and the aluminum producer Alcoa in foreign bribery cases, forcing Ms. White’s recusal in both. Cravath represented both companies before Ms. White joined the S.E.C.Before President Obama named Mary Jo White to run the Securities and Exchange Commission, she was the top federal prosecutor in New York City.Ms. White also withdrew from an accounting case against two former executives at Affiliated Computer Services, an information technology company bought by Xerox, long a Cravath client. Without Ms. White, the remaining commissioners fought over whether to approve the case. One Democrat, Luis A. Aguilar, issued a public dissent, calling the settlement “a wrist slap at best.” Of the roughly 10 Cravath cases that required Ms. White’s recusal, Mr. White helped handle at least four, the interviews show. Mr. White, a former S.E.C. official who specializes in corporate disclosures, is not a litigator. His role in the cases, the lawyers said, often amounted to making a phone call or sending an email, or working behind the scenes on a company’s disclosures. In the Avon case, Mr. White appeared in person at a meeting with Justice Department and S.E.C. officials, one lawyer said.He also played a role in the Computer Sciences accounting case, the lawyers said. Cravath entered that case early last year, joining another law firm, Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft. Although the four commissioners have yet to vote on the case, Computer Sciences has already publicly disclosed the contours of a settlement, saying it expects to pay the $190 million penalty and restate its earnings. Initially, lawyers said, the S.E.C. sought about $300 million.Like her Democratic colleagues, Ms. White, a political independent, typically supports large financial penalties. The agency’s Republican commissioners, Daniel M. Gallagher Jr. and Michael S. Piwowar, are decidedly more skeptical. In a speech from 2013, Mr. Gallagher raised concerns about “eye-popping” corporate penalties — or what he called “shareholder penalties, since that’s what they are.”Often, the Republican commissioners will approve a financial penalty if they believe it is roughly equivalent to the theoretical benefit that the illegal acts generated. In the Computer Sciences case, the estimated size of the improper benefit was discussed with at least one of the Republican commissioners, according to the lawyers.Even if the agency’s Republicans vote for the settlement, it is unclear whether the Democrats will do the same. Inside the S.E.C., some questions have arisen about whether the agency was planning to pursue civil charges against enough Computer Sciences employees. Although the S.E.C. will charge several employees, including former senior executives and lower-level staff, some employees who faced investigation will emerge unscathed. It is unlikely, the lawyers said, that Ms. White’s recusal had anything to do with the number of people charged.But concerns also arose at the S.E.C. about not demanding an admission of wrongdoing from Computer Sciences, the lawyers said. Months after telling the company to admit to misdeeds, the S.E.C. backed down, the lawyers said, a rare about-face that stemmed from concerns that the admission would imperil the company’s role as a government contractor.Without Ms. White voting on the case, the S.E.C. officials favoring such an admission may have lost a potential supporter. In 2013, she announced plans to shift the agency away from its decades-long practice of allowing virtually all defendants to settle without admissions of wrongdoing, making it a central element in her enforcement platform.It is impossible to know whether Ms. White would have pushed for admissions in this case, and she typically defers to the judgment of Mr. Ceresney, the enforcement chief.Cravath declined to comment, saying it could not discuss client matters. After Ms. White joined the S.E.C., Mr. White converted his Cravath partnership so that he would no longer receive a share of the firm’s profits. When Ms. White recuses herself, some cases drag on for months. A settlement last year with Bank of America automatically disqualified the bank from most private offerings of securities.Bank of America requested a waiver, but Kara M. Stein, a Democratic commissioner, balked. And while the negotiations dragged on, the S.E.C. and Bank of America did not receive court approval of the underlying settlement.Ultimately, a compromise emerged: Provide a temporary waiver. Yet while Ms. Stein praised the “breakthrough,” Mr. Gallagher lamented a “divergence from historical practice.”Alain Delaquérière contributed reporting.Advertisement