AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — The Walt Disney Company on Monday handed the reins of its sprawling theme park operation to a fast-rising executive known for streamlining the entertainment giant’s merchandise division.The executive, Robert Chapek, who has run Disney Consumer Products for the past three years and was previously a home entertainment manager, will immediately take over as chairman of Walt Disney Parks and Resorts. Mr. Chapek, 55, succeeds Thomas O. Staggs, who this month was promoted to chief operating officer, the No. 2 job at Disney over all.Disney did not name a replacement for Mr. Chapek. While the company most likely wanted to give Mr. Chapek his day in the sun, Disney is also working on a reorganization that is expected to result in the combination of its two smallest units — consumer products and digital media — as the toy industry becomes more rooted in technology. James A. Pitaro currently runs the digital group.Mr. Chapek assumes the theme park leadership after 22 years at Disney. He took over in 2011 at Disney Consumer Products, which is based in Glendale, Calif., and executed a wrenching but ultimately successful restructuring that changed the way Disney approaches the licensing of apparel and toys, among other items.Last year, profit for Disney Consumer Products increased 22 percent, to $1.36 billion.In working to retool the merchandising operation, Mr. Chapek worked closely with Marvel, which continues to be run by Isaac Perlmutter, an executive known for aggressively pushing for efficiencies. How closely Mr. Chapek will remain aligned with Mr. Perlmutter in his new job was unclear, although Disney has been working to further integrate Marvel characters into its parks around the world.Mr. Chapek, who will report both to Mr. Staggs and Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, declined to comment beyond prepared remarks. In a statement, Mr. Chapek said he was grateful for the opportunities he had had at Disney and was looking forward to “creating magical memories” for park visitors.Mr. Iger called him “experienced and versatile.” Mr. Staggs noted that Mr. Chapek would step in as construction continues at Shanghai Disneyland.The parks division, which recorded a 20 percent increase in profit last year, is also working on an “Avatar”-themed expansion in Florida and on “Star Wars”-themed additions for multiple parks.Advertisement