By DAVID GELLESFEB. 23, 2015
Stifel Financial, the financial services firm, said on Monday that it had agreed to acquire smaller rival Sterne Agee Group in a deal valued at about $150 million.Stifel will pay cash and stock valued at $51.55 per share for Sterne Agee. That is slightly below where Stifel stock opened on Monday. But after the market closed and the deal was announced, Stifel stock was up nearly 7 percent.With a market value of nearly $3.5 billion, Stifel offers banking, securities and financial advisory services through a handful of different brands including Stifel Nicolaus; Keefe, Bruyette & Woods, and Miller Buckfire.In acquiring Sterne Agee, Stifel will gain about 730 financial advisers and management of more than $20 billion of client assets.Advertisement“Sterne Agee’s fixed income platform is highly complementary to our existing products and services, and together will catapult this business to a new level,” Ronald J. Kruszewski, Stifel’s chief executive, said in a statement. “This acquisition furthers our goal of creating a balanced, well-diversified business mix with wealth management and institutional exposure.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Stifel said it expects Sterne Agee will add at least $300 million in annual revenues to the company.“Sterne Agee has been fortunate to experience growth and success for more than a century,” Eric Needleman, Sterne Agee Group’s chairman, said in a statement.“We believe that the time is right to merge our company with Stifel to allow our shareholders, clients and employees the opportunity to continue to prosper in the ever-challenging financial services arena,” Mr. Needleman said. “Our goal of being a preeminent financial services company has not changed, but we are accelerating this plan by joining together with a like-minded company with a similar legacy.”AdvertisementStifel was advised by its own team of bankers at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods, and received legal advice from Bryan Cave. Bank of America Merrill Lynch provided a fairness opinion to the Stifel board. Sterne Agee was advised by Sandler O’Neill & Partners, and received legal advice from Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.