AdvertisementSupported byBy David JollyPARIS — General Electric expressed confidence on Monday that its $13.5 billion acquisition of Alstom’s energy business would be completed, even after European antitrust authorities raised concerns about how it would affect competition in the market for heavy-duty gas turbines.The blessing of the European Commission, the executive arm of the European Union, is one of the final clearances that G.E. needs to close the deal for Alstom, a French company. The commission has authority to block a deal if it believes that it unfairly distorts competition. In June, G.E., the industrial and financial giant, won the French government’s backing for the acquisition after a convoluted battle played out in the news media.Under the deal, G.E.’s biggest, G.E. would obtain most of Alstom’s energy assets, while leaving its rail unit — famous for its high-speed TGV trains — as a stand-alone business.The European Commission said on Monday that it was worried that G.E., the world’s top maker of heavy-duty gas turbines, would eliminate one of its three major competitors in that business by acquiring Alstom. Siemens and Mitsubishi Hitachi Power Systems are the others.“We are concerned that the proposed acquisition might not only lead to higher prices but also result in less choice for customers and less innovation in the sector,” Margrethe Vestager, the European Union’s competition commissioner, said in a statement.In one important type of heavy-duty gas turbine, those operating at 50 hertz, the commission said, a combined General Electric-Alstom would control about 50 percent of the market in Europe and worldwide, outside of China.G.E. disputed the commission’s account. “We believe our alliance with Alstom is good for customers, employees and Europe, and that the gas turbine market is both global and highly competitive,” the company said in a statment. “We disagree with the preliminary concerns raised by the European Commission statement today.”It noted that the commission’s investigations were part of the “normal process for engagement on these issues,” and said that it still hoped to close the deal by midyear.The commission has until July 8 to decide. “The opening of an in-depth inquiry does not prejudge the final result of the investigation,” the European Commission said.In the deal for Alstom, Jeffrey R. Immelt, G.E.’s chairman and chief executive, has taken great pains to avoid the fate of the deal by his predecessor, Jack Welch, for Honeywell International. Mr. Welch’s $42 billion takeover of Honeywell foundered in 2001 in the face of opposition from Mario Monti, the European Union’s competition commissioner at the time.Advertisement