AdvertisementSupported byBy Reed AbelsonGeisinger Health System, which is viewed as a national model in providing both high-quality and cost-effective medical care, announced on Monday that it had chosen Dr. David T. Feinberg, the president of the UCLA Health System, as its next chief executive.Hospitals and doctors are struggling to adapt to a rapidly changing environment, where employers and insurers are increasingly rewarding them for the value of the care they deliver rather that the amount of care they provide. Dr. Feinberg is expected to bring a strong emphasis on providing a positive patient experience, increasingly viewed as an important part of care.Geisinger has been at the forefront of adopting new ways to deliver care. The system is one of only a handful of organizations, along with Kaiser Permanente in California and Intermountain Healthcare in Utah, to closely coordinate the care of patients, improve their health and reduce overall medical costs, through the full integration of an insurance plan with hospitals and physician practices.Geisinger offers a “perfect laboratory, or sweet spot, to make those things work,” Dr. Feinberg said.The system, which has nine hospitals and 1,200 physicians, is well known for such innovations as the so-called warranty for coronary bypass surgeries, promising employers and insurers that it could reduce complications and avoid hospital readmissions by having its doctors follow a specific protocol of care. The system, through its insurer, has also invested in helping doctors better manage the care of their patients by helping pay for nurses to oversee that care.Geisinger has recently expanded beyond Pennsylvania to announce plans to buy AtlantiCare, a health system in southern New Jersey. Geisinger is also active in medical research in areas like genomic medicine.Dr. Feinberg, a 52-year-old psychiatrist who has spent virtually all of his career at UCLA, is expected to take over Geisinger, which has headquarters in Danville in northeastern Pennsylvania, on May 1. He replaces the nonprofit system’s longtime chief executive, Dr. Glenn D. Steele Jr., 70. Dr. Steele will remain chairman of a for-profit venture the system spun off in 2013.In choosing Dr. Feinberg, Geisinger picked someone who made UCLA much more popular with its patients. For the last several years, Dr. Feinberg ran the four hospitals and faculty practice of the Los Angeles health system affiliated with the University of California, including the system’s flagship hospital, Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, one of the nation’s top academic medical centers.While the system is well respected for its sophisticated medical care, it has also been criticized for its high costs. Dr. Feinberg tackled both the system’s expenses and its reputation for poor patient service.“Our laser focus was on patient satisfaction, defining it as a true north,” Dr. Feinberg said. Too often, he said, doctors and nurses forget the importance of being present with the patient, he said, especially as medical care is more reliant on new technology. At UCLA, patient satisfaction scores rose sharply.“There are so many distractions,” Dr. Feinberg said. “The true north has to be, in the middle of a crazy payment system and all of these changes, how to care for the person,” he said, whether someone is arriving by helicopter for emergency medical care or is a new mother with various social and psychological challenges. “My leadership style is at the bedside.”One of his hopes, Dr. Feinberg said, is to bring some of the same thinking about patient experience to Geisinger’s health insurance unit. He wants to rethink the relationship the insurer has with its members and focus more on meeting needs in new ways.William Alexander, the chairman of the Geisinger Health System Foundation, said the board believed that Dr. Feinberg would be able to navigate through the rapid changes in health care through his focus on quality care and patient satisfaction. “He will be able to present a vision and make us a significant contributor to the industry,” he said.Geisinger would not disclose at the time of the announcement how much it planned to pay Dr. Feinberg as chief executive.The UCLA medical center was recently the site of a lethal “superbug,” transmitted through improperly sterilized medical scopes, that caused seven patients to fall ill, including two who died. While UCLA said it had followed the manufacturers’ guidelines, Dr. Feinberg was quick to apologize and acknowledge the need for people to understand what was happening.“I’ve had the experience in being involved in a variety of crises at UCLA,” said Dr. Feinberg, who added, “Apologizing and being transparent is crucial.”At Geisinger, Dr. Feinberg said he planned to spend the next several months learning more about the organization and spending as much time as he could with patients. At his interview, for example, he asked to speak to patients as way of better understanding their care.“It’s a great way to see how the system is working,” he said. “It’s really, really key to walk the shop floor.”Advertisement