
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

FEB. 23, 2015
Almost every judicial opinion instantly becomes fodder for second-guessing by all affected parties. The winner typically extols the virtues of the court’s analysis, while the loser attacks the judge’s reasoning as flawed to the point of leading to catastrophic consequences.Those views are on full display in the fight over the opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan in United States v. Newman. This was the landmark ruling late last December that overturned the insider trading convictions of the hedge fund managers Todd Newman and Anthony Chiasson and raised questions about whether the government had overreached its authority in such cases. If the appeals court lets the decision stand, the question is whether Congress might step in to clarify the scope of insider trading law.In a brief filed with the appeals court asking it to reconsider its decision, the Justice Department said that language in the opinion would “dramatically limit the government’s ability to prosecute some of the most common, culpable, and market-threatening forms of insider trading.”Mr. Chiasson’s lawyers responded by asserting the government was acting like Chicken Little by proclaiming “the sky is falling” for future insider trading prosecutions, although “its tone is less that of a frightened hen and more that of a petulant rooster whose dominion has been disturbed.”AdvertisementEach side has supporters that have filed friend-of-the-court briefs to bolster their favored position. The Securities and Exchange Commission, which brings most insider trading cases, said that the opinion would “undermine investor confidence in the fairness and integrity of the securities markets.”AdvertisementMark Cuban, the billionaire owner of the Dallas Mavericks who successfully fought back in court against S.E.C. charges that he traded illegally on confidential information, told the appeals court that it “must continue to reject the government’s attempts to expand insider trading proscriptions through litigation pursuant to which innocent traders find themselves ensnared in insider trading prosecutions.”The cause of all this consternation is largely traceable to one sentence in the Newman opinion describing the benefit a tipper must receive in exchange for providing confidential. The appellate court wrote that convicting a recipient of the information would be “impermissible in the absence of proof of a meaningfully close personal relationship that generates an exchange that is objective, consequential, and represents at least a potential gain of a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature.” In other words, there has to be more than just a casual friendship to support liability for insider trading based on tipping.Mathew Martoma, a former hedge fund manager who worked for Steven A. Cohen, highlighted that language in a recently filed brief seeking to have his insider trading convictions overturned. He claims the government showed only a modest friendship between him and the source of the information, which eventually generated gains and losses avoided of more than $270 million for Mr. Cohen’s firm, once known as SAC Capital Advisors.The Justice Department and S.E.C. have brought cases based primarily on the friendship between the tipper and the recipient as proof of the benefit requirement. As I noted in an earlier DealBook column, the appeals court has made life more difficult for the government but has not erected an insurmountable barrier.Once all the briefs are filed in the Newman case, the appeals court will have to decide whether to modify the opinion or perhaps have the case reargued in front of all the active judges of the appeals court, known as “en banc” review. The likelihood of a re-argument before the full court is low because about one case per year is subject to that process in the appeals court in Manhattan. Although the original three-judge panel could modify the opinion, there is an equally good chance the judges will stand by what they wrote about proving the benefit provided to a tipper – and the full court would probably go along with that.If the appellate court does not change the opinion, the Justice Department could appeal to the Supreme Court. But in all likelihood, prosecutors and the S.E.C. may try to figure out ways to live with the language of the Newman decision.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Insider trading law is largely a product of judicial decisions, so future cases can refine the contours of what is required to show the benefit that can effectively limit the impact of the Newman opinion. Moreover, the benefit requirement does not apply to cases in which someone gets inside information directly and then trades, or to tipping cases involving tender offers.Another alternative is for Congress to overturn the appeals court’s decision through legislation that clarifies the scope of insider trading liability. Politico reported that two senators are drafting legislation to negate the effect of the decision, although the exact language is still being worked out.AdvertisementThis would not be the first time Congress has overturned a judicial decision that it viewed as improperly constricting the scope of a federal criminal law. In 1987, in McNally v. United States, the Supreme Court rejected the “right of honest services” theory for violating the mail and wire fraud statutes by finding that the government could prosecute only schemes to defraud victims of money or property and not intangible rights. A year later, Congress enacted a statute reversing that ruling by making honest services fraud a basis for future prosecutions.Congress could take a narrow approach to reversing the Newman decision by defining what constitutes the benefit that the government must establish for tipping liability. It could state that personal friendship is enough to prove the tipper received a benefit without requiring evidence that it was such a close relationship that something valuable was received from dispensing the information. That would be enough to let the Justice Department and S.E.C. to continue to pursue cases involving golfing buddies or other social circles in which confidential information is passed around.A broader approach would be to actually try to define what is – and isn’t — insider trading. In his brief, Mr. Cuban argued that “congressional codification of exactly what constitutes insider trading is required.”Although Congress has embraced the prosecution of insider trading, it has been notably reluctant to provide explicit guidance about what constitutes a violation, perhaps out of fear that it would encourage traders to look for loopholes in the law. The Stop Trading on Congressional Knowledge Act, or Stock Act, adopted in 2012, made sure that members of Congress and their staff “are not exempt from the insider trading prohibitions arising under the securities laws,” but the law failed to provide any further explanation of what those prohibitions are.If Congress were to try its hand at defining insider trading, I expect that the push would be for a broader proscription of the types of trading that would violate the law. There has not been a public outcry to allow more trading on confidential information, and recent concern about the impact of high-frequency traders that rely on tiny informational advantages is unlikely to generate support for allowing increased use of market-moving information to generate profits.One means to expand insider trading law is to make any use of confidential information a violation, known as the possession theory. This is the approach taken by the S.E.C. when it adopted in Rule 14e-3, which prohibits trading on information about a tender offer as long as the person knows it came from someone connected to the transaction. The virtue of this approach is that it eliminates most of the hurdles that can prevent the government from proving a violation, such as whether a valuable benefit was provided to a tipper.Whenever Congress gets involved, the question is whether the cure will be worse than the disease. For those clamoring for legislation to fix insider trading laws, the push is more likely to be toward a broader prohibition than a nuanced approach. It is a tough sell with the American public to consider revising insider trading by adopting a new statute if it could be seen as favoring the interests of Wall Street and hedge funds over mom-and-pop investors.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »