By BROOKS BARNESFEB. 24, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  DreamWorks Animation reported a bigger-than-expected $263 million quarterly loss on Tuesday because of a big-screen dud, “The Penguins of Madagascar,” and a previously announced restructuring.The troubled studio, which has faced liquidity concerns in recent weeks and last year had two failed merger attempts, also said it raised $185 million through a sale and lease-back of its Glendale, Calif., headquarters.Jeffrey Katzenberg, the studio’s chief executive, nonetheless struck an upbeat tone in a conference call with analysts. “All in all, I think we’re making great strides,” he said. Mr. Katzenberg also contended that the studio had already moved on from recent layoffs that found 18 percent of its work force, or 500 people, without jobs.“There is a great morale,” he said.For the quarter that ended Dec. 31, DreamWorks Animation reported a loss of $263.2 million, or $3.08 a share, compared with a profit of $17.2 million, or 20 cents a share, in the same period a year ago. Analysts had expected a per-share loss of $3.01.AdvertisementThe company on Tuesday announced $210.1 million in charges tied to the layoffs, carried out beginning late last month, and an extensive retooling of its movie pipeline. Losses related to “The Penguins of Madagascar” and “Mr. Peabody & Sherman” totaled $57.1 million.AdvertisementMr. Katzenberg said on the conference call that he had returned to a “much, much more active, participating role” in moviemaking at the company. “Getting the feature film business back on track is my No. 1 priority,” he said, calling 2015 a “reset year.”Four of the company’s last six movies have required write-downs: “Rise of the Guardians,” “Turbo,” “Mr. Peabody & Sherman” and, now, “The Penguins of Madagascar.”Part of the reason DreamWorks Animation is struggling can be traced to increased competition. For several years, animation was among the movie industry’s most reliable genres, prompting studios that had not been in the cartoon business to build out divisions devoted to the art form.But increased supply has made animation a less reliable draw.A deeper audience shift may also be underway. Analysts say there is evidence that families are drifting from more traditional computer-animated films, like those made by Mr. Katzenberg’s studio, to another class of computer-generated movies: superhero pictures. Put more bluntly, the traditional computer-animated film may be falling out of vogue with its target audience.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Movie success is critical for DreamWorks Animation in part because an array of fledgling surrounding businesses — television, consumer products, book publishing — need a supply of new multiplex hits to exploit.The studio will try again on March 27 with “Home,” the studio’s only planned release this year. “Home” is about a misfit alien on the run from his people.Some analysts have recently raised concerns about the company’s liquidity. Doug Creutz, a media analyst at Cowen and Company, wrote in a Jan. 23 research note that the studio had put itself in “a precarious financial position” by releasing only one film in 2015, especially since “Home” is very high risk. (It is not a sequel, for instance.)On Tuesday, in addition to the sale of its campus, DreamWorks Animation said it had increased a revolving credit facility, ultimately giving it access to $500 million.A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: DreamWorks Animation Reports Loss on Film Flop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.