By BEN PROTESSFEB. 24, 2015
In Bill Clinton’s White House, Steven F. Reich fended off federal prosecutors and congressional committees. At the Obama Justice Department, he responded to investigations of the government’s botched gunrunning crackdown, known as Operation Fast and Furious. And as a defense lawyer at Akin Gump, according to his firm biography, he was “particularly adept at helping clients navigate crises.”With a background like that, his latest career move will have a familiar ring. Mr. Reich will soon become Deutsche Bank’s general counsel for the Americas, putting him on the front line of federal investigations into one of Wall Street’s biggest banks.His move, which a Deutsche Bank spokeswoman confirmed on Tuesday, coincides with the bank reaching a pivotal point. Its moment in the government spotlight has lasted for months, as prosecutors and regulators seemingly pick apart its every move.Like most big banks, Deutsche Bank faces criminal and civil investigations into interest rate manipulation and currency rigging. But the bank, Germany’s largest financial institution, has also drawn the ire of a federal regulator for its financial reporting procedures, people briefed on the matter said, and is now at risk of failing the Federal Reserve’s annual stress tests.AdvertisementMr. Reich’s role will be equal parts peacemaker and negotiator, allaying concerns from prosecutors while resisting their huge fines.It is a prominent position — in the bank and in the broader white-collar legal bar — and one that is equivalent to running a small law firm. The job, which entails overseeing at least 100 lawyers, can be a steppingstone to more prominent jobs in government and on Wall Street.AdvertisementOne of his predecessors, Robert Khuzami, went on to run the Securities and Exchange Commission’s enforcement division in the aftermath of the financial crisis. And the general counsel for the entire bank, Richard H. Walker, is himself a former S.E.C. enforcement chief.“Steve’s broad experience in both the private and public sectors will add a valuable perspective to our world-class team,” the spokeswoman, Michele Allison, said in a statement, adding that he will start in April.Mr. Reich, 53, is the latest former government lawyer to join a giant bank. In 2013, Standard Chartered hired David Fein, the United States attorney for the District of Connecticut, as its general counsel.Deutsche Bank is something of a magnet for white-collar litigators. After Mr. Khuzami departed for the S.E.C., the bank hired Joseph Polizzotto, a former top lawyer at Lehman Brothers.When Mr. Polizzotto retired in July, the bank handed the job on an interim basis to Michael Chepiga, a longtime litigator at Simpson Thacher & Bartlett. Mr. Chepiga, who is married to Pamela Chepiga, the litigator who defended the former Goldman Sachs trader Fabrice Tourre, will remain at the bank.Regulators say that a group of London traders, known as the “cartel” and the “mafia,” illegally dipped into the $5.3-trillion-a-day currency trade.After months of searching for a permanent successor, Deutsche Bank decided on Mr. Reich.“Given the challenges the leading financial institutions face today, Steve is uniquely qualified for the position,” said Barry H. Berke, the co-chairman of the litigation department at Kramer Levin Naftalis & Frankel. Mr. Berke, who worked on past cases with Mr. Reich, cited his experience “in the highest reaches of government.”AdvertisementAt Deutsche Bank, Mr. Reich’s challenges will be wide-ranging. In the interest rate investigation, federal prosecutors have discussed the possibility of requiring one of Deutsche Bank’s units to plead guilty to manipulating the London interbank offered rate, or Libor, the people briefed on the matter said. The German bank’s New York branch also faces separate inquiries from Benjamin M. Lawsky, New York State’s banking regulator, who is investigating Libor manipulation as well as currency rigging and violations of United States sanctions. Mr. Lawsky and Mr. Reich have known each other for more than a decade, meeting in Washington around the time of President Clinton’s impeachment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Reich, a graduate of Columbia Law School, began his career at the white shoe law firm Covington & Burling. After serving as an assistant federal public defender in Maryland, Mr. Reich shifted to Capitol Hill, setting in motion a series of jobs in which he alternately defended and investigated government misdeeds.First, he was among a team of lawyers who advised the House Judiciary Committee’s Democrats during the impeachment of Mr. Clinton. He later joined the White House, where he defended senior officials, including Mr. Clinton and Vice President Al Gore, from Justice Department and congressional inquiries.After leaving the government, Mr. Reich was special counsel to the Connecticut House of Representatives in an impeachment proceeding of then-Gov. John G. Rowland. He played a similar role for the Utah House of Representatives in an investigation of the state’s attorney general.In 2011, Mr. Reich returned to government as a Justice Department lawyer. During his interview for the job, he questioned whether he would have enough work to sustain a full-time position, said David A. O’Neil, a former colleague.Within weeks, the Fast and Furious investigation erupted. It was nearly a year before Mr. Reich had a day off.A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: New Counsel for Deutsche Bank Is Used to U.S. Inquiries.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.