By DAN HORCHFEB. 24, 2015
SÃO PAULO, Brazil — The insider-trading trial of the troubled Brazilian businessman Eike Batista could be thrown into disarray after the judge in charge of his case was found to have been driving one of Mr. Batista’s seized cars.The car is one of six luxury vehicles that the police seized this month, along with a yacht, watches, artworks and other property belonging to Mr. Batista, his sons, his current wife and his ex-wife. The court had also frozen real estate and investments belonging to Mr. Batista and his family after it froze his bank accounts last year.Mr. Batista is on trial on allegations of insider trading and stock market manipulation in the now-bankrupt petroleum company he founded, OGX. If convicted, he could face jail time and might have to pay up to 3 billion reais ($1.05 billion).A local newspaper, O Estado de São Paulo, filmed Flávio Roberto de Souza, the judge in charge of Mr. Batista’s trial, driving one of Mr. Batista’s cars — a Porsche Cayenne Turbo — in Rio de Janeiro.AdvertisementMr. de Souza acknowledged to several local newspapers Tuesday night that he had indeed been in the car. But he said that he was merely moving it from the police parking lot, where it was exposed to rain and sun, to his own building’s garage, which is indoors, to ensure that the car remains in good condition.Mr. de Souza said he had informed the local Department of Motor Vehicles that he would be driving the car, and he denied any irregularity.AdvertisementThe Rio de Janeiro federal court system announced Tuesday night that it would open an internal inquiry into the judge’s use of the car.Mr. Batista’s lawyers have already requested that Mr. de Souza be removed from the case. They claim that statements that the judge made after Mr. Batista’s trial began in November show a lack of impartiality. At the time Mr. de Souza called Mr. Batista “megalomaniacal.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An appeals court is to rule soon about whether to remove Mr. de Souza from the case, and two of the three appeals court judges have already indicated they will vote to do so.Even if Mr. de Souza is removed, the case will continue with another judge, and the courts have decided to open an additional case against Mr. Batista over charges of insider trading in another company he founded, OSX.Mr. Batista, who was once one of the world’s 10 richest people, with an estimated net worth of over $30 billion, has seen his corporate empire collapse since 2013. Both OGX and OSX have gone bankrupt, and his other companies have either gone bankrupt, sold control to outside investors or sold major assets.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.