AdvertisementSupported byBy Aaron M. KesslerWASHINGTON — Goodyear, one of the world’s largest tire manufacturers, has agreed to pay more than $16 million to settle charges that it violated federal antibribery laws tied to tire sales by its subsidiaries in Kenya and Angola.The Securities and Exchange Commission announced the settlement on Tuesday, in conjunction with charges that Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company violated the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.In settling the civil charges, Goodyear neither denied nor admitted wrongdoing, but agreed to pay a fine of $14.1 million — the amount of its illicit profits — as well as $2.1 million in prejudgment interest. It also agreed to monitoring by federal officials for three years.The case is unusual in that it stems from bribes paid primarily to other companies, rather than to government officials — a signal that the S.E.C. is taking a more aggressive stance toward commercial bribery rather than focusing only on improper payments to government workers.The S.E.C. said that Goodyear failed to properly oversee its Kenyan and Angolan subsidiaries over a four-year period, when they paid out more than $3.2 million in bribes, mostly to companies to gain their business but also to some local officials.Documents filed by the S.E.C. on Monday said that the Goodyear subsidiaries “routinely paid bribes to employees of government-owned entities and private companies to obtain tire sales. These same subsidiaries also paid bribes to police, tax and other local authorities.”The commission added, “All of these bribery payments were falsely recorded as legitimate business expenses in the books and records of these subsidiaries, which were consolidated into Goodyear’s books and records.”A lawyer representing Goodyear did not return a phone call seeking comment on Tuesday.Goodyear, which is based in Akron, Ohio, has factories in 22 countries and sells tires globally. In announcing the settlement, the S.E.C. said that the company had self-reported the violations and subsequently cooperated with federal investigators.Scott W. Friestad, associate director of the S.E.C.’s enforcement division, said in a statement that “Goodyear’s lax compliance controls enabled a routine of corrupt payments by African subsidiaries that were hidden in their books.”Officials at Goodyear’s Kenyan subsidiary, known as Treadsetters, made the bribes mostly by approving payments for phony promotional products and then directing the finance assistant to “write out the checks to cash,” according to the S.E.C. documents. That cash was then used to bribe employees of customers, as well as local government officials.In Angola, the bribery scheme by the Goodyear subsidiary Trentyre revolved around fabricated charges for freight and customs clearing costs added to its invoices for tire sales, officials said. Those phony charges were then grouped together into an account on the company’s books that it used to finance its bribes, the S.E.C. said.Goodyear is not the only automotive-related company to face bribery charges in recent years. In 2010, what was then DaimlerChrysler was charged with bribing foreign government officials to secure business in Asia, Africa, Eastern Europe and the Middle East. The company paid $185 million to settle S.E.C. and criminal charges.Advertisement