AdvertisementSupported byEconomic SceneBy Eduardo PorterMickey Kantor has a vivid memory of August 1993. The North American Free Trade Agreement was in trouble. Though the agreement had been signed the year before, during the administration of George H.W. Bush, the newly elected Bill Clinton had promised to attach side deals to the pact to guarantee minimum labor and environmental standards.The Mexican government hated them — they were thinly disguised protectionist tools to reward Mr. Clinton’s union friends, it thought. Mr. Kantor, then the nation’s chief trade negotiator, had to convince the Mexicans that Congress would not ratify the deal without them.“There was not a lot of space to negotiate,” he told me. “We could negotiate how to do it but not whether we would do it.”Mr. Kantor invited the Mexican trade minister, Jaime Serra Puche, to watch the Senate pass the president’s deficit-reduction package. It made it, given the opposition of every Republican and some Democrats, only by the single vote of Vice President Al Gore. “When he saw that, he understood,” he said.By November, the side agreements were in place. In January 1994, Nafta came into being. Labor rights had found a place in the rules governing international trade.And they didn’t make much difference.Two decades on, President Obama and his chief trade negotiator, Michael B. Froman, are navigating similar straits. Hoping to push through a trade agreement with over a dozen countries around the Pacific Rim, and another with the European Union, they must convince several skeptical domestic constituencies — especially America’s beleaguered labor unions — that the deals are worth having.The Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement “will constitute the largest expansion of enforceable labor rights in history,” noted the Economic Report of the President, released last week, “more than quadrupling the number of people around the world covered by enforceable labor standards.”The pursuit of trade agreements, the report said, “maximizes globalization’s benefits while minimizing globalization’s unwanted side effects.” They level the playing field, as it were, between American businesses and workers, and those in, say, Peru or Vietnam.And yet the fact is, it can’t be done. If we have learned anything in the two decades since Nafta, it is that no trade agreement can protect American workers on the losing side of globalization.There is a place for trade agreements: They apply rules to globalization. Without them, globalization would probably work worse, not only for the United States but also for its trading partners.“Globalization would happen with or without trade agreements,” Mr. Froman said in an interview. “Trade agreements are tools to shape globalization. This includes raising labor standards.”The United States is not the only country trying to write rules to govern the process. China, in particular, is negotiating trade agreements with many of its neighbors that contain little in the way of environmental and labor standards or other safeguards.“There is a real competition over what rules of the road will shape the global trading system,” Mr. Froman argued. “If the situation is difficult for American workers today, what will it be like competing against Asian countries with low standards set by China?”Though the case for trade deals may be sound, one shouldn’t overstate their power.Take Nafta. The International Labor Organization reports a couple of cases in the 1990s where Nafta’s side agreements pressed companies to recognize independent unions. Some manufacturing plants on the border dropped pre-employment pregnancy tests. But level the playing field for workers in Mexico and the United States? Nafta did not.While labor rules have been improved in later trade agreements, it is unclear how much difference they have made in the lives of workers, noted Marva Corley-Coulibaly, an economist at the International Labor Organization. Thea Lee, deputy chief of staff of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., said: “We still find them frustrating.”One thing is certain. If the goal was to protect American workers from globalization’s “unwanted side effects,” they have clearly not been up to the task.Research by David Autor of M.I.T., Gordon Hanson of the University of California, San Diego, and David Dorn of the Center for Monetary and Financial Studies in Madrid finds that rising competition from Chinese imports accounted for about a quarter of the decline in manufacturing jobs between 1990 and 2007.Short of cutting China off from world markets — a crazy prescription that would disrupt global production chains and very likely spread misery around the world — no tweaking of the trade rules will reverse this tide.“Labor provisions can play a role, but they are not going to solve these issues,” said Ms. Corley-Coulibaly, the I.L.O. economist.Step back and consider globalization, steered however imperfectly by trade agreements and other such deals. By and large, it has been a force for prosperity — fostering development around the world and bringing millions of people out of poverty. Ask pretty much any mainstream economist and you will hear that most Americans benefited, too.So how about this for a strategy to cope with the dislocations of global integration? Let’s not sweat too much the trade agreements and their standards. Protecting American workers from the downside of globalization depends less on changing the rules of other, poorer countries than on improving our own.The United States has, in fact, some of the weakest labor protections in the advanced world. Hostility toward organized labor in parts of the country is so intense that even companies that fervently want their workers to unionize can’t do it.And it’s not just about labor law. From unemployment insurance to pensions, the United States has a particularly threadbare safety net. Government social spending is among the lowest in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.European workers displaced by China can rely on a deeply rooted network of public support. American workers are pretty much on their own.Considered this way, trade agreements offer a different sort of opportunity to level the playing field. It’s not about forcing countries along the Pacific Rim to bring labor standards up to American norms. Rather, when it gets down to negotiating the details of a trade agreement with the European Union, the United States might import the region’s more expansive labor standards and its more generous social policies.This is an idea that organized labor could rally around. “We would like to build on the strengths that Europe has achieved, not weaken them,” Ms. Lee said. “We want very strong and ambitious labor standards in a European deal.” And it will do much more for American workers than imposing a “level playing field” on Mexico, China, Peru or Vietnam.Email: eporter@nytimes.com; Twitter: @portereduardo Advertisement