AdvertisementSupported byBy William AldenWall Street money helped fuel the North American energy boom in recent years. Now that oil prices have collapsed, Wall Street is again looking for ways to profit.Goldman Sachs is seeking to raise capital from wealthy individuals and other investors for a new fund to invest in the debt of troubled companies in the energy sector, according to confidential marketing materials obtained by DealBook.The fund, being raised by Goldman’s asset-management business, will invest mostly in high-yield corporate credit, the document shows. Known as the Energy Investment Opportunities Fund, it will also buy investment-grade credit and secured bank loans.The effort by Goldman, which has not previously been disclosed, is among many on Wall Street to capitalize on the turmoil among oil and gas companies. Oil prices lost about half their value in the second half of 2014 and continued falling in early 2015, though they recently have recovered modestly. That has put pressure on a range of energy producers and the funds that invested heavily in them.Top Wall Street investors are now gathering and deploying fresh war chests in the oil patch. Apollo Global Management, a big private equity and credit investing firm, is raising a fund to buy energy company debt. The Blackstone Group, the biggest alternative investment firm, recently raised $4.5 billion for its own energy fund.Such investors tend to argue that they can find assets that have an unfairly low valuation. Leon D. Black, Apollo’s chief, spoke about the energy sector at a conference in Berlin on Tuesday.“Energy is a special area,” Mr. Black said. “You really have to do your homework on the asset side. You have to know what basin you’re dealing with, what geology you’re dealing with, which real estate. Who else has been there drilling. What their experience has been. Because that can make all the difference in terms of outcome.”Goldman, which did not specify a dollar amount being sought for the new fund, expects to hold an initial closing by the end of the quarter. The fund charges a 1 percent management fee and imposes fees for early withdrawals of capital.Investors, who must commit at least $500,000, will agree to lock up their capital for 12 months after the initial close. The fund will last for at least two years beyond that period. Investors who want their money back before then will be able to make withdrawals quarterly, with 60-day notice, but will have to pay a fee of up to 3 percent, according to the marketing document.In the document, Goldman said the debt of energy companies “may be pricing in a distressed scenario which we believe fundamentals do not warrant.”A Goldman spokesman, Andrew Williams, declined to comment.Advertisement