By JACK EWINGFEB. 24, 2015
FRANKFURT — The euro may be one of the most embattled currencies on the planet, but at least it will soon feature some of the coolest technology.Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, unveiled a new type of 20-euro bill on Tuesday, featuring a transparent hologram intended to defeat counterfeiters.And lest it be said that Greece has never done anything for the eurozone except raise questions about its sustainability, the image on the hologram comes from Greek mythology. It depicts Europa, who according to legend was a Phoenician princess abducted and seduced by Zeus.Mr. Draghi took no note of any potential irony or symbolism during a brief appearance to introduce the bill, worth $22.70 at current rates. Europa already appears on the €5 and €10 notes, which do not have the transparent hologram.Advertisement“The euro notes that we use every day are the most tangible symbols of European integration,” Mr. Draghi said. “The introduction of a new bank note serves as a reminder that this integration is an ongoing process.”AdvertisementShortly afterward, though, Mr. Draghi commented on Greece in another context. The European Central Bank released a letter from Mr. Draghi in which he offered restrained praise for new policy commitments from the Greek government in order to qualify for continued European aid. The proposals are “a valid starting” point for further talks, Mr. Draghi wrote.During a ceremony at the central bank's headquarters here, Mr. Draghi signed an oversize image of the new €20 note. The signature of the president of the central bank, which issues the currency, appears on every euro note.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The new note is part of a gradual redesign of euro bills, which began circulating in 2002. A new €5 note began circulating in 2013 and a new €10 note last year.Despite the rise of electronic transfers and credit cards, cash remains an important part of the eurozone economy. The value of notes in circulation passed the €1 trillion mark in December, Mr. Draghi said.Counterfeiting has been a problem from the start and reached a record high in 2014, with more than half a million fake euro bills in circulation. The transparent hologram, or portrait window, is designed to make counterfeiting as difficult as possible but will not stop it altogether.“What one person does, another can always copy,” Antti Heinonen, former director of bank notes at the central bank, said in a new book he wrote on the history of euro scrip. Copies of the book, “The First Euros,” were handed out on Tuesday.The new €20 note will not go into general circulation until Nov. 25, but it was introduced on Tuesday to give makers of vending machines and automated teller machines time to adjust.A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: E.C.B. President Unveils New 20-Euro Bank Note.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.