AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelUncertainty regarding new strict rules governing the Internet as well as the prospects for its proposed merger with Time Warner Cable hung over Comcast on Tuesday, as the media conglomerate reported fourth-quarter profits that were up only slightly compared with the period last year.Comcast, which is the country’s largest cable operator and owns the NBCUniversal entertainment group, could face substantial changes in its business after a decision this week on new rules under consideration by the Federal Communications Commission. The rules — known as net neutrality — would regulate companies that provide Internet service much the same way as telephone companies or other utilities are regulated. The F.C.C. is scheduled to vote on the issue on Thursday.At the same time, Comcast’s proposed $45 billion acquisition of Time Warner Cable is awaiting regulatory decisions more than a year after it was announced. While Comcast executives said on Tuesday that they were confident the deal would close soon, some analysts have raised doubts that the transaction would be approved. Costs related to the transaction totaled $237 million in 2014, the company reported.“There’s no shortage of change occurring in the competitive landscape, the breakneck pace of innovation and shifts in the regulatory climate we must navigate,” Brian L. Roberts, Comcast’s chief executive, said in a conference call to discuss the earnings.Mr. Roberts reiterated Comcast’s opposition to the idea that the government should regulate the Internet like a utility, under Title II of the Communications Act. He called the Title II regulation “antiquated” and said that there were “unnecessary risks associated with applying 1930-style regulations to something as dynamic as the Internet.”“Our attention, just like everyone else, is on the actual text of the order, the upcoming vote, the strength of forbearance, and ultimately, the commission’s focus on preservation of incentives for the private sector to continue to invest aggressively in broadband,” he said.The implications of the coming regulation are unclear. Some rival telecom companies have said that such a regulatory approach could deter their investments in broadband service, and analysts have raised concerns that the new rules could lead to more price regulation. But Mr. Roberts said that it was premature to speculate on the impact the regulation would have on Comcast’s appetite to invest in broadband before seeing the order. “Until we see the fine print, I think we have to reserve judgment,” he said.That regulatory uncertainty, along with vast changes in how people are consuming media, has led to questions about Comcast’s business. “Operating results are now only half the story,” Craig Moffett, an analyst with MoffettNathanson Research, said in a research note. “There’s that other drama playing out in Washington (perhaps you’ve heard?).”Comcast reported on Tuesday that net income for the quarter that ended Dec. 31 inched up 0.6 percent to $1.9 billion, or 74 cents a share, up from $1.9 billion, or 72 cents a share, during the period last year. Total revenue increased 4.8 percent to $17.7 billion, with growth in its broadband and broadcast businesses offsetting advertising weakness at its cable networks.Comcast, similar to other television providers, is combating the move toward cord-cutting, where people cancel their subscriptions for television service in favor of cheaper streaming alternatives. During the quarter, Comcast added only 6,000 video customers, an 87 percent decline from the 46,000 it added during the period last year. Comcast added a total of 178,000 customers during the quarter.Revenues at NBCUniversal increased 2.3 percent to $6.6 billion. The broadcast group saw an uptick driven by such programs as “The Voice,” “The Blacklist” and “Sunday Night Football.” The company’s cable networks reported a 5.6 percent decline in advertising revenue because of ratings pressure.Advertisement