By CHAD BRAYFEB. 24, 2015
BERLIN — Private equity firms are shying away from overly risky investments as the price of potential acquisitions remains high, a panel of industry leaders said on Tuesday.At the SuperReturn International conference in Berlin, private equity leaders said that one of their biggest challenges was properly pricing potential risk and avoiding the temptation of increasing a fund’s risk profile in hopes of achieving higher returns.For investors, that has meant the return of capital – often at high multiples – but fewer opportunities to reinvest cash.“This, on aggregate, is a tougher environment to invest in. You need to be cautious. You need to be deliberate and you need to be patient,” Robert J. Tomei, founder of Advanced Capital Group, said.AdvertisementInvestors “would prefer that you preserve capital rather than invest it imprudently,” Mr. Tomei said.AdvertisementJoseph P. Landy, the co-chief executive of Warburg Pincus, said low interest rates made it easier and less expensive for firms to use leverage to make acquisitions. But low rates have also driven up the prices for those takeovers as more bidders can stay in the auction process longer. An influx of capital from large sovereign wealth funds also has contributed to higher prices for potential acquisitions for private equity firms.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To avoid riskier deals, Warburg Pincus is looking at potential investments at an earlier stage of a company’s life, Mr. Landy said.Glenn R. August, the chief executive of Oak Hill Advisors, said returning capital to investors – at significant gains – should not be viewed negatively in what has been a seller’s market.“This not about a once-a-year point in time,” Mr. August said. “Our business is about decades of investing capital. There are times when you want to sell things when prices are high.”Howard Marks, the co-chairman of Oaktree Capital Management, said investors needed to view the private equity industry – and investing in general – as being similar to the cylinders of a car.“There are times when we are buying and times when we are selling. You can’t do the same thing all the time,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.