AdvertisementSupported byBy Nathaniel PopperJPMorgan Chase on Tuesday went on the offensive against growing questions from analysts and investors on whether the company needs to be broken up.Chase executives spent much of their annual investor day explaining why the bank, the nation’s largest, benefits from its breadth and scale, in spite of the extra regulatory costs that come with the size.Regulations put forward two months ago are expected to hit JPMorgan harder than its competitors and have fed questions of whether the bank would be worth more broken into separate entities than it is whole.“JPMorgan has been under stress and strain, more than most, and that’s a burden we’re bearing, and we’ve got to get out of that,” Jamie Dimon, the bank’s chief executive, said Tuesday during his presentation to a roomful of investors and analysts at the bank’s Manhattan headquarters.Mr. Dimon and other executives detailed changes the bank would be making to ensure it did not grow any larger. Executives outlined new plans to reduce the amount of customer deposits it holds by nearly $100 billion and cut nearly $3 billion in expenses from its investment bank.But Mr. Dimon said the company’s basic model of providing the full range of financial services around the globe was still working.“Our mix obviously works for the client. That is the best judge,” Mr. Dimon said.The changes announced at the event, along with some improvements in the bank’s projections for its financial results this year, helped push JPMorgan’s stock up 2.5 percent on Tuesday, more than the broader market.Despite the numbers, though, Mr. Dimon’s team still faced lots of skepticism from the audience on whether the measures JPMorgan was taking would be enough to satisfy regulators and especially the Federal Reserve, which has been pushing the latest increase in regulations.“Are we missing the forest for the trees?” Glenn Schorr, an analyst at Evercore ISI Institutional Equities, asked after the first presentation of the day. “You’re optimizing, but is the Fed going to look at that and say, ‘I don’t get it, how many ways do we need to tell you to shrink, both in size and complexity?’ ”The conversation about the need for JPMorgan to shrink was given momentum by Goldman Sachs’s bank analyst, Richard Ramsden, who wrote a report last month explaining why JPMorgan might be worth more broken up.Mr. Dimon took on Mr. Ramsden directly as he insisted that JPMorgan was committed to continuing on in its current form.“We’re not going to give that up for anyone, including Richard Ramsden,” Mr. Dimon said.Separately, in a regulatory filing on Tuesday, the bank said it was facing a Justice Department inquiry into whether there were racial disparities in the way JPMorgan offered auto loans in recent years.The tough questions face a bank that seems, on the surface, to be doing quite well. Last month, the bank announced it had earned record profits in 2014, and Mr. Dimon suggested on Tuesday that the bank could increase the dividend it pays to shareholders.The growth in profits, though, has come not from growing revenues, but from cuts to expenses, which could hurt the bank’s long-term growth prospects.The chief executive of JPMorgan’s consumer division, Gordon Smith, outlined how the company had pushed travel and entertainment expenses down 30 percent, reduced hotel stays by 25 percent and even removed 20,000 phone lines.“We’re meticulously going through any waste,” Mr. Smith said.The cuts have been necessary, in part, because of the enormous legal and regulatory expenses the bank has had to pay since the financial crisis. The bank’s chief financial officer, Marianne Lake, said that all the legal and compliance costs added up to $35 billion since 2010.Mr. Dimon said he hoped that all the fines and fallout from the financial crisis would end in the next two years or so.But even if the bank does not face any more legal penalties, it will still have to deal with perhaps the most important new cost since the financial crisis: the increased cost of holding loss-absorbing capital.Central banks around the world have pushed since the crisis to increase the minimum amount of capital that banks hold, in the hope that it will protect banks in the case of a crisis.Banks can increase their capital by raising money from shareholders or retaining profits, but this generally makes the cost of doing business more expensive.Bigger banks have always had to hold more capital, but in December the Federal Reserve proposed new surcharges for the largest, most systemically important banks, and indicated that JPMorgan would face a higher surcharge than any other institution.The so-called GSIB surcharge — a jargony phrase that was repeated endlessly on Tuesday — is expected to force JPMorgan to hold 4.5 percent more capital than a standard bank.Ms. Lake said that JPMorgan was taking all steps possible to make sure it did not grow larger and require an even higher surcharge; she suggested the bank could even shrink enough to reduce its surcharge to 4 percent.Most of the cost of complying with the rules is expected to fall on JPMorgan’s Wall Street operations, which have higher capital requirements than the less risky consumer bank.Daniel Pinto, the head of JPMorgan’s investment bank, laid out new plans to cut annual expenses in his division by $2.8 billion over the next two years — a 13 percent drop.The investment bank is also looking at cutting some operations that come with particularly big capital requirements, like the $200 billion of excess cash that JPMorgan holds on deposit for international financial institutions. JPMorgan is planning to cut such deposits by around $100 billion this year, in part by charging some clients who keep money with the bank.Despite the cuts, Ms. Lake, the chief financial officer, said JPMorgan should keep its current mix of businesses because it had around $18 billion in cost synergies from having all its business lines under the same roof.“Scale has always defined the winner in banking,” Ms. Lake said.videoAdvertisement