By CHAD BRAYFEB. 24, 2015
BERLIN — The sharp drop in oil prices in recent months has opened up opportunities for private equity firms if they pay attention to the details, Leon D. Black, the founding partner of Apollo Global Management, said on Tuesday.Speaking at the SuperReturn International conference in Berlin, Mr. Black said energy companies had entered into a variety of lending arrangements, including high yield, in recent years based on the belief that oil prices would remain near $90 or $100 a barrel.As a result of the “cataclysmic fall” in oil prices, some companies are likely to find themselves in trouble and need new partners to stay in business, creating opportunities for private equity firms, Mr. Black said.“I think it’s a very good time to be getting into it. It’s changing,” Mr. Black said at the conference, an annual gathering of private equity leaders. “Some of the reasons we got into energy a few years ago had to do with amount of money that’s needed in the sector — $2.4 trillion is needed to take advantage of the U.S. opportunities in shale and fracking, and there’s a dearth of capital to do it.”AdvertisementThat’s where private equity can come in, offering a range of opportunities, including traditional credit and distressed investments in hopes of gaining control of a company, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But private equity firms need to make sure they understand the sector and have the expertise to invest wisely, he said.Advertisement“Energy is a special area,” Mr. Black said. “You really have to do your homework on the asset side. You have to know what basin you’re dealing with, what geology you’re dealing with, which real estate. Who else has been there drilling. What their experience has been. Because that can make all the difference in terms of outcome.”Mr. Black said about 40 people at Apollo were focused on the energy sector as part of its natural resources investing team, which dates to 2001.In terms of his outlook for oil, Mr. Black said, “I think there’s reasonable chance for prices to stay in the 50s for another 12 to 18 months. Eventually, it will go back to 70 or so, but it will take some time.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.