By CHAD BRAYFEB. 24, 2015
BERLIN — Private equity leaders made their case on Tuesday for investing in Europe despite concerns about the region’s economy and a potential exit by Greece from the eurozone.But one reason stuck out more than others: Europeans, despite the recent doom and gloom, are simply happier than people in other parts of the world.Speaking at the SuperReturn International conference in Berlin, Hugh Langmuir, managing partner at the European private equity firm Cinven, ticked off a list of reasons investors should think about investing here, acknowledging that he was a bit biased as a European himself.Europe accounts for a third of the world’s economic gross domestic product, Mr. Langmuir said. Europe is home to more Fortune 500 companies than anywhere else, including the United States. And Europe is home to great intellectual capital, he said.Advertisement“Finally, not to be underestimated, we have happy,” Mr. Langmuir said at the private equity gathering. “Europeans, as measured by the U.N., are happier than most other countries in the world. Seven of the top 10 happiest countries are based in Europe.”AdvertisementMr. Langmuir said that Europe can’t be painted with one brush. Over all, Europe’s economy grew at less than 1 percent last year, but some countries had much stronger growth, he said, noting Britain’s economy outpaced that of the United States.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Also, the introduction of quantitative easing by the European Central Bank, a weaker euro to the dollar that could potentially drive exports and a decline in oil prices all should help Europe’s economy in the near term, he said.“From an economic standpoint, there are strong reasons to believe we are on an up,” Mr. Langmuir said.During a separate session at the conference, Steve Koltes, the co-chairman of the European private equity firm CVC Capital Partners, said that many investors forget that European companies have been driven by the need to enlarge their businesses outside of their domestic markets.“Europe is still just stocked full with great companies that are very competitive globally and adapt,” Mr. Koltes said. “Of course, they’re not growing in Europe, but they’re growing in other places.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.