By ADAM LIPTAKFEB. 25, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The Supreme Court on Wednesday ruled that a state dental board controlled by dentists may be sued under antitrust laws for driving teeth-whitening services out of business.The decision, by a 6-to-3 vote, set standards that will most likely also apply to state licensing boards, including those for doctors, lawyers and other professionals. States often rely on such boards to decide which potential competitors may ply their trades.The case, North Carolina State Board of Dental Examiners v. Federal Trade Commission, No. 13-534, concerned a dental board with eight members, six of whom were required by state law to be practicing dentists and were elected by other dentists. The board also included a dental hygienist, elected by other hygienists, and a consumer appointed by the governor.About a decade ago, the board grew troubled by the rise of commercial teeth-whitening services in spas and shopping malls. It sent dozens of cease-and-desist letters to the services, noting that the unauthorized practice of dentistry was a crime. The letters had their intended effect: The services closed down.AdvertisementIn 2010, the Federal Trade Commission filed a complaint against the board, accusing it of anticompetitive behavior. The board responded that it was shielded from the complaint because it was a state agency incapable of violating the federal antitrust laws.AdvertisementThe United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond, Va., rejected that contention, saying that a state agency “operated by market participants who are elected by other market participants is a private actor” and is subject to the antitrust laws unless it is actively supervised by the state.Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, writing for the majority, agreed that the board was not shielded from antitrust suits.“Active market participants cannot be allowed to regulate their own markets free from antitrust accountability,” he wrote. Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen G. Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan joined the majority opinion.A supporting brief from the American Medical Association and several other medical groups had argued that a ruling against the dental board would discourage doctors from serving on professional boards and disrupt a “150-year tradition.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Several bar associations filed a brief making similar points on behalf of lawyers.Even as he acknowledged the value of having professionals serve on state boards, Justice Kennedy dismissed the doctors’ and lawyers’ concerns.States seeking to encourage their service on licensing boards had at least two choices, he said. They could actively supervise the boards’ work, thus conferring on it the state’s immunity from antitrust suits. And they could, he wrote, “provide for the defense and indemnification of agency members in the event of litigation.”What was clear, Justice Kennedy wrote, was that antitrust law “does not authorize the states to abandon markets to the unsupervised control of active market participants, whether trade associations or hybrid agencies.”In dissent, Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. wrote that the majority had gone astray by taking “the unprecedented step” of saying the applicability of the antitrust laws turns on whether a state board is “structured in a way that merits a good-government seal of approval.”AdvertisementThe majority “has headed into a morass,” he said, adding that its “crude test” for determining whether boards are controlled by market participants will be hard to apply.Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas joined Justice Alito’s dissent.States have the constitutional power to structure their professional boards as they wish, Justice Alito wrote, even at the risk of anticompetitive behavior.“Staffing the State Board of Dental Examiners with certified public accountants would certainly lessen the risk of actions that place the well-being of dentists over those of the public, but this would also compromise the state’s interest in sensibly regulating a technical profession in which lay people have little expertise,” he wrote.A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Justices Find Antitrust Law Valid Against Dental Board.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.