By NIKI KITSANTONISFEB. 25, 2015
ATHENS — Greece’s new plan to revamp its economy to satisfy eurozone creditors hit its first political snag on Wednesday, when the country’s energy minister publicly opposed efforts to sell off state assets as part of that program.“There will be no privatization in energy,” the minister, Panagiotis Lafazanis, who leads a radical-left bloc in Syriza, the party of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, said in comments to the center-left Greek daily newspaper Ta Nea.Although Mr. Lafazanis would presumably not have the final say, his opposition could disrupt plans to sell stakes in the public gas corporation, the state-controlled electric company and Greece’s largest oil refiner.Bids were solicited for the gas company, DEPA, under the previous government, which had also promised to partly sell off the other two. Mr. Lafazanis also opposed plans to privatize the power grid operator, in comments to another newspaper, Ethnos, claiming that the bids made to date “are not binding.”AdvertisementThe Greek economic plan approved by eurozone finance ministers on Tuesday promised not to roll back any privatization projects already in the works. Moreover, Greece needs the few billion euros that those sales might raise.AdvertisementBy late Wednesday, there had been no public response to Mr. Lafazanis from the government, but Mr. Tsipras might be hesitant to confront the energy minister because of his influence in the party.In a speech to Syriza lawmakers on Wednesday, Mr. Tsipras called for support of the government’s economic program but skirted the issue of privatizations. The government must move quickly to “detail” its overhauls and “build credibility” with its creditors, he said.In comments to reporters afterward, the economy and infrastructure minister, Giorgos Stathakis, who is closer to the prime minister than Mr. Lafazanis is, said that no completed sell-offs would be reversed but that the terms of all privatization projects currently underway would be “reviewed.”Yanis Varoufakis, the finance minister of Greece, says that the anti-austerity Syriza party did not make a U-turn with its extended bailout deal with the European Union.Talks between Greece and its lenders have shifted to covering Greece’s financing needs as its cash reserves dwindle.But the release of a pending loan disbursement of 7.2 billion euros, or $8.2 billion, will depend on Greece's keeping its promises. In an interview with Greek radio on Wednesday, the finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, said Greece had no immediate threat to government liquidity but “will definitely have a problem” meeting its obligation to make a debt payment of about €1.5 billion next month to the International Monetary Fund and around €7 billion in July and August to the European Central Bank.Greece has proposed issuing Treasury bills to raise some of the money but would need the approval of the European Central Bank to do so.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Greece’s creditors have pushed successive governments hard on privatizing state assets since the country signed its first bailout agreement in 2010. But an original revenue target of €50 billion by 2015 has been revised downward several times over the years. About €3 billion has been raised so far.Greece’s privatization drive has been dogged by administrative and legal problems. A plan to sell the gas corporation foundered in 2013 after the Russian giant Gazprom withdrew its interest, amid European Union competition concerns. But DEPA remained on the previous administration’s list of planned privatizations, along with plans to spin off 30 percent of the electric company and to sell a 66 percent stake in the power grid operator.AdvertisementSyriza was voted into office in late January on an anti-austerity platform that included promises to reverse privatizations. But the plan submitted this week to eurozone finance ministers took a more conciliatory stance. It also created new ambiguities by pledging to “safeguard the provision of basic public goods and services by privatized firms/industries.”The country’s lenders, including the International Monetary Fund and the European Central Bank, have expressed skepticism about the Greek reform proposal, demanding more specifics.Underscoring a continued dearth of trust between the two sides, the German Finance Minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, told German radio on Wednesday: “The question now is whether one can believe the Greek government’s assurances or not. There’s a lot of doubt in Germany, that has to be understood.”In comments later on Wednesday, Mr. Schäuble’s spokesman, Martin Jäger, said any changes to Greece’s privatization plans would “have to be closely agreed” to with the creditors, Reuters reported.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.