By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONOCT. 13, 2015
It has been a bad stretch for hedge funds that make bold bets on big economic trends. Two prominent multibillion-dollar macro hedge funds have shut down in the last week after double-digit losses.The Bain Capital Absolute Return Capital fund blamed a “challenging environment” for its shutdown. And Michael Novogratz, the well-known Wall Street trader who ran Fortress Investment Group’s flagship macro fund, which is also closing, went further, stating that the environment was “not conducive to achieving our best results.”But it is not all bad news for macro hedge funds, the corner of the hedge fund universe where managers wager on everything from currency moves to central bank interest rate increases and the direction of the price of oil. Some lesser-known macro-focused hedge funds like Element Capital Management and Atreaus Capital have made double-digit gains for investors so far this year.“Whenever you have a challenge, that is in itself an opportunity,” said Ari Bergmann, founder of Penso Advisors, a global macro manager. “I think that macro strategies thrive when there is divergence in monetary policy in central banks and market volatility,” Mr. Bergmann added, referring to the market expectation that the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates while most other major central banks continue to hold rates steady.AdvertisementBain Capital and Fortress were not the first firms to liquidate their hedge funds this year. Across the hedge fund industry, firms are shutting down after months of market turmoil that has pulled some of Wall Street’s most well-versed traders into the riptide. Prominent investors like David Einhorn, William A. Ackman, Leon G. Cooperman and Daniel S. Loeb have had a reversal in gains made this year.AdvertisementOn Tuesday, the $27 billion Renaissance Technologies became the latest to tell investors that it would close a fund — its $1 billion Renaissance Institutional Futures Fund — citing a “lack of investor interest,” according to an investor letter seen by The New York Times. The fund has lost 1.75 percent so far this year.Many macro hedge fund managers were unable to stem losses because of violent moves in the market this year. Several were clobbered at the start of the year after an unexpected move by the Swiss central bank to lift its cap on the Swiss franc against the euro. Others were hurt by the Chinese central bank’s sudden decision to devalue its currency, the renminbi, in August.“It’s no secret that it’s been really difficult to trade this year,” Adam Taback, deputy chief investment officer at Wells Fargo Private Bank, said. “Macro hedge funds in particular have seen this because of the commodity rout that not only impacted commodities but currencies too,” Mr. Taback said.While this year has been full of market surprises, the losses at Bain Capital and Fortress have been years in the making. When the Bain Capital Absolute Return Capital fund, run by Jonathan J. Goodman and Jeff Woolbert, told investors last week that it would close down its macro fund, it had already been losing money for three years. This year, the fund was down by more than 14 percent. Bain Capital told investors that it had received requests from investors to withdraw a sizable amount of their money from the fund.Bain did not respond to a request for comment.Fortress’s flagship macro fund lost more than 17 percent this year, pulled down by wrong-footed positions, such as a bet against the Swiss franc. Last year, it was down 1.6 percent for the year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Tuesday, Fortress notified investors that it would liquidate its macro hedge fund and that Mr. Novogratz, the chief investment officer, would leave the firm. Mr. Novogratz, well known on Wall Street for his outspoken views on the markets and his penchant for wearing colorful clothing, told investors that it had been “an extremely challenging two years.”In a joint statement, Fortress’s top executives, Peter L. Briger Jr., Wesley R. Edens and Randal A. Nardone, expressed disappointment. “While we regret closing a fund that has been productive in the past, we also recognize the market’s reluctance to ascribe value to this strategy even in its best years,” they wrote.Yet even so, several financial advisers have also recommended that investors allocate more money to macro hedge funds in recent months. SkyBridge Capital, a fund that invests in hedge funds, began the year with no money in any macro managers. Today it has more than 6 percent of its total $13.4 billion in assets under management in macro strategies.AdvertisementAnd macro hedge funds have outpaced other hedge fund strategies, according HFR, a firm that tracks industry data. Macro hedge funds have lost 0.6 percent so far this year, compared with 2.2 percent for the broader industry index and 2.7 percent for the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index.“There are going to be winners and losers, and if you missed those big moves and if you got a couple of things wrong it becomes very hard for investors to become patient,” said Troy Gayeski, a senior portfolio manager at SkyBridge Capital.“In general, everyone goes through tough patches,” Mr. Gayeski added. “One of the keys is to be able to articulate to your investors that you know how you will get out of the tough patch in the future.”A version of this article appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: As Some Hedge Funds Sink, the Challenge Buoys Others.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.