AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieThe optimism at JPMorgan Chase reinforces the overall mediocrity of the banking industry. Growth, cost cuts and new fees can bolster earnings 43 percent, JPMorgan’s chief, Jamie Dimon, and his crew told investors on Tuesday. They also suggested that that was enough to silence talk of a breakup.There’s plenty of work to do first, though. For starters, the businesses must earn an extra $3 billion among them. The consumer and investment banks also have to find nearly $5 billion in costs to cut.In addition, the plan involves shedding $100 billion in the deposits that JPMorgan holds for other financial institutions. They show up as a cost on the balance sheet and can be moved into money market funds, forced to pay their way through higher fees or even dumped as a future business.Whatever the approach, it factors into Mr. Dimon’s case against splitting up JPMorgan. Eliminating the deposits would reduce the bank’s size, complexity, interconnectedness and short-term funding needs. That and other actions could, in turn, potentially allow it to hold less extra capital and strengthen returns.A breakup would also diminish JPMorgan’s earnings while increasing costs, Mr. Dimon argued. Cross-selling accounts for some $15 billion — or more than 15 percent — of annual revenue. One-third of the investment bank’s top line in North America, for example, comes from commercial banking clients. And the bank would lose the $3 billion it saves from sharing costs. That alone would exceed any value created by freeing capital through a breakup, the bank’s finance chief, Marianne Lake, has argued.JPMorgan’s $9 billion in projected earnings increases do, however, assume that interest rates will rise and loan and other credit losses will remain low. Yet the bank will need to increase common equity to 12 percent from 10.2 percent.There’s the rub. The net result of driving revenue up and costs down is a mere 2 percentage point increase over last year’s return on tangible equity to 15 percent. It’s no disaster and better than most of its peers, but it’s hardly stellar. Mr. Dimon’s plan underscores just what an unimpressive business big banking has become.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement