AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesCushman & Wakefield, one of the world’s biggest commercial real estate companies, is seeking a buyer, according to people briefed on the matter.The company, which acts as a broker, developer, manager and financier to office buildings worldwide, is expected to fetch at least $2 billion, these people said.Cushman & Wakefield is controlled by the Agnelli family, the Italian dynasty that co-founded Fiat. The family’s investment arm, Exor, has approved Cushman & Wakefield’s hiring of Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley to solicit potential buyers, these people said.In an unusual twist for a conglomerate, Exor is allowing Cushman & Wakefield to handle its own sale process.Founded in New York in 1917 by J. Clydesdale Cushman and Bernard Wakefield, who were brothers-in-law, Cushman now has offices in 60 countries around the world and employs more than 16,000 people.In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the media group RCA owned Cushman & Wakefield before selling control to Mitsubishi Estate, a large real estate company.In 2005, the company oversaw the sale of the MetLife Building in New York for $1.72 billion, at the time the most expensive single-building sale for the city.The Agnelli family has steadily increased its control over Cushman & Wakefield in recent years. In 2007, the family paid about $565 million for a 67.5 percent stake. It now controls 81 percent. Employees at the firm own the rest of the company.John C. Cushman III, a descendant of one of the co-founders, remains on the board.Big international property firms continue to consolidate as commercial real estate values rise. Cushman & Wakefield’s two main rivals are both publicly traded companies: the CBRE Group, which is based in Los Angeles, and Jones Lang LaSalle, which is based in Chicago.The people briefed on the sale process said the Agnelli family did not want to sell Cushman & Wakefield to either main rival. The firm is hoping to find a financial buyer, like a private equity firm or sovereign wealth fund. Edward Forst, the firm’s chief executive, is chairman of the strategic review committee.One factor motivating the sale of the firm is its strong performance. Last year will be the best in Cushman & Wakefield’s history.With the sale of Cushman & Wakefield, Exor would be more focused on its other assets, which include a 27 percent stake in CNH Industrial and a 31 percent stake in Fiat Chrysler.When Fiat Chrysler spins off Ferrari later this year, Exor will be its largest investor.“The evaluation, from time to time, of potential options for its portfolio companies — including business divestments, combinations, acquisitions and other financial and strategic alternatives — is entirely consistent with its investment activity,” Exor said in a statement. “There is currently no transaction to disclose nor any guarantee that such an evaluation may result in any transaction involving Cushman & Wakefield.”News of the sale process was first reported by The Wall Street Journal.Advertisement