AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiTarget booked a loss for the fourth quarter from costs of closing its Canadian stores, but brisk sales in its apparel and children’s departments drove bigger-than-expected earnings in the United States.The results bode well for the Minneapolis-based retailer, which is in the midst of a turnaround that includes shuttering its 133 stores in Canada less than two years after opening them.Target said Wednesday that fourth-quarter earnings per share came to $1.50, beating analyst estimates of $1.46 and above the company’s guidance. Fourth-quarter sales in stores open at least a year jumped 3.8 percent. It booked fourth-quarter revenue of $21.75 billion, a 4 percent increase from the year-ago period.Major retailers have reported solid earnings for the most recent quarter, buoyed by a rebounding job market, including Lowe’s on Wednesday. Lower gasoline prices are also expected to leave consumers with more in their pocket to spend.In announcing its earnings Wednesday, the retailer TJX, which owns the discount chain stores HomeGoods, T.J. Maxx and Marshalls, followed a move last week by Walmart, saying it would increase minimum wages in the United States to $9 an hour. The increase will begin in June, and next year, all hourly employees who have worked there at least six months will earn at least $10 an hour.“This pay initiative is an important part of our strategies to continue attracting and retaining the best talent in order to deliver a great shopping experience for our customers, remain competitive on wages in our U.S. markets, and stay focused on our value mission,” said the company’s chief executive, Carol Meyrowitz.Walmart’s decision to raise pay was influenced by a concerted campaign by labor activists for higher wages in the retail sector, analysts said, as well as stiffer competition for workers in a tightening job market. Analysts have predicted that other retailers will soon have no choice but to follow suit in raising wages.TJX said net sales for the fourth quarter rose 6.3 percent to $8.3 billion. Same-store sales increased 4 percent.Target’s pretax loss for the quarter, related to its Canadian operations, came to $5.1 billion. The retailer is scheduled to release its full-year guidance at a conference for investors next month.“We’re seeing early momentum in our efforts to transform Target,” Brian Cornell, Target’s chairman and chief executive, said in a statement.Also Wednesday, the home improvement chain Lowe’s said its fourth-quarter earnings reached $450 million, or 46 cents a share, compared with $306 million, or 29 cents a share, in the year-ago period.Robert A. Niblock, Lowe’s chief executive, said in a news release: “The macroeconomic fundamentals are aligned for modestly stronger home improvement industry growth in 2015.”Advertisement