By CHAD BRAYFEB. 25, 2015
Guy Hands, the founder of Terra Firma Capital Partners, says that he’s interested in doing business across peripheral Europe and that a “Grexit” would be wise for both Greece and the euro zone.BERLIN — Guy Hands and David M. Rubenstein gave vastly different views on Wednesday about the future of the private equity industry. But that may be a result of where they are perched.Mr. Rubenstein is co-chief executive of one of the world’s largest private equity firms, the Carlyle Group, and Mr. Hands is the founder of Terra Firma Capital Partners, a smaller, privately held firm.Speaking at the SuperReturn International conference in Berlin, Mr. Hands said he believed the industry, outside the large, publicly traded firms like Carlyle, would go back to its roots and focus on smaller fund-raising and on being more closely tied to its clients.Most important, he said, they will go back to being “more genuinely private,” while the large firms will continue to move beyond traditional private equity to become generalist asset managers.Advertisement“It means being more aligned with your investors, putting much more of your own skin in the game, giving them what they really want, minimizing their fees, maximizing their returns,” Mr. Hands said.Advertisement“That way private equity will go ‘back to the future,’  ” he said. “To take advantage of these opportunities and create alpha, the future for private equity lies in its past.”David Rubenstein, co-founder the private equity giant Carlyle Group, discusses investment trends and where in the world his company is bullish on, including Japan.Separately, Mr. Hands said that his own money accounts for about half of the 1 billlion euros, or about $1.1 billion, that Terra Firma has available to invest.“The reality is I am extremely lucky,” Mr. Hands said in a response to a question from the audience. “I started in the industry 20 years ago, more than 50 percent is mine.”Mr. Rubenstein offered a bit of a different view on a separate panel at the conference.He sees private equity opening up to a much larger client base in the next decade, including individuals managing their 401(k) investments in the United States. He also sees sovereign wealth funds playing a larger role than they ever have.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And, he predicted, the industry will discuss its returns and its operations in a more standardized and public fashion.“People will actually know what a top quartile fund is,” Mr. Rubenstein said. “There will be a standard definition and a standard organization — government or nongovernment — that will certify someone is a top quartile. People will not be able to say they are top quartile, when they are not.”He also thinks the industry will go by a new name: Private equity does not fully describe what the industry does today, if not tomorrow, he believes.“Everything will be known to the public,” Mr. Rubenstein said. “Everybody’s performance will be known. Everybody’s valuation will be known.”“Everyone will feel the industry is as transparent as the public equity industry is,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.