AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter EavisBank of Internet USA has become one of the country’s top-performing banks by churning out high-cost mortgages to wealthy individuals with complex finances.But in a federal lawsuit filed on Tuesday, a former internal auditor of the bank contended that Bank of Internet was cutting corners as it grew at a rapid pace.The auditor, Matt Erhart, said in the suit that he was fired after revealing what he believed to be wrongdoing at the bank to federal regulators and management at Bank of Internet. The complaint, filed in federal court in the Southern District of California, said that Bank of Internet violated federal laws that seek to protect whistle-blowers.“As a former federal prosecutor and long time employment lawyer, I find the bank’s conduct as alleged here to be among the most egregious I have seen from a publicly traded company,” Carol Gillam, Mr. Erhart’s lawyer, said in a statement.In an interview on Tuesday, Gregory Garrabrants, Bank of Internet’s chief executive, said the allegations were groundless. “The factual inaccuracies here are numerous and substantial,” he said. “Mr. Erhart has made all of these allegations in great detail to federal regulators, who have reviewed them in depth and have found them to be wholly without merit.”Mr. Garrabrants said that Bank of Internet was planning to file a separate legal action against Mr. Erhart that may assert that he abused the bank’s private information.Bank of Internet, which is based in San Diego and has nearly $6 billion in assets, is a standout performer at a time when other banks are growing slowly. The bank was the subject of a New York Times report in August that examined where the bank’s growth was coming from.The bank’s biggest business is making mortgages to high-net-worth individuals who need loans to help buy big-ticket properties because they do not have sufficient cash on hand. Critics of the bank say that Bank of Internet is not doing sufficiently thorough checks on borrowers, adding that many might be more indebted than the bank’s filings suggest.But Mr. Garrabrants fiercely defended Bank of Internet’s business. The bank’s loans, he said in an earlier interview, have large financial cushions to protect the bank if borrowers default.Mr. Erhart’s complaint seeks to paint a picture of a bank where controls often did not apply. It says that Bank of Internet’s borrowers may have included foreign nationals who might have been off-limits under federal anti-money-laundering laws. The suit does not, however, name any of the borrowers that Mr. Erhart thought suspicious. And in an earlier interview, Mr. Garrabrants said the bank had passed a regulatory review of its loans to foreign nationals.According to the complaint, Bank of Internet at times failed to provide full and timely information to regulators.The suit says that in January, Bank of Internet told its primary regulator, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, that none of its accounts lacked tax identification numbers. The complaint added, however, that Mr. Erhart, whose employment at the bank ended in June, saw a spreadsheet that contained as many as 200 accounts without tax identification numbers.According to the complaint, Bank of Internet was also not forthcoming with the Securities and Exchange Commission when the agency sought information about an account at the bank.Neither the office of the comptroller nor the S.E.C. responded on Tuesday to requests for comment.Advertisement