AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — Daniel K. Tarullo, a member of the Federal Reserve’s Board of Governors, said on Tuesday he did not “expect that it would be appropriate” for the Fed to start raising its benchmark rate this year, breaking with the stated position of the Fed’s chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen. Mr. Tarullo spoke, in an interview with CNBC, less than 24 hours after another Fed governor, Lael Brainard, expressed similar hesitation in a speech  Monday afternoon.The comments by two officials on the Federal Open Market Committee who rarely speak publicly about monetary policy suggested that Ms. Yellen is facing growing internal opposition to the view she expressed last month that it will probably make sense to start raising rates this year to maintain control of inflation.“Yellen appears to have a revolt on her hands,” said Tim Duy, a professor of economics at the University of Oregon who follows the central bank closely. “She now faces the prospect of multiple dissents from the dovish wing of the F.O.M.C. if she insists on pushing through with a rate hike this year. Such a split decision would not enhance the institution’s credibility.”Ms. Brainard, a former Obama administration official who joined the Fed in 2014, and Mr. Tarullo, an adviser to Mr. Obama’s first presidential campaign before joining the Fed in 2009, both have roots in the world of Democratic economic policy making.More than seven years ago the Federal Reserve put its benchmark interest rate close to zero, as a way to bolster the economy. But that policy is about to change, perhaps this week.Leading members of that community, including the Harvard economist Lawrence H. Summers, have sharply criticized the Fed’s movement toward raising interest rates. Those critics have coalesced around a fairly uniform set of concerns that appear to resonate with Ms. Brainard and Mr. Tarullo.The differences, however, remain relatively narrow and could be resolved by new rounds of economic data in the coming months. Slower growth could persuade Ms. Yellen — who also has strong Democratic credentials and was a chief economic adviser to President Bill Clinton — to wait a little longer. Better news or rising inflation could persuade the skeptics to move more quickly.Michael Feroli, the chief United States economist at JPMorgan Chase, said that despite the fragmentation of the policy making committee, he expected Ms. Yellen and her right-hand man, Stanley Fischer, vice chairman of the Fed, to maintain control.“We still believe the Yellen-Fischer leadership can pull the committee together for a December liftoff, but in the interim the communications may continue to sound inharmonious,” he wrote Tuesday.The Fed has held short-term rates near zero since 2008 to stimulate economic activity by encouraging borrowing and risk-taking. Now, in the sixth year of a slow-but-steady expansion, officials are debating the right moment to start raising rates.The Fed could stall the economy if it scares borrowers by raising rates too quickly. Waiting too long could also end badly if inflation starts to rise or speculative asset bubbles pop.In a major speech last month, Ms. Yellen said continued job growth was likely to lead to higher inflation, and the Fed planned to start raising rates this year. She spoke before the government estimated the economy added just 142,000 jobs in September. But in a speech on Sunday, Mr. Fischer said he still expected the Fed to move this year.The most likely date is the final 2015 meeting of the Fed’s policy making committee on Dec. 15 and 16. Fed officials have said they are not likely to act at the committee’s Oct. 27 and 28 meeting.Other officials have lined up in favor of an increase sooner rather than later. Jeffrey M. Lacker, president of the Richmond, Va., Fed, voted to raise rates at the September meeting. James B. Bullard, president of the St. Louis Fed, said Tuesday that it would be “prudent” to start this year.The Fed said Tuesday, in a scheduled release, that eight of the 12 regional reserve banks had supported a September increase in a secondary but symbolic rate called the discount rate.Two Fed officials were already on the record as opposing a rate increase this year: Charles L. Evans, the Chicago president, and Narayana Kocherlakota, the Minneapolis president. But regional Fed presidents often take public stands. The Washington-based governors like Mr. Tarullo and Ms. Brainard seldom do.The unemployment rate is approaching a normal level by historical standards, but by other measures the labor market remains weak. Moreover, the historical pattern that inflation rises as unemployment falls — a relationship that economists call the Phillips Curve — has weakened in recent years. Inflation is also being suppressed by other forces, including a strong dollar, low energy prices and what Mr. Tarullo described as a “globally disinflationary environment.”“I don’t think anybody knows how much more progress could be made in a noninflationary fashion,” he said Tuesday. “My own perspective is that one should watch to see some tangible evidence that inflation would return to target.”He said the Fed could not easily correct its mistake if it moved too soon and growth stalled.Ms. Brainard would not say when she expected to start raising rates, but she expressed even stronger reservations than Mr. Tarullo that strong job growth was a sufficient reason to do so as long as inflation is quiescent.“I do not view the improvement in the labor market as a sufficient statistic for judging the outlook for inflation,” she said. “A variety of econometric estimates would suggest that the classic Phillips Curve influence of resource utilization on inflation is, at best, very weak at the moment.”Ms. Yellen said in September that if the Fed waited to raise rates and then was forced to increase rates more sharply to control inflation, it “would risk disrupting financial markets and perhaps even inadvertently push the economy into recession.”Ms. Brainard said she was not overly concerned the Fed might wait too long.“We have well-tested tools to address such a situation,” she said, “and plenty of policy room in which to use them.” Advertisement