AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioOne result of the spread of digital music around the world is an explosion in the amount of data generated from all those billions of clicks and streams — and a resulting need to follow all this information accurately.Kobalt, a company that handles music publishing rights and has built an extensive data-tracking system, will announce on Friday that it has raised $60 million in new investment to help it expand that data system. The latest financing round was led by Google Ventures and also includes investment from the computing mogul Michael S. Dell, who has put money into Kobalt in the past.The influx of cash will help Kobalt, which is based in London and has offices around the world, double its technology team and further extend its reach, said Willard Ahdritz, the company’s founder and chief executive.Well known in the music industry as an evangelist for data and transparency, Mr. Ahdritz said that “in the next six to 12 months, we are going to connect the pipes that are broken on a global scale.” For Kobalt’s clients, Mr. Ahdritz said, the value of their music can double in the next few years by fixing the inefficiencies and losses that can mount when royalties are cycled through the various old collection systems around the world.Bill Maris, the president and managing partner of Google Ventures, said in an interview that Kobalt’s mission of data efficiency fit well with Google’s own.“When you have an industry where it can take upward of a year to get paid for something that you’ve created, and it goes through this byzantine system that’s hard to track and understand, that doesn’t seem like the way it should operate,” Mr. Maris said.The new investment in Kobalt is in addition to $66 million that the company has raised in previous rounds. This financing is separate from a $153 million fund that Kobalt has raised to buy music rights. In its most recently reported fiscal year, the company had $163 million in revenue and a $7.4 million net loss.Founded in 2000, the Kobalt Music Group began by disrupting the world of music publishing, the side of the business that deals with copyrights for songwriting. While most publishers prefer to own a share of a song’s copyright, Kobalt took only a small administration fee, leaving the bulk of it for the writer.That strategy has allowed the company to sign up an array of publishing clients like Paul McCartney and his company MPL Communications; Dave Grohl of Foo Fighters; Stevie Nicks; and the pop songwriters Max Martin and Dr. Luke. Kobalt has since expanded to offer services in recordings, as well as various kinds of rights administration for artists and other publishers.Advertisement