By HIROKO TABUCHI and RACHEL ABRAMSFEB. 26, 2015
Four retailers, four turnaround bids — and they could not be more different.Sears, which has struggled to stem a perpetual slide in its sales, on Thursday reported its 11th straight quarter of net losses, and said up to 300 of its stores could be spun off in its new effort to raise much-needed cash.Kohl’s is faring much better. Its holiday season topped expectations, buoyed, like many of its peers, by a brightening economy, as well as by its decision to refocus on selling national brands like Nike and Disney.J. C. Penney, which had been fighting back to profitability after a disastrous run under its previous chief executive, swung to a loss in the fourth quarter, despite reporting strong holiday numbers this month. Analysts attributed this to the steep promotions offered to draw shoppers back to Penney stores.And Gap gave more details of its bid to revamp its ailing namesake label, appointing a new design leader, Wendi Goldman, a Limited Brands veteran, to head up the Gap brand. But it gave a cautious outlook for the year, saying a strong dollar and the lingering effects of the strikes at West Coast ports, could weigh on its bottom line.Advertisement“There are winners and there are losers,” said Al Ferrara, retail partner at BDO, the global accounting firm. “But the economy is good, the stock market is up, people feel good about their 401(k)’s,” he said. “For retailers, the rest is down to execution.”AdvertisementKohl’s gave the strongest indication that its turnaround is on track. Once a Wall Street darling, Kohl’s suffered in recent years from its merchandising, especially an ill-advised shift away from national brands toward private labels like Sonoma and Croft & Barrow. The midmarket department store has also come under increasing pressure from retailers like Macy’s on one hand, and discounters like Walmart on the other.But Kohl’s has since refocused on national brands that sell, as varied as Nike, Izod and Vera Wang, and it is on a rebound. The retailer reported a profit of $369 million, or $1.83 a share, for the quarter that ended Jan. 31, while revenue climbed 3.9 percent, to $6.34 billion. That narrowly beat expectations of analysts polled by Thomson Reuters, who had expected earnings per share of $1.80, and revenue of $6.33 billion.In contrast, Sears Holdings continued on its downward trajectory, reporting a net loss of $159 million in its fourth quarter. Even as other retailers reported an uptick in a brightening economy, sales dropped 7 percent at Sears, and 2 percent at Kmart.Sears’s chief executive, the hedge fund manager Edward S. Lampert, nevertheless pointed to signs of progress at the company, including investments in technology and e-commerce that he said would bear fruit in an eventual turnaround. Mr. Lambert, who owns 49 percent of the company, engineered the merger of Kmart and Sears a decade ago, promising to transform the struggling retailers.But failing to stop hemorrhaging sales, Mr. Lampert has turned instead to selling off the company’s assets, including the Lands’ End clothing brand and its shares in Sears Canada. On Thursday, Sears outlined its plans to spin off up to 300 of its locations into a real estate investment trust in a maneuver that it hoped would raise some $2 billion.Gap said its fourth-quarter revenue grew by 3 percent, to $4.71 billion, as strong sales at its Old Navy label offset continued weakness at its Gap stores. Profits rose 4 percent year-over-year to $319 million, or 75 cents a share, narrowly beating analyst forecasts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The retailer said it expected profit to decline in the just-started fiscal year because of the strong dollar, which can erode overseas earnings. Gap said lingering delays from the West Coast port dispute — resolved last week — would also hurt business. Still, its shares rose in after-hours trading, because of its announcement of a $1 billion share buyback program“None of us are satisfied with the performance we’re seeing at Gap,” Art Peck, Gap’s new chief executive, told analysts on a conference call. “I made a quick change with the senior leadership. It starts with righting the women’s business,” he said.AdvertisementHe promised more colors, prints and patterns this year, as well as a feminine look that he said had been missing from its lineup. Mr. Peck also said that Gap’s denim business was “seeing signs of life.” Gap’s signature denim khakis have struggled to attract shoppers, who are increasingly flocking to buy yoga pants and other so-called athleisure wear. But Mr. Peck said that a trip to New York Fashion Week had convinced him that a denim revival was afoot.“I’m encouraged there, though it’s early days,” Mr. Peck said.”They do really well on denim, they do really well on basics,” said John Morris, an analyst with BMO Capital Markets. “It’s the fashion side of the equation” that is their biggest product challenge, he said.Shares of J. C. Penney dropped more than 12 percent in after-hours trading, on news that the struggling department store chain missed expectations, reporting a loss of 19 cents a share.Penney has been engaged in a large turnaround effort since ousting its chief executive, Ronald B. Johnson, in 2013. The retailer, critics said, had lost sight of its core cost-conscious shopper. Instead, J. C. Penney began marketing more expensive items and offering fewer promotions, a strategy that failed to attract customers and contributed to a huge decline in sales.Now, it is back to heavy promotions, which analysts said weighed on its earnings. The retailer reported that net sales rose to $3.89 billion in the fourth quarter of 2014, up from $3.78 billion in the same period a year earlier, slightly beating average analyst estimates of $3.87 billion, according to analysts polled by Thomson Reuters.Analysts had also expected earnings per share of 11 cents in the fourth quarter.“They’ve had to basically unwind and reset everything that the prior management has done,” said Neely Tamminga, a senior research analyst and managing director with Piper Jaffray, who had predicted that same-store sales would grow 4 percent.Still, Mr. Ferrara of BDO said that J. C. Penney was following the right strategy in discounting heavily to lure shoppers.“They made an investment in winning back the customer,” he said. “I think they’re about to turn the corner, and the company’s here to stay,” he said. “When you have some retailers filing for bankruptcy, that’s pretty good.”A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: 4 Different Turnaround Tales at Retailers Sears, Kohl’s, Gap and J.C. Penney.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.