AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan HorchSÃO PAULO, Brazil — The Brazilian businessman Eike Batista won a court victory of sorts on Thursday when the judge who had been presiding over his trial was removed from the case after he was filmed driving Mr. Batista’s seized Porsche.Mr. Batista is accused of insider trading and stock market manipulation in the now-bankrupt petroleum company he founded, OGX.Ever since his trial began in November, his defense team has accused the judge, Flávio Roberto de Souza, of bias.Mr. de Souza had called Mr. Batista “megalomaniacal” and criticized his lifestyle as “ostentatious.” But it was the judge’s own lifestyle choices that led to his removal from the case.Mr. de Souza had ordered that cars and other possessions belonging to Mr. Batista be seized and put up for auction, but on Tuesday he was filmed driving one of the seized cars.Mr. de Souza has acknowledged that he had also moved a second car and a piano belonging to Mr. Batista’s family into his own building, for what he contended was safekeeping.The judge’s actions immediately became a nationwide joke, with a Mercedes-Benz dealership releasing an ad on Wednesday that offered a test drive as another way “to take a spin in a car that isn’t yours yet.”The court’s inspector general, Nancy Andrighi, cited both Mr. de Souza’s statements about Mr. Batista and his use of the defendant’s property in her decision to remove him.With the judge’s removal, all of his previous decisions, including his order to freeze up to three billion reais ($1.04 billion) of Mr. Batista’s property, are now up for review.Marcelo Fontes, a partner with the law firm Sergio Bermudes Advogados, which is defending Mr. Batista, said that Judge de Souza “had treated Mr. Batista as if he were already guilty. We expect a new judge to be impartial and permit us to demonstrate his innocence.”Thiago Bottino, a professor of criminal law at the Fundação Getulio Vargas law school in Rio de Janeiro, said that the judge’s removal was not necessarily to Mr. Batista’s benefit.“The federal prosecutor wanted him removed too, to reduce the chances that a conviction would be overturned on appeal,” he said.The inspector general said that Mr. Batista’s case would now be reassigned to another federal court to be chosen at random.But Mr. Bottino said the court would still probably take two or three years to reach a decision. If the court finds Mr. Batista guilty, his lawyers could appeal to the country’s highest court, a process that could take over a decade.“By then, the statute of limitations might apply,” Mr. Bottino said.Advertisement