AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioFor music fans in Britain, new albums come out on Mondays. In the United States, they typically hit stores on Tuesdays. In Japan, it’s Wednesdays.Back when brick-and-mortar stores were the main outlets for buying music, this retail patchwork made little difference to the industry. But in the digital age it has come to look increasingly antiquated, and may lead to piracy as impatient fans trade copies of new albums online.Now, after months of heated negotiations, the music industry’s global trade group has decided on Fridays as the official release day for new albums, everywhere. According to the trade group, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry, this will reduce piracy and align listeners around the world.“Music fans live in the digital world of today,” Frances Moore, the federation’s chief executive, said in a statement. “They want music when it’s available on the Internet — not when it’s ready to be released in their country.” According to Ms. Moore, record labels, distributors and others were consulted over nine months of meetings to sort out which day would be best; major retailers and digital outlets including Target, iTunes and Spotify also support the choice of Fridays as a global release day. Paul McGowan, the chief executive of Hilco Capital, which owns HMV, the British retail chain, said it would “get new releases to fans when they most want to buy them.”Yet the decision has also been harshly criticized by independents and small shops, which say the streamlining of digital sales is coming at the expense of physical retailers. Despite the worldwide drop in record sales, 141 million CDs were still sold last year in the United States, as well as more than nine million vinyl LPs, according to Nielsen Music.Calling Fridays “probably the worst day to pick,” Joe Nardone Jr., the owner of the Gallery of Sound chain in Pennsylvania, said it could result in logistical problems like being unable to restock a popular title over the weekend.Martin Mills, the chairman of the British label Beggars Group, and an unofficial spokesman for the independent sector, told retailers in a speech this week that the move would primarily benefit the big record companies.“It astounds me that the major labels are not listening to their customers, their interface with their artists’ fans,” Mr. Mills said. “I fear their consultation has been a charade, and the market leaders were always going to push this through.” In an interview, Ms. Moore said that in the discussions, “there was an element of, ‘Yes, I totally support a global release day; why not my day?’ ”Some concern shot through the music world when a British trade publication, Music Week, reported this week, citing anonymous sources, that Target stores might “drop music from its stores altogether” as a result of the adoption of Fridays as a universal release date. But on Thursday the company denied this.“Target completely supports the music industry’s efforts to fight piracy, and we are aligned on having one global release date,” a company spokeswoman said. “Target has absolutely no plans to stop selling music in our stores or on Target.com.”Exactly how and when the change will be put into effect is unclear. According to the federation, it may take six months. Despite their objections, even some of the loudest opponents seemed to accept the change as a fait accompli. “I doubt if we’ll have a choice,” Mr. Mills wrote in an email on Thursday. One concern among music companies has been the effect on an act’s all-important opening-week sales numbers. In the United States, for example, the weekly accounting period ends Sunday, thus giving albums that come out Tuesday six full days to rack up numbers. Last year Taylor Swift started her opening week a day earlier, on Monday, helping the album sell nearly 1.3 million copies in its first week in the United States, the largest opening in more than 12 years.The international federation said it was working with chart managers in each country to adjust the sales period to allow a full week of opening sales. On Thursday, Billboard, the leading American chart, said that a decision would be made on the matter in the coming months.At least some of the regional differences will survive. According to the federation, Japan will switch to Fridays only for international artists. Advertisement