By MICHAEL CORKERYFEB. 26, 2015
The deal seemed all but done when the CIT Group, a lender to small and midsize businesses, announced in July that it was acquiring OneWest, a regional bank in California.But federal banking regulators put the $3.4 billion merger through an unusual test on Thursday. They invited members of the public to share their opinions about the deal in a rare open hearing in Los Angeles.The Federal Reserve and the Office of Comptroller of the Currency set aside at least eight hours to hear testimony from more than 100 people, including homeowners, members of the clergy, small-business owners and advocates for the poor. The banks’ chief executives also testified.The public hearing, held at one of the Fed’s offices in Los Angeles, was set after a variety of groups raised concerns, particularly about OneWest’s foreclosure practices and the strength of its efforts to invest in low-income neighborhoods as required by the Community Reinvestment Act.AdvertisementMany of the speakers wanted the Fed and the Comptroller of the Currency to pressure the bank executives to do more to help financially struggling and minority neighborhoods before the deal obtains regulatory approval. Regulators have not provided any timetable for making a decision. CIT said this month that it expected the deal to close by the middle of this year.AdvertisementSome of the speakers, according to their prepared testimony, also took aim at the federal assistance that went to OneWest, the former IndyMac, which in 2008 suffered one of the largest failures of any bank in United States history. IndyMac’s assets were bought by a group of private equity investors that stand to reap a fortune from the merger. CIT, which went bankrupt in 2009, also received federal help through the Troubled Asset Relief Program.“OneWest and CIT were saved by U.S. taxpayer subsidies and they have failed to return the investment to the communities they are required to serve,” Isela Gracian, a vice president at East LA Community Corporation, a neighborhood development group, said in prepared remarks.The merger of OneWest and CIT is also a test case for banking regulators because the deal would create a large and complicated systemically important financial institution. These firms, regulators contend, require additional scrutiny because their failure could harm the broader financial system.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Federal regulators have been taking their time reviewing other bank mergers. Regulators are still reviewing M&T Bank’s proposed acquisition of Hudson City Bancorp, for example, more than two years after the deal was announced in August 2012.Federal banking regulators have raised concerns about the effectiveness of M&T’s anti-money laundering compliance programs. M&T has said it has under taken a “major initiative” to address those concerns.The intense scrutiny comes as analysts and bank executives say the financial industry is ripe for consolidation. Tepid demand for loans, moderate economic growth and costly regulations are pressuring more banks, particularly smaller ones, to combine forces.“There are too many banks competing for too little business,” said Christopher McGratty, a banking analyst at Keefe Bruyette & Woods. “We feel pretty confident that more consolidation is going to happen.”CIT’s chief executive, John A. Thain, testified that his company’s commercial lending business would complement OneWest’s retail business, without reducing competition. OneWest’s chief executive, Joseph M. Otting, acknowledged that the bank had received a “low satisfactory” rating when regulators most recently examined its investments in light of the Community Reinvestment Act. Mr. Otting said the bank had taken steps to improve that rating.In his prepared remarks, Mr. Thain, a former head of Merrill Lynch, said, “We are committed to continuing to support our communities.” While Thursday’s hearing in Los Angeles may prove only a speed bump in the approval process, OneWest had hoped to avoid the event entirely. Indeed, early this year the bank invited people to send a form email to the Fed’s chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, and other top regulators, expressing their support for the merger, and stating there was no need for a public hearing.AdvertisementThe email plea was unearthed by the California Reinvestment Coalition, a nonprofit group that focuses on issues affecting low-income people. The coalition has vocally opposed the deal and pushed for hearings.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: In Unusual Step, Regulators Invite Public to Open Meeting on Bank Merger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.