By WILLIAM ALDENFEB. 26, 2015
The three founders of the private equity giant Carlyle Group received more than $800 million combined in 2014, a regulatory filing on Thursday showed.The cash haul for David M. Rubenstein, Daniel A. D’Aniello and William E. Conway Jr., who founded Carlyle in 1987, included dividends, base salary and profits from their personal investments in and alongside Carlyle’s funds. It also included the return of the capital they had invested, although Carlyle does not separately disclose that figure.All told, the roughly $803.1 million that the three men received surpassed the $750 million they received in 2013. The bump showed how Carlyle continued to generate prodigious amounts of cash last year, even as energy-related investments weighed on its profitability in the fourth quarter.The soaring stock market has been a boon to the private equity business, allowing Carlyle and its rivals to reap large profits from selling stakes in companies they own. In 2014, Carlyle’s distributable earnings — a nonstandard profit measure reflecting the cash that can be given to investors — rose 16 percent, to $973 million, from the prior year.AdvertisementThe chiefs of Carlyle, the Blackstone Group, Apollo Global Management and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts tend to make a lot more than big bank chief executives. This is largely because they founded these private equity firms and have large ownership stakes that pay dividends.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Rubenstein, for his part, got $98.2 million in dividends for 2014. Mr. Conway and Mr. D’Aniello each got $95.1 million.AdvertisementPrivate equity founders can also earn sizable profits from investing their millions in the firm’s funds. After making personal investments with Carlyle, Mr. Rubenstein made $132.3 million in investment profit and returned capital. Mr. D’Aniello received $133.8 million from this source, and Mr. Conway took in $247.7 million.The base salaries of the three men were relatively paltry. Including 401(k) matching contributions, each was paid a $281,500 salary for 2014.Not one of them received a bonus.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.