By AARON M. KESSLERFEB. 26, 2015
WASHINGTON —  A Senate panel on Thursday cleared its first auto safety bill stemming from last year’s record number of recalls.The Senate Commerce Committee approved legislation that would give whistle-blowers in the automotive industry who report wrongdoing to the government a percentage of any fines or monetary judgments imposed by federal agencies.The bill, which passed with bipartisan support, allows whistle-blowers to receive up to 30 percent of penalties that exceed $1 million tied to any motor vehicle defect, noncompliance or violation of reporting requirements likely to cause risk of death or serious injury. It is modeled on similar programs by the Internal Revenue Service and the Securities and Exchange Commission.“While I believe most manufacturers are dedicated to putting vehicle safety first, there have been disappointing examples where that did not happen and Americans died and sustained serious injuries,” said Senator John Thune, Republican of South Dakota, who is chairman of the committee.Senator Bill Nelson of Florida, the committee’s top Democrat, co-sponsored the legislation with Mr. Thune and said that the “auto industry needs to be held accountable.”Advertisement“One way to do that is to encourage insiders to come forward and tell the truth,” Mr. Nelson said.AdvertisementThe bill now heads to the full Senate for consideration. If it passes there, it would be taken up by the House Energy and Commerce Committee, whose chairman, Fred Upton, Republican of Michigan, has been critical of lax regulatory oversight of the auto industry.The bill takes into account whether a whistle-blower’s information is not previously known to the government. It also includes provisions to protect whistle-blowers’ identities.The legislation would retroactively apply to past wrongdoing, meaning that if whistle-blowers came forward with information on previously undiscovered bad behavior, and that led to a new government inquiry leading to a fine, they would qualify for the compensation.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Senate Panel Clears Auto Safety Bill to Reward Whistle-Blowers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.