AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — The European Central Bank’s plan to begin a big monetary stimulus program next month is already causing money to contort in new and sometimes strange ways.German bonds maturing in seven years traded at a negative interest rate for the first time on Thursday, meaning investors are willing to temporarily lose money for the privilege of owning the bonds. And the German insurance giant Allianz, which traditionally invests mainly in bonds and other securities, announced on Thursday that it would invest billions of euros more in property, adding to a portfolio that includes a British military garrison and a French shopping mall.Both developments reflected attempts by investors to cope with the latest effects of European Central Bank monetary policy, which could help the eurozone economy but has already created problems for insurance companies and others obligated to put their money in ultra-safe assets.Government bonds have traditionally been the asset of choice for risk-shy investors. But the central bank’s plans to begin buying government bonds and other debt, at the pace of 60 billion euros, or $67.8 billion, a month, have pushed rates on bonds from Germany, Finland and some other countries into negative territory.Simply put, the same fears that are prompting the central bank to act — the threat of deflation, in which wages and prices actually fall for a protracted period — are prompting bond investors to behave as if investments could be worth less in the future than they are now.But for investors seeking to earn a return, there is little appeal in bonds that are worth less when they mature than when purchased.“Negative yields are for me a typical sign of bubble mania,” Maximilian Zimmerer, the chief investment officer of Allianz, said by telephone on Thursday.So beginning several years ago, when interest rates began their slide, the company began looking for alternatives. Among other things, Allianz, based in Munich, invested in wind parks; a shopping mall in Nice, France; and a military garrison in Colchester, England, which it owns and operates for the British Ministry of Defense. Allianz said on Thursday that it would aim to increase its alternative portfolio to €110 billion, up from €74 billion at the end of 2014.“I would like to do even more,” Mr. Zimmerer said, but noted that the company was limited by regulations. Allianz, in announcing its quarterly results on Thursday, also said that Pimco, the big bond-specialist investment firm it owns, had seen money leaving in recent months.Prodding companies like Allianz to seek out new investments may be just what Mario Draghi, the European Central Bank president, intended. By scooping up many of the safe assets, the central bank aims to force investors out of their comfort zones and get them to spend money in countries that need it, like Spain and Italy.Stocks markets are already rallying in anticipation of the central bank bond buying, a form of money printing known as quantitative easing that is aimed at arresting the recent slide in inflation to levels considered unhealthy for growth. Corporations are taking advantage of the low interest rates to raise money for investment. In another encouraging sign, the European Central Bank published data on Thursday showing that lending is beginning to recover in the eurozone.“If there’s little expected return in government bonds, then investors will look for better ideas,” said Richard Dunbar, an investment strategist at Aberdeen Asset Management in Scotland. “It’s an explicit part of the policy of quantitative easing to get investors to move toward riskier assets, and it appears to be working.”Similar quantitative easing by central banks seems to have helped economic growth in the United States and Britain, although their programs did not result in negative interest rates — in part, because those economies were not as chronically listless as the eurozone’s when those stimulus programs began.But Mr. Dunbar said it remained to be seen what would happen in Europe. “This is a massive monetary experiment,” he said. “It might have unintended consequences, and we watch that carefully.”Market interest rates on bonds have been falling to unheard-of levels in anticipation of the European Central Bank’s bond-buying program. On Thursday the yield on German seven-year bonds fell just below zero. A day earlier, the German government sold five-year bonds at a negative rate — minus 0.08 percent — for the first time.Why would any sane person buy a bond that will have a lower face value in seven years than it does today? In some cases, the investors are desperate for a safe place to put their money. Others may believe that the eurozone is on the verge of deflation, a broad decline in prices. If consumer prices are falling at a rate of 0.6 percent, as they did in January, a bond with a negative rate of 0.08 percent may still be profitable.Still, the negative rates make many market watchers nervous. If inflation rises again, as the European Central Bank hopes, some investors may suffer big losses.“The level of negative interest rates is something only capital markets can invent and justify,” said Hugues Le Maire, co-founder of Diamant Bleu Gestion, an investment firm in Paris. “You would not see that in real life.”Mr. Le Maire, though, is among the investors who are reveling in the effects of central bank policy. He has been investing in eurozone bank stocks, he said, because they have been the direct beneficiaries of European Central Bank policy, including access to cash at interest rates close to zero.If European Central Bank policy has the intended effect, inflation will rise again and so will interest rates. The eurozone economy will grow faster, and everyone will benefit, including insurance companies.“The E.C.B. is moving forward with energy and commitment,” said Pierre Guillemin, head of portfolio management at Swiss Life Asset Managers. “That’s a very good sign.”But if the central bank’s policy fails, there may be consequences in a region where the percentage of retired people is rising fast. State and private pensions will have problems earning the returns they need to finance retirement benefits.“That’s the real message about this very low interest rate environment,” said Mr. Guillemin, speaking from Paris. “The danger is not that it lasts for weeks, but that it lasts for years.”Advertisement