By WILLIAM ALDENFEB. 26, 2015
One of the biggest leveraged buyouts in recent years has turned into a headache for its private equity owner.Samson Resources, an oil and natural gas producer backed by the private equity giant Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, has hired two restructuring advisers as it struggles with mounting losses and a large amount of debt, two people briefed on the matter said on Thursday. The advisers — the restructuring teams of the law firm Kirkland & Ellis and the investment giant Blackstone Group — could help Samson pursue a number of possible strategies to repair its business.Samson, which was purchased for $7.2 billion in 2011 by a consortium led by K.K.R., has been struggling for some time because of sharp declines in natural gas and oil prices. The company reported a $470.7 million loss for the nine months through September. It has $3.8 billion of long-term debt.K.K.R.’s deal, which was one of the biggest buyouts since the financial crisis, was a challenge almost from the start. Falling natural gas prices weighed on the company’s bottom line. When oil prices plunged in the second half of last year, losses piled up.AdvertisementThe newly hired advisers might consider options like asset sales or a broader restructuring. News of their assignment was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal.AdvertisementThe collapse in energy prices has hurt a number of private equity firms that had invested heavily in oil and natural gas companies. K.K.R., Apollo Global Management and the Carlyle Group all reported lower profit in the fourth quarter as their energy investments suffered losses.But in the natural gas business, K.K.R. has a particularly ugly stain on its record. In partnership with TPG and the buyout arm of Goldman Sachs, the firm paid $45 billion in 2007 for the Texas energy giant that is now known as Energy Future Holdings. The company was wounded by the decline in natural gas prices and finally collapsed in bankruptcy last year.A spokeswoman for K.K.R. declined to comment. A spokesman for Samson said the company did not immediately have a comment.A version of this web log appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Oil Woes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.