AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — A plunge in gasoline prices last month lowered consumer prices by the most in six years. But if volatile food and energy costs were excluded, prices rose.The Labor Department said on Thursday that the Consumer Price Index fell 0.7 percent in January, the sharpest drop since December 2008. Tumbling prices at the gas pump accounted for nearly all of the decline.Core prices, which exclude food and energy, rose 0.2 percent. The cost of clothes, hotels and restaurants all rose.Overall consumer prices have slipped 0.1 percent over the last 12 months, the first yearly drop in five years.Also Thursday, the Commerce Department reported that orders to American factories for long-lasting manufactured goods rebounded in January, rising by the largest amount in six months. In addition, the Labor Department said on Thursday that more Americans sought unemployment aid last week, though the number of applications was still consistent with steady hiring.Orders for durable goods increased 2.8 percent in January, the biggest increase since July. Much of the strength in durable goods orders came from a big jump in airplane orders. Orders were down 3.7 percent in December and 2.2 percent in November.Demand in a category that serves as a proxy for business investment increased 0.6 percent in January. It was a small gain but it came after four consecutive declines, including decreases of 0.7 percent in December and 0.5 percent in November.The 2.8 percent rebound in total orders was larger than had been expected but it was heavily influenced by a surge in demand in the volatile category of commercial aircraft, which soared 128.5 percent in January after having fallen 58.3 percent in December.Excluding transportation, orders showed a more modest gain of 0.3 percent in January after declines in December and November.Over the last year, core prices have risen 1.6 percent, below the 2 percent level that the Federal Reserve considers optimal for a healthy economy.Excessively low inflation is complicating the Fed’s decision on when to begin raising the short-term interest rate it controls. Most analysts think the Fed will start to raise rates in June or September from record lows. But persistently low prices could delay that decision.The Fed chairwoman, Janet Yellen, told Congress this week that she expected the effects of falling oil prices to fade in coming months, causing inflation to creep back toward the Fed’s 2 percent target.Most economists agree. Paul Ashworth, chief United States economist at Capital Economics, says he expects core inflation to rebound to 2 percent by early next year.“There is little danger that this temporary bout of falling energy prices will develop” into deflation, Mr. Ashworth said.The stronger United States dollar and global weakness have hurt exports, but economists are also still optimistic that surging domestic demand will result in a sustained rebound in orders this year.Weekly applications for unemployment benefits rose 31,000 to a seasonally adjusted 313,000, the most in six weeks. The four-week average, a less volatile measure, increased 11,500, to 294,500.Applications are a proxy for layoffs. The average has been near or below 300,000 since September, a historically low number that suggests companies are holding onto their staffs and may even be stepping up hiring.“Despite larger-than-expected weekly swings, the trend in claims remains consistent with an improving labor market,” Derek Lindsey, an economist at BNP Paribas, said in a note to clients.Advertisement