AdvertisementSupported byBy Hilary StoutAmerican Express, bruised by the recent loss of two major partnerships and an important court case, is seeking to reinvigorate its brand by sweetening the rewards on one of its most popular lines of cards.The company announced on Thursday new benefits for holders of its gold cards, including double points for all restaurant transactions in the United States for its premier rewards gold card and regular gold card. It will begin offering a personalized travel service for those cardholders as well as a $100 annual credit for airline incidentals, including meals and baggage surcharges. And it will eliminate foreign transaction fees. Other types of gold cards will get new benefits as well.The new gold card benefits, which will begin June 1, won’t come without some added cost to cardholders: The annual membership fee for the premier rewards gold card will rise $20, to $195 per year. For the regular gold card, it will rise even more, to $160 from $125.The move signals a reinvestment in the company’s core business — premium charge cards aimed at affluent consumers — after recent efforts to expand its base to more middle-income shoppers.“You’ve seen us enter new consumer spaces, but we’re also getting really invested in continuing to rebuild our premium cards,” said Lisa Durocher, the company’s senior vice president, charge and benefits. Little has gone right for Amex in recent months — falling gas prices and weak holiday season sales took a toll on its revenue targets. The company said in January that it would eliminate 4,000 jobs, or about 6 percent of its work force. It announced this month that it had failed to renew two key partnerships, with Costco and JetBlue.Then, last week a federal judge ruled that Amex had violated antitrust laws with its longstanding policy that bars merchants that accept its cards from steering customers to use lower-cost forms of payment. The transaction fees Amex charges merchants are routinely higher than those levied by other card companies, in part to finance the lucrative rewards programs of cards like the gold card. The judge, Nicholas G. Garaufis of the Eastern District of New York, has yet to order a remedy, and Amex has said it will appeal the ruling, but the company could eventually be forced to alter its way of doing business.All of these setbacks have taken a toll on Amex stock, which traded at $94.27 a share on Dec. 29 and had fallen to $78.08 by Feb. 13. It has since crept up, and on Thursday closed at $83.25.The Costco deal had been particularly lucrative for Amex. Its cards were the only plastic other than debit cards that the big discount retailer accepted. The two companies also jointly issued a credit card for general use, and there is some question if those cardholders will stick with Amex.“That will be a loss of business that they need to replace,” said John Hecht, an analyst at Jefferies. “What they’re doing now is working hard to replace it.”“That would be a perfect backdrop to why they are increasing their rewards,” Mr. Hecht added.It’s been a tough stretch for card issuers in general. Because of the fitful and uncertain recovery after the deep recession five years ago, many consumers are still curbing spending. At the same time, new electronic payment options have created an opportunity and a challenge for legacy card companies.Over the last decade or so, Amex had introduced a few no-fee cards aimed at broadening its reach. That included the new rewards credit card Amex EveryDay, introduced a year ago, that rewarded customers for small frequent purchases and targeted busy errand-running moms rather than big-spending business executives. Ms. Durocher said the EveryDay card had been a “big success,” one of the company’s strongest new introductions in the last decade, but she would not give the specific number of cardholders or revenue.Because restaurant transactions are a big part of gold card charges, the double points for such purchases should delight holders of the cards but could be expensive to the company. Ms. Durocher said the appeal to the customer was paramount.“We chose the most important spend categories,” she said, “to give the benefit to people on the things they love to do.”The company would not disclose any revenue numbers, but it said the gold cards were the prime engine of growth in its charge-card portfolio, which is at the core of the company’s business. The premier rewards gold card membership grew 10 percent year over year from 2013 to 2014, a company spokeswoman said.Still, executives are hoping the new benefits will help further reinvigorate a brand that is nearly 50 years old.The gold card was introduced in 1966 as the executive credit card. Over time its perks and benefits expanded, and by the mid-1990s it had become a full-blown rewards program. Today it continues to be a leader in a space that has become increasingly cutthroat with numerous entries.“It definitely has gotten more competitive,” Ms. Durocher said. “More cards have rewards; more cards talk about rewards. It’s become a lot more complicated space.”Over the last year or so, Amex has begun teaming up with various businesses to allow cardholders to pay with their Amex points at the point of sale, including Amazon, the car-sharing service Uber, New York City taxis and McDonald’s. Executives said they planned more such partnerships in the near future as well as other enticements.Advertisement