By PETER EAVISFEB. 26, 2015
A New York hedge fund that is suing Argentina over its debt is moving swiftly to try to stamp out any effort by the country to issue new bonds in international markets.Argentina is seeking to sell roughly $2 billion of new bonds to investors and has employed JPMorgan Chase and Deutsche Bank to handle the deal. But the banks have now suspended the deal, at least temporarily.The bonds were being marketed outside of the United States to non-American investors. If the deal were to be called off completely, it would underscore the remarkable reach of a small group of investors armed with favorable court rulings.In response to a request by NML Capital, a unit of Elliott Management, Judge Thomas P. Griesa of the Federal District Court in Manhattan on Wednesday ordered JPMorgan and Deutsche Bank to produce documents that would describe how money from the bond sale might pass to Argentina. He also ordered the banks to have witnesses present at a deposition about the bond deal at 3 p.m. on Thursday.AdvertisementThe court’s demands led the banks to put their deal preparations on hold, according to two people briefed on the matter who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly on the transaction.AdvertisementElliott Management’s legal moves are the latest installment in its long-running legal battle to gain full repayment on bonds that Argentina defaulted on in 2001. Most of the bonds involved in that default were later exchanged for new securities, known as exchange bonds, that were worth far less than the original debt.Elliott and other investors gained the name “holdouts” after refusing to accept the exchange bonds in return for their securities. The holdouts scored a pivotal victory in 2012, when Judge Griesa ruled that Argentina had to pay the holdouts in full whenever it made payments on the exchange bonds.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A United States court had power over the exchange bonds because many of them were issued under New York law. And the judge’s ruling had teeth because global banks did not want to fall afoul of the order by passing money from Argentina to holders of the exchange bonds. Argentina, for instance, has in recent months not been able to get money to holders of its exchange bonds.Argentina’s attempts to sell the new bonds form an important test for the country. The bonds were going to be denominated in dollars and Argentina may need the foreign currency to pay off other debts coming due. What is more, a successful sale would demonstrate that the country was able to borrow billions of dollars in international markets even as the holdouts pursued it.Lawyers at JPMorgan and Deutsche Bank would almost certainly have taken steps to try to prevent the new bonds from falling afoul of Judge Griesa’s order. As well as being sold outside of the United States, the new bonds would be registered under Argentine law. At the deposition, the banks’ representatives may seek to show that their deal complies with the judge’s order.Still, the holdouts have had success in gaining courts outside the United States to seize Argentine assets. A court in Ghana, for instance, ruled that the country could impound an Argentina naval vessel in 2012. (Under international maritime law, the boat was later released.)A document relating to the deal suggests that it is being arranged in London. The holdouts may be hoping that a British court will support their efforts and threaten to seize any money that Argentina might raise through the bond sale. In a 2011 ruling on a case brought by NML Capital, a British court ruled that governments like Argentina could not claim immunity from certain civil judgments in courts outside of Britain.A document relating to the sale of new bonds includes a lengthy passage detailing potential legal challenges to the sale. Specifically, it raises the possibility of legal attempts to “attach assets of Argentina.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.