
Breakingviews By                     
PETER THAL LARSEN

FEB. 26, 2015
An “orderly succession plan balancing stability with fresh perspective.” That’s how Standard Chartered described the boardroom clearout that led to the departure of its chief executive, its Asia head, its chairman and three non-executive directors. Others might have used a more violent expression.For anxious investors, regulators and employees, the arrival of William T. Winters as the new chief executive is welcome. But Mr. Winters, a former JPMorgan Chase executive, will face an overflowing inbox when he takes charge in June.Peter Sands’s time was running out as soon as it emerged that Standard Chartered had hired headhunters to search for a replacement for the chief executive. Mr. Sands, a former McKinsey consultant, steered the bank through the financial crisis, but has struggled to get a grip on costs as growth in emerging markets slowed. The bank is expected to report its second-consecutive decline in full-year profit next week. The share price has almost halved in two years.Mr. Winters is a reassuring choice. As co-head of JPMorgan’s investment banking arm, he was a contender for the top job before falling out with Jamie Dimon, the chairman and chief executive. Mr. Winters is on good terms with the Bank of England, Standard Chartered’s lead regulator, and enjoys the support of Singapore’s Temasek, its largest shareholder. His willingness to turn his back on Renshaw Bay, the boutique asset manager he founded after leaving JPMorgan, suggests that he sees potential for a turnaround. And he is well placed to lure the executives needed to replenish Standard Chartered’s senior ranks, which will probably thin further in the coming months.But hiring is just one of Mr. Winters’ challenges. He must also re-examine the bank’s exposure to the commodities sector and to China, both of which are showing signs of strain. Any significant write-downs will affect the bank’s capital base, which investors already regard as thin. A capital raise might reassure the market and is easier for a newcomer to undertake, but would also make it harder for Standard Chartered to rebuild its return on equity, which fell below 9 percent last year. Finally, Mr. Winters has to resolve a long-running dispute with regulators in the United States about the bank’s money-laundering controls.Standard Charter’s overdue succession plan removes one of the many questions facing the bank. However, it is only the first step.Peter Thal Larsen is Asia editor of Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »