By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDFEB. 26, 2015
Goldman Sachs has promoted two regional heads of mergers and acquisitions to global co-heads of the business, the firm announced in an internal memorandum on Thursday.Michael Carr, the head of mergers for the Americas, and Gilberto Pozzi, his counterpart in Europe, will join Gregg Lemkau as co-heads of global mergers, according to the memo, which was reviewed by DealBook.Gene T. Sykes, most recently the other global co-head and a member of the firm’s management committee, will become a co-chairman, joining Tim Ingrassia, Jack Levy and Paul Parker. The role involves less management responsibility and lets the senior deal makers focus on bringing in new business.The moves change the leadership of one of Goldman’s most prominent and successful businesses. The unit placed first in Thomson Reuters’ ranking of deal advisers last year, working on 446 transactions valued at just over $1 trillion.AdvertisementMr. Sykes is one of Goldman’s best-known mergers specialists, having advised a range of clients, including General Electric, eBay and the Walt Disney Company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Carr, who joined Goldman in 1998 from Salomon Brothers, was previously the firm’s head of investment banking for Asia, excluding Japan, and co-head of the industrials and natural resources group.Mr. Pozzi, who joined Goldman in 1995 and became a partner in 2003, was previously the head of the firm’s global consumer retail practice.AdvertisementThe full memo is below:We are pleased to announce a number of leadership changes in Global Mergers & Acquisitions. Gene Sykes will become co-chairman of Global Mergers & Acquisitions alongside Tim Ingrassia, Jack Levy and Paul Parker. Michael Carr and Gilberto Pozzi will join Gregg Lemkau as co-heads of Global Mergers & Acquisitions.This group will work in collaboration to lead this important global client franchise by continuing to drive our leading global merger market share position, advising on important strategic and policy initiatives, and further strengthening and developing our global team. Their wealth of global experience, strong sector knowledge and deep client relationships reinforce the firm’s position in providing seamless coverage to clients.Gene, with 31 years of experience at the firm, has been instrumental in shaping and defining our M&A franchise across a range of businesses and regions. He is a trusted advisor to many corporate clients and has led numerous franchise-defining transactions. Gene is a member of the Management Committee. He most recently was co-head of Global M&A and is co-chairman of the Global Technology, Media and Telecom Group. Gene joined the firm in 1984 and became a partner in 1992.Michael most recently was head of Mergers & Acquisitions in the Americas. Previously he was head of Investment Banking for Asia Ex-Japan and co-head of the Industrials and Natural Resources Group. Michael joined the firm in 1998 as a partner.Gilberto most recently was head of EMEA Mergers & Acquisitions. Previously he was co-head of the Global Consumer Retail Group. Gilberto joined the firm in 1995 and was named managing director in 2003 and partner in 2008.Please join us in congratulating Gene, Michael and Gilberto on their new roles and wishing them continued success.Richard J. GnoddeDavid SolomonJohn WaldronA version of this web log appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Goldman's Promotions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.