By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDFEB. 26, 2015
Barnes & Noble said on Thursday that it would spin off its college bookstores business into a separate publicly traded company, changing up its breakup plans.Originally, the retailer had planned to part with the education division as part of a spinoff of its Nook business, made up in large part of its struggling e-reader device.Over the last year, Barnes & Noble has taken steps to reorganize itself to help stabilize its ebbing business. It has bought back stakes in the Nook business owned by Microsoft and the education publisher Pearson as part of the planned spinoff of the division.Now, however, Barnes & Noble will keep the Nook business and spin off just the college bookstore unit, its best-performing division. In the 26 weeks that ended Nov. 1, the education division reported $10.7 million in profit on top of $977.4 million in sales, according to a prospectus filed on Thursday.AdvertisementBy contrast, the core retail division reported $1.8 billion in sales and the Nook unit just $133.9 million in that same period. The college bookstores business was the only one to report revenue growth in that period.Advertisement“Separating Barnes & Noble Education will create an industry-leading, pure-play public company with more flexibility to pursue strategic opportunities in the growing educational services markets,” Michael P. Huseby, the bookseller’s chief executive, said in a statement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The unit, to be called Barnes & Noble Education, operated 714 stores as of Nov. 1, as well as sales of e-textbooks through its Yuzu platform.Shareholders in Barnes & Noble will receive stock in the independent college bookstore unit by the end of August.Shares in Barnes & Noble were up 5.6 percent in early morning trading on Thursday, at $25.67.Barnes & Noble has long been a dominant player on college campuses, along with the Follett Corporation. But the company’s chief rival, Amazon.com, has rmade a concerted push recently into the college bookstore arena, posing a new threat to Barnes & Noble’s position as a leader in a $10.3 billion market.Earlier this month, Amazon announced a new initiative with Purdue University to run a staffed delivery center on campus where students can pick up their Amazon packages and return rented textbooks.Amazon also offers free next-day delivery on textbooks and course materials to students and gives them a steep discount on Prime memberships through Amazon Student, which costs $49 a year. The online retailer has similar deals with two other universities, the University of California, Davis and the University of Massachusetts, Amherst.Alexandra Alter contributed reporting.A version of this web log appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: A Change in Plans.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.