AdvertisementSupported byBy Jenny Anderson and Chad BrayLONDON — Standard Chartered was everybody’s favorite bank when banks were considered bad news.The British bank sailed through the financial crisis, enjoying a steady decade of profit growth from markets in Asia, Africa and the Middle East. It was a darling among investors while its competitors licked their wounds, rummaged for billions to strengthen capital buffers and drastically restructured their businesses.But then its core Asian markets slowed and Standard Chartered became a repeated target of United States regulators. Its stock price fell nearly 50 percent in less than two years, and shareholders clamored for change.On Thursday, the bank responded, announcing a sweeping overhaul including the departure of its chief executive, its chairman, the head of Asian markets and several directors. Surprising many, it tapped William T. Winters, the 53-year-old former head of JPMorgan Chase’s investment bank — who was once seen as a candidate to succeed Jamie Dimon — to take the helm.“I highly regard Bill and believe he’s an excellent choice for the Standard Chartered role and will do a great job there,” Mr. Dimon said.Mr. Winters will succeed Peter Sands, 53, one of the longest-serving chief executives in British finance. During his tenure, Standard Chartered doubled in size, in profits, people and capital, said John W. Peace, the chairman, who announced on Thursday that he would step down in 2016.“Peter and the team have forged Standard Chartered into one of the truly great opportunities in global banking,” Mr. Winters said in a news release. “It’s a special bank. I’m struck by its amazing network, respected brand and powerful client relationships across the countries which will drive the future growth of the world economy.”Mr. Winters will join the bank on May 1 and will become chief executive in June. He will be based in London, where he has lived since 1992, and will receive a base salary of 1.15 million pounds, or about $1.8 million, as well as a pension and other benefits.“Shareholders should be elated,” said Steve Black, who was co-head of investment banking at JPMorgan with Mr. Winters. “It’s not the easiest thing in the world right now to attract good people to be a bank C.E.O.”He will have his work cut out for him. Standard Chartered has been hurt in recent years by regulatory fines and investigations and by its focus on emerging markets. It has shed thousands of jobs, closed its stock trading and underwriting unit and is looking to cut $400 million in costs. Impairments for bad loans, including in the mining sector, have soared.In a call with reporters, Mr. Peace repeated that Mr. Winters had a demonstrated ability to work with regulators.“He has great respect among regulators, clients and the market,” Mr. Peace said, adding that Mr. Winters’s understanding of the global regulatory environment was not something “you can learn on the job.”That understanding could prove helpful in navigating tricky regulatory waters.Standard Chartered paid fines of $667 million in 2012 as part of a settlement with the United States Department of Justice and the Department of Financial Services in New York over charges that it had transferred billions of dollars for Iran and other countries in violation of sanctions.Two years later, in 2014, it paid more than $300 million to settle with the New York department over computer system failures to flag potentially suspicious transactions with high-risk clients.Last fall, the Department of Justice and the Manhattan district attorney’s office reopened their 2012 investigation, seeking to discover if the bank withheld information during the original investigation and settlement into Iranian sanctions violations, according to people briefed on the matter. The authorities are working alongside the New York regulator, Benjamin M. Lawsky, who opened what is now his third investigation into the bank in three years, the people said. The focus of the inquiries is on accounts, some of them in recent years, that the bank opened for Iranian clients. Standard Chartered declined to comment on the investigations.Mr. Winters, an American, will become one of many foreigners running big British financial institutions: Mark J. Carney, a Canadian, is governor of the Bank of England; Xavier Rolet, a Frenchman, is head of the London Stock Exchange; António Horta-Osório of Portugal leads the Lloyds Banking Group; and Ross McEwan, from New Zealand, is chief executive of the Royal Bank of Scotland.Friends and former colleagues say Mr. Winters is keenly intelligent and very direct. Early in his career, he helped build the credit derivatives business at JPMorgan, going to London in 1992 as head of European fixed income. He later became head of the bank’s global markets division and in 2004 became co-chief executive of the group’s investment bank with Mr. Black, who now also lives in London. Mr. Winters helped manage JPMorgan through the financial crisis, which it weathered well, including helping to integrate the acquisition of Bear Stearns.His wife is a Croatian artist who runs a local theater company in Notting Hill called the Print Room, which Time Out called London’s “most upmarket fringe venue.”Mr. Winters shares her creative bent, illustrated by a fund-raising video he made in 2013 for the Young Vic theater in London about a group of bankers pitching a musical on the subject of bankers turned strippers. Mr. Winters acts, sings and rips off his shirt in the skit, titled “Birthday Suits.”He has loyal followers from his JPMorgan days. At his going-away party at the Campbell Apartment restaurant in Grand Central Terminal, hundreds of people packed the bar and stayed for hours, said two people who were there.Former colleagues say he is a savvy risk manager, in contrast to the last prominent American who took over a giant British bank, Robert Diamond, who went on a global expansion binge at Barclays only to have it blow up in the financial crisis.“Bill is a ruthless, live-in-reality kind of guy,” said Tim Main, a partner at Evercore and the former head of financial institutions investment banking at JPMorgan.“He will understand every single asset and every single liability and every single off-balance-sheet item. The industry needs guys like this in leadership positions,” he added.After Mr. Winters’s abrupt departure from JPMorgan in 2009, he fielded offers to take on jobs running big troubled British or European banks including Barclays and UBS. But he declined, opting instead to start an asset management company and work with the Independent Commission on Banking in Britain. That group ultimately put forward the recommendation to “ring fence” retail banking from investment banking. It is now law.That left him available as Standard Chartered investors grew restless. Big shareholders have been clamoring for months for fresh leadership, according to the British news media.Temasek Holdings, which owns almost 18 percent of Standard Chartered, declined to comment on whether it had pressed for management changes. But it said that it welcomed Mr. Winters, who “brings with him considerable experience, as well as an excellent reputation for building good teams.”Temasek also indicated that it expected more changes. “This ongoing process for board renewal must continue as the requirements and challenges facing the banking and financial sector across the world have become much more complex and onerous.”Jaspal Singh Bindra, the bank’s chief executive in Asia, will step down from the board at the end of April and leave the bank soon afterward. And as part of a multiyear succession plan, three longstanding directors will step down this year. Over time, Standard Chartered intends to shrink its board to 14 members from 19.Analysts also welcomed the shake-up. “With the share price having about halved since its March 2013 peak, the stock market was looking for a fresh start,” Ronit Ghose, a Citigroup analyst, said in a research note Thursday. “With the appointment of a highly regarded new C.E.O., and other senior changes ahead, investors can begin looking ahead to a material recovery opportunity.”The bank’s shares were up 5 percent at the close of trading.Jenny Anderson reported from London and Chad Bray from Berlin. Ben Protess contributed reporting from New York.Advertisement