AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewIn a recent The Trade column, Jesse Eisinger of ProPublica criticizes Justice Louis Brandeis’s advice that “Sunlight is...the best of disinfectants” for social problems. He describes the reliance on transparency and disclosure as an ineffective “regulatory crutch,” saying that “if lawmakers want to end a bad practice, ban it. Having them admit it is not enough.”The point that disclosure alone fails to stop bad public practice misses the aim of disclosure requirements. A disclosure requirement does not purport to be a solution, in and of itself, to a problematic public practice — no more than a news report about a scandal claims to resolve it.Disclosure is the first, necessary step on the way to ensuring that problematic public actors can be held accountable for bad action. Without first establishing a right to information, by what other route are we otherwise supposed to learn about actors’ misconduct or inefficiency, or that there’s a bad practice that needs correction?Recently, the principle that relevant information should always be disclosed where possible has taken some public hits. In many cases, like the loud arguments against releasing the names of wealthy political donors, this is simply self-interest at work — those wealthy donors would generally like to maintain their right to influence politics in secret.This opposition should be seen as a kind of clue to the usefulness of disclosure requirements. If disclosure wasn’t the first step toward political change, why would anyone fight so hard against it?Often the next step after winning a right to disclosed information is obtaining the information in a timely way and in an accessible format These improvements are also fought tooth and nail. The Senate is in its 12th year of refusing to submit its campaign finance reports electronically, with senators instead printing out their electronic records and then submitting them as reams of paper. That’s a tremendous amount of effort to avoid a useless mechanism, not to mention expensive — it costs taxpayers upward of $500,000 a year for the government to then digitize the data.On the other hand, we see plenty of evidence that disclosures — especially the hard-fought ones — can produce real change. ProPublica’s own work based on Medicare Part D claims data provides an important recent example of the value of publicly disclosed health care information. The data set containing all doctors’ Medicare prescription records from 2007 to 2012 was not truly available — despite being a formal public record — until ProPublica submitted a Freedom of Information Act request to have the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid release it.ProPublica took the disclosed data and analyzed it, identifying doctors with unusual prescription patterns and doctors with histories of receiving large payments from pharmaceutical companies. As a result, individual patients started asking more questions of their doctors, medical schools tightened their scrutiny of their affiliated staff, state legislatures mandated the use of prescription databases for doctor review and in the period following this public analysis, drug companies slashed the fees they paid to doctors.Most encouragingly, the disclosed data has changed government policy: As of mid-2015, doctors identified through this process will lose the right to participate in the Medicare Part D program.Nobody would disagree that enforcement of existing regulations — better inspections, more oversight, and more audits — would make for a more effective resolution to the problems that disclosure brings to our attention. But what else would lead us to be able to make the claims of insufficient regulatory response without the information about problems being available in the first place?As Justice Brandeis also said, “The world presents enough problems if you believe it to be a world of law and order; do not add to them by believing it to be a world of miracles.” It would truly be a miracle if lawmakers spontaneously corrected complicated social and ethical problems before the public demanded it. Disclosure is not by itself the answer, or the end of the reform process. It is just the beginning. But without this beginning, we can expect to have no reform process at all.Chris Gates is the president of Sunlight Foundation is a nonpartisan nonprofit that advocates for open government globally and uses technology to make government more accountable to all.Advertisement