By DAVID GELLESFEB. 28, 2015
The rise of Berkshire Hathaway is the stuff of legend, memorialized in dozens of books charting the creation of perhaps the world’s greatest conglomerate, and the rise of its patron saint, Warren E. Buffett.But even 50 years after he took control of what was once a fledgling textile manufacturer, Mr. Buffett is still hung up on a few poor decisions. In a 24,000-word letter to commemorate his golden anniversary at the company, he reflected on some of the more memorable stumbles in Berkshire’s illustrious history.In 1964, Mr. Buffett was a minority shareholder in Berkshire Hathaway. Seabury Stanton, then the company’s chief executive, tried to buy back Mr. Buffett’s shares at a price lower than what Mr. Buffett had asked for.“I bristled at Stanton’s behavior and didn’t tender,” Mr. Buffett wrote. “That was a monumentally stupid decision.”AdvertisementBerkshire’s business — and its share price — continued to erode, and Mr. Buffett says he regrets paying so much for the Berkshire stock he acquired during those years.Advertisement“Buying the stock at that price was like picking up a discarded cigar butt that had one puff remaining in it,” he wrote. “Though the stub might be ugly and soggy, the puff would be free. Once that momentary pleasure was enjoyed, however, no more could be expected.”Even as Berkshire’s stock fell, Mr. Buffett kept buying, and eventually took control of the company. “I became the dog who caught the car,” he said, noting that the textile business that gave Berkshire its name was eventually shut down.Mr. Buffett’s batting average did not improve quickly, either.Undeterred by his “first mistake” of committing much of his resources to a dying business, he said, “I quickly compounded the error.” By combining his next purchase, an insurer called National Indemnity Company, with Berkshire Hathaway, he wound up sharing the company’s profits with Berkshire’s other shareholders.“Indeed, my second blunder was far more serious than the first, eventually becoming the most costly in my career,” he said, estimating that the choice wound up diverting about $100 billion to “a collection of strangers.”A third early mistake Mr. Buffett owned up to was the 1975 acquisition of Waumbec Mills, another textile company in New England. He shut it down a few years later.“And now some good news: The northern textile industry is finally extinct,” Mr. Buffett wrote. “You need no longer panic if you hear that I’ve been spotted wandering around New England.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The mistakes slowed once Mr. Buffett met Charlie Munger, who “had grown up a few hundred feet from where I now live and as a youth had worked, as did I, in my grandfather’s grocery store,” Mr. Buffett recalled.Mr. Munger is now Berkshire’s vice chairman and Mr. Buffett’s closest adviser.“In 56 years, however, we’ve never had an argument,” Mr. Buffett said. “When we differ, Charlie usually ends the conversation by saying, ‘Warren, think it over and you’ll agree with me because you’re smart and I’m right.’”AdvertisementOne great success came in 1972, when the company had the chance to acquire See’s Candies for $25 million. At the time, the small California company earned annual profits of “$4 million pretax while utilizing only $8 million of net tangible assets.”That small deal became the unlikely engine for many of Berkshire’s future successes.“To date, See’s has earned $1.9 billion pretax, with its growth having required added investment of only $40 million,” Mr. Buffett wrote. “See’s has thus been able to distribute huge sums that have helped Berkshire buy other businesses that, in turn, have themselves produced large distributable profits. (Envision rabbits breeding.)”Employing his trademark self-deprecation, Mr. Buffett concluded his reflections by recounting yet another costly mistake.In 1993, Mr. Buffett approved the acquisition of Dexter Shoe for $433 million, paying for the deal with Berkshire stock. It was a bad decision, and Berkshire quickly wrote down the value of the business to zero.The true cost was much greater, however. The value of that $433 million in Berkshire stock today is $5.7 billion. “As a financial disaster,” he said, “this one deserves a spot in the ‘Guinness Book of World Records.’”Mr. Buffett said he had made the same mistake more than once.“Several of my subsequent errors also involved the use of Berkshire shares to purchase businesses whose earnings were destined to simply limp along,” he said. “Mistakes of that kind are deadly. Trading shares of a wonderful business — which Berkshire most certainly is — for ownership of a so-so business irreparably destroys value.”But investors in Berkshire Hathaway know better. Even with Mr. Buffett’s mistakes on the books, the value of Berkshire stock is up more than 1.8 million percent over the past 50 years.“Overall, Berkshire’s acquisitions have worked out well — and very well in the case of a few large ones,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.