By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMFEB. 27, 2015
The Federal Reserve’s vice chairman, Stanley Fischer, said that it was time for the central bank to bring a little more mystery to its relationship with financial markets, suggesting on Friday that the postcrisis era of detailed guidance was drawing to a close.The Fed has sought to increase its influence over markets since the Great Recession by talking about its future plans: how much money it intended to invest in securities; how much longer it expected to hold its benchmark rate near zero. Most recently, the Fed said in January that it did not plan to raise rates before June.“It seems to me that you unnecessarily constrain yourself,” Mr. Fischer said of such guidance during a panel discussion at an annual monetary policy conference sponsored by the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. “There’s no good reason that I can see for us to telegraph every action that we have to take.”The comments came just days after Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, told a Senate committee the central bank would announce as soon as March that it would consider raising its benchmark rate at each meeting of its policy committee.AdvertisementMs. Yellen emphasized that such a change in forward guidance did not mean the Fed would move immediately to raise rates. And Fed officials at the conference Friday similarly suggested the trajectory remained unchanged. They do not plan to move before June. After that, they do not know how much longer they will wait.AdvertisementJohn C. Williams, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, said he agreed with Mr. Fischer that the Fed needed to “wean” investors of the expectation that policy makers would describe their plans months or years in advance. He said the Fed should try to restore the primacy of the latest economic data, rather than its own guidance, as an indicator of the likely course of monetary policy.The remarks by Fed officials contrasted with the keynote presentation at the conference. The authors — two academics and two Wall Street economists — said that because of uncertainty about underlying economic conditions, the Fed should wait longer before raising its benchmark rate. Then when the Fed does move, it should raise the rate more sharply.“There may be benefits to waiting to raise the nominal rate until we actually see some evidence of labor market pressure and increases in inflation,” concluded the authors, the economics professors Kenneth West of the University of Wisconsin and James Hamilton of the University of California, San Diego and the economists Ethan Harris of Bank of America and Jan Hatzius of Goldman Sachs.Ms. Yellen, however, has said repeatedly that the Fed plans to act once officials are “reasonably confident” inflation will rebound, a less stringent standard.William C. Dudley, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the vice chairman of the Fed’s policy-making committee, said he agreed with the authors’ basic argument that uncertainty about underlying economic conditions was a reason for the Fed to move slowly. Mr. Dudley said he also viewed the risks of moving too soon as greater than the risks of moving too late.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But he emphasized that the Fed already was moving slowly. “It is important not to overemphasize uncertainty to justify a policy of persistently low short-term interest rates,” he said.Loretta Mester, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, also pushed back against the advice of the paper. She noted that the analysis did not consider the risk that holding down rates was worsening financial speculation.“Our models aren’t well developed enough to allow us to quantify the risks to financial stability of holding rates at zero for a long time, yet the crisis showed us that financial instability comes at a very high cost,” Ms. Mester said.AdvertisementNone of the Fed officials offered a specific timetable. Mr. Fischer became the latest to express frustration with “the excess attention to liftoff and the relative lack of attention to what happens the next day.” Fed officials say there is little difference for the economy whether the Fed acts in June or September.Mr. Fischer also cautioned that investors should not assume the central bank will raise rates in regular increments, as when the Fed raised interest rates by 0.25 percentage points at 17 consecutive meetings from 2004 to 2006.“I know of no plans to behave by following one of those deterministic paths for the next two or three years,” he said. “I hope that doesn’t happen. I don’t believe it will happen.”A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Vice Chief Suggests Fed Will Give Less Guidance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.