By DAN HORCHFEB. 27, 2015
SÃO PAULO, Brazil — JBS, the world’s largest meatpacker, has withdrawn its proposed initial public offering, which would have spun off its Brazilian pork, poultry and food operations into a separate company.The I.P.O., which was supposed to raise as much as 3.5 billion reais ($1.2 billion), was withdrawn because of unfavorable market conditions, a person briefed on the matter said.But JBS still intends to conduct an I.P.O. when conditions improve, and it could refile its proposal at any time, this person said.JBS had originally filed I.P.O. plans in May to spin off the operation, known as JBS Foods. It withdrew the plan in October on a Friday, only to refile its request the following Monday in the hope – so far in vain – that market conditions would improve.AdvertisementThe operation is the second planned Brazilian I.P.O. to be withdrawn this year. Azul, the airline started by the JetBlue founder David Neeleman, withdrew its planned stock offering in January.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bankers were initially optimistic about the I.P.O. market for this year, after the re-elected President Dilma Rousseff surprised the market last November by appointing a Chicago-trained economist and financial market executive, Joaquim Levy, as Brazil’s finance minister.But the forecasts for Brazil’s economy have been worsening. The central bank’s most recent survey of local financial institutions gives a consensus forecast that the economy will contract 0.5 percent this year and that inflation will top 7 percent. Brazil’s currency, the real, has fallen nearly 30 percent against the dollar since the JBS Foods I.P.O. was first announced last May.AdvertisementThe I.P.O. prospectus had listed Itaú BBA as the lead underwriter, as well as Banco do Brasil, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Bradesco BBI, BTG Pactual, Credit Suisse, HSBC and Santander as other underwriters.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.