
Breakingviews By                     
GEORGE HAY

FEB. 27, 2015
The last time the Lloyds Banking Group paid a dividend, Gordon Brown was the British prime minister, Lehman Brothers still existed and “banker” was yet to become a term of abuse. The fact the British bank is making its first shareholder payout since August 2008 is, therefore, an encouraging milestone. But in valuation terms, this year’s dividend is more important.In a sense, the 2014 dividend is more about its existence than its size. It means that the Prudential Regulation Authority, which oversees British banks, is comfortable with Lloyds’ profitability. So it should be. The bank only managed a low pass in December’s British stress tests, but that assessment needs to be taken in the context of its worst-case planning. Actual reported figures show the group’s net interest margin — the difference between the interest it takes in and pays out — has jumped 33 basis points to 245 basis points in a year, and should be 255 basis points in 2015. Return on equity, stripping out the costs of restructuring and compensation of customers who were improperly sold payment protection insurance, is almost 14 percent — way above Lloyds’ 9 to 10 percent cost of equity.Even so, Lloyds is being conservative: A 0.75 pence per share full-year dividend represents barely a 10 percent payout ratio on its 8 pence underlying earnings per share, and below the 1 pence forecast. Actual return on equity is still only 3 percent, and although Lloyds’ 12.8 percent core Tier 1 ratio is solid, global capital requirements may rise. Net interest margins are already being hit by lower mortgage rates.The major driver of Lloyds’ valuation is whether it can afford to distribute more than the 50 percent of earnings, as it has hinted. If it paid out half of the 5.8 pence in earnings per share expected by analysts for 2015 and long-term dividends growth of 5 percent can be assumed, the shares would be worth 72 pence based on a Gordon growth model, lower than the current 79 pence price. If Lloyds paid out 70 percent of earnings — as some expect might be possible — that climbs to 100 pence.Regulatory uncertainties and Britain’s competition review give pause for thought. The fact that the bank is still 23.9 percent state-owned is relevant given the British election in May. But there is handsome upside potential for investors inclined to be bullish.George Hay is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »