
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

FEB. 27, 2015
Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. tried to bury the lead.Toward the end of public comments he gave last week at the National Press Club, Mr. Holder slipped in that he had given his staff members at the Justice Department precisely 90 more days to come up with new civil or criminal prosecutions against Wall Street for wrongdoing involving the manufacture and sale of mortgage-backed securities in the years leading up to the financial crisis.“I don’t know if I’m making news now or not,” Mr. Holder said sheepishly in answering the penultimate question of the day.He most certainly was making news, and it was not good. In fact, it was particularly awful news: After more than seven years since the onslaught of the financial crisis, the clock is ticking rapidly in what has been Mr. Holder’s abysmal track record of holding individual bankers, traders and executives accountable for what went wrong.Forget for the moment that the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act, known as Firrea, has a 10-year statute of limitations. Can it really be coming down to this? Is Mr. Holder content to have his legacy be defined, in large part, by the fact that exactly zero individual Wall Street bankers, traders and executives have been successfully prosecuted for their role in inflating a real-estate bubble that cost investors hundreds of billions of dollars in losses and millions of ordinary Americans their jobs when it exploded?AdvertisementIn his defense, Mr. Holder said he did try. “To the extent that individuals have not been prosecuted,” Mr. Holder told the National Press Club, “people should understand it is not for lack of trying. These are the kinds of cases that people come to the Justice Department to make. Young people who want to be assistant U.S. attorneys in the Southern District of New York and Eastern District of Virginia, San Francisco, live for these big cases. The inability to make them, at least to this point, has not been as a result of a lack of effort.”AdvertisementThis strikes me as just so much spin. The truth seems to be that federal prosecutors across the board lost their zeal for fighting Wall Street after November 2009, when a federal jury in New York found the hedge fund managers Ralph R. Cioffi and Matthew M. Tannin not guilty of fraud in connection with decisions that led to the liquidation of two Bear Stearns funds — costing investors most of their $1.5 billion.It was not a great moment for the Justice Department, especially because there seemed to a credible trail of evidence that both Mr. Cioffi and Mr. Tannin knew that the assets they were stuffing into the two hedge funds, and then leveraging to the hilt, were ripe for collapse.It can’t be pleasant to lose a prominent case you should have won. But isn’t it the responsibility of the Justice Department to at least try to bring these cases, even if one got away? Isn’t it the role of these gung-ho young prosecutors, as Mr. Holder describes them, to gather up the facts and present the best case they can to a jury? Unfortunately, the anecdotal evidence points to a different pattern: Prosecutors across the country have used their subpoena power to interview witnesses and gather reams of documents, data and emails from Wall Street firms and then put together draft complaints that were used as cudgels to beat the Wall Street banks into multibillion-dollar financial settlements. That is not the same as a prosecution; that’s more akin to a stickup.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If the Justice Department is even remotely serious about using the next three months to bring cases against Wall Street, its first calls should be to Richard M. Bowen III, a former senior executive at Citigroup, and to Alayne Fleischmann, a former associate at JPMorgan Chase. Both Mr. Bowen and Ms. Fleischmann were responsible for making sure the third-party mortgages each firm was buying and packaging into mortgage-backed securities met written credit standards. Both Mr. Bowen and Ms. Fleischmann discovered that the mortgages were faulty. Both of them told their bosses about the problem, and both were virtually ignored. Both were also fired: Ms. Fleischmann in February 2008 and Mr. Bowen in January 2009. Both have become whistle-blowers, and both have suffered nearly irreparable harm to their careers for simply for trying to do the right thing.Both Ms. Fleischmann and Mr. Bowen have given a lot of information to the Justice Department and to the Securities and Exchange Commission. Mr. Bowen has met with Kevin Traskos, the chief of the civil division in the United States attorney’s office in Colorado, and then later spent two days with Richard K. Hayes, an assistant United States attorney in the Eastern District of New York, who flew to Dallas to meet with him. (Mr. Hayes reports to Loretta Lynch, who is awaiting Senate confirmation to succeed Mr. Holder.) Since September 2013, Mr. Bowen has heard nothing further from the Justice Department. Citigroup reached a $7 billion settlement last summer.On March 13, 2013, Ms. Fleischmann gave a deposition to Richard Elias, an assistant United States attorney for the Eastern District of California, in which she laid out all the wrongdoing she had witnessed at JPMorgan. Her information was pivotal in the $13 billion settlement that JPMorgan reached with the government later that year.“There were loans that we knew had substantial problems with them that were going to mean that when they were sold to investors, the investors weren’t going to get paid properly,” Ms. Fleischmann, a former lawyer, told me. “And we sold those loans to the investors anyway without disclosing to them these problems. Fraud is basically that you are selling these securities on misstatements or omitting information that would have been important to investors.”After the settlement, Ms. Fleischmann received a call telling her to make herself available between Dec. 15 and Christmas to meet with investigators who were still looking into whether to file a criminal complaint against the bank for securitizing the faulty mortgages. But Ms. Fleischmann has never heard from any criminal investigators or anyone else from the Justice Department since giving her deposition.Both remain willing to help make a case against their former employers. But as both know all too well, time is running out.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »