By NICOLA CLARKFEB. 27, 2015
PARIS — Profit at International Airlines Group, the parent company of British Airways, leapt by 81 percent last year, bolstered by strong passenger demand on its key routes across the Atlantic and a turnaround at its once-struggling Spanish carrier, Iberia.The group, also known as I.A.G., said on Friday that it had an operating profit before exceptional items in 2014 of 1.39 billion euros, or $1.57 billion, on revenue of more than €20 billion. That was up sharply from the year-earlier operating profit of €770 million on revenue of €18.7 billion. Net profit for 2014 surged to €1 billion, from €527 million the year before.Although headquartered in London, the group, whose holdings also include the Spanish low-cost carrier Vueling, reports its financial results in euros.The recovery at Iberia, which follows three years of painful restructuring and job cuts, comes as I.A.G. is seeking to accelerate growth further by acquiring Aer Lingus, Ireland’s flagship airline, for which I.A.G. has offered €1.4 billion.AdvertisementWhile the Aer Lingus board has strongly endorsed I.A.G.’s bid, the Irish government, which owns 25 percent of the carrier, has yet to give its blessing, citing concerns that the deal could result in job losses in Ireland and reduced service between Dublin and Heathrow Airport in London, Europe’s largest international hub.Advertisement“We have been very clear with the Irish government that we want to acquire Aer Lingus to grow the airline,” Willie Walsh, I.A.G.’s chief executive, said in a British radio interview on Friday. “We see opportunities to expand in a significant way the Aer Lingus business on the trans-Atlantic.”Mr. Walsh singled out the “remarkable” turnaround at Iberia, after six years of losses, as evidence of the potential benefits of joining I.A.G. Iberia posted an operating profit of €50 million last year, after recording a loss of €166 million in 2013.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The improvement in Iberia’s fortunes has tracked a steady recovery of the Spanish economy as it emerges from years of recession and high unemployment triggered by Europe’s recent sovereign debt crisis. The economy grew 1.4 percent last year, the fastest pace since 2012.Iberia, which has cut more than 3,000 jobs since 2012, has recently begun to expand, even as other former national carriers in Europe continue to struggle in the face of competition from low-cost rivals in their home markets as well as fast-growing carriers from the Persian Gulf on lucrative long-distance routes.Last year, Iberia revived services from its Madrid hub to cities including Havana and Santo Domingo, in the Dominican Republic, that were canceled during the worst of the economic crisis. I.A.G. has announced plans to upgrade Iberia’s fleet with 16 new long-range jets from Airbus over the next five years.I.A.G. said operating profit at British Airways, its largest brand, jumped by nearly 60 percent to €1.2 billion, buoyed by the steady economic recovery in the United States as well as consolidation in the busy trans-Atlantic air travel market, which has served to keep fares high.As a result of a 2010 alliance with American Airlines, which subsequently merged with US Airways, I.A.G. and its partners now control roughly one-fourth of the air travel market between the European Union and North America, making the group the third-largest airline alliance plying the Atlantic. An alliance of Lufthansa, United Airlines and Air Canada controls 29 percent of the market, while a grouping of Delta Air Lines, Air France-KLM, Alitalia and Virgin Atlantic has 28 percent.I.A.G. forecast on Friday that sharply lower oil prices this year and continued progress in reducing other operating costs would lead to further earnings improvement. The group said it foresaw a 2015 operating profit “in excess” of €2.2 billion, up from a previous forecast of €1.8 billion.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Profit Increases 81% at Parent of British Airways.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.