By MELISSA EDDY and NIKI KITSANTONISFEB. 27, 2015
BERLIN — German lawmakers voted overwhelmingly on Friday to extend the terms of Greece’s bailout by four months, despite growing misgivings over Athens’s willingness to make economic overhauls viewed in Berlin as necessary to ensure a long-term recovery.Wolfgang Schäuble, Germany’s finance minister, urged lawmakers to support the extension to ensure Europe’s future success, even as he conceded that doing so was “not easy for me.”Germany, as the richest and most influential member of 19-country euro currency union, speaks with the loudest voice in the bloc and has been among Greece’s toughest taskmasters. Failure by the German legislature, the Bundestag, to grant the additional four months could have driven Athens into default and bankruptcy, leaving it with no choice but to leave the currency union.“The discussions before and after the elections in Greece didn’t make this decision any easier, and neither have the discussions of the past few days and hours, to put it mildly,” Mr. Schäuble told lawmakers, 542 of whom voted in favor and 32 against. Thirteen of the 587 lawmakers who cast ballots abstained.AdvertisementAnd yet, even with Greece, the way forward is political uncertainty, as some members of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras’s own leftist Syriza party are opposed to the terms of the bailout extension.AdvertisementAnd the first anti-government protest since the Jan. 25 elections was marred by violence late on Thursday when dozens of masked youths hurled firebombs at the police, set cars on fire and smashed storefronts in central Athens, in opposition to the bailout deal.It remained unclear on Friday when, or indeed whether, the new Greek government would bring the deal to a vote in Greece’s Parliament.In comments to Greek television on Friday, Nikos Pappas, Mr. Tsipras’s chief of staff, said no decision had been made regarding a vote on the full deal. But he said that Greek lawmakers would have the chance to vote when the measures set out in the agreement were brought to Parliament in separate pieces of legislation, probably starting next week.Most Syriza legislators have indicated that they would back the deal, but there is still concern about disagreements in government ranks being openly revealed in a parliamentary vote. Several other countries that were required to vote on the deal, including Estonia, Finland and the Netherlands, were expected to give their approval.Under the deal, reached by European leaders and Athens last week, Greece will have to introduce a series of overhauls of its labor market and judicial system aimed at routing out corruption and tax evasion, and promoting growth. In a letter addressed to the leaders of the 18 other countries using the euro, Greece’s finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, detailed the points to be undertaken.But before the vote in Berlin and other European parliaments, Mr. Varoufakis also raised the issue in interviews published this week of renegotiating Greece’s 320 billion euros, or $365 billion, in debt, a move that has been ruled out by Germany and served to underline the misgivings felt by many Germans toward Greece.There are signs of dissent in the Greek government over the conditions of the agreement with its creditors, which some officials see as a capitulation on Syriza’s campaign promises to lighten austerity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thursday’s street protest was organized by far-left groups that perceive Greece’s deal with creditors as an extension of an austerity program that has slashed living standards. Greece’s Communist Party has planned another antigovernment protest for Friday evening.AdvertisementAs Mr. Tsipras seeks to flesh out his government’s overhaul program while keeping dissenting lawmakers in line, debate is shifting to Greece’s debt obligations through March after a senior government official suggested that Greece could delay a payment to the International Monetary Fund next month if it could not find the money.Greece’s debt obligations for March alone are €7.27 billion, including €4.6 billion in Treasury bills set to be rolled over and €1.6 billion in debt repayments due to the International Monetary Fund.Alekos Flambouraris, a senior cabinet official responsible for coordinating the government’s operations told Greek television on Thursday that Greece might seek extra time to repay the monetary fund if necessary. Mr. Varoufakis has suggested that the European Central Bank help settle Greece’s debt to the fund using a sum of €1.9 billion in profits on Greek bonds held by the European Central Bank on the secondary market.It remains unclear how the rest of the debt obligations will be met by Greece, which has suggested it could issue Treasury bills to raise the money but needs approval from the European Central Bank to do so.In Germany, there is growing mistrust over Mr. Tsipras’s left-wing government, which took office on promises to abandon the austerity that Berlin has suggested as the best salve for Athens since the beginning of the euro crisis.Members of Chancellor Angela Merkel’s conservative bloc have had deep misgivings against Greece, reflected in the tone taken by Klaus-Peter Willsch, of the chancellor’s center-right Christian Democrats, who asked lawmakers on Friday if they would “buy a used car from Tsipras and Varoufakis.”Since German lawmakers first agreed to help Greece, the tone between the two countries has ranged from irritable to irrational, with the Greek news media portraying Ms. Merkel and Mr. Schäuble as Nazis intent on their country’s destruction, and the Germans casting Greeks as spendthrifts eager to sap their industrious country of its hard-earned wealth.Mr. Schäuble, in comments before the vote, sought to reassure the public that the latest vote was about granting more time, not more funding.“This is not about new billions for Greece, not about changing this program,” Mr. Schäuble said. “It’s about providing additional time to completing this program successfully.”Melissa Eddy reported from Berlin, and Niki Kitsantonis from Athens.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.