By NICOLA CLARKFEB. 27, 2015
PARIS — Robust demand for new commercial jets lifted Airbus Group profit by 59 percent last year, despite continued underperformance at its military division, where delays to a new transport plane led to more than $600 million in additional costs, the company said on Friday.Airbus said that net income for the full year climbed to 2.34 billion euros, or $2.65 billion, from €1.47 billion in 2013. Revenue, the bulk of which comes from the commercial aircraft unit, rose 5 percent from a year earlier, to a record €60.7 billion.Like Boeing, Airbus has watched demand for its passenger jets grow in recent years, thanks to rising demand for air travel, particularly in emerging markets. Until recently, high oil prices also created a strong incentive for airlines to replace older, fuel-guzzling planes with more efficient models. That has led to long waits for customers seeking to get hold of new planes — particularly single-aisle aircraft, which represent roughly three-quarters of the two companies’ growing order books.To help catch up with a backlog, Airbus said on Friday that it planned to further accelerate production of its most popular single-aisle series, the A320, to 50 a month beginning in 2017, from a previously planned increase to 46 a month early next year. Airbus currently produces around 42 of the 150-seat planes monthly.AdvertisementWhile underlying profit for the group’s main commercial aircraft business soared 68 percent to €2.67 billion, earnings at its military division faltered as the group pushed ahead with a restructuring of those operations. The military unit has struggled as its biggest customers — European governments — have reined in spending. Underlying profit for defense and space operations fell 38 percent last year, to €409 million, on sales that were nearly flat, at €13 billion, Airbus said.AdvertisementAmong the military division’s largest challenges has been a series of production problems with its A400M Atlas cargo plane that pushed back delivery to several European countries, including Britain, France and Germany. On Friday, Airbus said it had booked new charges of €551 million related to the A400M, a program that is already billions of euros over budget.Once held up as a model of Pan-European arms procurement, the A400M — a 37-ton cargo and troop transporter with four turbo-propeller engines — was initially commissioned in 2003 by six European NATO member states and Turkey, to replace their aging fleets of Lockheed C-130s and Transall C-160s.But its development has been dogged for years by technical and production problems that have led to threats of order cancellations and postponements. Since 2006, Airbus has absorbed more than €4 billion in unanticipated charges for the A400M, equivalent to about one-fifth of its estimated €20 billion in development costs.Airbus executives acknowledged that production problems with the military cargo plane had become an unwelcome burden, even as the group’s passenger jet business showed enough strength to justify paying a record dividend of €1.20 per share, up from 75 cents a year earlier.“It could have been a crown of laurels,” the Airbus strategy chief, Marwan Lahoud, said in an interview on French radio, referring to the A400M Atlas. “It’s in the process of becoming a crown of thorns, and we are taking measures to rediscover the laurels.”European governments agreed in 2010 to a complex, €3.5 billion bailout of the A400M after Airbus Group, then known as European Aeronautic Defense and Space, threatened to abandon the project if its stakeholders did not assume a larger share of the plane’s upfront costs and a less ambitious delivery schedule.The first A400M was delivered four years late, in 2013, to France, which now has six of the planes and has already deployed them in West Africa and in Iraq. Britain has taken delivery of two of the 22 A400Ms it has on order, and Turkey has also received two. Germany has received one and is scheduled to receive five more A400Ms this year, out of 53 on order.AdvertisementAirbus has a total of 174 orders for the transporter and hopes to eventually sell as many as 400 of them worldwide over the next 30 years. However, the program’s rising costs have made the plane a tough sell for the export market. Airbus has so far secured only one A400M deal with a non-NATO customer: Malaysia, which ordered four of the planes in 2005 and is expected to receive its first delivery in March.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Analysts said the A400M’s versatility — it can fly faster and farther than most existing transporters and can be converted into an airborne refueling tanker — would eventually attract more foreign buyers. A decision by Boeing to end production of its larger, C-17 cargo lifter this year is also likely to drive prospective customers to the Airbus plane.“Anybody who is going to want new airlift capability in the future is going to look at the A400M incredibly seriously,” said Sash Tusa, an aerospace and defense analyst at Edison Investment Research in London. Short of leasing aging Soviet-built military cargo planes like the Antonov-124, he said, “it will be the only game in town.”In presenting its earnings, Airbus said it would keep looking for ways to shore up the finances of its military business, in part through the sale of small, ancillary businesses and noncore financial assets. Last year, the group reaped €383 million in capital gains from the sale of nearly 10 percent of the French aerospace group Dassault Aviation — the maker of Rafale fighters and Falcon business jets — as well as a minority holding in Patria, a Finnish defense company.Mr. Lahoud told reporters on Friday that, market conditions permitting, Airbus hoped this year to sell another chunk of its remaining one-third stake in Dassault, with an eye to eventually disposing of the investment entirely.Alongside the military restructuring, Airbus said its biggest challenge in 2015 would be managing the significant production increases planned across its entire range of commercial jets.In addition to the A320, Airbus said on Friday that it aimed to step up the output of its latest long-range jet, the A350, which entered commercial service in January, as well as the twin-deck A380 “superjumbo.” The aim is to recoup tens of billions of euros in research and development costs on both planes. (Airbus said it expected the A380 would break even, on a per plane basis, for the first time this year.)“My target for this year is two words: Ramp up,” said Thomas Enders, the Airbus chief executive.Boeing, too, has sought to step up its production rates, with a goal of increasing production of its 737 cash cow to 52 planes a month by 2018.But some analysts worry that the sharp drop in oil prices that began last summer, combined with signs of mounting overcapacity in regions like Asia, could presage a slowdown in jet orders over the coming years, just as the planned production increases by Airbus and Boeing are reaching their peak.AdvertisementThe two companies say their large backlogs — equivalent to more than eight years’ production at current rates — would soften the financial impact of falling demand. But analysts warn that raising production at the start of a downturn in orders could eventually weigh on future jet prices.Mr. Enders shrugged off such concerns on Friday, suggesting that there was room to ramp up production of the workhorse A320 beyond the planned 50 a month.“The demand is clearly there to move the rates to 60-plus,” Mr. Enders said. “There are studies underway.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.