AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesWeWork, a New York start-up valued at $10 billion with the mission “to create a world where people work to make a life, not just a living,” is seeking to put a contentious labor dispute behind it.On Tuesday, WeWork, which offers temporary office space with perks like arcade games, showers and coffee bars to entrepreneurs and big businesses alike, said it would now use unionized contractors to provide janitorial services for its locations in New York and Boston.The agreement comes after months of protests from former WeWork cleaners, who were paid as little as $10 an hour through a nonunion contractor, Commercial Building Maintenance.In the weeks ahead, WeWork will put out a request for proposals from unionized cleaning contractors in New York and Boston. As part of its request, it will ask that former C.B.M. workers be hired. For former Commercial Building cleaners that WeWork does not hire directly, the company has set aside $250,000 for severance payments, which will be allocated based on years of service.The settlement is an abrupt turn for WeWork, which was facing criticism from its members — the individuals and businesses who rent space — many of whom sympathized with the laid-off janitors.“This was a case of two organizations that really didn’t know each other,” said Arthur Minson, WeWork’s chief operating officer. “Once we were able to sit down with the union, in a matter of a few weeks’ time we moved from foes to friends.”The dispute began this year, when cleaners working for C.B.M. realized they made far less than unionized janitors in New York. With help from the local chapter of Service Employees International Union, they began to demonstrate outside WeWork spaces, calling for union representation and higher wages.C.B.M. asked WeWork to renegotiate its contract to allow the workers to join a union, but WeWork declined, leading to the layoffs of about 100 cleaners. Instead, WeWork said it would directly employ janitors, or so-called community service associates, but would not commit to hiring all the former Commercial Building cleaners.Last month, tensions came to a boil, as WeWork’s chief executive and one of its founders, Adam Neumann, confronted protesters outside company headquarters. But until Tuesday, WeWork had not changed its position.Labor experts praised the deal.“This is a model agreement,” said Jennifer Gordon, a professor at the Fordham University School of Law who specializes in immigration and employment. “Cleaners stood up for their rights, and WeWork listened. The outcome here demonstrates that a firm can and should take responsibility for the treatment of workers whose labor benefits its business, whether it hires them directly or through a contractor.”As part of the agreement, S.E.I.U. will no longer pursue a charge it filed with the National Labor Relations Board accusing WeWork of discriminating against pro-union job applicants.“This in many ways is an unprecedented agreement,” said Hector Figueroa, president of the local S.E.I.U. chapter. “We hope that this helps more good jobs get associated with the sharing economy. Services workers that are part of these operations need to have a place in the new economy.”Former Commercial Building workers, many of whom were vocal in their frustration with WeWork, cheered the news as well.“It is very exciting for me and my former co-workers to see that WeWork is committing to good cleaning jobs and that I will have a chance to return to work there,” said Ivan Castelan, one of the former Commercial Building cleaners. “It feels really good to see that when working people stand together, we can change our lives and the lives of other workers for the better.”Mr. Minson said the community service associates that WeWork had already hired would be kept on staff. “As a fast-growing company, we have a robust need for talented people,” he said.He added that while WeWork had not decided how it would handle cleaning arrangements in other cities, he believed that the resolution of this ordeal would win the company good will.“Hopefully, people have learned that we are great partners to work with,” Mr. Minson said. “We’re incredibly reasonable and practical. We believe in the ‘we way’ of doing business.”Advertisement