AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeThis interview with Susan Salka, chief executive of AMN Healthcare, a staffing company based in San Diego, was conducted and condensed by  Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences for you?A. I grew up primarily in Nebraska, in a little town of 100 people. I say primarily, because my dad was in the Navy before that, and we moved all around. That definitely influenced me, in terms of just having to embrace change and be adaptable.It really causes you to be open to new ideas and new people. You were always walking into new places where you didn’t know anybody, so you had to learn to make friends quickly.You also knew you weren’t going to be there for very long, and so you had to be O.K. with that. In fact, you need to embrace it, because there’s nothing you can do about it.Any leadership roles for you early on?There were 12 kids in my high school graduating class, so I’m not sure what kind of leadership opportunities there were back then. But I started working when I was 12 years old, washing dishes at the Hungry Horse Saloon. I would do anything just to keep busy. I became the assistant cook, then the cook, then the hostess and the server, and some nights it was so dead I would be all of those things combined.I ended up working in the neighboring town at Jigg’s Bar, which had a restaurant. I got a little tired of offering up the same dishes, so I decided to offer “specialty nights,” with Mexican or Italian food. I was about 15. They ended up being a big hit. I’ve always liked to figure out what people want and find a way to deliver it.Any favorite expressions that your parents would repeat often around the dinner table?My dad has 10,000 expressions. When he would say these things as I was growing up, I would roll my eyes every time, but I find myself using many of those same expressions today.One of them has to do with keeping things simple and making people feel comfortable around you. If somebody was talking over his head, using big words, being too complex, or trying to act too sophisticated, he would say, “Would you break that down to cows, chickens and taters?”I used to think it was silly — what do cows, chickens and taters have to do with each other? But years later, I realized that the message is, keep it simple. Don’t overcomplicate things. As a leader, that’s something that I’ve really learned over time. The strategy and the business can be complex, but you have to explain them in a way that’s really easy to understand.Did you have an idea of what you wanted to do when you were in college?I wanted to be a C.P.A. I studied accounting, but I fell in love with economics, too, so I ended up graduating with a dual major. Not long after I graduated, I moved to California and joined a diagnostic and therapeutic company called Hybritech.I was just a little financial grunt at first, but I got to know the C.F.O. and a lot of the leadership team, because when a new project or anything came up, I would raise my hand and say, “Can I do that?” I was 21, I had all the time in the world on my hands, and so I would get involved in all these special projects and be there until midnight.Now that you’re a C.E.O., how do you hire? What questions do you ask when you’re interviewing job candidates?I’ll ask about the different kinds of environments they’ve worked in, the kinds of decisions they’ve made, and just what’s important to them. I’m really trying to get a sense of their philosophy for working with their team members.The other thing I always try to understand is, “Where are you in your journey of life in terms of reaching your professional goals, and why would joining our team help you achieve something that’s really important to you professionally and maybe even also personally?” I think the two are somewhat intertwined.I’ll always preface that by saying, “You don’t have to tell me anything personal that you don’t want to,” but I find that when I ask the question that way, people open up about where they are in their professional journey. I don’t want somebody who just sees this as a job. I want it to be really important in their life somehow.What kind of career advice do you give to new college grads?They need to be flexible when they join a company about doing different things. Maybe I’m biased, because that’s what I did when I joined my first company. I said, “I’ll do that, I’ll do that,” so many times.When I meet with younger people in the company about their career paths, I’ll say, “Well, what is it that you think you want to do?” Sometimes I hear, “I want to be a director,” or, “I want to be a vice president.”Instead, I’ll try to talk with them about experiences they might want to have. What are they passionate about? Do they like leading people? How do they think about their career in terms of experiences, and leveraging what they really love to do, as opposed to being focused on a goal around a particular title? I still find a lot of people are driven by titles. You’ve got to be willing to kind of zig and zag along the way.Any other advice you’d give to new college grads?Network with anyone you come in contact with. When I’m talking to a group of 300 or so business students at a college, I’ll say, “Any one of you, give me a call or email me. Here’s my email address.” I may have one or two people follow up, and then I’ll hear that other students complained to the dean that they can’t get a job. It always amazes me.Use those networks. Don’t be shy. They have to have a little more initiative and drive.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about the challenges of leading and managing. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice.Advertisement