AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieJamie Dimon’s global diaspora is on the verge of extending its reach to Barclays.James E. Staley, known as Jes, the onetime investment banking chief at JPMorgan, looks poised to be the British lender’s next boss. He would join a coterie of former Dimon lieutenants in chief executive roles. Mr. Staley, however, will put his mega-bank skills to the biggest test.Mr. Staley, who is managing partner at the hedge fund BlueMountain, presided over market share growth in JPMorgan’s Wall Street advice and trading operations after taking over in 2009. Previously, he helped the investment management division double assets under management to $1.3 trillion. And as a member of the bank’s upper echelons, he would have contributed to the 2008 decisions to buy Bear Stearns and expand the Chase retail brand by acquiring Washington Mutual out of receivership.The class of Dimon deputies is shaping up to be a formidable one. Bill Winters, Mr. Staley’s predecessor at the investment bank, took the top job at Standard Chartered this year. Charlie Scharf now runs Visa, after turning a decent but somewhat directionless JPMorgan retail business into a solid operation.Scott Powell, a protégé of Mr. Scharf, was hired this year to run Santander’s embattled United States operations. His chairman is JPMorgan’s former head of regulatory affairs, Tim Ryan. Santander also appointed Blythe Masters, a longtime JPMorgan executive, to be chairwoman of its American auto lender. And erstwhile Dimon consigliere Frank Bisignano now leads First Data, the payments processor expected to go public this week.Their success is a testament to the demanding environment Mr. Dimon fosters at JPMorgan. Mr. Winters and Mr. Staley lost out when they were seen as potential challengers for the top job. JPMorgan also is conspicuously missing from the list of 15 banks managing First Data’s initial public stock offering.Of all the alumni, Mr. Staley probably will get the best chance to apply his universal banking know-how. Barclays remains one even though it sold its asset management business and is shrinking its investment bank. Its return on equity is on track to fall short of its cost of capital until at least 2018, according to Thomson Reuters data. That means the British bank will be counting on Mr. Staley to make the most of the JPMorgan experience.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com. Advertisement