
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

MARCH 1, 2015
Michel Bernardaud  is chairman and chief executive of the French porcelain house Bernardaud.Q. You joined the family business in 1979. Had you always wanted to join? Did you have a choice?A. Actually it came as a surprise when my father asked me to join, because he would never discuss business at home. I knew of course he was a well-known manufacturer in Limoges and the company was prestigious, but I had no clue about the business itself, its size, any sales or volume, really anything. In fact, I didn’t say “yes” immediately, which was also a surprise for him [laughs]. I was 22 and just out of business school at HEC, working in Paris, life was good. But I thought about it and did say yes and I don’t regret it.Q. What advice did your father give you when you started?A. Well, the problem is that he didn’t give me any advice! He was not very talkative and I had to learn almost by myself. It was like throwing someone in the pool and asking them to swim. So it was not always easy, but on the other hand, he gave me almost free hand to try to grow the business in various countries of the world.I was put in charge of exports outside of Europe. There was already someone managing exports in Europe and I worked with him. It wasn’t always easy because I didn’t want to step on anybody’s toes, not be the son of the boss. I had to find my way but keep good relations with the management already in place. It’s not always an easy balance but I tried to gain respect through working hard, being reasonably humble, though also assuming the fact that my name was that of the company. The good thing was, the company was not as developed as it is now. There were a lot of territories to open, so plenty of opportunities.AdvertisementQ. Is being thrown into the deep end of the pool the best way to learn?A. Honestly, it depends on the individual and the personalities. Retrospectively, I realize I learned a lot — probably more than I thought at the time I was working with my father. I did learn a lot observing what he would do, I also learned by being frustrated, too. But I wish my father was still with us so I could thank him for everything he showed me.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. Your two younger siblings are also working in the company. How do you make it work?A. We try not to discuss the business at home. Of course, it’s not always easy. It’s inevitable that sometimes the conversation turns to business at the dining table. I don’t think there is any secret to making it work. But I do believe it is easier if there is a clear hierarchy and somebody is in charge. But being in charge also means listening to the others, especially if they are members of the family. You must consider their points of view.AdvertisementQ. What do you think makes a great leader?A. You have to know where you want to go but you also have to take into consideration the fact you are dealing with human beings, and they are allow to make mistakes, as you may sometimes do yourself. People are the way they are and you have to take them with their pluses and minuses. You will not change them.As a leader it’s important to understand what you can ask from somebody. Don’t ask too much and don’t ask too little. It’s a fine line. If you ask too much, then you only have to blame yourself if things don’t get done the way you want. I think a leader should always put himself in the shoes of the people he’s talking to: do they understand what you want, what you are saying?Q. What do you look for in your senior management?A. I always respect people who are hard working. For me it’s key. I like people capable of team work and people who try to achieve success through their own merit and work, without stepping on anybody else’s head. As a family business, it’s also very important to me that newcomers integrate and work closely with the people already there. I see it as my responsibility to make it work.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »