By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINOCT. 13, 2015
The criminal trial of three former leaders of the law firm Dewey & LeBoeuf is slowly becoming a story about the ordeal of the jurors, who have been deliberating the defendants’ fate for 17 days after sitting through a trial that began in late May.On Tuesday in Manhattan, the jury of seven women and five men reached a partial verdict — for the second time in a week — that acquitted the men of some of the dozens of charges against them. But the jury told the trial judge it remained deadlocked on 93 other counts, including the most serious charges.Last Wednesday, the jury acquitted the defendants, Steven H. Davis, Stephen DiCarmine and Joel Sanders, of more than three dozen charges of falsifying business records at the once-prominent law firm. The acquittals on Tuesday were on similar charges. The jury has yet to reach agreement on charges such as grand larceny, conspiracy, scheme to defraud and securities fraud.The men are charged with overseeing a scheme to manipulate Dewey’s financial records to persuade banks and investors to continue providing financing to the firm, which filed for bankruptcy in May 2012.AdvertisementThe second partial verdict in a week makes the possibility of a mistrial more likely, especially since the deliberations were cut short because one juror was sick and said he had dozed off in the jury room.But Justice Robert M. Stolz of New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan told the jurors he wanted them to continue trying to reach a verdict on the remaining counts.AdvertisementStill, the judge acknowledged several times on Tuesday that the proceedings had become something of a grind for the jurors, a few of whom looked away when they were told to continue their deliberations.“I understand how long you have been at this,” Justice Stolz told the jurors just before a lunch break. And in dismissing the jurors for the day, he said, “I recognize this has not been a very efficient day.”If the juror who was ill cannot continue, the judge could replace him with an alternate — an option raised on Tuesday that would require the jury to begin its deliberations anew on the dozens of unresolved charges.The former Dewey & LeBoeuf executives are accused of masterminding a four-year scheme to manipulate the finances of the law firm to keep it afloat during the financial crisis. The case is one of the most significant white-collar prosecutions brought by Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, and the proceedings have been closely watched by the New York legal community.Mr. Davis, the law firm’s former chairman, was an architect of the 2007 merger of two law firms that created Dewey & LeBoeuf. He then led the firm until April 2012, a few weeks before it filed for bankruptcy. Mr. DiCarmine, the firm’s former executive director, and Mr. Sanders, its former chief financial officer, were other major figures in Dewey’s management team.The heart of the prosecution’s case focused on year-end revenue adjustments that authorities said were intended to make the law firm’s finances appear healthier. Authorities said the adjustments were made to meet covenants in the firm’s bank loans and persuade insurance firms to invest in a $150 million bond offering in 2010.A version of this article appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Dewey & LeBoeuf Trial Tests the Jurors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.