MARCH 1, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.08 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.03 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Board of Education, $230.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYCambridge, Mass., $75.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Richland School District 2, S.C., $61.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYClark County, Nev., $182.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementIndian Prairie School District, Ill., $60.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Maryland, $922 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementONE DAY DURING THE WEEKArizona State University, $352 million of debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.Higley Unified School District, Ariz., $54.9 million of school improvement and refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Birdville, Tex., Independent School District, $189.6 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. FirstSouthwest.California, $1.9 billion of general obligation bonds. Bank of America.Citrus Community College District, Calif., $60 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Goose Creek, Tex., Consolidated Independent School District, $109.7 million of school building and refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Indiana University, $160.6 million of revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Iowa Higher Education Loan Authority, $86.2 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Dougherty.Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, $495 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America.Louisiana, $62.5 million of health care facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lubbock Cooper, Tex., Independent School District, $75 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.AdvertisementMaine Turnpike Authority, $138.3 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America.Medford, Ore., School District, $136.3 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency, $219 million of multifamily housing revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.University of Dayton, Ohio, $90 million of debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.West Linn-Wilsonville School District, Ore., $164.7 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Northeastern York, Pa., School District, $51.7 million of general obligation bonds. Boenning & Scattergood.Portland, Ore., $109 million of airport revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Prosper, Tex., Independent School District, $155.4 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Cypress-Fairbanks, Tex., Independent School District, $297.9 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James.New Caney, Tex., Independent School District, $54.6 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Oppenheimer.Eagle Mountain-Saginaw, Tex., Independent School District, $64.7 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. FirstSouthwest.Virginia Port Authority, $142 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan StanleyUniversity of Virginia, $170 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.