
Frequent Flier By                     
BEN PASCAL

MARCH 2, 2015
EVEN as a child, I took a couple flights a year. I’ve learned to love everything related to flight, so business trips don’t bother me.My background is in research and development in the medical device industry. Now I’m an entrepreneur, and a founder of Invisible Sentinel. We develop rapid diagnostics to detect the presence of pathogens in food and beverage manufacturing. My business partner, Nicholas Siciliano, invented the technology, and is the C.E.O. I’m the chief business officer. That means I travel a lot.My wife travels as much as I do for business as a developer and trainer for a medical device company. We have this master calendar at home and on our phones that shows our travel schedule. We try hard to make sure that we have two days during the week when we don’t have to be away. We make it work, and understand that this is what our lives are like right now.I’m a mellow traveler. I don’t get jet-lagged. I don’t get upset. I just go along with whatever happens. It doesn’t make me special, and it’s not a superpower. Rather, my travel mellowness just evolved. What’s the point of getting upset?AdvertisementIn fact, I still get excited about business travel. This past October, I had my passport stamped in two new countries — Australia and New Zealand. We make a detection tool for wine spoilage organisms and are working with vineyards west of the Pacific. It’s been amazing, as has my driving in those countries. I apparently can’t handle driving on the left side of the road, which resulted in a lot of laughter at my expense and a rather large sticker placed on the interior windshield advising me to “Keep Left.” That helped, except when I got to traffic circles.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On a more positive note I did learn to really appreciate rugby. I always liked the sport, but I wasn’t an avid fan. Now I am, especially of the world-famous All Blacks. I even got a photo taken with the team captain during a chance meeting at the airport.I always like to bring back souvenirs for our staff. When I was in New Zealand I got turned on to Vegemite, an Australian spread that’s made from leftover brewers’ yeast extract. I loved it. I thought our staff would like it also. They didn’t. In fact, they hated it. I’m convinced they don’t know what’s good.I sometimes need a translator. I was recently in Spain and Italy, and I struggled with the language barrier when it came to some specific wine-related industry vernacular. It can also be tough to convey some of the technical specifications. Science-based processes are universal, but some of the nuance can get lost in translation. I took Spanish for years, but I’m still not very good and I’m trying to get back into it. It was great when I found a translator who spoke Spanish, Italian and English.But sometimes I’m not sure I’m completely understood at airports when I speak English. I often carry a thermocycler with me on the plane. It’s about the size of a football and is used for D.N.A. amplification and other techniques. It looks pretty odd to security, so I always get questioned, and the conversations are rather short and stilted. An agent will say, “What’s that?” I reply: “A thermocycler used for D.N.A. amplification.” I get a bizarre look from the agent and then am waved through.As told to Joan Raymond. Email: joan.raymond@nytimes.com Q. How often do you fly for business?A. Once a week at least, domestic and international.Q. What’s your least favorite airport?A. Toronto Pearson International. If you indicate that you are traveling to Toronto for business, they always make it a point to send you for a secondary screening, and the wait is about 30 minutes. The questions at the secondary screening take about two minutes.Q. Of all the places you’ve been, what’s the best?A. New Zealand. The people are very friendly and the land is incredible.Q. What’s your secret airport vice?A. I’ve memorized my way around a dozen popular airports, and have T.S.A. PreCheck. I never show up to an airport early.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Embrace the Adventure, and Find an Even Keel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »