
On the Road By                     
 JOE SHARKEY
 
MARCH 2, 2015
IS this any way to run a government?“Absolutely not,” said Michael W. McCormick, the executive director of the Global Business Travel Association, which represents corporate travel managers. He was expressing the dismay that travel executives feel about recurring threats of a partial shutdown of the Homeland Security Department and its effects on planning.“There already is a level of frustration about notifying their travelers whether there could be delays or disruptions,” he said. Even with temporary patches like the seven-day bridge-funding to keep the department operating this week, “people ultimately do have to make decisions whether to postpone trips that could be disrupted — and that has a high cost,” he said.Greeley Koch, the executive director of the Association of Corporate Travel Executives, had similar concerns. Two of Homeland Security’s major agencies, Customs and Border Protection and the Transportation Security Administration — both of which are critically important in the daily travel infrastructure — each have almost 60,000 employees who could be affected in a shutdown.“On the one hand, we’re hearing Secretary Johnson saying that a shutdown would cause terrible disruptions for travelers,” Mr. Koch said, referring to Jeh Johnson, the Homeland Security chief. “On the other hand, we’re hearing that the T.S.A. screeners and the customs officers will continue to show up for work as usual. We’re asking: Which is it?”AdvertisementOn news sites, updates on the upheaval over the funding typically appear under tabs labeled “Politics.” Corporate travel managers, however, see the economic effect of the standoff, given the importance to travel of smoothly operating government functions, at airports in particular.The Global Business Travel Association estimates that American business travel this year will account for about $310.2 billion in spending, part of an estimated more than $1.2 trillion in global spending on business travel.“We’d put it under ‘economy’ because business travel has such a huge effect on the U.S. economy,” including on the widening scope of international business partnerships, said Kevin Maguire, a travel manager at a large technology company that has about 3,000 employees who regularly travel on business. Mr. Maguire, a board member of the Global Business Travel Association, said he was not allowed to identify his company in talking to the news media.AdvertisementIn 2013, during the 17-day partial government shutdown, there were no major travel disruptions, but the confusion “slowed people up,” Mr. Maguire said. “People adjusted business trips just to avoid having to travel then. Now, if this situation continues, cancellations will happen, and that is where we don’t want to be.”As many travel managers have, Mr. Maguire has been fielding employees’ questions about scheduling trips. “There is no severe angst at this moment, but I think the decision to fund Homeland Security for only a week threw some gasoline on the fire. I’m getting calls on a regular basis from employees wanting to know what the heck is going on,” he said on Sunday.In the event of a shutdown, T.S.A. screeners will remain on the job at checkpoints, but “without pay” until the situation is resolved, according to Melvin J. Carraway, the acting administrator of the agency.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A spokesman for the T.S.A. would not comment on the possibility of delays and backups caused by furloughs of administrative workers, and referred me instead to a blog posting by Mr. Carraway, who wrote that “over 90 percent of our work force, that’s about 50,000 employees, would continue to report to duty.” He added, “critical operations would continue, but support for those operations would cease,” as workers engaged in training, hiring, technology and many administrative operations would be furloughed.Mr. McCormick said the uncertain outlook has already had consequences as some trips are being put off. “When business trips are canceled, they’re usually not replaced,” he said. “You don’t regain that lost productivity. Schedules don’t just snap back into place.”This week and into next week, the air travel system — already routinely operating near capacity in the United States, with little slack for accommodating disruptions — will be under added strain if severe winter weather affect major airports hubs.For example, icy conditions forced more than 1,500 flight cancellations on Friday and Saturday at the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport, where thousands of stranded passengers spent the night in terminals — and passengers on one American Airlines flight spent nine hours stuck on a plane unable to take off because of ice.As delays and bad weather continued in much of the country over the weekend, airlines were waiving penalty fees at many airports for passengers who decided to reschedule trips.Internationally, business travel managers have been expressing growing concern about travel uncertainties in the United States, including potential long waits in customs lines at international arrival airports if a shutdown occurs. About 15 percent of all international arrivals to the United States are people on business trips, the Global Business Travel Association says.Mr. Maguire is scheduled to take a business trip to China on Friday, just as the one-week extension of funding for Homeland Security is set to expire. He said he has already had feedback from Chinese partners baffled over how the United States could have let this kind of mess develop.AdvertisementHe said he expected more questions on this when he arrives in China, but he added, “Trying to explain that is impossible.”Email: jsharkey@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Travel Uncertainty in Washington Standoff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »