AdvertisementSupported byBy Nelson D. SchwartzSometimes, even the supposed experts can lose track of a billion dollars or two. Or, in this case, $100 billion.While few outside of Texas and North Dakota are complaining about this huge savings that consumers have enjoyed since energy prices began falling last summer, economists have been stumped recently trying to figure out exactly what consumers are doing with the windfall.They have not gone on a shopping spree at the mall or online. Results at many retail chains have been mixed, and some stores that are middle-class fixtures, like Sears and J.C. Penney, continue to struggle.One hint at what consumers might be thinking came Monday, when new government data on the economy showed a healthy gain for wages and salaries in January, even as spending by consumers inched lower for the second month in a row. As a result, the savings rate ticked upward to 5.5 percent, the highest level in just over two years.The yardsticks for retail activity have been surprisingly lackluster lately. Even when the effect of lower gas prices and therefore less spending at service stations is stripped out, core retail sales were flat last month and actually dipped 0.2 percent in December.“There is a little head-scratching going on,” said Michael Hanson, senior United States economist at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. “You can’t deny that everyone on Wall Street has been looking for better data. The pickup in the savings rate is a little bit of a surprise and it is an indication that people are still cautious.”Still, no one disputes the benefits of lower energy prices, especially for less affluent Americans who pay a larger share of their income to fuel their cars and heat their homes.With gas prices having dropped to $2.50 at the end of 2014 from a high of $3.78 in June, American drivers saved an estimated $76 billion last year, according to Douglas P. Handler, chief United States economist at IHS, a research firm.A further drop in gas prices in January created billions more in savings. And despite a recent rebound to $2.33 a gallon as of last week, consumers are still receiving a huge windfall compared with a year ago. In the Northeast, where the weather has been frigid and many people depend on heating oil, the extra savings has also been substantial.“The big question is, where did it go?” said Mr. Handler, who estimates the typical household will have an extra $1,100 to $1,200 to spend this year if energy prices remain steady.As with many big questions in macroeconomics, there are a multitude of explanations, and a final answer will not be available for a while until more data arrives.One theory is that people are banking the savings, as the higher savings rate in December and January suggests.Another possibility is that consumers are spending more on services like dining, travel, housing and health care, instead of actual goods like appliances, clothing, cars and other items captured in the monthly retail sales figures. Data for purchases of services will not be available until March.Jeff Bryant, a scrapyard worker in Canton, Ohio, said that while the saving on gas is nice, it’s no substitute for higher hourly pay or more hours on the job. He earns $19 to $20 an hour, but that has barely increased in recent years, and now his employer is trying to cut back on overtime and reduce workweeks to 32 hours from 40 hours.For now, though, he’s happy for what relief he can find at the pump, even if he does not plan to hit the mall anytime soon. “Every little bit helps, and it makes me feel a bit more comfortable,” Mr. Bryant said. “I might buy a new pair of shoes for the summer.”A more fundamental explanation for Mr. Bryant’s reluctance to spend now is what’s known in economics as the permanent income hypothesis, developed by Milton Friedman when he was at the University of Chicago in the 1950s. His theory suggests that consumer spending is determined by what people expect to earn over the long term. So temporary gains like savings on gas or a one-time tax cut don’t alter underlying patterns of consumption.“People tend to save windfalls and in this case there’s also a lag in terms of spending because people aren’t convinced gas prices will stay low,” said Guy Berger, United States economist at RBS.In a few cases, consumer behavior has changed.With gas prices on the downswing, Americans are buying higher-priced light trucks and S.U.V.s, rather than smaller, more fuel-efficient cars. In January, light trucks and S.U.V.s accounted for 56 percent of total auto sales, the highest proportion since 2005, said Joseph G. Carson, global chief economist for AllianceBernstein.“When you drive down the cost of owning the car, people buy bigger vehicles with more options,” said Mr. Carson, noting that light trucks on average cost $10,000 more than regular cars.Although Mr. Bryant has yet to see any evidence of it, the good news now is that wages may finally be poised to rise at a more robust pace as the labor market tightens, along with energy savings accumulating further. Employers added workers last year at the fastest rate since 1999, and the unemployment rate now stands at 5.7 percent, down from 8 percent two years ago.Economists expect the unemployment rate to fall again when the government reports data Friday on how the job market performed in February. And they will be watching closely to see if January’s healthy 0.5 percentage point increase in average hourly earnings was a fluke or a sign of things to come.In particular, if economic growth is to be sustainable, it is critical that the vast middle and lower tiers of the American work force enjoy better wage growth, as these groups have seen paltry gains during the recovery.Walmart, the nation’s largest private employer, said in February that it would raise its minimum hourly pay to $9, affecting about half a million workers, and lift it to $10 in early 2016. Last week, the TJX Companies, owner of the T.J. Maxx and Marshalls retail chains, announced a similar move.While the hourly gains might seem small, they are significant economically since the bottom half of earners “effectively have no savings so they will spend any additional earnings,” Mr. Hanson said.What’s more, Mr. Hanson said, the rebound in purchasing power during the recovery has largely been limited to higher-income workers with more education and specialized skills. The wage increases by Walmart and TJX are benefiting the opposite end of the wage and skill spectrum, he said, and could be a turning point in the recovery.In Canton, Mr. Bryant, 56, hopes the raises these big retailers are giving their workers will encourage nearby blue-collar employers to do likewise. “It seems like everybody else is doing well and getting paid a bit more,” he said. “We’re still waiting.”Advertisement