
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

MARCH 2, 2015
A $15 billion technology M.&A. spree is a poor fix for limp sales.The chipmaker NXP Semiconductors, which acquired Freescale Semiconductor, and Hewlett Packard, which bought Aruba Networks, need strong demand to compensate for falling prices. The trouble is, that has not happened.Some in the chip industry may still kid themselves that they work for fast-growing upstarts, but that’s an outdated image. Freescale, which makes chips for products like anti-lock brakes and FitBit activity trackers, has barely grown its top line over the past four years.NXP has, at least, struck what looks like a financially decent deal. The $11.8 billion it’s offering in cash and stock means that it’s essentially paying no premium. And the present value of the $500 million in costs it expects to cut comes out north of $3 billion, after taxes. Some two-thirds of that accrues to the buyer’s shareholders. Moreover, the combined company’s additional girth might give it added sway when negotiating both with suppliers and big clients such as carmakers.Rick Clemmer, chief executive of NXP Semiconductors, on buying a smaller peer, Freescale Semiconductor, in a deal that would create a big maker of chips.Hewlett-Packard’s $3 billion purchase of Aruba is more about filling in a gap. The target’s gear is used for managing wireless networks. That’s a hot market, and the company is increasign revenue at almost 20 percent a year. HP’s own networking business is barely expanding as falling prices eat up most of the gains from higher sales.AdvertisementPerhaps some of Aruba’s shine will rub off on HP’s offerings. It won’t, though, solve the buyer’s bigger problems with deflation and tepid demand for PCs and printers. HP’s overall top line is projected by analysts to shrink by about $5 billion. Aruba’s $800 million or more of revenue expected this year will barely make a dent.AdvertisementThe two deals bring the total value of technology mergers and acquisitions so far this year to $53 billion, which is the fastest start since 2000, according to Thomson Reuters data. It’s a tempting route to take to bolster waning fortunes. Tech giants like IBM, HP, Cisco, Oracle — and a number of smaller chipmakers -- face stagnating or even declining revenue.Swallowing rivals can also lead to tactical victories; NXP’s market value rose 17 percent on its deal. But acquisitions cannot make the hardware market grow any faster.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »