
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

OCT. 13, 2015
Elton John has a song called “Sorry Seems to Be the Hardest Word,” but for Michael Horn, the chief of Volkswagen’s American subsidiary, that was just about the easiest thing to say at his appearance before a House subcommittee last week.Mr. Horn offered “a sincere apology” for the company’s use of computer software to evade emissions testing of its diesel engines, but few details about how it planned to fix the problem.While apologies can be comforting, the company’s cooperation with investigators will be the true measure of how it will be treated by the Justice Department in its criminal investigation. And on that front, there is reason to question just how cooperative Volkswagen will be as it faces scrutiny that now includes a second computer program that affected how emission controls operated in its cars.Mr. Horn laid the blame for the software that operated as a “defeat device” to fool laboratories conducting emissions tests on “a couple of software engineers who put this in for whatever reason.” In response to Representative Joe Barton’s expression of incredulity at such a claim, Mr. Horn agreed that “it is very hard to believe.”AdvertisementThat approach is consistent with the narrative Volkswagen has offered about who is responsible since the Environmental Protection Agency filed a notice on Sept. 18 that the defeat device violated the Clean Air Act. The company has emphasized that senior management was not involved in any decisions regarding the software, pointing to low-level employees as responsible for any misconduct.AdvertisementVolkswagen’s former chief executive, Martin Winterkorn, said in a statement announcing his resignation that he accepted responsibility for the “irregularities” in the engines “even though I am not aware of any wrongdoing on my part.”The supervisory board, roughly the equivalent of the board of directors for an American corporation, backed his position by emphasizing in a statement that Mr. Winterkorn “had no knowledge of the manipulation of the emissions data.” Matthias Müller, Volkswagen’s new chief executive, attributed the problem to a few employees, disclosing that four employees had been suspended by the company.So at this point, the company seems to be portraying the installation of the software as something akin to an episode of “The Big Bang Theory” in which a few nerdy computer scientists engaged in some back-room high jinks to help avoid a minor nuisance like emissions standards – cue the laugh track.The notion that rogue employees slipped a major component of the engine’s software past all the company’s engineers, not to mention the outside supplier of its engine management system, Robert Bosch GmbH, does sound like quite a stretch. Designing a new automobile is a multibillion-dollar endeavor, with constant testing to ensure it meets engineering and regulatory standards. And the company built its advertising campaign in the United States around the benefits of its diesel engine technology, so meeting those standards was not like a stray bolt tucked under the seats.The Justice Department has put a renewed emphasis on how well companies identify individual wrongdoers, including senior management, as the measure of corporate cooperation. Although Volkswagen has promised a vigorous internal investigation, the company’s position, announced at the outset, that Mr. Winterkorn and other senior managers were kept in the dark could affect the thoroughness of the inquiry.One challenge prosecutors in the United States will face is obtaining evidence that can be used to prosecute individuals. In a typical investigation, the company turns over documents to the Justice Department, which can also issue grand jury subpoenas compelling individuals to produce records and testify. If necessary, investigators can obtain a search warrant to enter a company’s offices to seize files and computers if there is concern that incriminating evidence might be destroyed. That can provide a trove of valuable information.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But those tools are not available because Volkswagen’s offices are in Wolfsburg, Germany, well beyond the Justice Department’s reach. German investigators searched the company’s headquarters and elsewhere last week looking for evidence of who was responsible for installing the software, but whether that information will be shared with American authorities remains to be seen. Germany is well known for having much stricter personal privacy laws than the United States, and that may hamper how much can be disclosed to aid in prosecuting individuals.The Justice Department expects companies to share the results of their internal investigations. As a show of good faith, many agree to waive the protections of the attorney-client privilege and work product doctrine to provide information that might not otherwise be available to prosecutors. General Motors earned plaudits from Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, for its “fairly extraordinary” cooperation that included an extensive report from its investigation and continuing access to confidential information developed by its lawyers.AdvertisementWhether Volkswagen will be equally forthcoming is not yet clear. Information the company shares with American authorities could strengthen potential claims by state attorneys general and car owners seeking compensation from the company for the diminished value of cars with the software. Mr. Horn said that the company did not plan to buy back its vehicles and wanted to install a fix for them, but that is unlikely to slow a legal process that could add significantly to Volkswagen’s costs if the company provides a road map to any violations.One potential avenue for obtaining information is the whistle-blower program at the Securities and Exchange Commission, which offers rewards of 10 to 30 percent of any recovery for violations. Although no one inside Volkswagen blew the whistle about the software, the company’s position that rogue employees were responsible for installing the software could encourage an insider to come forward to point the finger at those higher up the corporate ladder who may have known about the defeat device.Mr. Horn, Volkswagen’s top leader in America, was a convenient punching bag at the House subcommittee hearing, pointing out that he could not promise to provide documents from the corporate headquarters because there are “quite a number of people above me.”The real test of the company’s cooperation will depend on how much it is willing to share with prosecutors at the Justice Department who want to trace responsibility for the violations as far up into corporate management as possible.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »