AdvertisementSupported byBy William AldenIEX, the upstart stock-trading platform that rocketed to prominence last year after being featured in the Michael Lewis book “Flash Boys,” has hired a former New York Stock Exchange official as it seeks to become a full-fledged stock exchange.Signaling its big ambitions, IEX said early Monday that it had hired Claudia Crowley, a former regulatory chief of the Big Board, as its chief regulatory officer. She is expected to play a central role as the company seeks regulatory approval to operate as an exchange before the end of the year.IEX, which opened in 2013, uses technology to slow down the high-frequency traders that dominate the modern stock market. The company says this creates a more level playing field for investors and can ward off abuse — an ideological stand that has attracted both friends and enemies.“Flash Boys,” which portrays high-frequency trading in a harsh light, recounted the founding of IEX by Brad Katsuyama and others. It thrust the young company into the center of a debate about computerized trading, with Mr. Katsuyama, the chief executive, appearing on television and even testifying before Congress.In September, IEX raised $75 million of financing from investors, including the venture capital firm Spark Capital and the mutual fund manager Franklin Templeton Investments. It said it would use the cash to help it become an official exchange.The trading platform is classified as a dark pool, where institutions can buy and sell shares without alerting the broader market. Becoming an exchange, with increased regulatory responsibilities, could help promote trust and attract new investors to IEX.”We are excited to have Claudia join the IEX team,” Mr. Katsuyama said in a statement. “It was clear from our early conversations with Claudia that she shares our vision for the future of the industry and her experience at N.Y.S.E. uniquely suits her to provide valuable insights to IEX and our subscribers.”Ms. Crowley will work alongside John Ramsay, the chief market policy officer of IEX, who was previously the acting head of the trading and markets division of the Securities and Exchange Commission. IEX hired Mr. Ramsay last June.Ms. Crowley joined the Big Board in 2008 and served as its regulatory chief from 2010 to 2013. She previously spent more than two decades at the American Stock Exchange. Since leaving the N.Y.S.E., she has worked as an adviser to financial companies, including IEX.In a statement, Ms. Crowley said she was attracted to IEX’s “commitment to both innovating solutions to enhance fairness and transparency in the markets, as well as to robust regulatory compliance.””IEX’s mission is to simplify markets for investors, issuers and their fiduciaries, and I look forward to helping drive that change,” she added.She starts on April 1.Advertisement