AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedGordon E. Dyal, a former head of Goldman Sachs’ mergers business and a veteran deal maker, is retiring, the firm announced in an internal memorandum on Monday.The announcement of Mr. Dyal’s departure comes days after Goldman made changes in the leadership of the mergers business, which regularly tops various rankings of deal advisers on Wall Street.Mr. Dyal served most recently as co-chairman of the firm’s investment bank, a role he took on in 2011. He was previously its global head of mergers and acquisitions, a role he occupied for seven years.He first joined the firm as a partner in 1998 from Morgan Stanley.”During his career, Gordon has played a critical role in building our investment banking franchise, helping to establish the firm’s leadership position across many markets,” Lloyd C. Blankfein, Goldman’s chief executive, and Gary D. Cohn, the firm’s president, wrote in the internal memorandum. “He has led some of the most important merger transactions and built strong relationships with clients in the United States, Europe and Asia. In addition, Gordon has helped to mentor and develop many of our banking professionals.”Beyond working at Goldman, Mr. Dyal serves on the board of the Wildlife Conservation Society. He also owns a big ranch in Montana that happens to be near property owned by David Letterman.The full memo is below:After 16 years of distinguished service, Gordon E. Dyal, co-chairman of the Investment Banking Division (IBD), has decided to retire from the firm.During his career, Gordon has played a critical role in building our Investment Banking franchise, helping to establish the firm’s leadership position across many markets. He has led some of the most important merger transactions and built strong relationships with clients in the United States, Europe and Asia. In addition, Gordon has helped to mentor and develop many of our banking professionals.Gordon is a member of the Management Committee, the IBD Client and Business Standards Committee and the Investment Banking Services Leadership Group. He joined Goldman Sachs as a partner in 1998. From 1999 to 2001, Gordon was co-head of European Mergers & Acquisitions. In 2001, he was named co-head of Investment Banking in Europe. Gordon became global head of Mergers & Acquisitions in 2004 and assumed his current role in 2011.Gordon serves on the board of the Wildlife Conservation Society.Please join us in thanking Gordon for his dedication and service to the firm, his clients and our people. We wish him and his family all the best in the years ahead.Lloyd C. BlankfeinGary D. CohnAdvertisement