AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningWhen investigators arrive at the door of a hedge fund with a search warrant, the consequences can be devastating. Clients fear being linked to misconduct, and even a history of strong investment returns often cannot stem the tide of withdrawals if there is even a whiff of scandal.David Ganek and his hedge fund firm, Level Global, found out just how quickly any connection to insider trading can cause problems when the F.B.I. executed a search warrant at its offices in November 2010. A few months later, when Mr. Ganek could not persuade the government to publicly disavow his involvement in questionable trading, he announced that the firm would close because of client concerns about possible charges.Mr. Ganek was never charged with a crime, and last week he took the fight to the government by filing a lawsuit accusing a number of F.B.I. agents and federal prosecutors, including Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, of violating his rights in conducting the search. Winning such a claim against Mr. Bharara and other attorneys from his office will be difficult, however, because the law provides significant protection to prosecutors when they act as advocates on behalf of the government.A confidential warrant application underpinning the raid was unsealed by a federal judge at the request of The New York Times, and it contains a detailed affidavit from an F.B.I. agent explaining the basis for believing there was evidence of insider trading at Level Global’s offices.Mr. Ganek contends that the affidavit falsely stated that he had received inside information based on statements by a Level Global analyst, Spyridon Adondakis, who was cooperating in the investigation. He also accuses the government of fabricating evidence in a report about a meeting F.B.I. agents had with Mr. Adondakis, known as Sam, soon before the search.At the insider trading trial of another Level Global manager, Anthony Chiasson, Mr. Adondakis testified that he did not provide confidential information to Mr. Ganek. Mr. Chiasson’s convictions were reversed in December by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan because the government did not introduce enough evidence of his knowledge about any benefit provided to the original source of the information.The typical remedy for an illegal search is to apply the exclusionary rule to prevent the government from using the evidence at trial. In addition, someone whose property was improperly seized can file a request under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 41(g) to have the government return it.Neither of those would do Mr. Ganek any good. He was not charged with insider trading, although prosecutors did label him an unindicted co-conspirator, so there was no proceeding in which to suppress evidence from the search. And simply returning the property seized, which consisted of Level Global records and computer files, was irrelevant once the hedge fund was liquidated.David Ganek, whose hedge fund was raided in 2010, sued Preet Bharara, claiming that the government fabricated insider trading accusations against him.The Supreme Court recognized in Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents that an individual whose constitutional rights were violated can sue the federal officials responsible for damages. The court pointed out that “an agent acting — albeit unconstitutionally — in the name of the United States possesses a far greater capacity for harm than an individual trespasser exercising no authority other than his own.”Mr. Ganek’s lawsuit contends that the warrant should not have named him because of what the complaint called false information about his involvement in insider trading and that the government tipped off The Wall Street Journal about the search to generate publicity for its investigation. Thus, he seeks damages for violation of the Fourth Amendment for an illegal search and the Fifth Amendment for violation of his right to due process. Mr. Bharara and other supervisors are accused of allowing “their subordinates to act with impunity in an environment in which those subordinates were not adequately supervised or disciplined.”The hurdle to bringing this type of claim against the prosecutors is that the Supreme Court recognized in Imbler v. Pachtman that they are clothed in “absolute immunity” when acting as an advocate in a judicial proceeding. Investigators receive only “qualified immunity” from being sued, which is a more limited protection from liability.If absolute immunity applies, then the case is dismissed almost immediately because there is no possibility of any recovery for the plaintiff. It is unclear from Mr. Ganek’s complaint what level of involvement prosecutors had in drafting the warrant application or conducting the search, so they may be shielded from liability.In explaining the scope of the protections provided to prosecutors when acting as advocates, the Supreme Court recognized that “this immunity does leave the genuinely wronged defendant without civil redress against a prosecutor whose malicious or dishonest action deprives him of liberty.” To justify shielding prosecutors from lawsuits, the Imbler opinion pointed to the statement of Judge Learned Hand, one of the leading jurists of the 20th century, that “it has been thought in the end better to leave unredressed the wrongs done by dishonest officers than to subject those who try to do their duty to the constant dread of retaliation.”That means few tools are available to police prosecutorial misconduct related to judicial proceedings, even when there may be significant harm. A complaint can be filed against prosecutors with the state bar, which oversees legal ethics, but successful disciplinary actions against them are uncommon. Prosecutors are also subject to internal discipline, but that offers little redress to a defendant. For example, former Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska had the charges against him dismissed after prosecutorial misconduct came to light, but holding individual prosecutors responsible proved to be elusive.Absolute immunity does not apply if prosecutors essentially acted as investigators in conducting the search or gave advice to F.B.I. agents on the legality of their conduct. Even if Mr. Ganek can show the prosecutors had significant involvement in the search warrant, however, they would still receive the protection of qualified immunity.To overcome this immunity, a plaintiff must show the prosecutor or investigator violated clearly established law. Using false information to obtain a warrant can meet that standard, although it requires more than just a mistaken judgment about the evidence supporting the search.In Ashcroft v. Al-Kidd, the Supreme Court said that this protection applied to “all but the plainly incompetent or those who knowingly violate the law.” If the prosecutors and F.B.I. agents are entitled to qualified immunity, then the case will be dismissed at an early stage.Investigations are messy affairs, with decisions made on incomplete information and no small amount of guesswork when applying for a search warrant. Mr. Ganek is pressing for damages from a search that effectively put Level Global out of business, but whether the blame for that can be assessed against federal prosecutors and F.B.I. agents will turn first on whether he can overcome the protections afforded by absolute and qualified immunity.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningAdvertisement