AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedA little over a month ago, Carl C. Icahn seemed poised for a fight at the Gannett Company. Now, the veteran activist investor is backing down.Gannett disclosed on Monday that Mr. Icahn had withdrawn his two nominees for its board, as well as his corporate governance proposals that would have made it easier to sell the media company.The billionaire owns roughly 6.6 percent of Gannett’s stock.The announcement came as Gannett outlined the corporate governance for its newspaper publishing business, which will be spun off as an independent public company later this year. Many of the rules fit the general principles that Mr. Icahn had advocated: annual elections for directors, a limited life span for anti-takeover “poison pill” plans, special meetings that can be called with the support of 20 percent of the company’s shares.Those rules appear to have persuaded Mr. Icahn that Gannett would not build up fearsome defenses to ward off potential suitors for either the newspaper or the remaining broadcast businesses. (Some compromises appear to have been struck, because Mr. Icahn initially sought a 10 percent threshold for special elections.)“Establishing an appropriate governance profile for the new publishing company has been a top priority for the board as we prepare for the separation later this year,” Marge Magner, Gannett’s nonexecutive chairwoman, said in a statement. “The details we are announcing today reflect productive conversations we’ve had with Mr. Icahn and other shareholders, and are consistent with Gannett’s shareholder focus and track record of responsible corporate governance.”The appearance of Mr. Icahn had surprised the media company, though his threat was aimed at preventing Gannett from putting in place the kind of tough corporate governance rules that have drawn activist opprobrium at other companies. Nelson Peltz of Trian Fund Management, for example, has criticized DuPont for adopting features like a staggered board, where directors aren’t up for re-election every year at its performance chemicals division. The division is to be spun off later this year.Advertisement