AdvertisementSupported byBy David JollyPARIS — Prices fell in February in Europe for the third straight month, adding to worries about possible deflation. The jobless rate, though, declined to its lowest since 2012, providing a welcome glimmer of hope that the economy might be picking up steam.Consumer prices in the eurozone, the 19-nation euro currency bloc, fell 0.3 percent in February from a year earlier, said Eurostat, the statistical agency of the European Union. Prices fell 0.6 percent in January and 0.2 percent in December.A separate report from the agency, based in Luxembourg, showed the jobless rate in the eurozone edged down to 11.2 percent in January, its best level since April 2012, from a revised 11.3 percent in December.Certainly, improvement in the labor market was modest, and more than 18 million people in the eurozone remain out of work. But the data is a welcome addition to reports last month on higher consumer confidence and increased buying by corporate purchasing managers, which supported the case that the region was gaining momentum.Although the inflation and unemployment numbers were marginally stronger than economists had expected, the market reaction was muted. The euro, which has been trading near its lowest levels since 2003, closed the European day down 0.1 percent at $1.1187, while the Euro Stoxx 50 index of eurozone blue chips closed 0.2 percent lower.The additional evidence of deflation — a prolonged period of outright declines in prices and wages, which can create a debilitating economic cycle that is hard to break — gives further urgency to the new initiative by the European Central Bank aimed in part at arresting the price decline before it becomes a tailspin.Under the central bank’s new policy, known as quantitative easing, it is expected this month to begin buying up to 60 billion euros, or about $67 billion, of bonds — including sovereign debt — on the open market.Energy prices fell 7.9 percent in February from a year earlier, Eurostat said. The downturn in oil prices, which began falling sharply in the second half of 2014, has contributed to the deflationary pressures on Europe.Many economists see lower energy prices as an unalloyed good for the economy, since they put more discretionary income into consumers’ pockets. But oil prices are only part of the story, as inflation has undershot the European Central Bank’s target rate of just under 2 percent since early 2013.The so-called core inflation rate, which strips out energy and food prices, rose 0.6 percent in February.“It’s like a tax cut,” Jacques Cailloux, chief European economist at Nomura in London, said of lower oil prices. While the impact is positive, he said, the benefit is likely to last only a few months before fading.Mr. Cailloux said the small decline in the jobless rate suggested lower energy prices were helping to lift growth in the eurozone’s gross domestic product to slightly above the 1.1 percent he has been predicting for 2015. But he still expects the region to remain in “a slow-growth, low-inflation environment” for some time to come.The best hope, he said, was that the positive impact of the lower oil price would feed back more broadly throughout the economy, creating a sustained surge in growth. But, he added, “I don’t think that’s what we’re seeing for now.”Weak prices are not unique to Europe. The Federal Reserve chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, last week warned that “inflation remains well below our longer-run objective.” Britain, China and Japan are all facing weak price pressures of their own.Falling prices in the eurozone also reflect the slack in the labor market. Inflationary pressures are modestly stronger in Germany, where the jobless rate was just 4.7 percent, than in Spain and Greece, where a quarter or more of the work force is unemployed and where prices are contracting.In January, the latest month for which a detailed breakdown is available, every member of the eurozone experienced annual deflation, led by a 2.8 percent fall in Greek prices.Advertisement