

      By BINYAMIN APPELBAUM and 
    
NEIL IRWIN

MARCH 4, 2015


The Federal Reserve on Wednesday offered a new window on its response to the Great Recession, publishing complete transcripts of the 11 policy-making meetings held by Fed officials during 2009.In the early months of that year, the Fed pressed ahead with the bold measures it had initiated in 2008 to arrest the financial crisis. By summer it had largely succeeded, and economists would later determine that the economy stopped shrinking in June. Officials then began to grapple with how the Fed could best support and hasten a recovery.The transcripts, released after a standard five-year delay, provide more than 1,800 pages of details about the deliberations led by former chairman, Ben S. Bernanke. Janet L. Yellen, now the chairwoman of the Fed, also participated as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.Fed Actions The Fed launches its “quantitative easing” campaign with the purchase of mortgage bonds.Over the next six years, it will eventually amass more than $4 trillion in mortgage bonds and Treasury securities.Public Remarks Mr. Bernanke warns that the highly unpopular job of using taxpayer money to bail out financial institutions in the United States and other countries was far from over.Emergency Meeting Officials from the Fed display deep discomfort with a bailout program the central bank, the Treasury department and the F.D.I.C. had negotiated with Bank of America. Mr. Bernanke adds later that his discomfort is being eased by the fact that the Treasury department, through its T.A.R.P. bailout resources, is taking more risk of loss than the Fed.Along with Jeffrey Lacker, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Mr. Bernanke also notes how Bank of America got in such trouble to begin with, namely from its acquisition of Merrill Lynch during the Lehman Brothers collapse. Later, Mr. Lacker accuses Bank of America of not being forthright about when it learned of the Merrill Lynch losses. Also at the meeting, Fed officials discuss their communication strategy around inflation, and Mr. Bernanke expresses deep worry about acting in ways that would prove politically toxic. He had consulted with members of the incoming Obama administration who, he relays, had no substantive objection with the Fed moving to a more explicit inflation target, but didn’t want to face political blowback. Janet L. Yellen, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, argues that being explicit about inflation goals could help assuage fears the Fed was risking hyperinflation.Mr. Lacker: “This obviously is an uncomfortable thing for any central bank to do.”