By HIROKO TABUCHIMARCH 3, 2015
Target said on Tuesday that it would cut several thousand jobs over two years, mostly at its headquarters in Minneapolis, as it struggles to overcome a string of difficult years.The company also announced a revamping of its food business, describing grocery aisles more akin to a Whole Foods than a suburban discount chain.“We’ll be much more nimble, much more agile,” Brian Cornell, the chief executive, told a meeting of analysts in New York. He added, “We’re in the very early stages of a shift in our business.”The coming job cuts follow a period marred by an extensive breach of customer information in 2013, sluggish customer traffic, competition from online retailers and a disappointing expansion into Canada.AdvertisementBut Mr. Cornell, who joined the retailer in August, is taking some of the bold steps analysts say are necessary to get Target back on track. In January, he announced the company would close its 133 stores in Canada and place its entire Canadian operation under bankruptcy protection. About 17,600 people lost their jobs in that failed expansion, which has resulted in more than $2 billion in net losses since 2011.AdvertisementThe fresh job cuts at home are part of an effort to save $2 billion over the next two years, from a combination of corporate restructuring at its headquarters, leaner supply chains and more efficient product sourcing, Target said in a statement. The company will set up centralized teams at its headquarters that will tackle specific areas of the business, like analyzing shopper data. And it will reinvest $2 billion to $2.2 billion in its business, including $1 billion in technology and improvements to the supply chain.But Target could face mounting labor costs at its 1,795 stores in the United States now that Walmart has announced it will raise the pay of 500,000 of its lowest-paid hourly wage workers. Mr. Cornell did not commit to the possibility of similar raises at Target, but he said Target wanted to make sure that its hourly pay remained “very competitive.”For the full year, Target forecast $4.45 to $4.65 adjusted profit per share, in line with analysts’ expectations, and said it expected to see a modest 1 percent growth in comparable sales. Fourth-quarter sales in stores open at least a year rose 3.8 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Cornell said the retailer would focus on its fashion, infants’, children’s and health departments to increase sales and customer traffic. As for food, customers can expect to see more natural products, he said — more organic and gluten-free fare, along with specialty yogurt, granola, coffee and tea, and wine and craft beer. The company also plans to make its ingredient labeling clearer and simpler.As Target’s merchandising chief, Kathee Tesija, put it: Food has not been why shoppers come to Target — and “that has to change.”The retailer said it would experiment with reshaping its food section this year, and start introducing those changes at stores countrywide next year.Craig Johnson, the president of Customer Growth Partners, a retail consulting firm based in New Canaan, Conn., said that succeeding would be difficult, but that the moves could attract a lot of customers. He also said that cutting jobs and costs was a painful but necessary step.Still, he added: “The trick is, you can’t cut your way to growth. You have to build traffic. You have to get your customers back.”Target is also investing in its online business, which analysts said once trailed its competitors but is now contributing to sales. The company is making a big push into e-commerce sales, recently halving its threshold for free deliveries, to $25, something analysts said could win market share but eat away at profit margins.AdvertisementTarget expects to open a modest number of new stores this year in 15 new locations. Eight will be smaller stores in cities, the company said. The smaller urban stores, which Target first opened in 2012, are twice as profitable as its full-size stores, executives said.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Target Plans to Cut Jobs to Help Save $2 Billion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.