
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

MARCH 3, 2015
Trust Citigroup to benefit from getting rid of its most profitable business. The huge bank has at last sold its subprime consumer finance unit OneMain Financial to a rival, Springleaf, for $4.25 billion. The unit has generated returns that far exceed anything else at Citigroup. And yet the deal provides all manner of relief for the lender run by Michael L. Corbat.Losing OneMain deprives Citigroup of much-needed earnings. The unit’s return on assets, at 6.7 percent, is some seven times better than its owner’s 0.9 percent, a sign of both OneMain’s lower costs and the higher interest rates it charges customers. The business could earn $574 million this year, analysts at Bernstein figure. That is a mere fraction of what Citigroup will produce, but the bank needs all it can get.Mr. Corbat can offset much of the hit. First, the sale will provide a decent one-time bolster to income. Along with retiring the higher-cost funding for OneMain, Citigroup reckons that the pretax gain will amount to about $1 billion. The sale price should also give the bank an opportunity to tap into its $50 billion or so of deferred tax assets accumulated from losses during and after the financial crisis that can be used as long as its United States-based businesses turn a profit.The third overt financial benefit will be capital freed up after shedding OneMain’s nearly $10 billion of assets. Assume Citi holds 10 percent against the sum, and that’s almost $1 billion. Mr. Corbat can either reinvest the money or try to persuade the Federal Reserve to allow him to return some or all of it to shareholders.Getting OneMain into good enough shape to sell took substantial effort. Securing a deal required at least four years. That means being rid of it at last removes a serious management distraction. And in one final perk, Citigroup investment bankers will get a bit of league table credit for advising on the sale. Now all Mr. Corbat has to do is find a way to produce healthy returns from the rest of his sprawling empire.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »