By RAPHAEL MINDERMARCH 3, 2015
MADRID — Isabel dos Santos, the daughter of the president of Angola and the second-largest investor in BPI, a Portuguese bank, is pushing for the bank to merge with a domestic rival, Millennium BCP, rather than accept a takeover bid from CaixaBank, a Spanish bank.BCP said on Tuesday that it would analyze the merger proposal if BPI was also willing to do so, a day after the banks were urged to combine in a joint letter sent by a representative of Ms. dos Santos, one of Africa’s wealthiest businesswomen.Any merger between BCP and BPI would not only allow them to dominate the Portuguese market but is likely to make Angolans the largest investors in the new entity. Ms. dos Santos owns 18.6 percent of BPI through an investment company called Santoro Finance, while Sonangol, Angola’s state-owned oil company, has a 19.4 percent stake in BCP.The proposal from Ms. dos Santos comes after CaixaBank, which is based in Barcelona, made a full takeover bid last month for BPI, in which it already owns a 44.1 percent stake.AdvertisementCaixaBank’s cash offer valued BPI at 1.94 billion euros, equivalent to €1.329 a share for the 55.9 percent of BPI that it did not already own. The unexpected attempt by Ms. dos Santos to derail CaixaBank’s bid — or force the Spanish bank to raise its offer — helped push BPI shares up 8 percent on Tuesday, to €1.48 a share. Shares in BCP rose 2.4 percent.AdvertisementMs. dos Santos has built up considerable influence in Portugal by investing in a range of sectors, incljuding banking and energy. Her presence, alongside that of other oil-rich Angolan investors, grew during a sovereign debt crisis that crippled Portugal and forced its government to call international creditors to the rescue because it could no longer meet its debt repayment obligations.Last year, Ms. dos Santos also briefly tried to prevent Oi, a Brazilian telecommunications operator, from selling Portuguese assets to Altice for €7.4 billion by proposing an alternative deal. In December, however, she withdrew her plan, allowing the transaction to proceed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As part of Portugal’s bailout, agreed in May 2011, the Portuguese banking sector was allocated €12 billion of €78 billion of emergency funding. The Portuguese banking sector ended up requiring only half of that rescue recapitalization, but it was then hit last summer — only a few months after Portugal exited its bailout program — by the collapse of one of its biggest institutions, Banco Espírito Santo, which was part of a family-controlled group.The tussling over BPI also comes as the Portuguese government is scheduled this month to select a list of bidders for the auction of Novo Banco, which was formed last August to salvage the healthy assets of Banco Espírito Santo. BPI has not confirmed it would bid, but analysts have considered BPI to be among the front-runners to buy Novo Banco.Ms. dos Santos is arguing that CaixaBank’s bid for BPI “doesn’t reflect correctly the value of the institution,” according to her letter, a copy of which was also sent to the chief executive of CaixaBank. Instead, the letter argues that a merger between BCP and BPI would not only reinforce their domestic market share but also their presence in Portuguese-speaking Africa, namely in Angola and Mozambique, as well as Poland, where BCP already has banking operations.However, any merger between BCP and BPI is likely to face considerable regulatory hurdles, given that the two banks already rank among the largest in Portugal and would, if combined, have about 27 percent of the loan portfolio of the domestic banking sector.CaixaBank didn’t comment on the plans of Ms. dos Santos. Its chairman, Isidro Fainé, told a meeting with journalists on Monday in Barcelona that, after CaixaBank’s bid for BPI, “we’ve just started the game,” according to Reuters.Still, when it made its bid, CaixaBank stressed that the offer was not only conditional on securing at least 50 percent of the total equity but also on erasing a restriction on the voting rights of BPI shareholders. BPI’s rules limit the voting rights of any individual shareholder to 20 percent of the share capital.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Bank Bids.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.