
Breakingviews By                     
DOMINIC ELLIOTT

MARCH 3, 2015
Barclays has one thing right. Last year, the British bank found itself in the eye of a public relations firestorm for increasing staff bonuses when profit fell. On the face of it, the bank’s chief executive, Antony P. Jenkins, has managed to get things right in his 2014 results, announced on Tuesday. Barclays’ investors shouldn’t celebrate just yet, though.It’s not surprising that employee costs at Barclays have fallen — Mr. Jenkins is running his investment bank with three-quarters of the staff and a third of the risk-weighted assets it had last year, at 122 billion pounds, or $187 billion. But even with 2,100 fewer investment bankers, the average amount paid to the remaining bankers has stayed at £199,000. The percentage of investment bank revenue devoted to paying staff has actually gone up slightly.Poor investment bank performance explains why. Return on equity has fallen to 2.7 percent from 8.2 percent in 2013. That’s miles below the banking sector’s cost of capital, which the consultant McKinsey & Co. puts at 11.5 percent. Fixed income revenue fell 18 percent in the fourth quarter from the same period in the previous year, worse than European banks on average. Revenue from equities dealing was roughly flat but still below peers.There was also a big difference between full-year headline number and underlying profit. The investment bank had to swallow an extra £1.25 billion provision for foreign exchange-related litigation. Factor this in and a one-time increase in fixed salaries as a result of the European bonus cap, and the investment bank’s pretax profit would have actually fallen 12 percent, the same as the drop in the bonus pool adjusted for that extra expense.At least Barclays’s other divisions are holding up. Barclaycard produced a return on equity of 16 percent in 2014, while retail banking delivered a 12 percent return. Mr. Jenkins’s turnaround program is sufficiently on track, with 2016 targets on leverage and capital looking achievable, to allow him to receive 57 percent of his potential bonus for 2014.But an 11 percent core Tier 1 equity target is low compared with its British peer Lloyds, which doesn’t have an investment bank. Lower costs can only offset declining trading revenue so far, and American and British ring-fencing costs won’t make it any easier to generate investment banking returns. Mr. Jenkins may have to cut his misfiring investment bank further.Dominic Elliott is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »