By JENNY ANDERSONMARCH 3, 2015
LONDON — Mark J. Carney, governor of the Bank of England, said on Tuesday that the bank’s former chief foreign exchange dealer had been fired for multiple breaches of internal policies, not because he failed to flag potential misconduct in the currency market.Testifying before the Treasury Select Committee in London, Mr. Carney said that Martin Mallett, the former executive, was dismissed in November for sharing an internal Bank of England document with market participants, offering personal opinions about bank policy, using bad language and sending emails with inappropriate attachments.The breaches “could’ve brought the bank’s reputation into disrepute,” Mr. Carney said.Mr. Mallett was fired in November when the bank released an independent investigation into whether its employees participated in or had been aware of manipulation and collusion in the foreign exchange market. Six banks have so far paid $4.3 billion to settle charges of misconduct, and Barclays, which did not settle, announced on Tuesday that it had set aside 1.25 billion pounds, or $1.9 billion, to cover litigation and conduct costs for foreign-exchange related investigations.The £3 million Bank of England investigation, completed by Lord Grabiner, a well-known, top-dollar London lawyer who also worked on the phone hacking inquiry, concluded that the bank and its employees did not engage in any improper conduct. It said that Mr. Mallett’s exercised bad judgment for not flagging concerns about potential manipulation, which he expressed in conversations with market participants, but that he had not acted “in bad faith” or engaged in any unlawful or improper behavior.”AdvertisementIn 2012, Mr. Mallett had a phone conversation with a senior UBS trader about “the shenanigans that could possibly go on around fixings,” referring to the so-called fix.Regulators say that a group of London traders, known as the “cartel” and the “mafia,” illegally dipped into the $5.3-trillion-a-day currency trade.In that call, Mr. Mallett indicated that lawyers, or regulators, might not look favorably on chat room activities. Regulators, “if they were aware that it was going on, would be uncomfortable with it.”AdvertisementAttempts to contact Mr. Mallett were unsuccessful.Jesse Norman, a conservative member of the Treasury Select Committee, commissioned a lawyer to weigh in on the Grabiner report, expressing concern that the investigation was less than thorough. Charles Béar, the lawyer, said the Bank of England failed to properly examine its own role in the scandal, after setting “very low tests” for the inquiry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The performance of the Bank’s officials at various levels has not been subject to the scrutiny in the way in which professional people are normally assessed when a serious problem comes to light,” Mr. Béar wrote in his report.Mr. Carney acknowledged that the bank’s reputation had been damaged from the investigation. “Our reputation has certainly taken a knock,” Mr. Carney said. “This hasn’t been a pleasant experience.”He said that under a new “escalation policy” that allows employees to call attention to potential problems, 50 reports had been made. Forty-two of those have been delivered to the Financial Conduct Authority for further investigation.Mr. Carney was also asked about another Grabiner investigation, reported by The Financial Times in November, into whether central bank officials were aware of potential manipulation of money-market auctions in 2008.“We at the bank don’t provide a running commentary on the inquiries we’re conducting,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Carney Testimony.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.