By EMILY STEELMARCH 3, 2015
Seeking to contain the damage from the Brian Williams crisis and put an end to a series of management missteps that has left NBC News in turmoil, NBCUniversal is preparing to shake up the executive ranks of its news division.The company is in advanced discussions with its former news chief, Andrew Lack, about returning to the network, multiple NBC executives briefed on the discussions said Tuesday. An announcement is expected in the coming days.Mr. Lack, 67, is expected to take on the leading role at the NBC News group, which includes NBC News, MSNBC and CNBC, said the people, who spoke on the condition they not be identified because the talks are continuing.His arrival would signal a broad reorganization of the top level of NBC’s news operation, leading to changes for the two executives who have led the unit through a rocky period over the last year. Patricia Fili-Krushel, the chairwoman of the NBCUniversal News Group, is expected to be reassigned to a corporate position on the executive team of Steve Burke, chief executive of NBCUniversal. Deborah Turness, the president of NBC News, is expected to remain in her position and would report to Mr. Lack, one person said.The changing of the executive guard comes a month after NBC News was rocked by Mr. Williams’s admission that he embellished an account of his role in a helicopter episode in Iraq in 2003. The disclosure undermined his position as the nation’s leading news anchor and sent the network into days of crisis control; on Feb. 10, the network suspended Mr. Williams for six months without pay.AdvertisementA former news producer for CBS, Mr. Lack was recruited to NBC in 1993 when the network was reeling from its admission that it had rigged a General Motors truck to explode during a report on truck safety broadcast on “Dateline,” its newsmagazine program. Mr. Lack was president of NBC News from 1993 until 2001, and ran up a series of successes during that period. He was celebrated for rebuilding the NBC News division, transforming the look of modern news and establishing close relationships with executives and stars.AdvertisementHe later worked as chief executive of Sony Music Entertainment and chairman of the Bloomberg Media Group, where he tried to bolster the company’s ratings-challenged television operations. He left that post in September and most recently worked as chief executive of the Broadcasting Board of Governors, an independent federal agency that oversees international networks like Voice of America and Radio Free Europe.Mr. Lack is returning to a news division again in disarray. When Comcast acquired NBCUniversal in 2011, Brian L. Roberts, Comcast’s chief executive, called the news operation “the crown jewel” of his giant media group. At the time, “Nightly News,” the “Today” show and “Meet the Press” were all at the top of the ratings. Since then, “Today” has fallen behind its ABC rival “Good Morning America,” “Meet the Press” has suffered ratings declines, and the network’s evening newscast was shaken by Mr. Williams’s exaggeration and suspension. MSNBC also is in the middle of a shake-up, reflecting weak ratings.The television news landscape has also changed starkly since Mr. Lack was last in charge. The standing of the nightly newscast has faded against the onslaught of competition from cable and digital news.The suspension of Mr. Williams was just the latest in a string of setbacks in the news unit since Ms. Turness arrived at NBC in 2013 after working as a top television news executive in Britain. In her short tenure, she removed David Gregory as host of “Meet the Press” because of low ratings, ending his two-decade career at the network. She also fired Jamie Horowitz as the head of the “Today” show just 10 weeks after she hired him. In addition, NBC faced criticism last fall when its chief medical editor, Dr. Nancy Snyderman, violated a self-imposed quarantine after being exposed to Ebola in Liberia.It is not clear how Mr. Lack’s appointment would affect Mr. Williams’s fate at the network. An NBC investigation into Mr. Williams and his reporting is continuing. That includes the Iraq incident, his descriptions of his reporting on Hurricane Katrina and other coverage.Mr. Lack, who is known to be close with NBC News’s roster of performers, played a big role in Mr. Williams’s rise to the anchor chair. At a party celebrating Mr. Williams’s 10th anniversary as anchor of “NBC Nightly News,” Mr. Williams called Mr. Lack the best boss for whom he had ever worked, one person said.Mr. Burke talked with Mr. Lack when NBC executives were assessing their options on how to discipline Mr. Williams, according to people with knowledge of the discussions. But Mr. Burke will make the ultimate decision about Mr. Williams, executives said.AdvertisementMr. Williams is eager to return to work, tell his story and put the controversy behind him, a friend who spoke to Mr. Williams on Tuesday said. Mr. Williams did not respond to an email seeking comment. His lawyer, Robert Barnett, declined to comment.In December, Mr. Williams signed a new five-year contract reported to be worth $10 million a year. A public morals clause in NBC News’s standard contract with performers could give the news group a way out of the agreement, said a television industry executive who has seen the contract. The clause states that a situation that brings the employee into “public disrepute, contempt, scandal or ridicule, or which justifiably shocks, insults or offends a significant portion of the community,” would give the company the right to terminate the agreement, the executive said.A path to redemption for Mr. Williams is unclear. He ranked as the 23rd-most-trusted person in the country before the controversy, on par with the businessman Warren E. Buffett and Robin Roberts of “Good Morning America.” He has since slid to 3,288, according to the Marketing Arm, a research firm owned by the Omnicom Group whose celebrity index is closely watched by media and marketing executives.News of the potential management changes at NBC News comes as new ratings figures show that NBC’s “Nightly News” has sustained its lead over rival broadcasters in the three weeks since Mr. Williams stepped down from the broadcast. Lester Holt has filled in as anchor since Feb. 9.The race remains tight. A total of 9.7 million viewers tuned in to NBC’s evening news broadcast last week, beating ABC’s 9.5 million and CBS’s eight million, according to Nielsen data provided by Horizon Media.Viewership has dropped slightly since Mr. Williams’s last week in the anchor chair, when the broadcast drew 10.2 million viewers, but ratings swings can depend on the news events covered during the broadcast. (During the week of Feb. 16, for instance, NBC drew 10.1 million viewers.)An article on Wednesday about Andrew Lack’s expected return to NBC misstated, in some editions, the occasion for a party at which Brian Williams called Mr. Lack the best boss for whom he had ever worked. The party was for Mr. Williams’s 10th anniversary as anchor of “NBC Nightly News,” not his 10th anniversary at NBC. (He joined the network in 1993.)A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: NBC News Is Said to Woo Former Chief to Return.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.