
In Debt By                     
STEPHEN J. LUBBEN

OCT. 13, 2015
The last week was awash in retail bankruptcy filings — two of particular note.The one that got the most media attention was American Apparel. The good news is that the bankruptcy filing might end the company’s seemingly interminable fights with Dov Charney, its founder and former chief executive.  The company is sensibly indicating that it will continue to make its products in the United States, one thing that distinguishes it from a swarm of other discount clothing retailers.The process in that case is being driven by secured lenders, largely hedge funds, which will control the company when the dust settles. The host of unsecured trade creditors listed on the petition – including the law firm I worked for long ago  – probably are asking what will be left for them.The other big retail case of the week is City Sports, well known to anyone who attended school in Boston in the 1990s. Perhaps therein is the root of the problem. Somewhat confusingly, it filed for bankruptcy announcing its intention to reorganize, while saying that it must sell all of its stores by the end of the month. The filing also shows a host of unpaid trade creditors who must be wondering about their fate.A quick look at the docket shows that the company is party to a secured lending facility that gives the lenders a lien on all of the debtor’s assets, including its cash. That cash, we are told, is the “sole source of funding for operations and the costs of administering these Chapter 11 cases.” It is these lenders who are driving the show, demanding a court-approved sale this month.AdvertisementSo the company is free to reorganize, but make it snappy.The cases speak to the debate underway about proposed changes to bankruptcy laws that would make the process cheaper for and potentially more favorable to businesses trying to reorganize.AdvertisementThe Loan Syndications and Trading Association recently released a report focused on the importance of preserving Chapter 11 in its current form.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is in response to a  report released by the American Bankruptcy Institute that included what the association calls “harmful changes to the rights of secured creditors.” The institute instead portrays its proposed changes as restoring the balance of power in Chapter 11.There seems to be little doubt that secured creditors have taken control of Chapter 11. It was this reality that the governments of the United States and Canada exploited in the automotive bankruptcy cases during the financial crisis. Whether this is good or bad depends largely on where you stand.The syndications and trading association represents the interests of those who have taken control: the secondary market in pieces of secured loans facilitates that control. The bankruptcy institute represents bankruptcy interests more broadly, and went out of its way to propose changes to Chapter 11 that had broad support in the bankruptcy community. Some (including myself) have sometimes grumbled that the institute was, if anything, too cautious.In the absence of clear empirical evidence, which is still lacking on the crucial questions, that leads me to suspect the institute is more apt to get it right on this point.But the syndications and trading association has the clear benefit of inertia on its side. If Congress does nothing, as one might suspect will be the case, it wins.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »