AdvertisementSupported byYear of FrettingBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — When Ben S. Bernanke walked into the Federal Reserve’s ornate boardroom in December 2009, the officials who were gathered around the long table gave the Fed’s chairman a standing ovation.Mr. Bernanke had just been crowned Person of the Year by Time magazine. The recession had ended, unemployment had crested and Mr. Bernanke was widely regarded as singularly responsible.But the return to normalcy that Mr. Bernanke and his committee began to chart at that end-of-the-year meeting soon proved premature. The Fed had arrested the financial crisis, but the moment would also turn out to be the beginning of a yearslong series of failures to provide a sufficiently large dose of stimulus to restore the battered American economy to its previous health. Transcripts the Fed released on Wednesday of its 2009 policy meetings show that Mr. Bernanke and his colleagues had a relatively clear understanding of the depth of the nation’s economic problems. But they were hobbled by doubts about the Fed’s ability to do more and by concerns about the potential political and economic consequences.At that December meeting, Mr. Bernanke told his colleagues that he was acutely aware of “fairly substantial” calls for the Fed to be doing “a lot more.” But he quickly added: “The reason I personally, at least, am not convinced that that’s the right way to go is that the connection between what actions we can take at this point and effective easing in the markets is not at all clear. For example, on the one hand, mortgage rates are already extraordinarily low — it’s not clear that we can lower them much more.”He would eventually change his mind. Over the course of his second term as Fed chairman, which began in early 2010, Mr. Bernanke orchestrated three more rounds of bond buying, more than tripling the volume of purchases that the Fed had made during 2009.In the early months of that year, the Fed pressed ahead with the bold measures it had initiated in 2008 to arrest the financial crisis. By summer it had largely succeeded.The latest batch of crisis-era transcripts — the Fed releases annual installments after a five-year delay — adds a chapter to the Fed’s halting journey from a single-minded focus on inflation in the years before the crisis to its broad and continuing embrace of responsibility for stabilizing the financial system and reviving job growth. Mr. Bernanke, who left the Fed last year at the end of his second term, emerges as a perceptive judge of economic conditions and a consultative leader who rarely pushed to impose his perspective on his colleagues, even when he turned out to be right. His successor, Janet L. Yellen, then the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, appears in these transcripts as prescient in her concerns about the enduring weakness of the economy. She warned at the December meeting that the Fed might need to resume its bond buying — but she went no further, and neither did anyone else. In early 2009, financial markets were still in disarray, and Fed officials worked closely with the incoming Obama administration on a successful plan to restore confidence through a series of measures, including theatrical “stress tests” of the largest banks.At the same time, the Fed began to shift from firefighting to reconstruction, the work that remains its focus. The Fed had already reduced its benchmark interest rate nearly to zero in December 2008. It had also started to buy mortgage-backed securities in January, seeking to revive the availability of financing for borrowers. At the Fed’s second meeting of the year, in March, officials agreed to expand that program substantially. On top of the existing plan to buy $600 billion in mortgage bonds, the Fed said it would buy a further $1.05 trillion in mortgage bonds and Treasury securities. Fed officials arrived in a mood of profound concern.Just three nights earlier, Mr. Bernanke told the CBS program “60 Minutes,” during the first live interview conducted by a Fed chairman, that he saw “green shoots” — signs of emerging recovery in financial markets. But at the meeting, Mr. Bernanke made clear the overall picture was still grim, and other officials agreed.Richard Fisher, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, said he had taken soundings from 29 corporate executives. “In fact,” Mr. Fisher said, “one actually called me and said, ‘Do you want some good news?’ In the early months of that year, the Fed pressed ahead with the bold measures it had initiated in 2008 to arrest the financial crisis.“And I said, ‘Please.’ “He said, ‘Call somebody else.’ ”Some thought the Fed should buy more bonds, including William C. Dudley, the newly installed president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Another official, James Bullard, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, argued that the Fed should not set a limit but instead should announce that it would purchase a certain volume of bonds each month. The Fed eventually concluded in 2013 that Mr. Bullard’s proposal was the most effective way to conduct a bond-buying program. But caution prevailed. Ms. Yellen, among others, worried that a larger balance sheet could interfere with the Fed’s ability to increase interest rates as the economy began to recover. Officials also worried the Fed could overwhelm the capacity of the financial system if it tried to buy too many bonds. And, from the outset, some officials fretted that higher inflation would surely result.The greatest doubts, however, were focused on the likely benefits of the purchases, particularly of Treasury securities. Officials generally agreed that buying mortgage bonds was helping, but there were no comparable problems in the Treasury market. The best argument, several officials said, was simply the idea that it was worth trying everything. “We don’t know exactly how much a Treasury purchase program would do, but, if we start one, we’ll be able to answer that question,” Mr. Dudley said.The Fed has publicly insisted in the intervening years that buying Treasury bonds had important benefits, even as a number of academics have published studies contradicting that conclusion. Mr. Bernanke joked last year, “The problem with Q.E. is it works in practice, but it doesn’t work in theory.” But the transcripts show that Fed officials at the time harbored the opposite view.“On theoretical grounds, I believe there’s a very strong case that they should have some effect, but it has been awfully hard to identify exactly what that effect is,” Ms. Yellen said at the Fed’s June meeting. “I would say the benefits don’t merit the costs.”By the second half of 2009, this skepticism was being reinforced by optimism that the recession was over. The National Bureau of Economic Research would later determine the downturn had ended in June.“I think it does appear that the real economy is reaching something of an inflection point,” Jeffrey Lacker, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, said on June 24, accurately capturing the underlying shift. But even though the economic ship was no longer sinking, it was still struggling to advance. The Fed repeatedly overestimated the strength of the economy in the years before the financial crisis. Officials continued to understate the nation’s economic problems well into 2008. The 2009 transcripts show, however, that most officials were cleareyed about the weakness of the recovery. “If you put all of those imbalances together and you think about what is going to support sustainable economic growth, it is a little hard to see where a robust recovery is going to come from,” Mr. Bernanke said in April, and he maintained this caution through the rest of the year.Daniel Tarullo, a Fed governor, noted at the Fed’s November meeting that the word he had heard the most during the discussions was “sluggish.”But when the Fed convened in December, there was unanimous agreement it was time to stop buying bonds.Mr. Bernanke expressed “somewhat more confidence” about the health of the economy, although he was careful to describe the Fed as “walking on eggshells.” Elizabeth A. Duke, a Fed governor, said the mortgage market still needed help, but she doubted that the central bank could provide it by buying more bonds.“I think there’s uncertainty about the benefits of adding to our longer-term purchases and some costs to that as well, so I’m not prepared to argue for that,” said Donald L. Kohn, the Fed’s vice chairman.Ms. Yellen warned in November that retreating too quickly might leave the economy in a “dangerous deflationary situation,” a prescient forecast. Now she told the committee that she had shown the Fed’s optimistic job growth forecast to the San Francisco Fed’s board.They were “incredulous,” she said. But Ms. Yellen did not push for the Fed to keep buying bonds. She noted only that if the retreat went badly, “I think we may need to resume purchases.”Advertisement