By BEN SISARIO and NOAH SMITHMARCH 4, 2015
LOS ANGELES — How closely does Robin Thicke’s hit “Blurred Lines” resemble a classic by Marvin Gaye?That question is central to a closely watched copyright case here, and on Wednesday, Pharrell Williams, the producer behind “Blurred Lines,” acknowledged a similarity to Gaye’s 1977 song “Got to Give It Up” but denied that there had been any intention to copy it.“I must have been channeling that feeling, that late-’70s feeling,” Mr. Williams testified in the case, which pits him and Mr. Thicke against the family of Gaye, who died in 1984.Gaye’s children accuse Mr. Williams, Mr. Thicke and the rapper T.I. of borrowing musical elements of “Got to Give It Up” without permission.AdvertisementClosing arguments are expected on Thursday in the case, which is being heard before Judge John A. Kronstadt in United States District Court for the Central District of California.AdvertisementAt one point during Mr. Williams’s testimony, which lasted less than an hour, he was played snippets of both songs in skeletal versions reconstructed by a musicologist retained by the Gaye family. Listening to the juxtaposed bass lines, Mr. Williams responded, “It sounds like you’re playing the same thing.”At that point, Mr. Thicke, who was attending the trial, left the courtroom.The trial has gripped the music world with its war between celebrities and the family of a beloved Motown star, as well as the possibility of huge damages. This week it was revealed in court, through an accounting statement attested by both sides, that “Blurred Lines” — the top-selling song of 2013 — generated more than $16 million in profits.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although Mr. Thicke, Mr. Williams and T.I. share official credit on “Blurred Lines,” Mr. Williams testified that he wrote and masterminded the song in nearly every way. The core of it was created in about an hour, Mr. Williams testified, before Mr. Thicke arrived at a planned recording session.Under questioning from his lawyer, Howard E. King, Mr. Williams was asked directly if he had copied “Got to Give It Up.” He said no. Speaking in mellow and polite tones, Mr. Williams added that he had grown up with Motown and that Gaye was “one of the ones we look up to the most.”Under cross-examination by the Gaye family’s lawyer, Richard S. Busch, Mr. Williams was shown several interviews in which he seemed to liken the sound of “Blurred Lines” to Gaye’s style in “Got to Give It Up.”Mr. Williams responded that those comments were only his interpretation in hindsight, and that Gaye had never been in his mind during the creation of “Blurred Lines.” “Sometimes we look back,” he said, “and see what comes out.”Mr. Busch then asked Mr. Williams whether “Blurred Lines” had a similar “feel” to “Got to Give It Up” and others from its era.“Feel,” Mr. Williams said, “not infringement.”Ben Sisario reported from New York, and Noah Smith from Los Angeles.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.