By RACHEL ABRAMS and AARON M. KESSLERMARCH 4, 2015
While shares of Lumber Liquidators closed up slightly on Friday, investors could barely wait to sell their stock by Monday morning.Shares of the flooring retailer fell more than 20 percent after a report Sunday night on “60 Minutes,” the CBS News program, said that some of the company’s laminate wood contained potentially hazardous levels of formaldehyde, a known carcinogen. The flooring in question came from factories in China and was mislabeled as safe, according to the report.By Wednesday, the stock had sunk more than 30 percent since Friday’s close. The company had already withdrawn from the annual Raymond James investor conference, where it had been scheduled to present. Regulators scrambled to respond to the report, even as federal lawmakers called for an investigation.It remained unclear which agency has ultimate jurisdiction over any possible inquiry, underscoring the murkiness of laws governing safety in consumers’ homes.Advertisement“For consumers with potentially affected wood flooring, it makes no difference to them which federal agency does what,” Elliot F. Kaye, chairman of the Consumer Product Safety Commission, said in a statement. “All that matters is that the government use its resources and authorities to try to answer this fundamental question: Is the affected flooring in homes safe or not?”AdvertisementIn a statement on its website, Lumber Liquidators disputed the “60 Minutes” findings, saying that the program had used “an improper test method” and that its products were safe.Further, the company argued that the “attacks” on its products were driven by short-sellers — investors who bet that a company is overvalued.“That’s nonsense,” said Whitney Tilson, a hedge fund manager who said he first became suspicious of Lumber Liquidators after shares of the company more than doubled in a year. Mr. Tilson shorted the stock, and paid $5,000 to test three pieces of wood for himself. He said that formaldehyde levels in the wood he tested were two to six times the California limits.“That is not a matter of opinion,” Mr. Tilson said.While formaldehyde has long been associated with an increased risk for leukemia and other cancers, the United States has yet to enforce any federal safety standard restricting its use in certain wood products. California pioneered strict standards on its own, which the Environmental Protection Agency adopted in 2010.But after multiple extensions at the urging of industry groups, those standards have not yet gone into effect. In a statement, the E.P.A. said that it was still completing its rules, which it expected to publish by the end of this year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The “60 Minutes” episode accused Lumber Liquidators’ Chinese suppliers of deliberately mislabeling products as being compliant with California’s rules, a finding that the company also disputed.The accusations of tainted Lumber Liquidators floorboards echo the problem of contaminated Chinese-made drywall used in thousands of homes during the American housing boom, particularly after the 2005 hurricane season devastated areas along the Gulf Coast, leading to shortages of domestic drywall.The federal government’s response to the Chinese drywall crisis was the formation of an interagency task force led by the Consumer Product Safety Commission that included the E.P.A., the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and others. However, the agencies frequently fought with one another over whose responsibility it was to solve the problem. Ultimately, the E.P.A. and C.D.C. largely deferred to the safety commission, taking little action of their own.AdvertisementThe safety agency did send inspectors to China to visit factories — where lax practices were discovered — but was ineffective at bringing relief to thousands of homeowners. Commission officials defended their response as the best they could do under circumstances involving foreign companies based in China that they had no ability to compel.Unlike Chinese drywall manufacturers, Lumber Liquidators is an American company with many assets in the United States. That could make the consumer safety agency’s job easier this time, should it choose to pursue the matter.Xuhua Zhou, a 25-year-old individual investor from Los Angeles, began blogging about Lumber Liquidators’ potential formaldehyde issues in 2013. Like Mr. Tilson, he became suspicious of the company’s quick success and, later, of potential issues with formaldehyde.“I decided to buy some flooring product and do some testing of my own and see what I could find,” said Mr. Zhou, who also shorted the stock. “The result wasn’t very settling.”A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Lumber Liquidators Plunges After TV Report of Tainted Flooring.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.