By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and PETER EAVISMARCH 4, 2015
Etsy was born in 2005 in a Brooklyn loft as a way for one of its co-founders to sell his handmade wooden goods.Now the company is seeking to go public in what promises to be one of the more closely watched market debuts of the year.Etsy filed its first prospectus for an initial public offering on Wednesday, disclosing a preliminary fund-raising target of $100 million. But the online bazaar — whose wares range from whimsical knit “beard” hats to vintage jewelry — will most likely seek much more.With the filing, Etsy is preparing to market itself to prospective investors in as soon as three weeks and could begin trading on the Nasdaq stock market by mid-April under the symbol ETSY.AdvertisementUnlike some of the other prominent companies that have gone public over the last six months, like the Alibaba Group of China or the online lender Lending Club, Etsy has quirkiness built into its DNA. Its first chief executive and co-founder, Rob Kalin, barely squeaked into college and came up with Etsy as a way to sell his homemade wares. (Its name, Mr. Kalin has said, arose from a misunderstanding of the Italian phrase “eh, sì” from the movie “8 1/2.”)Advertisement“Since inception, Etsy has challenged conventional ways of thinking about commerce, business, individuals and communities,” Chad Dickerson, the company’s chief executive, wrote in a letter included in the prospectus. “I intend to keep our unconventional operating philosophy as we become a public company, and I welcome new investors into our community.”But its path to an initial offering has been rocky at times. Mr. Kalin stepped down as chief executive in 2011 and was succeeded by Mr. Dickerson, the chief technical officer at the time.And the company has been criticized for failing to adequately clamp down on the sale of counterfeit goods as well as for letting vendors sell products that come from factories instead of vintage finds or goods solely from artisanal workshops.Still, in its decade of existence, Etsy has become a significant business. It reported $195.6 million in sales last year, up 56 percent from the previous year. And as of Dec. 31, it had 685 employees, most of whom are still based in the Dumbo neighborhood of Brooklyn.Like other Internet companies that aim to go public, Etsy presents a measure of earnings that differs from that required by generally accepted accounting principles. Etsy’s own metric, known as adjusted Ebitda, or earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, says that the company made $23 million last year. But it lost $15 million according to standard accounting principles.Adjusted Ebitda was positive because in addition to excluding taxes, depreciation and amortization, it did not count the cost of paying employees in stock.While investors often find such nonstandard measures of profits useful, they may be surprised at some of the items Etsy has left out of its particular metric. The company, for instance, also excluded acquisition-related expenses and foreign exchange losses.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If those two items are included in the calculation, Etsy’s underlying earnings growth would slow considerably. Specifically, the firm’s adjusted Ebitda increased 36 percent in 2014, from $17 million in 2013. But if acquisition and foreign exchange costs were included, growth would have been only 6 percent.AdvertisementOther items in the filing may give investors pause. Etsy, for instance, said that it had 19.8 million “active buyers” at the end of 2014. An active buyer doesn’t have to be using Etsy frequently, though. The only requirement is to have made one purchase in the previous 12 months, according to the filing.Though the prospectus did not disclose details like how many of its shares are outstanding, it is possible to estimate market value. EBay trades at about 14 times its Ebitda for 2014. Applying that multiple to Etsy’s adjusted Ebitda would give it a value of about $322 million.In his letter, Mr. Dickerson said that the company would not give quarterly or annual earnings guidance, numbers used by many public companies to steer analysts’ expectations.Etsy’s biggest existing shareholders include investment firms like Accel Partners, Index Ventures and Union Square Ventures. Together, the three control more than half of the company. The prospectus did not disclose how many shares any of the firms planned to sell.As part of the offering, Etsy plans to take about $300,000 of its proceeds from the I.P.O. to finance Etsy.org, a nonprofit it established in January to help train female entrepreneurs.The offering is being led by Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Etsy, an Online Bazaar for Crafts, Prepares for an Initial Offering.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.