By WILLIAM ALDENMARCH 4, 2015
A fledgling investment bank run by Paul J. Taubman, the former Morgan Stanley deal maker, is getting ready to make its Wall Street debut.The new firm will be called PJT Partners Inc., named for Mr. Taubman, its chairman and chief executive, according to a regulatory filing on Wednesday. It will house the deal makers that Mr. Taubman has hired since leaving Morgan Stanley in 2012, along with the three advisory businesses of the Blackstone Group.The 150-page filing did not specify the timing of the merger between Mr. Taubman’s shop and the Blackstone businesses, though it is expected to occur in the second half of this year. Following that, the combined firm will be spun off to Blackstone shareholders. (Blackstone has said its shareholders will initially own 65 percent of the new firm, while the firm’s employees will own the balance.)In a letter included in the filing, Stephen A. Schwarzman, Blackstone’s chief executive, said the new PJT Partners would be free of the potential conflicts that arise when a deal advisory business is housed inside a giant investment firm.Advertisement“The spinoff will free our advisory businesses from the current constraints on their expansion opportunities that have arisen from the growth and broadening of our asset management business,” Mr. Schwarzman said in the letter.Advertisement“Our advisory professionals have been effectively precluded from competing for engagements in many transactions where the potential for an investment by a Blackstone fund created an actual or perceived conflict of interest,” he said.PJT Partners will include virtually all of Blackstone’s advisory operations, though Blackstone will still be able to provide capital markets services to its own portfolio companies. The advisory businesses include three segments: mergers and acquisitions, restructuring and reorganization and the group known as Park Hill that helps private equity funds, real estate funds and other funds raise capital.These Blackstone operations together recorded a $4.5 million profit in 2014, with $401.1 million in revenue, the filing showed. The operations previously experienced annual losses since at least 2010.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Taubman and Blackstone spent the final months of 2014 planning the structure of the new firm, including a slight reduction in the headcount of Blackstone’s mergers and acquisitions segment, according to people briefed on the matter who were not authorized to speak publicly.Between five and eight partners have left the M.&A. segment in anticipation of the tie-up, out of at least 20 partners in that segment, the people said. Among the changes, PJT Partners plans to shutter its advisory practice in Frankfurt.The restructuring and Park Hill groups are expected to remain largely intact. The filing said the Blackstone businesses include 38 partners.At the same time, Mr. Taubman has been hiring. In November, he lured  Don Cornwell, a Morgan Stanley managing director specializing in sports team deals, after recruiting two other senior Morgan Stanley bankers, James Murray and Robert Friedsam. His group now includes 10 partners, including him, and plans to hire more in the coming months.As the firm was being planned, one particularly thorny challenge was the name. Employees had no shortage of ideas, including a number that used some variation of “Blackstone” or the word’s components.But in the end, the no-nonsense PJT Partners — which Mr. Taubman had already been using — was chosen because it showed the firm’s independence from Blackstone, one person briefed on the matter said.AdvertisementStill, PJT Partners won’t be located too far from Blackstone, which will be a client. It has signed a lease at 280 Park Ave. — a short walk from Blackstone’s offices at 345 Park Ave. .We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.