AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackThe first immune-based treatment for lung cancer won approval from the Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday, and it could displace more conventional chemotherapy for certain patients, at least.The drug, Opdivo, from Bristol-Myers Squibb, is one of a class of medicines that have electrified oncologists in recent years because they free the body’s own immune system to attack tumors.Opdivo, also known as nivolumab, was approved last year to treat advanced cases of the skin cancer melanoma, but the approval for lung cancer is in some ways more significant.Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths by far, with 224,000 new diagnoses and nearly 160,000 deaths last year. That means approval to treat lung cancer could help more patients and also result in much larger sales for Bristol-Myers. The drug sells for about $12,500 a month.Also, while melanoma was known to be vulnerable to attack from the immune system, many scientists doubted this would be true for lung cancer.In one trial, lung cancer patients who received Opdivo lived a median of 9.2 months compared with 6.0 months for those who received docetaxel, the standard chemotherapy used for such patients. By another measure known as the hazard ratio, the risk of death was 41 percent lower for those who received Opdivo, according to the drug’s label.That study was terminated early because the results were so strong. And the F.D.A. decision to approve the drug came far faster than analysts had expected, more than three months before the agency’s June 22 deadline.The approval was only for so-called squamous cell cancer, which accounts for about 30 percent of cases of non-small-cell lung cancer and is associated with smoking. Moreover, the approval was for second-line treatment for metastatic disease, meaning that patients have to first try a chemotherapy treatment.Dr. Francis Cuss, head of research and development at Bristol-Myers, said the company hoped to have clinical trial results for non-squamous lung cancer by the middle of the year. It is also studying Opdivo as a first-line treatment for metastatic lung cancer, meaning that it could be used before chemotherapy.Opdivo, which is given by intravenous infusion every two weeks, inhibits a protein known as PD-1, which acts as a brake on immune system cells. With the brake disabled, the immune cells can attack the tumor.In one lung cancer study, Opdivo significantly shrank tumors in only 15 percent of lung cancer cases, a fairly low rate compared with some chemotherapy drugs, which kill cancer cells by poisoning them. Yet immune system drugs appear to prolong lives for some patients even when the tumors do not shrink so much.“We’ve said that overall survival is where we think the value is,” Dr. Cuss said.In winning the lung cancer approval, Bristol-Myers beat out its rival Merck, which has a similar drug called Keytruda. Merck beat Bristol to market for the treatment of melanoma last year. Analysts say Merck could gain approval as a second-line treatment for both squamous and non-squamous lung cancer by the end of this year.Mark Schoenebaum, an analyst at Evercore ISI, said in a note on Wednesday that the Opdivo approval “was the fastest I’ve seen in my 15-year career.” He estimated sales of Opdivo for second-line use in squamous cell lung cancer could reach $1 billion to $1.5 billion a year in the United States and Europe. With approval for non-squamous lung cancer, that could expand to more than $4 billion, he said. Ono Pharmaceutical sells the drug in Japan.Drugs that unleash the immune system can cause some complications affecting the lungs, colon, liver and other organs. The most common side effects of Opdivo were fatigue, shortness of breath, pain, decreased appetite, cough, nausea and constipation, the F.D.A. said.Advertisement