AdvertisementSupported byBy Jenny AndersonLONDON — The Serious Fraud Office, the British agency that investigates and prosecutes fraud and corruption, is investigating whether the Bank of England played any role in rigging money market auctions during the financial crisis in 2007 and 2008.Both institutions confirmed the inquiry on Wednesday night.The investigation follows an independent inquiry commissioned by the central bank last year and carried out by Anthony Grabiner, the same lawyer who conducted a separate £3 million inquiry into whether the Bank of England knew or participated in colluding and rigging the currency markets.The bank said in a statement that it referred the results of Mr. Grabiner’s liquidity auction investigation to the Serious Fraud Office on Nov. 20 2014. The agency confirmed this evening that it was investigating the matter.A criminal investigation will cast a heavy shadow over the central bank, whose governor, Mark Carney, has sought to make transparency and reform a priority.This week however, the Bank of England came under fire from members of the Treasury Select Committee over Mr. Grabiner’s other investigation into whether any bank officials knew of or participated in the rigging of foreign exchange markets.Mr. Grabiner concluded that report in November, clearing the Bank of England of any improper conduct. It criticized Martin Mallett, the bank’s former chief currency dealer, saying that Mr. Mallett failed to alert his superiors about concerns that he had about potential problems in the market and that he did not relay conversations he had with senior market traders about the issues which became central in the investigation.Six banks have so far paid $4.3 billion to settle charges in the currency rigging inquiry. Mr. Mallett was fired over sharing an internal Bank of England document with market participants, offering personal opinions about bank policy, using bad language and sending emails with inappropriate attachments.At the Treasury Select hearing, Jesse Norman, a Conservative member of the committee, said that he had commissioned a lawyer to weigh in on the Grabiner report, saying that he was concerned that the investigation was less than thorough. Charles Béar, the lawyer, said the Bank of England had failed to cast a tough enough eye on its own role in the scandal, after setting “very low tests” for the inquiry.“The performance of the bank’s officials at various levels has not been subject to the scrutiny in the way in which professional people are normally assessed when a serious problem comes to light,” Mr. Béar wrote in his report.In that meeting, Mr. Carney defended Mr. Grabiner’s first report and declined to comment on the money market investigation.“We at the bank don’t provide a running commentary on the inquiries we’re conducting,” he said.That stance changed on Wednesday night after The Financial Times reported that the Serious Fraud office was investigating the bank over the auctions.Advertisement