By JENNY ANDERSONMARCH 4, 2015
LONDON — Foreign companies registered in offshore tax havens like the British Virgin Islands own 36,342 buildings in London that could be used for illegal purposes, a report by Transparency International said on Wednesday.No one, not even the British Land Registry, knows the true owners of these properties, which can be used for tax evasion, money laundering or the proceeds of crime, the report said. They can also be used for legitimate tax-planning and investment reasons, it said.Analyzing data from the land registry and the Metropolitan Police Service’s Proceeds of Corruption Unit, Transparency International reported that 180 million pounds of property in Britain has been investigated since 2004 as the suspected proceeds of crime. About 75 percent of those properties were owned by offshore companies that hid the identities of their true owners, the report said.Jonathan Benton, director of operations for the Proceeds of Corruption Unit, said that the “lack of access to beneficial ownership information about offshore companies that hold property in the U.K. is a major barrier for our investigations.” He also described the number of properties his unit had investigated as “the tip of the iceberg.”AdvertisementRobert Barrington, executive director of Transparency International, an anticorruption nonprofit group, said that although the numbers were tiny in terms of the total size of the property market, the link between offshore corporate secrecy and potential illicit activities was clear.Advertisement“It will hide a multitude of things,” he said of secrecy rules. “It will hide completely legitimate transactions, it will hide tax avoidance, which is legal, and tax evasion, which is not. It will hide money laundering of all sorts, and within the money laundering, it will hide money of completely corrupt origins,” he said.The group made 10 recommendations to improve transparency, including requiring foreign companies that buy British property to disclose to the land registry the identities of the true owners. It also suggested a cap on all-cash purchases and a requirement that estate agents do background checks on buyers as well as sellers.Property is a hot-button issue in Britain. An influx of foreign money has created widespread anxiety that the global ultra-wealthy are making London unaffordable for British citizens.Some companies connected to property investment criticized the report. Naomi Heaton, chief executive of London Central Portfolio, an asset-management group that focuses on the high-end property rental market, said that connecting offshore ownership — 99 percent of which she says is legitimate — with corruption was “invidious.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She supported the disclosure of the identities of beneficial owners but wondered why offshore companies had to be portrayed as villains.“That’s a fine recommendation,” she said. “But don’t dress it is up by creating a whole sense of sleaze and dirt about lots of innocent people doing things in an innocent way.”Mr. Barrington said he hoped that the government would pass a law that would hold foreign companies to the same standards as those of British companies, which will soon be required to disclose a property’s true owners.“We will have an absurd situation in which there is one law for British companies and another law for non-British companies,” he said.AdvertisementThe extent of offshore ownership of British property has apparently surprised even the Treasury. A recent tax on luxury homes purchased by corporations raised five times more than the Treasury expected, according to Bloomberg. The tax of up to more than £143,000 applies to those who buy residential property for more than £1 million and don’t lease it. The proceeds from the tax led Britain’s National Crime Agency to consider investigating whether some of the houses were bought to launder money, a spokeswoman for the agency said.Transparency International said it had started an online petition to rally and demonstrate concern over the consequences of secrecy.“U.K. property has long been a safe haven for overseas investors seeking a stable political and business climate, financial security or an attractive place to live,” the report said. “However, there is growing evidence that it has also become a safe haven for corrupt capital stolen from around the world, facilitated by the laws which allow U.K. property to be owned by secret offshore companies.”Ms. Heaton said descriptions like this were irresponsibly fueling unrest in Britain. “They are creating anger against offshore companies by suggesting they are hiding things,” she said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.