By JONATHAN WEISMANMARCH 4, 2015
WASHINGTON — When he’s not legislating, Senator Jon Tester, a Democrat, is a wheat, barley and alfalfa farmer in Big Sandy, Mont. That makes him a good bet to support President Obama’s trade agenda, which is generally backed by agriculture interests.But before he signs on to anything, Mr. Tester said Tuesday, he wants to see what Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, the ranking Democrat on the Finance Committee, can come up with in arduous negotiations with Republicans.“Oh, he’s important,” Mr. Tester, the chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, said of Mr. Wyden. “He is the most important person in the caucus on this issue.”Mr. Obama’s ambitious trade agenda — once seen as the best chance for bipartisan accomplishment in an otherwise rived Congress — appears to rest on the narrow, somewhat wobbly shoulders of Mr. Wyden, a position acknowledged by both parties and the White House with some trepidation.Advertisement“I’m not going to offer some self-promotional comment,” Mr. Wyden said, happy to be in the spotlight but shuffling nervously in the glare on his tall, thin frame. “But as the ranking Democrat, what I’ve tried to do is work closely with all my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to put in place what I call ‘trade done right.’”AdvertisementThe trade deal sought by the Obama administration, the Trans Pacific Partnership, would be the largest accord since the North American Free Trade Agreement went into force in 1994. It would bind 12 nations along the Pacific Rim to a new economic regime with lower trade barriers; fortified protections for workers, the environment and corporate secrets; and new rules to govern the integration of state-owned companies into the global economy.But even before it is completed, the deal is being challenged, largely by the president’s own party.Mr. Wyden, whose interest in trade stems from his own export-focused state, has found himself trying to thread a maddeningly narrow needle with proposals that would placate Democrats who worry that any such deal will hasten the loss of United States manufacturing jobs while assuring Republicans that he is not undermining the free flow of global commerce.On the heels of that deal, Mr. Obama would like to negotiate a second multilateral trade accord with Europe.But before any of that can happen, the White House, its trading partners and most congressional leaders say Congress must pass so-called trade promotion authority, which would let Mr. Obama reach those agreements knowing that Congress can approve or reject them — but cannot amend them.Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, the Republican chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, says he cannot go forward with such “fast track” authority until the Senate can produce a bipartisan version. Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah, the Republican chairman of the Finance Committee, says he cannot produce one without the support of his committee’s ranking Democrat, Mr. Wyden.Mr. Wyden is no stranger to controversy. He has long seen himself as a bridge between the parties. He teamed up with Mr. Ryan on an overhaul of Medicare ahead of the 2012 elections, enraging fellow Democrats. He tried to forge bipartisan comity with an approach to universal health care that broke with the Democratic leadership but also with most Republicans. He drafted, then redrafted, tax reform plans with successive Republican partners.AdvertisementBut none of those idiosyncratic efforts got anywhere close to becoming law. This time, leaders in both parties need him to succeed.From his position in the driver’s seat, Mr. Wyden is putting demands on the fast-track bill that Republicans are not sure they can accept — most important, a shut-off valve that Congress could turn if the details of the Pacific or European accords did not live up to their promise.“Right now it’s kind of stuck because I think some of the Democrats want things that we just can’t give them,” Mr. Hatch said on Tuesday.The Obama administration and Republican negotiators say they have bent over backward to win Mr. Wyden’s support.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“President Obama and Senator Wyden share the common goal of ensuring that America’s workers and businesses are made stronger through our trade agreements,” said Brandi Hoffine, a White House spokeswoman. “The president greatly appreciates Senator Wyden’s leadership on this issue and his commitment to reaching consensus on trade agreements that set new, higher standards for labor and environmental protections and offer even greater opportunities for American workers to get good-paying jobs and American businesses to expand into new markets.”The trade promotion bill under negotiation would direct the administration to pursue trade agreements that set tough new standards on labor, the environment, intellectual property, agriculture and state-owned enterprises. It would also include new requirements for congressional and public access to documents before, during and after trade talks.Republicans are also considering including mandated congressional consultations with the administration on international currency manipulation, changing the trade negotiation objectives to include human rights, creating a chief transparency officer at the White House trade office and imposing mandatory timelines for submitting the trade agreements to Congress and the public.But Mr. Wyden remains unsatisfied, both with the Obama administration and his Republican counterparts. Anti-trade activists have protested at his home in Portland, disrupted town hall meetings and called for someone to challenge him in the Democratic primary next year. Republicans have openly blamed him for the current impasse.“If you believe deeply in trade as I do and you want more of it, it doesn’t make sense to have all this secrecy that makes the public cynical about what’s going on,” Mr. Wyden said in a shot at the White House, which has kept the details of the Pacific trade deal close to the vest.AdvertisementMr. Wyden said he would not negotiate in public, but aides familiar with his position say he remains adamant that if the president brings forward a trade deal that falls short of the standards expected by lawmakers, Congress should be able to suspend trade-promotion authority so members can amend it. Republicans say just the possibility of a fast-track shut-off would greatly diminish the trade deals under negotiation.“It’s crucial to be able to tell your negotiating partner if they put their last best offer on the table, that Congress will not either disregard the agreement or amend it,” said Senator Rob Portman, Republican of Ohio and a United States trade representative in George W. Bush’s White House. “They don’t want to go through the political pain once, then have the rug pulled out from under them.”But pro-trade Democrats say the White House and Republicans have to come toward Mr. Wyden. In the past, trade deals could pass on the strength of overwhelming Republican support, supplemented by a minority of Democrats.This time around, a new dynamic has developed. Hard-core conservative Republicans who might have supported trade legislation are opposing it simply because they oppose anything that would grant Mr. Obama more power. That means more Democratic support will be needed, Mr. Wyden’s first and foremost.“This is all about building consensus and building support,” said Representative Ron Kind of Wisconsin, chairman of the New Democrat Coalition, a group of pro-business Democrats. “Getting Ron Wyden on board is important not just in the Senate but in the House.”A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Trade Agenda May Hinge on a Senator.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.