AdvertisementSupported byBy Jenny AndersonA European banking regulator issued formal guidelines on Wednesday morning instructing banks on how they can pay certain employees and who is affected by a much-debated cap on bonuses.The 119-page document from the regulator, the European Banking Authority, indicated that the bonus cap applies to all bank-owned subsidiaries, including asset managers and insurance groups, if their employees take risks that could affect the overall group’s stability.Many banks appear not to have been applying the bonus cap to these groups, and will now need to do so.The guidelines from the authority, which writes guidelines to interpret European laws, will apply the rules to “institutions on a solo and consolidated basis, including all subsidiaries which are not subject to the CRD IV framework,” a news release accompanying the guidelines said. CRD IV stands for Capital Requirement Directive IV, which is the name of the 2013 law that introduced the bonus cap.The document also cements the authority’s position that banks cannot issue so-called allowances to get around the bonus cap.That cap, which limits bankers to bonuses equal to one or two times their salaries, inspired banks to invent new pay categories that they designated as fixed pay in an attempt to bolster overall pay. Instructed by the European Union to look at the allowances, the authority said in October that they were not fixed pay, but bonuses.“Role-based allowances which are discretionary, not predetermined, not transparent to staff or not permanent should not be considered as fixed but should be classified as variable remuneration, in line with the letter and purpose” of the 2013 law the authority said in October.The guidelines issued on Wednesday kick off a three-month consultation period in which the industry can respond. The authority will then issue a final draft this year, in time to be applied to 2015 pay. (The bonus cap has been in effect since Jan. 1, 2014. The guidelines are meant to clarify what the rule means and how the banks should apply it.)The guidelines elaborate how to identify staff affected by the bonus cap, so-called material risk takers, as well as clarifying fixed and variable compensation. This time, the authority tried to leave little room for banks’ creative interpretation.“Remuneration is either fixed or variable; there is no third category of remuneration,” it said.Fixed pay, it said, includes nondiscretionary payments or benefits that do not depend on performance. Variable pay, it said, “is everything else.”The guidelines offer a laundry list of examples: Health care, child care and “proportionate” pension contributions? Fixed.Long-term incentive plans and retention bonuses? Variable.The banks now have various headaches to contend with (aside from headaches related to conduct and litigation, poor earnings, shrinking investment banks and increased regulation). All the work and expense they put into creating allowances — hiring pay consultants, vetting their versions of them with lawyers — will be nullified and they will be forced to start anew.There are added wrinkles, too, because of the various layers of regulations. It is up to local regulators to comply with European Union rules and banking authority guidelines or explain why they are not complying. Every British regulator, including the Prudential Regulation Authority, disagrees with the bonus cap, and the P.R.A. approved many of the allowances. Iit is up to the P.R.A., as a local regulator, to decide whether the banks violated European laws in paying the allowances.”Apart from the peer pressure, the only way to force countries to act on allowances would be the commission-led breach of E.U. law procedure, which is highly unlikely,” said Jean-Franςois Gerard, an employment lawyer at Freshfields.Complicating matters are the P.R.A.’s own set of pay requirements. For example, although the European law says that at least 40 percent of variable pay should be deferred for at least three to five years, and 50 percent should be paid out in instruments like shares (and more of both for more senior management), the P.R.A. has added rules saying that bonuses, vested and not, can be clawed back for up to seven years.The European Banking Authority also said it would submit to the European Union a recommendation that waivers be allowed for smaller and simpler organizations whose pay is not based on bonuses. “The E.B.A. is of the view that specific exemptions could be introduced for certain institutions that do not rely extensively on variable remuneration,” the authority said in a news release.Advertisement