By DAVID JOLLYMARCH 4, 2015
PARIS — Areva, the struggling French nuclear giant, said on Wednesday that it would embark on a major cost-cutting plan to bring its finances in order as it braced for another difficult year in 2015.“We have to cut our costs and master the difficult projects that penalize us financially,” Philippe Knoche, the chief executive of the state-controlled company, told a news conference in Paris.Areva is a world leader in its field, with businesses stretching from producing and recycling nuclear fuel to designing and building reactors. But its core business has experienced faltering demand since the March 2011 nuclear disaster in Fukushima, Japan, even while the company makes a big bet on new reactor technology.Mr. Knoche, who stepped up last year after his predecessor, Luc Oursel, became ill and died, said the company would refocus on its core nuclear business; expand ties with its larger partner EDF, the French state-controlled nuclear power company; and build its presence in China, the world’s fastest-growing market for nuclear energy.AdvertisementAreva also reported a 2014 loss of 4.8 billion euros, or nearly $5.4 billion, compared with a €500 million loss a year earlier. Sales came in at €8.3 billion, down 8 percent. The results were in line with expectations after the company last week rushed out a preliminary report in the wake of news media speculation about its finances.AdvertisementThe loss came as the company wrote down assets by €1.5 billion and took a €1.1 billion charge on three nuclear projects. It also wrote off €938 million of deferred tax assets that it has recognized are now worthless.Mr. Knoche said that he expected sales to fall as much as 5 percent this year. The company will sell €430 million of assets, including in renewable energy, and will scale back investment and seek bank financing to help close the gap, he said.Cost cuts, including a freeze on salaries and wages, would also yield about €1 billion in savings annually by 2017, he said, helping the company to have a positive cash flow in 2018. Mr. Knoche declined to estimate if any jobs would be lost as Areva scaled back, saying negotiations with employee representatives were just beginning. But he said any layoffs would be done on a voluntary basis.Areva had more than 45,000 employees worldwide at the end of 2013, more than two-thirds of them in France.Areva’s net debt soared as its financial position deteriorated, rising 30 percent last year to €5.8 billion. Its market value, in contrast, is just €3.6 billion. The company’s shares fell nearly 0.5 percent by midday Wednesday in Paris trading.The company’s financial difficulties have led to widespread speculation that the government of President François Hollande will have to ride to the rescue, either by injecting new capital or by arranging an alliance with EDF, which is the dominant power utility in France and the world’s biggest operator of nuclear plants. The state owns about 87 percent of Areva and about 85 percent of EDF, formerly known as Électricité de France.The government on Wednesday made clear its continued support for Areva, saying in a statement that “the French nuclear industry is essential for the sovereignty and energy independence of our country,” and that the government, as the company’s largest shareholder, “places the highest importance on Areva, an essential player in this industry.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For his part, Mr. Knoche sought to cool news media speculation of a near-term restructuring of the nuclear sector, saying that all current discussions with EDF concerned operational, not financial, matters, echoing comments made last month by the EDF chairman and chief executive, Jean-Bernard Lévy. ​Mr. Knoche said he would have more to say on the subject before Areva’s midyear results were issued in July.AdvertisementLike its peers, Areva has been hurt by the post-Fukushima backlash against atomic power, including Chancellor Angela Merkel’s decision to stop all German nuclear plants by 2022.But many of Areva’s problems are self-inflicted. The company bet its future on reactor technology called EPR, but no such project is yet operating and it has turned out to be too expensive for many of the developing nations that are still in the market.The most advanced EPR project, the Olkiluoto 3 in Finland, is tied up in lawsuits over delays and cost overruns and may not go online until the end of the decade, more than 10 years behind schedule. A €720 million provision against losses on that project contributed to the big net loss announced by Areva on Wednesday. The company has now taken more than €4 billion of charges against the Finnish project.Another EPR project at Flamanville, in northern France, is also facing major delays. And the outlook for a near-term start to construction on an ambitious project in Britain, the Hinkley Point C nuclear power station, is looking tenuous.Mr. Knoche defended EPR, saying “its design and safety have never been questioned, in spite of its problems.” He said Areva had learned a great deal from the projects now underway and was using that feedback and experience to improve the design.Areva is also still feeling the hangover of mistakes made by a former chief executive, Anne Lauvergeon, who badly overpaid for a Canadian mining company, Uramin, in 2007; Areva later had to write down the investment by an estimated €1.9 billion. Standard & Poor’s cut Areva’s debt rating to junk late last year.There was one bright spot in Areva’s results: Its order backlog rose 13 percent last year, to €46.9 billion.Still, Mark Hibbs, a Berlin-based nuclear analyst at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, said the market for new reactors in the West “may be in recession for a decade.”While Areva remains dominant in a stagnant European market, Mr. Hibbs said, the future may belong to others, amid “stiff competition from the U.S., maybe Russia, and certainly China, which keeps upgrading its French-based technology and can offer financing and lower construction costs.”Stanley Reed contributed reporting from London.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.