By CHAD BRAYMARCH 4, 2015
LONDON — The British government said on Wednesday that it had agreed to sell its 40 percent stake in Eurostar International, which operates high-speed trains connecting London with Paris and Brussels through a tunnel under the English Channel, for about 757 million pounds, or $1.16 billion.A consortium that includes Caisse de Dépôt et Placement du Québec, which manages public pension funds in Quebec, and Hermes Infrastructure, a unit of the British fund manager Hermes Investment Management, will pay £585.1 million for the British government’s stake. Eurostar will also redeem preference shares held by the government for £172 million after the sale closes, which is expected in the second quarter of this year.“It’s great that we have reached an agreement to sell the U.K.’s shareholding in Eurostar that delivers a fantastic deal for U.K. taxpayers that exceeds expectations,” George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, said in a news release.Eurostar, which began service in 1994, operates up to 19 round trips a day between London and Paris and 10 round trips a day between London and Brussels.AdvertisementS.N.C.F., the French state-owned railway operator, owns 55 percent of Eurostar, and S.N.C.B., the Belgian national rail company, holds 5 percent. S.N.C.F. runs the rail service and will continue to do so after the sale.AdvertisementThe French and Belgian operators did not participate in the bidding process, which began in October. They have the right to acquire shares at a 15 percent premium over the final bid, but they are not expected to exercise that option.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The sale is subject to regulatory approval and to S.N.C.F. and S.N.C.B. not exercising their rights to acquire the shares.Eurostar transported 10.4 million people in 2014 and posted revenue of £867 million in 2014.The sale of its Eurostar stake is the latest in a push by the government to put Britain on more solid financial footing through asset sales and reductions in public services.Mr. Osborne is proposing the sale of a variety of government-owned assets and entities by 2020, in hopes of raising £20 billion.The British government plans to use the proceeds from the sale of the Eurostar stake and other government assets to reduce the country’s public debt.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.