By CHAD BRAYMARCH 4, 2015
LONDON — The British bank Standard Chartered, which generates most of its earnings in Asia, said on Wednesday that profit fell 37 percent in 2014. It cited higher charges for bad loans and other credit risks, an accounting charge on its Korean business, and a previously announced settlement with the United States authorities.But Peter Sands, the bank’s departing chief executive, said that the lender had sacrificed some profit as it moved to cut costs, reshape its operations and focus on less risky businesses.The bank said it was targeting cost reductions of $1.8 billion over the next three years, would cut another 2,000 jobs in its retail operations this year and would further reduce the risk in its loan portfolios and business lines. The lender cut 2,000 jobs in its retail operations in 2014.Standard Chartered also disposed of 15 underperforming and nonstrategic businesses, or is in the process of exiting them.AdvertisementLast week, Standard Chartered announced that it planned to shake up its leadership, which included the departures of Mr. Sands, who had been chief executive since 2006; its chairman; and several long-serving directors.Advertisement“I leave Standard Chartered proud of what we have achieved and confident about what the future holds for this extraordinary institution,” Mr. Sands said in a news release.The bank has brought on William T. Winters, the former head of JPMorgan Chase’s investment bank, as its new chief executive. He is expected take over in June.The lender’s bonus pool for 2014 was down 9 percent from 2013 and 27 percent from 2011, said John W. Peace, the Standard Chartered chairman.Mr. Sands said he and other executive directors who serve on the bank’s board of directors would not be taking bonuses this year.For the year ended Dec. 31, Standard Chartered, based in London, said profit declined to $2.51 billion from $3.99 billion in 2013.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bank said that impairments for loans and other credit risks had jumped 33 percent to $2.14 billion in 2014, from $1.62 billion in the prior year.The bank also took a $726 million good-will impairment, a noncash charge, related to its Korean business, after a $1 billion write-down in the prior year.The bank levy, an annual fee by the British government charged to banks operating in the country, rose 56 percent to $366 million.AdvertisementIn August, Standard Chartered also agreed to pay a $300 million fine as part of a settlement with the New York State Department of Financial Services after its computer systems failed to flag wire transfers from areas of the world considered vulnerable to money laundering. This came after a $667 million penalty imposed by state and federal authorities in 2012.The bank’s operating income, which is similar to revenue in the United States, declined 2 percent to $18.2 billion in 2014 from $18.7 billion in the prior year.Underlying pretax profit, which excludes the settlement, the good-will impairment and other costs, declined 25 percent to $5.2 billion in 2014 from $6.9 billion in the prior year.Expenses rose 5 percent to $10.7 billion, including $181 million in restructuring charges as well as increased spending to respond to regulatory and conduct matters.For example, the bank carried out a financial crime risk mitigation program intended to strengthen its internal controls.In its corporate and institutional client segment, its largest business line, operating income declined 2 percent to $10.4 billion. In its retail business, operating income rose nearly 2 percent to $6 billion.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.