By JONATHAN SOBLEMARCH 4, 2015
TOKYO — Toyota Motor on Wednesday appointed a Frenchman to the position of executive vice president, the most senior job at the carmaker after the president and the chairman, and the highest rank to which a non-Japanese has risen in its history.It also appointed a woman to a senior executive role, that of managing officer, for the first time.Toyota’s top ranks have long been dominated by managers who have spent decades at the company — inevitably men and, in the most senior positions, inevitably Japanese. The latest promotions were aimed at creating more diversity, the company said.“By appointing talented people from affiliates outside Japan to executive positions, Toyota aims to foster innovation by enabling people from many different backgrounds to contribute and provide input,” it said in a statement.The French executive, Didier Leroy, will be one of six executive vice presidents reporting to Akio Toyoda, Toyota’s president and chief executive. Mr. Leroy joined Toyota in 1998 from Renault, the French automaker, and was put in charge of Toyota’s European operations in 2010.AdvertisementToyota’s first female senior executive, Julie Hamp, is also a foreigner — an American who oversees public relations at the automaker’s North American division. She joined Toyota from PepsiCo in 2012. In another first, she is being promoted alongside Toyota’s highest-ranking African-American official, Christopher Reynolds, the company’s general counsel in North America.Toyota has been edging away from its tradition of management uniformity since Mr. Toyoda, the grandson of the company’s founder, took over as president in 2009.AdvertisementIn 2010, after a series of embarrassing safety recalls, Mr. Toyoda promoted a group of North Americans and Europeans to run some operations outside Japan that had previously been overseen by Japanese expatriates. The operations included the European division headed by Mr. Leroy as well as two major factories in the United States, in Texas and Indiana.The intention, Toyota said at the time, was to give local managers more autonomy and a more direct pipeline to executives in Japan so warnings about potential quality problems could be transmitted to headquarters more quickly.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The latest changes will take Mr. Toyoda’s experiment in diversity a step further, if not exactly to a demographic tipping point. Of Toyota’s current crop of 57 senior executives and board members, seven are citizens of a country other than Japan, and none are women.The promotions will take effect on April 1, Toyota said.Mr. Leroy will be one of three new executive vice presidents at the company, which has typically had six or seven people in that role at any given time. The others are Takahiko Ijichi, a former finance executive who currently runs a Toyota-affiliated real estate company, and Shigeki Terashi, Toyota’s head of research and corporate planning.Three current executive vice presidents are retiring: Satoshi Ozawa, Masamoto Maekawa and Yasumori Ihara.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Toyota Names a Frenchman and a Woman to Senior Jobs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.