AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelJerome Kurtz, who as commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service during the Carter administration was known for cracking down on tax shelters and other tax advantages for the wealthy, died on Friday in Manhattan. He was 83.The cause was complications of surgery, his family said.Considered one of the leading tax policy experts of his time, Mr. Kurtz advocated what he called “horizontal equity” in taxation, meaning that people should be taxed equally based on what they earn, regardless of the source of the money.“Income is income, whether it comes from capital gains or a salary,” he was quoted as saying in a 1977 article in The New York Times on his taking office as I.R.S. commissioner. “People should be assessed according to their ability to pay.”Mr. Kurtz drew criticism from some quarters for a series of major policy proposals. Wealthy taxpayers were angered by his efforts to eliminate tax shelters, like investments in master phonograph recordings and coal. Businessmen were angered by his scrutiny of deductions for travel and business lunches.He also moved to enforce regulations that had eliminated the tax-exempt status of racially segregated private schools — a stand that brought him death threats requiring Secret Service protection, according to his daughter Madeleine. The Reagan administration later overturned the regulations. Mr. Kurtz was quoted in The Times as calling the new policy “outrageous and clearly contrary to the law, a reversal of years and years of precedent.”Several of Mr. Kurtz’s principles of tax equity were reflected in later policy initiatives, culminating with the Tax Reform Act of 1986, said William Rosoff, a longtime friend and associate. “From the standpoint of overall philosophy, it has gotten undermined in the last number of years, but it is always a back and forth depending on the administration,” he said.Born in Philadelphia on May 19, 1931, Jerome Kurtz was the second of two sons. His father died when he was a year old, and he was raised by his grandmother and his mother, who worked as a bookkeeper. Mr. Kurtz graduated from Temple University in 1952 and from Harvard Law School in 1955.In 1956, he married Elaine Etta Kahn, an artist, and started a two-year stint in the Army. Mr. Kurtz had joined the law firm Wolf, Block, Schorr & Solis-Cohen in 1955 and returned to the firm after serving in the Army.In 1966, he was recruited to the Treasury Department to work as a tax legislative counsel by the tax law scholar Stanley Surrey, who had taught Mr. Kurtz at Harvard and had a major influence on his philosophy toward tax policy, Mr. Rosoff said.Mr. Kurtz returned to Wolf, Block in 1968. He was also a lecturer on taxation at Villanova Law School and the University of Pennsylvania and a visiting professor at Harvard Law School.After leaving the I.R.S. in 1980, Mr. Kurtz went on to work as a partner in the Washington office of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison. He was later a professor at New York University Law School, where he led its graduate tax program, and continued to do consulting work after he retired.Mr. Kurtz’s survivors include his daughters, Madeleine Kurtz and Nettie Kurtz Greenstein, and four grandchildren. His wife died in 2003.Madeleine Kurtz said her father’s philosophies on tax policy stemmed from an innate sense of fairness. “He would say doing what is fair is what is right,” she said.Advertisement