By ANDREW POLLACKMARCH 5, 2015
Robert Duggan, according to his many websites, has played basketball with Pat Riley of the N.B.A., taught his children to surf by the time they were 3 and made fortunes starting and selling companies in fields as varied as cookies and robot surgery. He is the largest donor to the Church of Scientology.Now Mr. Duggan, 70, has something to add to the list. He is selling Pharmacyclics, the publicly traded cancer drug company he rescued, to the drug maker AbbVie for $21 billion.The amount stunned Wall Street, pushed aside one of the giants of the pharmaceutical sector, Johnson & Johnson, and set off a debate about whether AbbVie had paid too much.Pharmacyclics’ crown jewel — and its only marketed product — is the drug Imbruvica, a treatment for chronic lymphocytic leukemia and two other, rarer blood cancers. The drug, approved in late 2013, is considered a breakthrough. Analysts predict that sales could eventually grow to several billion dollars a year.AdvertisementStrategically, the deal seems to make sense for AbbVie. The company now receives more than 60 percent of its sales from the autoimmune disease drug Humira, which will face competition from near-generic versions in the next few years. AbbVie needs new popular drugs to maintain growth, and Imbruvica could fit that bill.AdvertisementStill, at least some analysts said the company had paid too much.“The feedback I’ve gotten so far has been overwhelmingly negative,” said Mark Schoenebaum, a pharmaceutical analyst at Evercore ISI, who surveyed institutional investors on Thursday. “People say it kind of makes AbbVie look desperate.”AbbVie’s shares fell 5.7 percent on Thursday, closing at $56.86.The deal, announced on Wednesday night, came after a bidding war and valued Pharmacyclics at $261.25 a share. That is more than double the stock price at the start of 2015, and well above the $230.48 it closed at on Wednesday.In 2011, Gilead Sciences agreed to pay $11 billion to buy a company that was developing what became the hepatitis C drug Sovaldi. Sovaldi recorded an astonishing $10.3 billion in sales last year, its first full year on the market.By contrast, AbbVie is paying almost twice as much for Pharmacyclics, but it is obtaining a drug that is expected to have about $1 billion in sales this year, its second full year on the market. (AbbVie assumed less risk than Gilead because Imbruvica is already on the market, while Sovaldi was still in clinical trials when Gilead obtained it.)AbbVie, however, will own only half of Imbruvica, splitting marketing and profits with Johnson & Johnson, Pharmacyclics’s partner.For several days, Johnson & Johnson was considered the most likely acquirer of Pharmacyclics, and there were erroneous news reports on Wednesday before the markets closed that it had won the bidding. But AbbVie stepped in with a higher bid, according to people briefed on the matter.AbbVie executives suggested on a conference call with securities analysts that they were assuming Imbruvica could eventually exceed $11 billion in annual sales, higher than most analysts expected and better than any cancer drug has done. The top-selling cancer drugs now, Roche’s Rituxan, Avastin and Herceptin, have about $7 billion each in annual sales.AdvertisementRichard A. Gonzalez, AbbVie’s chief executive, defended the price on the conference call.“I’m happy with the value,” he said, saying the deal would add to the company’s earnings per share starting in 2017.He said there had been multiple bidders and multiple rounds of bidding, with three companies in the running until the end.“Imbruvica represents a pipeline in a molecule, much like Humira did,” Mr. Gonzalez said, meaning that Imbruvica might be used for many different cancers. Humira has become the world’s best-selling drug, with sales of $12.5 billion last year, partly because it is used to treat various diseases including rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and ulcerative colitis.AbbVie is not really a presence in the cancer drug market but has made that market a priority, particularly blood cancers. It is in late-stage development of a compound called ABT-199, which it shares with Roche, and it recently licensed rights to another experimental drug from Infinity Pharmaceuticals. AbbVie hopes those two drugs and Imbruvica can be used in combination.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The high price of Pharmacyclics was energizing for the biotechnology industry, setting off speculation on which company would be acquired next by a drug maker needing new products.The pharmaceutical industry “continues to be willing to pay whatever price it has to in order to secure the asset it feels it just has to have,” Simos Simeonidis, a biotech analyst at RBC Capital Markets, wrote in a note to investors on Thursday. He titled the note: “I Wish I Knew How to Quit You,” saying there was “no end in sight for the pharma/biotech romance.”Mr. Duggan’s stake of around 18 percent in Pharmacyclics is now worth more than $3.5 billion at the price AbbVie is paying.His drug company’s change in fortunes alone is remarkable. In 2008, Pharmacyclics’s share price fell below $1 after it became clear that a brain cancer drug it had developed would not win regulatory approval. Mr. Duggan invested in the company because he had lost a son to brain cancer. That year, most of the board resigned, clearing the way for him to become chief executive.The company’s salvation came from a group of compounds it had acquired in 2006 from Celera Genomics, a DNA sequencing company that briefly toyed with developing drugs. One of those compounds became Imbruvica. Pharmacyclics paid only $6.6 million in cash and stock to Celera, plus promises of future payments and royalties. (Celera was acquired by Quest Diagnostics, which sold rights to Imbruvica royalties for $485 million.)AdvertisementA spokeswoman for Pharmacyclics said Mr. Duggan was not available for an interview on Thursday. But in a 2013 interview, Mr. Duggan said that Imbruvica, a pill, was successful because it was “patient friendly.” He said that in his previous job, running Computer Motion, a robotic surgery company that became part of Intuitive Surgical, “I learned firsthand the power of being an ally of the patient.”Mr. Duggan studied economics and business at the University of California in Santa Barbara and Los Angeles but did not graduate. He became an investor and venture capitalist, starting and running many companies.Former Pharmacyclics employees say Mr. Duggan is an aggressive manager who moved quickly to develop and market Imbruvica. Some praised him, but others said he could be brusque and intimidating.Many employees at the drug company participate in a program in which they assess the traits that they and their co-workers possess that give them the potential to be geniuses.Mr. Duggan and his wife, Trish, have given money to organizations including the University of California, Santa Barbara, where they met, and programs for helping drug addicts quit.Both follow the philosophies of L. Ron Hubbard, the founder of the Church of Scientology, and they have given tens of millions of dollars to it. In the 2013 interview, Mr. Duggan brushed off criticism of the organization.“What religion isn’t controversial in its start?” he asked. “I’ve clearly benefited from the philosophy, so it’s been a two-way street.” He said the church had taught him to “make a difference for the better,” adding that the company “launched a drug that, for patients in need, really truly makes a difference.”William Alden contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: AbbVie Wins Bidding War, Then Goes on Defensive.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.