AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberThe falling price of Bitcoin has not entirely quashed investor enthusiasm for the virtual currency.The United States Marshals Service said on Thursday that 14 registered bidders took part in an auction for 50,000 Bitcoins, worth about $14 million, that were seized in connection with the online bazaar Silk Road. The service said it received 34 total bids, slightly more than the 27 bids it received from 11 bidders at its second auction in December, which was also for 50,000 Bitcoins.The winner or winners of the auction will be notified by 5 p.m. on Friday.The latest auction was for Bitcoins seized from computer hardware belonging to Ross Ulbricht, who was convicted in Federal District Court in Manhattan in February on charges related to the operation and ownership of Silk Road. The website was shut down in October 2013 after the authorities said it was an online bazaar for illegal drugs and other illicit activities.The format of the third auction mimicked that of the previous auction in December. Bidders had six hours, from 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Thursday, to submit sealed bids for the coins, which the Marshals Service had broken into several blocks. The first series contained 10 blocks of 2,000 Bitcoins, while the second contained 10 blocks of 3,000 Bitcoins. Bidders could participate in both series and bid on multiple blocks.The auction generated little of the attention that accompanied the government’s first auction in June, when it sold nearly 30,000 Bitcoins. At the time, Bitcoin was enjoying a speculative boom that had sent its price to about $1,150 at the end of 2013. Although the price of one Bitcoin had since fallen, to about $570 at the start of the first auction, investors were still willing to bet heavily on the currency. With the auction, the government also legitimized Bitcoin in the eyes of its supporters, fueling a sense of optimism and driving even casual Bitcoin users to participate. Forty-five bidders took part in the first auction.Since then, however, the price of Bitcoin has tumbled. At the start of the second auction in December, Bitcoin was trading at about $370, dissuading many investors from submitting bids. Participation in the auction fell drastically compared with the first auction, raising questions about investor appetite for Bitcoin.Bitcoin is now trading at about $280, up from about $200 earlier this year.But while the Bitcoin frenzy appears to have subsided, the fact that the latest auction had more bidders than the one in December should provide some hope to Bitcoin supporters. One bidder, SecondMarket, an upstart exchange that nearly swept the second Bitcoin auction, participated in the sale on Thursday on behalf of its trading division. The investment firm Pantera Capital said on its website that it would create a syndicate for the auction but declined to comment on Thursday on whether it had participated.In total, the government has recovered 173,991 Bitcoins, meaning it still has a fairly significant amount of coins to sell. Lynzey Donahue, a spokeswoman for the Marshals Service, wrote in an email that the service anticipated selling the 44,341 remaining Bitcoins “in the coming months” but that “no exact dates have been determined.”Advertisement