AdvertisementSupported byBy Landon Thomas Jr.Thomas E. Faust Jr. does not come across as an industry disrupter. He is the chief executive of Eaton Vance, a midsize fund company in Boston that has carved out a solid yet unspectacular niche as a provider of investment funds and advice.But since last November, when his company won regulatory approval for a new fund vehicle that seeks to marry the best features of active and passive investing, Mr. Faust has been arguing that the mutual fund industry — or stock-picking funds at least — must either embrace his model or die.“We are changing the social contract with mutual fund investors,” said Mr. Faust, who was in New York this week to make his case to asset managers and investment advisers that his way is the future of the business. “This really can be transformational.”Mr. Faust is focusing on the $10 trillion that investors entrust to mutual funds run by portfolio managers who think they can outsmart the market by picking their own mix of stocks and bonds. Of late, though, the market has been outsmarting them. Last year was the worst one for active managers in quite some time.According to Morningstar, 74 percent of equity mutual funds lagged behind their benchmark index. Bond investors fared a bit better, but even so, 65 percent missed their target index. Upset with poor performance and management fees of 1.5 percent and above, investors have been switching to low-cost index trackers, with so-called exchange-traded funds leading the way.These funds trade like stocks and provide exposure to a basket of stocks or bonds that can track a broad index like the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index or a riskier asset slice like leveraged loans or Indian stocks.Investors, from retirees to sophisticated hedge funds, are drawn to the low fees, limited tax consequences and freedom to trade at will. Then there is the transparency: The portfolio of assets is available for all to see all the time.Over the last 20 years, exchange-traded assets have rocketed from negligible levels to $2 trillion.Eaton Vance’s innovation is to take this structure and introduce it to active fund management.So instead of an exchange-traded fund tracking an index, Eaton Vance could, for example, offer one directed by a portfolio manager who specializes in United States growth stocks.Unlike a traditional exchange-traded fund though — and this is the company’s special twist — the new vehicle would not have to disclose its daily basket of stocks, a crucial concern for managers who worry about speculators getting in front of their trades.“I really believe it’s a more efficient structure,” said Mr. Faust, a former equity research analyst who became chief executive of the firm in 2007. “Now, all we need is for the asset managers and the broker dealers to embrace it.”Because it took four years for Eaton Vance, which oversees $295 billion in assets, to receive approval from the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr. Faust is not expecting another firm to come up with a better model. In fact, the S.E.C. rejected a competing idea backed by the fund giant BlackRock and others last year.Eaton Vance is aiming to introduce 18 of what it calls NextShare funds later this year, but in Mr. Faust’s view, the real money to be made is by licensing the company’s technology to other fund companies.“What is 5 basis points of $10 trillion?” he mused, referring to the 0.05 percent charge of overall assets that funds using the structure would pay to Eaton Vance. That, he said, would be more or less equal to the company’s stock market value, which is about $5 billion.To Mr. Faust’s point, after the fund’s approval was disclosed, shares of Eaton Vance soared 20 percent in a day as investors bet that the innovation would transform the company.Still, the asset-management industry can be slow to change, and there is no guarantee that it will rush to adopt an untried model being trumpeted by a competitor. Moreover, analysts say, exchanges like Nasdaq as well as broker dealers will have to make significant investments to accommodate the new funds.“There are a lot of operational hurdles for them to clear,” said Dave Nadig, a specialist at ETF.com, an industry research firm based in San Francisco. “That is a lot of work to do for just one product from one company.”True enough, Mr. Faust concedes.But, he insists, the clock is ticking for the old-style mutual fund as performance suffers and assets flee to index-tracking exchange-traded funds.“If the industry does not do this,” he said, “a lot of people will be out of jobs.”Advertisement