By NEIL GOUGHMARCH 5, 2015
HONG KONG — The private equity group CVC Capital Partners and other investors have raised about $750 million by selling down their shares in HKBN, a broadband Internet provider, in Hong Kong’s biggest initial public offering so far this year.HKBN is a rare, yield-driven play on Hong Kong’s domestic economy. It is the city’s second-biggest residential broadband provider behind HKT, which is controlled by Richard Li, the son of Asia’s richest man, Li Ka-shing.CVC, based in London, joined with the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation, known as G.I.C., and AlpInvest Partners, a Dutch private equity firm owned by the Carlyle Group, to collectively sell a 64 percent stake in HKBN to the public. The I.P.O. raised 5.8 billion Hong Kong dollars, or $748 million, after it priced on Thursday at 9 Hong Kong dollars per share, the top of the marketed range, according to two people with direct knowledge of the matter who declined to be identified because the information was not public.After a few lackluster years, Hong Kong’s I.P.O. market bounced back in 2014, thanks to several large deals, including the $3.7 billion listing of Dalian Wanda Commercial Properties in December.AdvertisementThis year got off to a slow start, with several smaller deals being priced but activity generally suppressed around the Lunar New Year holiday in February.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Now, bankers in Hong Kong say the market for new listings is showing signs of picking up, with several other, larger I.P.O.s, including a number of midtier Chinese banks and brokerage firms, planning potential share sales.AdvertisementHKBN and its backers have positioned its offering as a yield-based play, with the company promising to pay out at least 90 percent of adjusted free cash flow as dividends to its new shareholders. That was attractive enough to lure the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board, which manages the retirement funds of 18 million Canadians, as a major investor, paying 1.5 billion Hong Kong dollars for a 17 percent stake in HKBN.Following the I.P.O., CVC’s stake in HKBN will decline to 14 percent from 68 percent. The stake held by Singapore’s G.I.C. will slip to 10 percent from 11 percent, while AlpInvest’s stake will be reduced to less than 2 percent, down from 8 percent.Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase and UBS were the sponsors and main underwriters of the deal, while Rothschild was the financial adviser for HKBN.A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.