By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINMARCH 6, 2015
A private investigator who has done work for small New York City law firms that specialize in personal injury and medical malpractice litigation pleaded guilty on Friday in federal court in Manhattan to one charge of conspiracy in hiring a hacker to help with his investigation.The guilty plea, by Eric Saldarriaga, an investigator from Queens, stems from an inquiry by federal prosecutors and the Federal Bureau of Investigation into the so-called hacker-for-hire business. Mr. Saldarriaga entered his plea before Judge Richard J. Sullivan of Federal District Court in Manhattan.In the court proceeding and a five-page “criminal information” charge, the clients of Mr. Saldarriaga were not identified. The charge said Mr. Saldarriaga, 41, operated under the alias “Emmanuela Gelpi” in seeking out the services of hackers to help him gain “unauthorized access” to at least 60 email accounts.Under the plea agreement, he could be sentenced to six months in prison. A sentencing date was set for June 26.AdvertisementMr. Saldarriaga had been cooperative with authorities for several months, people briefed on the matter said.AdvertisementThe investigation of Mr. Saldarriaga and his company, Iona Research and Security Services, could now turn attention onto some of his clients, assuming they were aware he was hiring hackers to break into email accounts. In a posting on an older Yahoo message board used by private investigators, Mr. Saldarriaga said his company did work for about 20 law firms.In recent years, federal authorities across the United States have begun focusing on private investigation services that work with hackers-for-hire to illegally gain access to email and social media accounts to gather information for investigations. Authorities are concerned that some lawyers might be working with hackers, either directly or indirectly, to obtain information that could be helpful in representing a client or preparing for trial.Last month, federal prosecutors in San Francisco, in an unrelated case, announced the indictment of two private investigators and two computer hackers on charges that they had illegally entered email and Skype accounts to gather information for matters they were working on for clients. Some of the illegally gathered information was intended to support a lawsuit, authorities said. In that case, there has been no indication that the private investigators were working on behalf of a particular law firm.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In February, The New York Times reported that prosecutors working for Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, were close to securing a guilty plea from a private investigator who had hired others to do illegal computer hacking for him. That private investigator has now been identified as Mr. Saldarriaga.Mr. Saldarriaga began seeking the services of hackers-for-hire in 2009 and up until March 2014, the criminal complaint said. His case is loosely related to another inquiry that led to a New York City police officer pleading guilty in federal court in 2013 to charges that he had paid a company to hack into the email accounts of some colleagues.In that case, Edwin Vargas, who was a detective at the time, was accused of paying $4,000 to an unidentified firm to hack into the email accounts of 43 people, including current and former New York police officers. Mr. Vargas, who was sentenced last year to four months in prison, wanted to determine whether any of his colleagues were dating a former girlfriend.Peter Brill, who represented Mr. Vargas, is also the lawyer for Mr. Saldarriaga. He declined to comment on Friday after the court proceeding.The criminal complaint said Mr. Saldarriaga had illegally gained access to the accounts of people to either gather information for his clients or for his own personal use.The website for Mr. Saldarriaga’s firm says it can perform tasks like Internet profiling, email tracing and computer monitoring. The website also said Iona Research specialized in criminal and insurance claims investigations.AdvertisementMatthew L. Schwartz, a former federal prosecutor in Manhattan and now a lawyer with the firm Boies Schiller & Flexner, said that the guilty plea from Mr. Saldarriaga was another indication of how commonplace hacking has become and that federal authorities’ prosecution of cybercrime is not “limited to terrorists” and state-sponsored hackers.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Investigator Admits Guilt in Hiring of a Hacker.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.