By RAPHAEL MINDERMARCH 6, 2015
MADRID — CaixaBank of Spain said on Friday that it would push ahead with a takeover bid for the Portuguese bank BPI, even after BPI’s board rejected its offer of about 1.08 billion euros and one of BPI’s largest investors urged it to consider another merger plan.CaixaBank said it had no intention of sweetening its offer but would instead pursue its existing bid “until completion.”In an attempt to derail the CaixaBank plan — or at least force the Spanish bank to raise its bid — a representative of Isabel dos Santos, the daughter of the president of Angola and the second-largest investor in BPI, sent a letter on Monday to the chief executives of BPI and Millennium BCP, a larger Portuguese bank, urging them to merge. BCP said it would analyze such a proposal if BPI was also willing to do so.On Thursday, BPI’s board further weakened CaixaBank’s position by recommending that its shareholders reject its bid as too low.AdvertisementOn Friday, however, CaixaBank said in a regulatory filing that it could not consider a Portuguese merger deal “whose terms have not yet been presented.” CaixaBank said it had “the will and obligation” to complete its own deal.AdvertisementLast month, CaixaBank, based in Barcelona, began its bid for a full takeover of BPI. It already owns a 44.1 percent stake. CaixaBank’s cash offer valued BPI at 1.94 billion euros ($2.4 billion), equivalent to €1.329 euros a share for the 55.9 percent of BPI that it does not own. BPI shares closed at €1.52 on Friday, extending their rally since Tuesday, when BCP confirmed that it had been approached by Ms. dos Santos, one of Africa’s wealthiest businesswomen.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Thursday, after its board meeting, BPI said that a bid should value the company at least at 2.04 euros a share, or 2.26 euros if synergies from a takeover were included. Even though CaixaBank is BPI’s largest shareholder, it did not take part in the board’s discussion of its bid, under Portuguese rules that forbid interested parties from attending.Ms. dos Santos owns 18.6 percent of BPI through an investment company called Santoro Finance. As Portugal sank into a long recession during the euro debt crisis, she extended her influence in Portugal with investments in industries like finance and energy. Late last year, she also briefly threatened to derail a telecommunications deal between Oi, a Brazilian operator, and Altice, over the sale of a Portuguese business.To justify her latest intervention, Ms. dos Santos argued that CaixaBank’s bid undervalued BPI. She also said her merger plan would allow the two banks not only to dominate their domestic market but also to build up their presence in the parts of Africa where Portuguese is spoken.Any merger between BPI and BCP, however, could raise significant antitrust concerns in Portugal. The fighting over BPI could also affect the Portuguese government’s attempt to complete the cleanup of the country’s banking industry by auctioning Novo Banco, which was formed in August to salvage the healthy assets of Banco Espírito Santo. BPI was expected to be among the bidders for Novo Banco.CaixaBank is among the few cajas, or savings banks, to have emerged unscathed from Spain’s banking crisis. It recently expanded its presence in the Iberian Peninsula by taking over the Spanish business of Barclays Bank.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.