AdvertisementSupported byBy Ian AustenOTTAWA — Brewers Retail has sold beer pretty much the same way since it opened 88 years ago.At an older store in the downtown neighborhood of Glebe here, shoppers make their selection from a dizzying wall display of more than 300 slightly oversize beer labels. Their orders are dispatched to a windowless warehouse attached to the store. The beer then pops out of a small hole in the wall and clatters down steel rollers for pickup.“Ontario’s kind of puritanical when it comes to this stuff,” said Nick Lea, after buying 15 bottles of Sleeman Original Draught.The antiquated retail system, which accounts for the bulk of sales in the province, is at the center of the beer wars in Ontario.Small breweries and retailers are pushing to break the company’s grip on beer sales. Consumers want better prices and more convenient shopping. And the government is looking for more money.Similar fights are playing out across the globe, as craft and independent brewers jockey for space alongside behemoth brands. It is just more intense in Ontario, given the industry’s unorthodox system.A remnant of post-Prohibition rules, Brewers Retail, which now brands its 466 shops as the Beer Store, basically controls the market for beer, with 80 percent of sales in the province. The company began as a cooperative with local Ontario brewers. Now, the quasi-monopoly is owned by three of world’s leading players: Anheuser-Busch InBev, Molson Coors and Sapporo Breweries.Small brewers say the system perpetuates the market dominance of the big brands.Moosehead Breweries, an independent beer maker, sells more beer at Brewers Retail than other stores. But Moosehead’s president, Andrew Oland, is critical of the limited opportunity to promote his brands at stores. The customer experience, he says, is also lacking.“The older stores — I’m trying to come up with an analogy that doesn’t talk about communism, Russia,” Mr. Oland said from the brewery in St. John, New Brunswick. “Well, it wouldn’t be a consumer experience consistent with the 21st century.”Smaller brewers like Moosehead are now finding an unexpected ally in the government.Facing a severe budget shortfall, Ontario, Canada’s most populous province, is looking for new revenue. That process has raised the prospect that the brewers’ quasi-monopoly may be broken, opening up the province’s $3 billion beer market to other retailers. The province’s Liberal government has promised to introduce major changes to beer sales this spring in its budget.Separately, the country’s competition bureau is comparing how beer is sold in Ontario versus its neighbor Quebec. A spokeswoman for the bureau said officials want to determine “the effect that these differences have on competition in each province.”Brewers Retail, which has long been a generous political donor, defends its business. The company argues that dismantling the system would increase the price of beer and limit selection.“Truth be told, it is a highly, highly cost-efficient model for consumers,” said Stewart Glendinning, the chief executive of Molson Coors Canada. “I know what’s best for consumers. And having seen a wide range of retailing across the world, I can tell you that this is a system that is low-cost and passes that cost along to consumers.”Through television ads, pamphlets and online, Brewers Retail also darkly suggests that beer sales by other retailers will unleash a wave of underage drinking. One Beer Store commercial depicts a middle-aged clerk in a cluttered convenience store joking with three teenagers while they stock up on beer and whisky. “Have fun tonight, boys,” the clerk says as they leave the shop.Over the last nine decades, calls to reform or eliminate Brewers Retail have come and gone. But its hold over the market is now under siege after the Ontario government asked a group of academics and business leaders to look at possible asset sales to raise money.As part of the review, the team, which is headed by Ed Clark, the recently retired chief of Toronto-Dominion Bank, assessed the Liquor Control Board of Ontario, the only other significant beer retailer in the province. Ultimately, the group recommended that the government keep its liquor stores.But it also concluded that the province should be getting more money from the Beer Store. The owners, according to the assessment, significantly benefit from the low cost and tight distribution.In a news conference, Mr. Clark proposed that the Beer Store’s owners pay an annual “franchise fee,” to the government, which they would be banned from passing on through higher prices. The alternative, he said, would be for them to give up what he called a monopoly.One persistent question is whether the low-cost model translates into better prices for consumers. Both sides in the debate have produced elaborate, and contradictory, studies about the overall impact on prices relative to other provinces.But as residents of Ottawa and other places immediately bordering Quebec know, Ontario doesn’t have many beer bargains, particularly on imported beer.In Quebec, beer is more widely available at grocery stores and convenience stores in addition to government liquor stores. Some brands can be significantly cheaper.A case of 24 bottles of Stella Artois, a flagship brand of Anheuser-Busch InBev, sells for 47.95 Canadian dollars, or $38.50, at the Beer Store, sales tax and bottle deposits included. At Costco stores in Quebec, it costs 36.65 Canadian dollars. Alcohol taxes are modestly lower in Quebec, but not enough to account for the difference.Beyond price, craft brewers argue that the Beer Store and its system stymies growth. Depending on who is counting, craft breweries account for about 4 to 6 percent of Ontario’s beer market. In British Columbia, which has a more competitive and convenient beer retailing system, craft beer holds 12 percent of the market.“It’s an arrangement that doesn’t appear to do a whole lot for the consumer,” said Darren Smith, the president and chief executive of the Lake of Bays Brewing in Baysville, Ontario. “If there’s a monopoly, there should be some public good.”Getting a product into the Beer Store is also expensive. There’s an upfront fee of 2,800 Canadian dollars and then an additional charge of 230 Canadian dollars for each store where the brewer wants to sell.For Beyond the Pale, a small brewery in Ottawa, that price of admission is just too high. It is sticking to sales through a small counter at the brewery, direct sales to bars and restaurants and the liquor board.Sitting in an office made of plywood and unpainted lumber, Al Clark, one of the brewery’s founders, said that the Beer Store was “just not on the radar for a small brewery like us.” He would prefer that the government give small brewers permission to open more than one retail store.“It’s really just a barrier to competition there where you’ve got a monopoly to distribute beer that’s given to three international organizations.”Brewers Retail says it is trying to address some of the criticism, particularly around the shopping experience.Mr. Glendinning said the company planned to expand the number of stores with self-service shopping, although he acknowledged that beer remained largely hidden in the back of up to three-quarters of its outlets. He promised iPads would replace the walls of labels in the warehouse-style stores.And, most recently, the Beer Store offered all other breweries the chance to purchase small ownership stakes. The proposal, though, was met largely with indifference from craft brewers.Advertisement