AdvertisementSupported byBy Hannah SeligsonWhen visitors arrive at Art Basel Hong Kong this month, they will be able to explore artwork by Richard Serra, Keith Haring and Ai Weiwei — along with a plethora of luxury brands decked out to show their artistic side.Davidoff, the cigar company, will be on hand selling humidor boxes designed by the French artist Lison de Caunes, at 19,500 euros apiece. There will be also be a hand-painted BMW art car and a lounge space sponsored by Executive Jet Management China, a part of the private aviation company NetJets.Ruinart, the LVMH-owned Champagne company, will operate a bar, along with carts that will weave through the 233 galleries represented, selling glasses of bubbly for about $22. Other brands will be showcased in the Collectors Lounge, a space set aside for companies to market their products.If you include all three fairs — held annually in Miami Beach and Basel, Switzerland, in addition to Hong Kong — Art Basel is the best-attended art event in the world. The Miami fair attracted 73,000 visitors in December; 65,000 people are expected to show up in Hong Kong for the fair, to be held March 15 to 17.When you consider that someone in Miami paid $1.2 million for a work by Richard Prince, you can see why companies want to be part of the Basel action. The wealthy people who buy art at the fair often have plenty more to spend.Competition is stiff for brands seeking sponsorship deals at the fair. “We get approached by companies every week who want to partner with us, and every year that number increases,” said Marc Spiegler, director of Art Basel. There is a sponsorship fee for brands, although he would not disclose specific numbers. “Brands pay more to take part in the fair than galleries,” he said.The bar is high for those seeking sponsorship deals, Mr. Spiegler said, because Art Basel is only looking for companies with “day-to-day engagements with the arts.” So the companies do their best to display their artistry.BMW, the lead automotive sponsor for the fairs, is underwriting Art Journey, an award for emerging artists. The shortlist will be announced during Art Basel Hong Kong. “Our customers are into the arts,” said Ludwig Willisch, chief executive of BMW North America. The company says it spends in the low-two-digit millions a year on collaborations involving the arts, a small fraction of its overall marketing budget.UBS, the lead sponsor of all three fairs, will have a curated selection of its artwork displayed in its dedicated lounge space in Hong Kong. In addition, the bank has two full-time curators who buy art from the Basel fairs (among other places) for its worldwide collection, which already includes thousands of pieces of contemporary art.“Art creates a certain glow around our brand,” said Johan Jervoe, global group chief marketing officer at UBS. He added, however, that there was a concrete return on investment for sponsoring the fairs.The real estate firm Douglas Elliman, too, has seen tangible benefits. In 2013, “around a third of people who came to Douglas Elliman’s first showcase of high-end properties at Art Basel Miami made follow-up appointments to view them in person,” said Adriana PintoTorres, director of luxury sales for Douglas Elliman in Miami. “It was extremely successful,” she said.For others, the payoff is not as direct. “Art is part of corporate social responsibility,” Hans-Kristian Hoejsgaard, chief executive of Oettinger, Davidoff said at a brunch in Miami in December to discuss the Davidoff Art Initiative, focused primarily on contemporary artists in the Dominican Republic and the Caribbean. (A majority of Davidoff’s tobacco is grown in the Dominican Republic.) Consumers recognize art as a credible link to a brand, but it’s not something that shows up in a profit and loss statement, he said.Luxury companies want to be linked to the fair not only because it is a popular destination for the 1 percent, but also because visual artists “represent the intersection of intellectual activity and money,” said Jonathan T. D. Neil, director of Sotheby’s Institute of Art in Los Angeles. “Brands want to get into that business,” said Mr. Neil, who is also the associate editor of ArtReview, the international contemporary art magazine.Artists, of course, also benefit. Without certain brand sponsors and competitions, some artists say it would be more difficult to break into the extremely competitive art world. Traditionally, galleries — and the coterie of high-end art consultants who buy from them — have been the arbiters of artistic talent and one of the few gateways to critical acclaim and commercial success in the art world. To some extent, corporations have become an added gateway — a reality that has led to certain amount of concern in art circles. The fear is that corporate interests could compromise artistic integrity.When Ruinart, the official Champagne sponsor of Art Basel, approached the artist Georgia Russell about designing Champagne packaging for a limited edition of 2,325 bottles, she was initially ambivalent. “I’m a fine artist and this was a little a bit out of what I normally do. I don’t want to become like Jeff Koons,” said Ms. Russell, referring to that artist’s collaborations with companies such as H&M, Dom Pérignon and BMW, on everything from leather handbags to the body of a car.But Ms. Russell agreed to the project, which Ruinart, a division of the luxury goods conglomerate LVMH, commissions every year from a different artist. Her sculpture was displayed in the Collectors Lounge at Art Basel Miami; she hopes the exposure will be good for her career. Ms. Russell’s work was represented at Art Basel Miami by Galerie Karsten Greve at Art B, which has three locations across Europe. Even so, she said it would have been hard to turn down Ruinart because, among other reasons, it has such a wide marketing reach and budget.Artists themselves, it seems, now feel the pressure to also be well-recognized global brands. Most galleries simply don’t have that kind of publicity apparatus.The 33-year-old Chicago street artist Hebru Brantley was selected by both Red Bull and Bombay Sapphire in 2012 to show his work at the Scope Art Show, an art fair for emerging artists that occurs the same week in December as Art Basel Miami. He said winning two corporate-sponsored art competitions had helped him generate hundreds of thousands of dollars in income. Winning those competitions put Mr. Brantley’s work in front of celebrities, like Jay Z, who bought a painting that year.Mr. Brantley has gone on to work with Nike and the Swiss watch company Hublot. “The old methodology of only having a gallery is outdated for me personally,” Mr. Brantley said.Since artists have historically had patrons, from wealthy citizens to monarchs to religious institutions, some contend that it’s fairly benign for brands to take on a similar role. That’s how Andras Szanto, an adviser to Art Basel sponsors including Davidoff Cigars and Audemars Piguet, views the convergence of corporations and artists. “This is not a new chapter in the debasement of art. It’s a potential reservoir of funding that when done respectfully and thoughtfully is simultaneously good for the brand and good for the artist,” Mr. Szanto said.Still, with the growing cross-pollination of brands and art, there are increasingly more judgment calls to be made about the balance between artists and brands.At the Scope fair in Miami, intermingled among the 131 gallery spaces were five sponsored galleries by brands such as the paper company Moo, Red Bull and Bombay Sapphire. They all displayed work by emerging artists, some selected from online competitions.Outside on the beach was Heineken House, a pyramid with 12 walls being painted live over the course of six days by a rotating group of a dozen artists, all of whom were paid for their time. Fiat, the official automotive sponsor of Scope, had a brand-new car in the middle of the fair. Visitors willing to fill out a short survey were entered for the chance to win it.Four years ago, companies couldn’t be tempted to sponsor the fair, said Daria Brit Greene, vice president of the Scope Art Show, who also oversees brand partnerships; now she says she has to turn away many. The companies pay the same rate as the galleries do for their space, $60 a square foot, she added. “It does take away from a traditional gallery showing their art, so we try to keep to a minimum, how much space we give to brands,” Ms. Greene said.At the Art Basel fairs, the only branded items allowed on the floor are the Ruinart Champagne carts and Audemars Piguet clocks. “I would not allow a BMW in the middle of the fair,” Mr. Spiegler said. The Ruinart carts, he says, pass the test because, unlike a car, they are small and don’t block any sight lines.“You can’t buy your way onto the floor; it’s for galleries who have earned it,” he said.Advertisement