AdvertisementSupported byApplied ScienceBy Phyllis KorkkiTry to avoid working for a company with a narcissist at the top. That’s because narcissistic C.E.O.s tend to overspend on investments and deliver substandard results. On top of that, they are often paid more than their humbler yet better-performing peers, according to a recent study.Researchers came to this conclusion after analyzing the signatures of about 450 chief executives at public companies. The size of a person’s signature is positively associated with many of the traits of narcissism, such as ego, exploitativeness and dominance, said Charles Ham, a doctoral candidate at the University of Maryland and one of the C.E.O. study’s authors, along with Nicholas Seybert, an assistant professor at the University of Maryland, and Sean Wang, an assistant professor at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. All the signatures came from annual reports or news releases, which provided a consistent benchmark for comparing them. (Don’t try this at the office; the sample needs to be large and the format unvarying.) Then the researchers looked at the executives’ level of investment and tracked later results. Given the data, it appears that the narcissists talked a good game but could not live up to it. Not surprisingly, their tenure at companies was shorter, too. Narcissists may do the most damage at the top, but they can disrupt workplaces at all levels. They possess very little empathy and have grandiose views of themselves, leading to feelings of entitlement and a constant need for admiration, said S. Mark Young, a professor at the Marshall School of Business at the University of Southern California. Narcissists are cutthroat and scheming, Professor Young said. They tend to dominate the conversation and will do just about anything to be the center of attention, even if it’s negative attention. When you meet a narcissist at a party, he or she can be charming, but that mask will fall off in the workplace. Narcissists can seriously hurt group dynamics, Professor Young said. If they are assigned to a team, they may refuse to compromise and complain to the manager that every other team member is inferior. One solution may be to isolate the narcissist as much as possible, Professor Young said. On the plus side, some narcissists are very creative and have high energy and a strong desire to get things done. Within certain limits, they can even make good leaders, he said. But, on the whole, the best way to avoid dealing with a narcissist is not to hire one, Professor Young said. Some personality tests can spot the signs, although careful listening for lots of entitled “I”s during an interview might also do the trick. (Professor Young said he was skeptical of recent research showing that the best way to ferret out a narcissist is simply to ask a person: “Are you a narcissist?” Narcissists, he noted, are not self-aware.)Professor Young cited a recent paper showing that employee narcissism is on the rise, based on results from a longstanding assessment known as the Narcissistic Personality Inventory. He suggests several reasons for this. One could be an increase in excessive parental praise and coddling. “The harsh reality of discovering that one is not particularly special, that the world does not owe them anything, and that finding a job is increasingly challenging has caused a downward psychological spiral,” according to the paper. Alternatively, a rise in childhood trauma, as families become more fragmented, could also be leading to a rise in narcissistic traits, Professor Young said. Throughout life (unless a good therapist enters the picture), narcissistic behavior becomes a temporary way to extract attention that was lacking in younger years. Given that possibility, try to feel a little compassion toward your ranting narcissistic co-workers — even though they may never feel the same toward you. Advertisement