
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
MARCH 7, 2015
Ben Bernanke and his colleagues at the Federal Reserve Board have earned accolades from all corners for the extraordinary actions they took to rescue the financial system in 2009. While 2008 was the Fed’s annus horribilis, exposing how unaware the central bank had been of the risks building in the financial system, 2009 was its year of redemption.So it was interesting, last week, to read the newly released transcripts from Federal Reserve Board meetings in 2009, which include some of the darkest days of the mess.With the economy now on a sound footing and the stock market near a record high, the decisions made by the Fed to shore up credit markets in the aftermath of the 2008 crisis look even better.But the transcripts also reveal for the first time what critics within the Fed were saying about some of the trillion-dollar programs. And even though the critics’ worst fears did not come to pass, their concerns are worth exploring. For this reason alone, the transcripts make for fascinating reading.AdvertisementThere were two basic camps within the Fed. On one side were the reserve bank presidents who wanted to throw anything and everything at the crisis. For the most part, these officials came from regions — like New York and Boston — that are home to big financial firms. They contended that the financial system was in such peril that big substantive action had to be taken, pronto.AdvertisementOn the other side were those who hoped to weigh the trillion-dollar programs — separately and together — to make sure their costs and risks didn’t exceed their benefits. Many holding this view were from regions with more diverse economies, like Kansas City and Dallas.“This last discussion has been fascinating against the backdrop of our not having a clear sense of exactly why and how expanding our balance sheet affects the world,” said Jeffrey M. Lacker, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Va., at an April 2009 meeting. “I think we’re really groping in the dark here. I think we need to recognize that.”Mr. Lacker and others who raised questions about the potential costs and benefits of the 2009 programs had good reason to. As the new transcripts indicate, their concerns were at least in part intended to protect the larger economy from the perils of rescuing reckless market participants.Consider the discussions surrounding something with a mouthful of a name — the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, also known as TALF. Operated by the New York Fed, it was put in place in late November 2008 and allowed borrowers to receive loans for up to five years in exchange for asset-backed securities they held. For the securities to be eligible for exchange, they had to be newly issued and rated AAA. The program would have allowed up to $200 billion in loans.The idea behind it was to open the credit spigot for businesses and consumers — making it easier to provide car loans, for instance — and jump-start the moribund asset-backed securities market. By limiting eligible securities to those that were newly issued and highly rated, the Fed hoped to limit the risks associated with lending against questionable assets.But the TALF program later became riskier. The Treasury proposed loosening the TALF program’s asset eligibility requirements to include so-called legacy securities. This was a euphemism for asset-backed instruments created during the boom that had become toxic.
                In the early months of that year, the Fed pressed ahead with the bold measures it had initiated in 2008 to arrest the financial crisis. By summer it had largely succeeded.            Why open up the program to such risks? Providing a market for such securities would propel their prices, Fed staff argued, and bolster bank balance sheets.AdvertisementIn 2009, of course, the Fed was under significant pressure from financiers to save their institutions and the markets. It also had to hold the line against the United States Treasury, which was pushing it to accelerate its efforts.Five regional Fed presidents balked. “I would stay away from legacy TALF,” said Gary H. Stern, then president of the Minneapolis Fed. “Funding the bad bank is a close cousin to being the bad bank.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other objections came from Richard W. Fisher, the Dallas Fed president; Thomas M. Hoenig, then head of the Kansas City Fed; Charles I. Plosser of the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank; and Janet L. Yellen, then president of the San Francisco Fed and now the chairwoman of the Board of Governors.The criticisms went nowhere. In May 2010, the Federal Reserve announced that it would accept legacy securities backed by commercial mortgages.The TALF program emerges in the transcripts as a sticking point for those at the Fed who objected to the ad hoc nature of the rescues. These people, quite rationally, wanted a cost-benefit analysis of the proposals to ensure they would generate real results while limiting downside exposure.“What’s not clear to me is whether we have the right set of metrics to help us judge how much expansion we need and what the right trade-offs are as we do it,” said Mr. Plosser at the March meeting, referring to balance sheet growth. (That was the meeting at which the Fed staff proposed expanding TALF.) “It seems to me that we do these various programs on almost a one-off basis. I think one of the challenges we face is getting some grasp of how these programs are benefiting us at the margin.”It took a few more months for the program to start running on all cylinders, but by then, the economy and the stock market had begun showing signs of life. Perhaps because of those improvements, the facility never ballooned in size.According to the New York Fed, outstanding loans in the program peaked at $48.2 billion in March 2010. Three months later, it stopped making new loans. The final outstanding loan in the facility was repaid in October 2014.So did the program work? On the surface, it looks like a money generator, having reaped $746 million in fees and income. The New York Fed kept 10 percent of that and sent the rest to the Treasury. But those returns are not adjusted for the risk that the Fed took by being willing to bring dubious securities onto its balance sheet and the true costs of lending money against them.AdvertisementHow effective was it?Post-mortem research on the program published by the New York Fed in 2012 drew basically positive conclusions. TALF “is likely to have made a significant contribution to restoring liquidity in 2009 and 2010,” the paper said. But even that research, coming from a regional bank that had strongly supported the program, acknowledged that it was difficult to isolate the facility’s true impact.Obviously, in the 2008 crisis, the Federal Reserve was operating without a guidebook. And there wasn’t much time to do the kinds of cost-benefit analyses of liquidity programs that some in the Fed wanted.Still, if these transcripts show us anything, it’s that regulators should be armed with precisely these kinds of assessments. And well before the next financial panic ensues.A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: At the Fed, Rolling Dice in a Crisis.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »