AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.01 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.10 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: TUESDAYBoston, $270 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Clark County, Nev., $181.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Hartford, Conn., $72 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New York, $319.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYFlorida Board of Education, $250 million of debt securities. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $300 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Parkway, Mo., School District, $50 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYNew York City, $203.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKCalifornia Municipal Finance Authority, $67 million of refunding revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.University of California, $2.8 billion of revenue bonds. Barclays Capital. Citrus Community College District, Calif., $60 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray. Clear Creek, Tex., Independent School District, $181.5 million of unlimited tax school building refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities. Colorado Health Facilities Authority, $111.6 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler. Commerce City, Colo., $51.5 million of sales tax revenue refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Connecticut, $500 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. Dallas, $578.6 million of waterworks and sewer system revenue refinancing bonds. Cabrera Capital Markets.Hamilton, Ohio, City School District, $72.8 million of various purpose general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Hays County, Tex., $60.8 million of limited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James. Houston, $223 million of airport system special facilities revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Houston, $65 million of airport system special facilities revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. Illinois Educational Facilities Authority, $72.3 million of University of Chicago adjustable rate revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities. Lincoln, Neb., $161.3 million of electric system debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Louisiana Public Facilities Authority, $181.2 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley. Macomb County, Mich., $263.8 million of taxable debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency, $89.9 million of single-family housing revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Miami-Dade County, Fla., $56.5 million of industrial development revenue bonds. Raymond James. Michigan Finance Authority, $312 million of student loan asset-backed notes. Bank of America. Froedtert Health Inc., Wis., $100 million of taxable revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley. Minnesota Housing Finance Agency, $50.1 million of homeownership finance bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Missouri Joint Municipal Electric Utility Commission, $193.9 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities. Monroe County, N.Y., $60 million of refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. Montour, Pa., School District, $97 million of general obligation bonds. Boenning & Scattergood.New Jersey Economic Development Authority, $50.8 million of revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.New York City, $800 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority, $300 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America.University of North Carolina at Charlotte, $110 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America. Southeastern Ohio Port Authority, $60 million of hospital facilities debt securities. Bank of America. North Olmsted, Ohio, City School District, $80.6 million of school improvement bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Philadelphia School District, $150 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Raleigh, N.C., $91.9 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Rhode Island Tobacco Settlement Finance Corporation, $600 million of tobacco settlement asset-backed bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. Rockwall, Tex., Independent School District, $89.5 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James. San Francisco Public Utilities Commission, $450 million of water system bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. American University, Washington, D.C., $125 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities. Henrico County, Va., $60.2 million of general obligation public improvement refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities. Issaquah, Wash., School District, $150 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Advertisement