AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberWomen across New York had vanished.Rosie the Riveter disappeared from her iconic poster in a bus shelter. Serena Williams faded from a giant Beats billboard in Times Square. Gone was Scarlett Johansson from the March cover of Condé Nast’s W magazine.On Sunday, the Clinton Foundation co-opted some 40 existing advertisements, posters and other media, cutting out the women as part of a campaign to call attention to gender inequality. The stunt, the work of the advertising agency Droga5, was intended to drive online traffic to a report by the foundation’s No Ceilings initiative on the status of women and girls across the globe. “This is about putting a really important issue in front of people,” said Katie Dowd, director of digital strategy at the Clinton Foundation. “We’re really trying to create a moment that feels meaningful.”The campaign and the release of the No Ceilings reports coincided with International Women’s Day, observed annually on March 8. The project also marked the 20 years since Hillary Rodham Clinton spoke on women’s rights at a United Nations conference in Beijing.The Clinton Foundation, founded by former President Bill Clinton, is also using online video, radio and social media to represent the idea that women are “not there” yet in terms of gender equality. Female celebrities, including Cameron Diaz and Amy Poehler, star in a video on the campaign’s website, Not-There.org, that explains the effort. The media company iHeartMedia removed women’s voices from well-known songs on 186 of its radio stations nationwide. The foundation also put up short videos on the photo-messaging app Snapchat and encouraged users of social media to change their profile pictures to a woman’s blank silhouette. Mrs. Clinton and Chelsea Clinton blacked out their Twitter profile photos as part of the campaign.The sweeping strategy reflects pressure in the advertising industry to create big, in-your-face campaigns in the hopes of slicing through the barrage of media clutter. To make an impact, marketers are willing to go to extremes to reach a consumer base that already contends with a constant flood of content.“We want to create content that people actually want to engage with,” said Susie Nam, general manager of Droga5. “We don’t want this to be transient.”Along with Condé Nast and Beats, several other companies gave the foundation permission to replace their existing ads with modified ones, including the consumer-products giant Unilever, which owns the Dove and Tresemmé brands, and Under Armour, a Droga5 client. The media space for the stunt was donated or provided at a discount. The foundation covered the cost of printing the altered material.So-called purpose-driven marketing campaigns have taken off in recent years, as companies look for new ways to connect with their consumers, said Jim Stengel, a business consultant who previously worked as chief marketing officer at Procter & Gamble. And gender equality is certainly a hot topic. Just last week, Sheryl Sandberg, chief operating officer of Facebook and author of the book “Lean In,” introduced a new campaign with the National Basketball Association called Lean In Together that encourages men to stand alongside women to promote gender equality. “Everybody is trying to understand how to lead with a sense of an inspiring purpose at the heart of their brand,” Mr. Stengel said. The Not There campaign “is a great example of a client and these brands looking for a really big idea that breaks through.”For Unilever, whose Dove brand in particular has had a number of successful ad campaigns directed at women, deciding to help the Clinton Foundation spread its message was easy, said Gina Boswell, the executive vice president for personal care for Unilever North America. “It really comes from a responsibility to take action, honestly,” Ms. Boswell said, adding that she hoped adopting the campaign’s message would reflect well on the company itself, whose customers are largely women.By Sunday evening, the Not There website had been viewed at least 104,680 times, according to the foundation.McNally Jackson Books, an independent bookstore in Lower Manhattan, had set up a window display of Condé Nast magazines, including Vogue, Glamour and Allure, with women erased from their covers. The afternoon light glinted off the glass, making the Not There web address somewhat difficult to see. Inside, a small stack of modified magazines sat on a table in the cafe area. None were for sale.Advertisement