AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieWells Fargo and JPMorgan have reported third-quarter results that highlight a $7 billion challenge for rival Bank of America. That’s the extra annual profit the lender run by Brian Moynihan would need to earn for a 10 percent return on equity, generally the level at which big banks cover their cost of capital. Cutting spending to match Wells Fargo’s efficient operation would not quite suffice, though. And JPMorgan proved on Tuesday that it can manage passable results even when revenue falls.Mr. Moynihan has made progress. Slashing costs and eliminating huge legal bills allowed Bank of America to apply only 66 percent of its revenue to expenses in the three months to September, down from 78 percent for the whole of 2013.Investors are eagerly awaiting guidance from management about when higher short-term interest rates will impact the banks’ bottom lines.Wells Fargo used just 57 percent of its top line in the third quarter to keep the engine humming and produced a 12.6 percent return on equity. It’s one of America’s most efficient banks, so expecting it to reduce costs quite that much may be a stretch. Doing so would, though, allow the bank to raise net income this year by $6 billion, based on annualizing its revenue for the first nine months. That would leave it a bit shy of a 10 percent equity return.JPMorgan, meanwhile, just fell short of that benchmark for the third quarter – after stripping out a big tax benefit. That’s not bad, considering the bank’s 6 percent drop in revenue from last year pushed its efficiency ratio up to 65 percent. The acceptable return suggests Jamie Dimon, the bank’s chief executive, has a better mix of businesses or a firmer grip on capital allocation.Mr. Moynihan needs to find ways to expand his bank. It’s a tough task, as the 2.4 percent drop in Bank of America’s top line and JPMorgan’s lower revenue show. Both institutions are lending more, with core loans jumping $91 billion at Mr. Dimon’s shop and $60 billion at Mr. Moynihan’s. The impact is small, though, because of the banks’ sheer size, rock-bottom interest rates and the predominance of low-risk borrowers that pay little for credit.Bank of America reckons a 1 percentage point increase in interest rates would add $4.5 billion to revenue, or some $3 billion to net income. That would allow it to beat its cost of capital, assuming more costs cuts. Trouble is, there’s little sign the Federal Reserve will soon oblige.Advertisement