AdvertisementSupported byBy Jessica Silver-Greenberg and Jenny AndersonBrady W. Dougan is stepping down as chief executive of Credit Suisse, the bank said on Tuesday, ending his tenure as one of the longest-serving chieftains of a global banking powerhouse.Mr. Dougan, 55, an American who has led the Swiss bank since before the financial crisis, will be succeeded by Tidjane Thiam, 52, who heads the British insurance company Prudential, where he has been praised for his leadership. (It has no connection to the United States company of the same name.)The change at Credit Suisse is effective June and follows recent stumbles. Last year, the Zurich-based bank, which has large operations in New York, was the first of its size and significance in decades to plead guilty to a criminal charge.In that settlement with United States authorities, Credit Suisse admitted that its bankers enabled clients to illegally evade American taxes and agreed to pay about $2.6 billion in penalties.At the time of the plea agreement in May, Mr. Dougan’s job seemed secure. And he could have survived the legal problems if the bank’s financial performance had been better, said people briefed on the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.Last month, Credit Suisse reported that it had swung back to a profit in the fourth quarter, earning about $993 million, but it also told investors to brace for continued fallout from the legal settlements.At the time, Mr. Dougan said the results demonstrated “consistency in our performance amid a challenging market environment with increased volatility.” But some in the bank, the people with knowledge of the matter said, said they believed that little would change if Mr. Dougan remained at the helm. The bank, they said, needed a new strategy. While other banks have pursued a more radical restructuring, Credit Suisse has taken more of a piecemeal approach.Shares of Credit Suisse have fallen nearly 27 percent over the last 12 months.After the tax evasion settlement in the United States, pressure began to build among some Swiss politicians to force change at the top of the bank.The Financial Times earlier reported the planned shake-up.In Mr. Thiam, Credit Suisse will get an executive who has been tested by adversity.Soon after taking the helm of Prudential, he led a $35 billion bid for the Asian arm of the American International Group, a deal that he said would transform the British insurer. But a battle ensued, and the takeover effort ultimately failed. In 2013, British regulators fined Prudential 30 million pounds, or $45.1 million, and censured Mr. Thiam for not informing the regulators of its intention to bid for the unit and for not dealing with the regulators in a cooperative way.More recently, Prudential has reported strong results. Its shares are up 11.5 percent since the beginning of the year.Mr. Thiam was born in the Ivory Coast to a family with powerful political connections. In 1982, he became the first Ivorian to pass the entrance examination to the exclusive École Polytechnique in Paris. He received an M.B.A. from Insead, the business school, in 1988 and then worked for McKinsey, the consulting firm, in New York and Paris.In the early 1990s, he returned to his country and eventually became the minister for planning and development. In that position, he promoted the privatization of many industries. When he was out of the country in 1999, the Ivorian military staged a coup. He flew back and was asked to become chief of staff in the government; he refused.On a British radio program in 2012, Mr. Thiam spoke of the coup. “I had no job, no career, nothing at all,” he said. “It taught me a lot about myself. If you’ve been in a situation where you have nothing, there’s nothing much you’re afraid of.”In 2000, he was released and left the country. He worked for McKinsey again, then for the insurance company Aviva. He was named chief executive of Prudential in 2009, becoming the first black chief executive of a F.T.S.E. 100 company.Mr. Dougan, who has been chief executive since 2007, has been called “the Teflon man,” for his ability to deflect troublesome issues. The length of his tenure as chief is extraordinary for the leader of a Wall Street bank — only Lloyd C. Blankfein of Goldman Sachs and Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase have held the reins for longer. It is all the more remarkable given the turmoil regarding Credit Suisse executives before Mr. Dougan took over. Four chief executives led the bank from 1998 to 2007, including John J. Mack.A smart, low-key, marathon runner known for driving a Prius, Mr. Dougan has always been a bit of a loner on Wall Street. He is rarely seen on the charity scene or in the society pages.The son of an Illinois railway dispatcher, Mr. Dougan joined Credit Suisse nearly 25 years ago. His understated ways may have made him a good match for the Swiss.Before becoming chief executive, Mr. Dougan was head of Credit Suisse’s investment bank, a unit that is separate from the private bank, where the tax abuses occurred. But he has been a member of the executive committee since 2003, and some industry lawyers have questioned whether he and other top executives should have had better oversight of the private bank.Some people close to the bank have questioned whether Mr. Dougan could have negotiated a less harsh outcome for the Swiss bank by working even more closely with the American authorities. Credit Suisse’s rival, UBS, in 2009 paid a $780 million fine and agreed to a deferred prosecution agreement, a lesser punishment than Credit Suisse’s conviction.Mr. Dougan has apologized at public hearings and in individual meetings with American authorities, the people said, pointing out that the activities were limited to a small group of employees.Still, the tax case is not the only headache facing the Swiss bank. Last year, Credit Suisse paid $885 million to settle charges that it packaged and sold faulty mortgages in the prelude to the financial crisis.Advertisement