AdvertisementSupported byOn the RoadBy Joe SharkeyTHE idea raised alarms among privacy advocates: Social media postings would be fair game for private companies doing background checks on people applying for the PreCheck security program, under a government request made in December.Not long after, the Transportation Security Administration last month abruptly withdrew that request for proposals. Among those concerned was Thomas P. Bossert, a security consultant and a former Homeland Security aide to President George W. Bush, who said it represented a “massive expansion and outsourcing of the government’s data-mining.”That doesn’t mean the idea has gone away, however.The T.S.A. said in a filing that it had sent the request for proposals back for revisions because of “some difficulties” with the language, as the agency proceeds with its plan to hire private companies to get more travelers into PreCheck, which now has about 950,000 members.“T.S.A. is interested in exploring ways to work with the private sector to expand and strengthen PreCheck,” a spokesman, Ross Feinstein, said in an email interview.The request for proposals was posted Dec. 22 on a government website for businesses seeking federal contracts, and withdrawn on Feb. 7. A section of it described the scope of personal data that private companies could use to evaluate PreCheck applicants, who pay $85 for the enrollment process. Besides criminal and other governmental records, companies could also use “other publicly available information such as directories, press reports, location data and information that individuals post on blogs and social media sites” for background checks, the guidelines said. Data about retail purchases could also be considered.PreCheck, which allows approved passengers to pass through security with less scrutiny than others (like not having to remove shoes or take laptops from cases), is the surviving descendant of a succession of Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System programs. The goal of these has been to use background checks to create a large pool of what is called trusted or known travelers — those who have been determined to pose little risk, who can be processed more quickly through security.Under John S. Pistole, who left the T.S.A. in December after four years as administrator, PreCheck got off to a strong start in December 2013, and for the most part it has brought relief at security for many passengers. But growth seems to have slowed, and the agency is looking for help in increasing enrollment. Congress has long pressured the T.S.A. to include private contractors in more of its operations.Mr. Bossert, who was deputy assistant to the president for Homeland Security in the Bush administration, said in an interview that while privacy issues were the most provocative aspect of the request for proposals, his broader concerns are potential security flaws in a too-aggressive rush to “entice people with reduced security” into a widely expanded PreCheck, while shifting the administrative and marketing of the program to private enterprise.“They think if they could just advertise it more, and if it were easier to sign up, they would get more people into PreCheck,” he said. Mr. Pistole and others at the T.S.A. have described ambitious plans to have as many as 50 percent of air travelers in the country using some kind of risk-based expedited security plan like PreCheck, but Mr. Bossert suggested that enrollment might have peaked. “I suspect that the people who travel a lot already pay for it, and those who don’t travel a lot don’t find it to be worthwhile,” he said.There is strong political resistance to government collection of private data beyond the simple background checks now used for PreCheck. On the other hand, private companies now routinely delve into various databases of readily available information on individuals’ behaviors and buying patterns, using the data to put targeted ads on user’s screens or suggesting something to buy on Amazon.“Private industry already has access to all kinds of commercially available personal data about you, and people generally are comfortable with that,” Mr. Bossert said.But people are far less comfortable with the prospect of a company sifting through the vast amount of commercially available personal data for the purpose of creating a potentially intrusive security profile that would be collected under the aegis of a government agency, he added.Mr. Bossert predicted that the T.S.A. would reissue the proposal in basically the same form, with modifications to the most contentious language.Business travelers, who fly more frequently than others, are the prime users of PreCheck and similar programs like Global Entry, which provides fast-pass re-entry at airport customs checkpoints for Americans returning from international trips. But business travel executives said agency officials didn’t consult them before issuing the request for proposals in December.“How secure is the biometric and personal data? What happens to the data if these companies go out of business? Is that data then just for sale to whoever decides to buy the company?” asked Greeley Koch, executive director of the Association of Corporate Travel Executives. “We’re not necessarily against the idea, but we’re concerned about the execution.”Michael W. McCormick, executive director of the Global Business Travel Association, said closer consultation with corporate travel representatives was needed to iron out concerns about using private enterprise for the PreCheck program.“It’s an area where though the intentions are good, it’s fraught with issues,” he said.Email: jsharkey@nytimes.com Advertisement