By MICHAEL CORKERY and MARY WILLIAMS WALSHOCT. 14, 2015
Officials in the Treasury Department are discussing a radical and aggressive response to the fiscal chaos engulfing Puerto Rico that could involve a broad debt exchange assisted by the federal government.The proposal calls for the federal government to help Puerto Rico collect and account for local tax revenues from the island’s businesses and residents, according to people briefed on the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to publicly discuss the proposal. An inability to collect all the taxes owed is widely seen as contributing to Puerto Rico’s debt crisis.The tax proceeds would be placed in a “lockbox” overseen by the Treasury and eventually paid out by the Treasury to the holders of the new bonds that Puerto Rico would issue in the proposed exchange. Since the Treasury would effectively become the paying agent for the new bonds, they would be more attractive than the bonds that creditors now hold.That would make it easier for Puerto Rico to exchange the new debt with creditors who hold bonds that have been devastated in value since the island warned this summer that it could not pay its debts.AdvertisementThe proposal has logistical, political and legal challenges, however, and may never get off the ground.Advertisement“Right now, Puerto Ricans don’t even like to pay taxes to their own government,” said one person with knowledge of the discussions. If the I.R.S. were to suddenly replace the local tax authorities and try to gather up the money for debt service, “people would say, ‘Go to hell. I’m not paying the U.S. government.’ ”But the fact that such an unusual idea has been floated between the Treasury and top finance officials from Puerto Rico in recent months suggests a sharp shift in Washington’s approach to the island’s economic crisis.Without addressing the proposal directly, officials from the Treasury said in a statement that it had “no plans to provide a bailout to Puerto Rico.”Until now, the Treasury has provided mostly technical assistance to island officials, while the Republican leaders in Congress have expressed strong reservations about bailing out Puerto Rico. The island’s first choice appears to be a bankruptcy law amendment that would allow the island to send some of its governmental bodies into Chapter 9 municipal bankruptcy court. But bills introduced to that effect have not moved.The current proposal, which has been called a “global exchange vehicle” by some, and “superbond” by others, appears to have been developed as a backup plan, in case the Republican lawmakers do not change their minds.The idea would not involve the federal government issuing debt, or even guaranteeing debt, on Puerto Rico’s behalf.Rather, Treasury would help safeguard Puerto Rico’s tax proceeds to reassure creditors that they would not be used for any purposes other than to pay off debt. That safeguard, in theory, should lower the default risk and allow Puerto Rico to borrow at lower interest rates.AdvertisementFor the last year, Puerto Rico has been virtually shut out of the debt markets because potential investors see the island as highly risky and expect to be compensated for bearing that risk with exceptionally high interest rates.Puerto Rican officials have been warning that the island is likely to exhaust its cash in November, and a debt payment of almost $300 million is due on Dec. 1. They have also been saying they would soon lay out their initial proposal for a debt exchange, but so far a large number of creditors — particularly those with bad memories of Detroit’s grueling bankruptcy case — have declined to sign the mandatory confidentiality agreements.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Yeah, we heard the ‘superbond’ piece, we heard that Treasury might be involved, but we have this fundamental issue,” said the person with knowledge of the discussions. “Is this a real deal, or is it just designed to fail?”That person believed that a deal of this type would raise complex legal questions about whether Treasury’s involvement changed the priority of the creditors. Those that felt they had lost their places at the front of the line might sue, and their lawsuits might prompt others to pile on.A hornets’ nest of litigation might ultimately even persuade the Republicans in Congress to give Puerto Rico the amended bankruptcy law that it wants, that person said, adding, “We know they want to do a grand and sweeping deal, and we don’t know if they’re negotiating in good faith or they’re just setting us up.”The proposal, first reported by The Wall Street Journal, is partly meant to address creditors’ concerns about widespread tax avoidance in Puerto Rico, which has a flourishing underground economy. For several months, a local property-tax collection body has been refusing to transfer $400 million of tax revenues to the island’s Government Development Bank, for example, prompting the bank to sue. The bank orchestrates Puerto Rico’s debt and says it is supposed to hold the money in trust and use it to pay general-obligation bonds.The mayors who dominate the tax body’s governing board say the bank’s cash-flow records are opaque and they do not know what will happen to the money if the bank gets it. Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah, the chairman of the Finance Committee, told Puerto Rican officials in a recent hearing that it would be hard to give them federal assistance unless they opened their financial records to scrutiny.Creditors’ concerns about inadequate tax collection and fiscal transparency have been a focal point in their early talks with Puerto Rico’s investment bankers about a possible debt exchange, said one person briefed on the discussions.The logistics of sending federal tax collectors or contractors to Puerto Rico would be difficult. The idea also presents legal problems. Holders of the island’s general-obligation bonds, for example, currently have an explicit constitutional promise of having the first claim on “available resources” to pay their bonds. They would most likely challenge any move that would lay claim to tax revenues and send them somewhere else, such as the United States Treasury.Holders of lower-priority bonds might like the idea of a federal role, however. The idea of a state-led revenue “intercept” is not uncommon in cases where severely distressed cities or school districts have shown signs of defaulting on their bonds. In Puerto Rico’s case, the Treasury would be stepping into the role that is normally played by the state.AdvertisementIt is unclear whether a Treasury-assisted debt exchange would apply to all of the island’s $72 billion debt. The lockbox could be used to assure payment of just a portion of the new bonds, for example, as a way of helping reluctant creditors to the table as part of a broader exchange.A version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Considers Plan to Help Puerto Rico .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.