AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CieplyLOS ANGELES — In a rare assignment of criminal liability for safety violations on a film set, the producer and director Randall Miller on Monday pleaded guilty to involuntary manslaughter in the death of Sarah Jones. Ms. Jones was killed by a freight train on the Georgia set of “Midnight Rider” last year.Mr. Miller entered the plea as his trial was about to begin in Jesup, Ga., a lawyer for Mr. Miller confirmed. The lawyer, Donald F. Samuel, said Mr. Miller was expected to spend a year in prison as part of a sentence that prevents him from directing or participating in the physical production of films for a decade.Charges against Jody Savin, Mr. Miller’s wife, who was also a producer of “Midnight Rider,” will be dropped under the agreement, Mr. Samuel said.Separately, Jay Sedrish, who was an executive producer on the film, entered a plea agreement under which he would be fined and sentenced to 10 years’ probation, but would not serve jail time, according to Deadline.com and other news services. A lawyer for Mr. Sedrish, John Ossick, did not respond to a query.Hillary Schwartz, who was a first assistant director on the film, has been seeking to have criminal charges against her dismissed in a case that is being tried separately.Ms. Jones, a 27-year-old camera assistant, was killed and others, including Mr. Miller, were injured on Feb. 20, 2014, when a CSX freight train suddenly appeared on tracks across which the film crew was setting up a shoot without the railroad’s consent. A lawsuit against CSX has been delayed pending resolution of the criminal charges, according to a spokeswoman for Ms. Jones’s parents.Kristin Seay, a spokeswoman for the CSX Corporation, said the company was “prepared for the civil case when it is scheduled.” Ms. Seay declined to discuss the plea agreements.“Midnight Rider” was to have starred William Hurt in a story about the rock star Gregg Allman, but filming was suspended after the accident and never resumed. Ms. Jones’s death unleashed widespread calls for closer attention to film safety, particularly on independent productions that, like “Midnight Rider,” are made without the heavier scrutiny that often attends big-budget studio films.For many, the incident evoked memories of a 1982 accident in which the actors Victor Morrow, Myca Dinh Le and Renee Shin-Yi Chen were killed by a helicopter on the set of “Twilight Zone: The Movie,” which was directed by John Landis for release by Warner Bros. Mr. Landis and others were tried but acquitted on manslaughter charges.Ms. Jones’s parents, Richard and Elizabeth Jones, earlier settled litigation against Mr. Miller and others, and have taken up the cause of film safety and education through a nonprofit named for their daughter.“We are not now, and never have been, seeking revenge for Sarah’s death,” Ms. Jones’s parents said in a statement on Monday. But, they added, “we do want those responsible to be held accountable and are satisfied with the terms of the agreement reached between the District Attorney’s office and defense attorneys.”After the sentencing, according to Deadline.com, Judge Anthony Harrison said: “There is nothing this court could do to really bring justice to this case.” He called the episode a tragic accident “that could have been prevented.”He told Ms. Jones’s parents: “I hope that this day will contribute to your goal of sending a message of safety to the industry” and that it would “give some meaning to this tragedy.”Advertisement