By ADAM LIPTAKMARCH 9, 2015
Washington — The Supreme Court on Monday unanimously handed Amtrak an interim victory in a lawsuit challenging the power it wields over competitors. The ruling was a setback for a trade group that had challenged a 2008 federal law giving Amtrak, which carries passengers, a role in setting standards for freight railroad companies.The Supreme Court focused on a threshold question in the case: Was Amtrak a government agency or a private company?In 2013, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled that Amtrak was private, relying on a federal law that said it “is not a department, agency or instrumentality of the United States government” and “shall be operated and managed as a for-profit corporation.” That meant, the appeals court said, that in 2008 Congress had improperly delegated legislative authority to Amtrak.Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, in a majority opinion joined by seven other justices, said the appeals court had gotten the threshold question wrong by placing too much emphasis on a “statutory label” rather than examining the ways in which Amtrak acts like the government in practice. For purposes of the standards at issue in the 2008 law, he concluded, “Amtrak is a governmental entity.”AdvertisementBut that is not the end of the matter, Justice Kennedy said, listing a number of constitutional issues raised by the Supreme Court’s ruling in the case, Department of Transportation v. Association of American Railroads, No. 13-1080. The Supreme Court sent the case back to the appeals court for reconsideration under the premise that Amtrak is public.AdvertisementIn making that initial determination, Justice Kennedy considered Amtrak’s ownership, structure and operations.The government owns most of Amtrak’s stock, he wrote, and eight of the nine members of its board are appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate. It is subject to the Freedom of Information Act in years it receives a federal subsidy, Justice Kennedy wrote, “which thus far has been every year of its existence.”Moreover, Justice Kennedy added, “the political branches exercise substantial, statutorily mandated supervision over Amtrak’s priorities and operations.” That includes congressional oversight hearings and subsidies in excess of $1 billion a year, he wrote.“Given the combination of these unique features and its significant ties to the government, Amtrak is not an autonomous private enterprise,” Justice Kennedy wrote. “Amtrak was created by the government, is controlled by the government and operates for the government’s benefit.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But that ruling may not be the end of the matter, Justice Kennedy said, listing remaining constitutional issues for the appeals court to consider.In a pair of concurrences three times as long as the majority opinion, Justices Samuel A. Alito Jr. and Clarence Thomas underscored what Justice Alito called “a host of constitutional questions.”Though “Amtrak must be regarded as a federal actor for constitutional purposes,” Justice Alito wrote, “it does not by any means necessarily follow that the present structure of Amtrak is consistent with the Constitution.”Among the potential constitutional problems, Justice Alito said, are the role of the president of Amtrak’s board, who is not appointed by the president, and that of an arbitrator empowered by the law to resolve disputes.Advertisement“This case, on its face, may seem to involve technical issues,” Justice Alito wrote, “but in discussing trains, tracks, metrics and standards, a vital constitutional principle must not be forgotten: Liberty requires accountability.”Justice Thomas voted with the majority but did not join Justice Kennedy’s opinion. He decried the growth of “a vast and unaccountable administrative apparatus that finds no comfortable home in our constitutional structure.”“The end result may be trains that run on time (although I doubt it),” he added, “but the cost is to our Constitution and the individual liberty it protects.”A version of this article appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Supreme Court Sides With Amtrak, but Not Without Some Distaste.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.