
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

MARCH 9, 2015
The British philosopher Francis Bacon is attributed with saying that “knowledge is power,” and Wall Street pours enormous resources into obtaining information in the hope that greater knowledge will provide an edge on the market. But recent charges against a corporate officer show that passing along confidential information can be perilous, even if the intent is something other than insider trading.On Feb. 26, James Dunham was arrested by the F.B.I. for disclosing information in 2013 to an analyst at a Boston financial services firm, Detwiler Fenton & Company, about sales of a new BlackBerry smartphone. The firm used the information in a negative research report, which contributed to a 7 percent drop in BlackBerry’s stock.Mr. Dunham was the president and chief operating officer of Wireless Zone, a Connecticut company that has more than 400 franchise Verizon Wireless outlets that sell smartphones from different manufacturers. A report in the Boston Business Journal identified the companies involved.Mr. Dunham’s position gave him valuable knowledge about customer purchases and returns of different smartphone brands, and he secretly entered into a consulting arrangement with Detwiler Fenton that paid him $2,000 a month to provide insights into the wireless communications industry. When the research report about BlackBerry came out, the company issued a news release that it was asking the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Ontario Securities Commission in Canada, where BlackBerry is based, to investigate what it called “a false and misleading report about retail return rates for the company’s new BlackBerry Z10 smartphone.”AdvertisementThat sounds like a potential market manipulation case in which false information is released to help short-sellers profit from the anticipated decline in the stock price. But it turns out that was not the case because the information in the report was not necessarily false, or at least was not disclosed for the purpose of pushing the price down, which would be required to prove a violation.AdvertisementThe case resembles the recent insider trading prosecutions involving expert networks that put hedge fund traders together with sources inside companies to provide information about industry trends. These relationships sometimes crossed the line into tipping confidential information about earnings and other corporate developments. Among those convicted of insider trading based on contacts developed through expert-networking firms were Mathew Martoma, a former hedge fund manager at Steven A. Cohen’s SAC Capital Advisors, and Winifred Jiau, a consultant for Primary Global Research.But Mr. Dunham is not charged with tipping inside information that was used to trade. Detwiler Fenton has not been accused of misusing the information for its own profit or to help clients trade in advance of the research report, which is required for a securities law violation.Instead, federal prosecutors used the mail and wire fraud statutes as the basis to accuse Mr. Dunham of breaching a duty of confidentiality owed to his employer by disclosing the information for personal profit. An affidavit filed with the criminal complaint describes a Wireless Zone requirement that employees not disclose “confidential business information” or do anything that would do “damage to its business or reputation.” Mr. Dunham did not disclose his consulting arrangement with Detwiler Fenton to the company.Using the federal fraud statutes is a new means of policing corporate employees who improperly disclose information even if there is no evidence that it led directly to trading that would support an insider trading charge. One way to prove a violation of the mail and wire fraud statutes is to show that the defendant deprived an employer of the “intangible right of honest services.” Congress adopted a statute in 1988 making this type of violation subject to prosecution even when the deceptive conduct does not directly deprive the victim of money or property.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Skilling v. United States, however, the Supreme Court limited the scope of the statute so that it could not be used for just dishonest business conduct or a breach of fiduciary duty. Instead, the court found that this type of violation arose only in “fraudulent schemes to deprive another of honest services through bribes or kickbacks supplied by a third party who had not been deceived.”Whether Mr. Dunham’s consulting arrangement with Detwiler Fenton constitutes a bribe or kickback is not entirely clear because the Supreme Court failed to define what those two terms mean. A bribe is generally considered to be a quid pro quo arrangement in which official authority is misused for personal gain. A kickback is identified in one federal statute cited by the court in the Skilling opinion as compensation provided “for the purpose of improperly obtaining or rewarding favorable treatment” in the award of a contract.Giving money for information could be viewed as akin to a bribe or kickback because of the benefit received. But it could also be seen as an ordinary business arrangement in which a corporate official is paid for insights into an industry that will be used to analyze the prospects of different companies.The payment alone does not prove there was improper conduct, particularly when it is used for analyzing a company. The Supreme Court pointed out in Dirks v. S.E.C., an insider trading case, that the S.E.C. said “market efficiency in pricing is significantly enhanced by analysts’ initiatives to ferret out and analyze information, and thus the analyst’s work redounds to the benefit of all investors.”AdvertisementUsing information obtained from one’s employer to buy and sell stocks can be prosecuted as insider trading under the misappropriation theory because the employee breaches a fiduciary duty. The S.E.C. recently accused two former employees of Capital One of insider trading for using information in the bank’s database about the volume of credit card purchases to put together information about the prospects of various retailers whose shares they traded. But without the trading, no violation occurs.The mail and wire fraud statutes can fill a gap that allows prosecutors to address disclosures of confidential information that might not fit under the insider trading prohibition. But this tool is not available to the S.E.C. because only the Justice Department can enforce criminal laws.Whether the payments received by Mr. Dunham are bribes or kickbacks remains to be seen. Although he kept the arrangement secret from his company, it does not appear that the agreement itself was improper on Detwiler Fenton’s part or that inside information was misused. If the Justice Department is successful in its prosecution, it opens a new avenue to police how confidential information is used in the markets.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »