AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesAcross America, many shopping malls are dying. Stagnant middle-class incomes, overbuilt retail space and competitors like Amazon.com and Costco are turning these former fixtures of the retail landscape into abandoned boxes, devoid of clients or customers.But at the wealthier end of the shopping spectrum, it is a different story. Packed with stores like Apple and Prada that cater to the top 20 percent of consumers, these malls — often near urban and exurban centers — remain lucrative developments for a handful of big developers.Now, the Simon Property Group, which owns the Forum Shops at the Caesars Palace Las Vegas and the Sawgrass Mills shopping center in Sunrise, Fla., among other malls, is seeking to consolidate its hold on the high end.On Monday, Simon began an unsolicited attempt to acquire a rival, the Macerich Company, which owns properties including the Queens Center in New York, a middle-class but heavily trafficked mall that is considered among the most profitable in the country. Simon’s offer values Macerich at about $22.4 billion, including the assumption of some $6.4 billion of Macerich’s debt.Simon’s chief executive, David Simon, said he was making his offer public after unsuccessfully trying to get Macerich’s management to engage in discussions about a sale since December.The backdrop for Mr. Simon’s ambitions is an increasingly polarized retail landscape. While lower- and middle-class shoppers are seeking bargains and avoiding traditional shopping centers, high-end malls are booming.Simon, based in Indianapolis, is already the largest operator of so-called Class A malls. Adding Macerich’s portfolio of properties would make Simon even bigger, expanding its reach in California and other western states.Macerich, which is incorporated in Maryland athough it is run out of California, also operates Class A malls and shopping centers, but does not compete with Simon in many markets.“Simon’s appetite for more Class A malls speaks volumes to the asset class,” said D. J. Busch, a senior analyst with Green Street Advisors. “Simon’s menu of options to allocate its capital are vast. They have opportunities in Europe and Asia. For them to put their weight behind A malls in the U.S. is an indication of where they believe the growth is.”In a move to ease antitrust concerns over a potential deal, Simon said it had reached a deal to sell some Macerich assets to General Growth Properties. Details of the sale to General Growth were not made public, but a person briefed on the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity said Simon planned to sell just a handful of properties, worth less than 25 percent of the value of Macerich’s portfolio.In doing so, Simon essentially took one of the other logical bidders for Macerich out of the running. Bank of America Merrill Lynch is advising Simon, and Latham & Watkins is providing legal advice.Macerich said on Monday that it had received Simon’s offer and was reviewing the proposal with its advisers, which include Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase and the law firms Kirkland & Ellis, Goodwin Procter and Venable.It is unlikely that Macerich will simply accept Simon’s offer. Instead, it could hold out for a higher price.Simon has offered equal parts cash and stock worth $91 for each unit of Macerich stock, or about $16 billion. That represents a 30 percent premium to Macerich’s share price before Simon announced it had acquired a 3.6 percent toehold in the company in November.But Paul E. Adornato, an analyst at BMO Capital Market, said he believed that Macerich could be worth as much as $115 a share.“I think there’s a lot of room to go,” he said. “Let the games begin.”In November, the Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan acquired about 11 percent of Macerich for $71 a share. The Simon offer is worth $20 a share more than that.Macerich, a real estate investment trust, could also take steps to block a hostile takeover. The company has unique corporate bylaws that could allow it to elect board members to lengthy terms without shareholder approval.“If Macerich wants to derail the deal, they have certain weapons at their disposal,” Mr. Adornato said. “But I’m not sure they want to derail the deal. They may just want to sell at a higher price.”Anticipating such moves, Simon on Monday beckoned Macerich to the bargaining table.“We urge Macerich to forgo entrenching defensive tactics that obstruct the will of its shareholders and instead engage in serious discussions with us,” Mr. Simon said in a statement. “It is our strong preference to work with Macerich to reach a mutually beneficial agreement, and we are available immediately to meet with Macerich and its advisers.”“We believe Simon’s cash-and-stock offer would bring compelling value to shareholders of both companies,” Mr. Simon said. “Macerich shareholders would receive a significant current cash premium as well as the long-term upside potential of an investment in Simon, which is widely recognized for its high-quality portfolio and industry-leading operating performance.”“In retail real estate, and specifically malls, there’s an argument that bigger is better,” Mr. Busch said. “There are leasing and operating synergies that come with being a large portfolio. Macerich has been a capable operator over time, but at the end of the day Simon is the best mall operator in the U.S.”Shares of Macerich rose nearly 7 percent on Monday, closing at $92.76, a price that suggests investors believe the bidding will go higher. Shares of Simon were down slightly.“Some malls are dying,” Mr. Adornato said. “But it’s not a foregone conclusion that all malls are doomed to die a slow death.”Advertisement