AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill VlasicDETROIT — After a rough 2014 punctuated by a record number of safety recalls, the last thing General Motors needed was a prolonged proxy fight with unhappy shareholders.So G.M. on Monday moved to defuse a potentially distracting battle with dissident investors by approving a plan to buy back $5 billion in stock that is intended to improve its stagnant share price.The decision to dip into its cash reserves to finance a buyback came after weeks of discussions between G.M. and an investment group led by Harry J. Wilson, a member of the government task force that administered the company’s $49 billion bailout in 2009.Last month, Mr. Wilson told G.M.’s chief executive, Mary T. Barra, that he was heading an effort by hedge fund investors to prod the automaker to share its $25 billion cash hoard with stockholders.He argued that with that much cash on hand, G.M. could easily afford to buy back as much as $8 billion in stock without jeopardizing its vehicle programs and other capital requirements.If G.M. declined, Mr. Wilson’s group would be prepared to nominate him for a seat on the board at this summer’s annual meeting and start a proxy fight to gain broader shareholder support for a buyback.But rather than fight, G.M. surprised even Mr. Wilson by agreeing with him.“I was very impressed at how Mary handled this and what it says about her general style and management approach,” Mr. Wilson said in an interview Monday.In an unusually quick resolution, G.M. last Friday offered to start buying back $5 billion in stock immediately, as well as provide new details on how it would allocate capital in the future.In return, the hedge funds, which own about 2 percent of G.M.’s stock, agreed to withdraw Mr. Wilson’s nomination for the automaker’s board.Mr. Wilson said the buyback program removed the need to gain a board seat and pursue an activist agenda.That is a welcome conclusion for Ms. Barra and the G.M. board, which is struggling to rebuild the company’s image after last year’s safety crisis. It was set off by the long-delayed recall of small cars with defective ignition switches linked to 64 deaths. The number of deaths was updated on Monday, from 57, by Kenneth Feinberg, the lawyer administering the compensation program.“We really feel this is the right framework for the company, as we continue to execute our plan to become the most valued automotive company,” Ms. Barra said at a news briefing on Monday at company headquarters.G.M. executives said the company had been planning measures for some time to improve its stock price, including increasing its quarterly dividend. But executives said they were increasingly aware that G.M. needed to tamp down concerns that it was hoarding cash, as well as become more open about its plans.The market reacted positively to news of the buyout, which is scheduled to be completed by next year. In trading on Monday, G.M.’s shares rose more than 3 percent to close at $37.66.Ms. Barra said the buyback would not affect G.M.’s ability to finance new product programs, expand its Cadillac brand or fix its troubled European operations.But the company may still have to deal with more costs associated with its safety problems. G.M. has spent about $3 billion so far on fixing recalled vehicles and compensating victims of accidents tied to faulty ignition switches.Yet the automaker could still face a large fine as a result of a continuing Justice Department investigation. And a ruling pending in federal court could increase G.M.’s liabilities for defective vehicles built before the company filed for bankruptcy six years ago.The Fitch Ratings credit rating agency said the company might have to revise the stock buyback program if more recall costs arose.Advertisement