By LESLIE PICKER and MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDOCT. 14, 2015
One highly anticipated initial public offering came up short of expectations on Wednesday while another was delayed, illustrating how challenging the market has become for stock debutants.Other planned offerings have been delayed or canceled outright in recent weeks. While the I.P.O. plans of the fast-growing mobile payments company Square and the sports car maker Ferrari have generated interest in the market, the troubled offerings raise questions about the reception they and others prepared to go public will receive.Given its large size, First Data, another payments company, has been seen as a bellwether for the current I.P.O. market. The company, owned by the private equity firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, had been seeking to raise as much as $3.2 billion. But Wednesday evening, First Data priced its offering at $16 a share — well below its expected price range of $18 to $20.Also on Wednesday, the supermarket chain Albertsons decided to delay pricing its stock sale, people briefed on the matter said.AdvertisementThe company and its underwriters, led by Goldman Sachs, were worried by the turmoil in the retailing sector after Walmart unexpectedly lowered its sales forecasts.AdvertisementThe luxury retailer Neiman Marcus, which looked ready to return to the public markets by the end of the year, decided to pursue a listing in 2016. And Digicel, a telecommunications company, pulled out of its planned $2 billion I.P.O. last week.“Recent volatility in equity markets has seen a number of I.P.O.s listing at a discount to their signaled price range, and this was a less attractive route for us,” Denis O’Brien, Digicel’s chairman, said at the time. Advisers to companies seeking to list say that the wild swings of the stock markets this year have taken a toll on new stock sales.These are just the recent signs of how far the market for initial public offerings has fallen after several banner years.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Roughly 36 percent fewer I.P.O.s, or 144 over all, priced this year compared with the same time last year, according to data from Renaissance Capital. And those that did price fell an average of 3.5 percent from their offering price.Albertsons was set to become the second-biggest I.P.O. of the year. First Data will remain the biggest, with a $2.6 billion offering. Shares of First Data will begin trading on Thursday on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol FDC.A number of payments-related I.P.O.s have weathered a difficult market. CPI Card Group Inc., a Canadian producer of credit cards, slashed its offering size before making its debut with a slight gain last week. In London, shares of Worldpay increased by 6 percent on Tuesday after the company priced its deal in the midpoint of the range.First Data generates revenue by collecting fees from processing debit and credit card transactions and for providing services to financial institutions. It processed 40 percent of electronic payment volume in the United States in 2014. As long as consumers continue charging for goods, First Data will rake in cash.AdvertisementBut the company has $21 billion in debt on its books. While the proceeds from the I.P.O. will be used to pay down some of it, it is still a large amount for some investors to grapple with. And First Data’s growth is low. Revenue increased just 3.2 percent in 2014, to $11.2 billion.This is not First Data’s first market debut. The company was spun off from American Express and spent 15 years in the public markets before Kohlberg Kravis Roberts acquired it for $29 billion in 2007. The timing was not ideal for one of the largest leveraged buyouts in history, as the financial crisis crimped the business.After a series of chief executives, First Data hired Frank Bisignano from JPMorgan Chase in 2013 with the aim of turning the company around.His strategy was to acquire start-ups, such as the cloud-based payments company Clover, and invest in upgrading First Data’s technology infrastructure, according to his letter in the company’s I.P.O. filing. Mr. Bisignano has helped the company post some of its narrowest net losses — $458 million in 2014 — in years. He also secured a $3.5 billion equity infusion, including $1.2 billion from K.K.R.Citigroup, Morgan Stanley, Bank of America Merrill Lynch and K.K.R. are managing the First Data offering.A version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Companies Eyeing Public Offerings Reckon With Inhospitable Market.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.