By JESSICA SILVER-GREENBERGMARCH 10, 2015
As the host of the daytime talk show bearing his name, Montel Williams brought spicy subjects — long-lost loves and cheating spouses — into millions of American living rooms. But it is a different role entirely that has landed him in hot water: his position as the celebrity face of MoneyMutual for New Yorkers.The company, and Mr. Williams, its star backer, drew regulatory scrutiny on Tuesday when New York State’s top financial regulator accused MoneyMutual of marketing illegal, high-cost loans to New Yorkers desperate for cash. As part of the settlement with the financial regulator, Benjamin M. Lawsky, MoneyMutual agreed to pay a $2.1 million penalty, and Mr. Williams agreed to withdraw his endorsement.The New York State Department of Financial Services “has made no finding of a violation of law by Mr. Williams, and the agreement does not require him to pay any fines or penalties,” Jonathan Franks, a spokesman for Mr. Williams, said in a written statement. He noted that “Mr. Williams and his staff have cooperated fully with the D.F.S. throughout the course of the investigation.”The action on Tuesday severs the ties in New York between Mr. Williams and MoneyMutual, a pairing that the company often promoted. “Montel believes that a short-term loan from MoneyMutual’s network of participating lenders can provide the immediate assistance to avoid costly fees,” the company said on its website.AdvertisementPitches to lenders took a similar tack, Mr. Lawsky’s office said, as the company told prospective clients that “Montel Williams has endorsed MoneyMutual and would not do so if it were not a legitimate company.”AdvertisementMr. Williams went farther. In commercials, Mr. Williams appealed to people who “need cash now,” promising to help them get the money, and fast. What he did not say is that loans, with interest rates that can surge beyond 1,300 percent, can thrust people further into debt, and even force them into bankruptcy.The move against MoneyMutual is part of a broader push from federal and state authorities to crack down on the payday lending industry. And lead generators like MoneyMutual, state authorities say, are a critical link in the broader ecosystem of payday lenders and their practice of offering short-term loans with steep interest rates.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lead generators do not make the loans directly. Instead, they set up websites that market the loans. At first glance, some of the sites flashing $100 bills appear to be lenders, prompting customers to enter their private financial data in applications for loans.With that critical information, the payday lenders can gain lucrative access to New Yorkers and extend loans that exceed the state’s usury cap of 25 percent annual interest.Such interest rates can be tricky to enforce, thanks, in part, to the lead generators. As New York and 14 other states have steadily imposed caps on interest rates in recent years, lenders have proven limber. Some morph, for example, from storefronts to websites, where they can evade individual state laws.In the case of MoneyMutual, Mr. Lawsky’s office said, the company sold leads that traced to about 800,000 New Yorkers.Interest rates on the loans that MoneyMutual helped to broker, the regulator said, sometimes reached 1,304 percent — more than 80 times higher than the state cap.A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Lender Backed by Montel Williams to Pay $2.1 Million Fine.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.