AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieCredit Suisse has found the type of chief executive that the industry fears, but needs.The top executive at the British insurer Prudential, Tidjane Thiam, who is to replace Brady Dougan this summer, has no ties or loyalties to either investment or private banking. And he has a reputation for making bold moves — witness his bid for a rival, A.I.A., in 2010. The a combination should send shivers not just through Credit Suisse, but through rivals across the City of London and Wall Street, too.The business of trading and corporate advisory is stuck in a profitability trap. Banks like Credit Suisse that offer an array of services need far more capital than in the past. At the same time, the biggest revenue generator — trading bonds, currencies and commodities — has been steadily declining.Credit Suisse is an apt poster child for the industry. Its investment bank generated a return on equity of just 8 percent last year. Strip out various issues from funding costs to legacy assets and that improves, but for the past few years these so-called noncore charges have kept recurring.Banks like Barclays, Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase are grappling with the same problems. Return on equity rarely bests 12 percent for even the top performers. But it’s especially stark for the likes of Credit Suisse. Almost half of its 25 billon Swiss francs of revenue last year, and more than 60 percent of pretax earnings, stem from private banking and wealth management. Private banking and wealth management is a good, low-capital business that cranked out a pretax margin of about 30 percent in 2014, just ahead of its local rival, UBS. But the capital-intensive investment bank crowds out much of that performance.Mr. Thiam can approach these problems with a blank slate, buoyed by a record at Prudential that has seen the stock triple in five years. Applying a no-holds-barred approach to Credit Suisse would serve shareholders well, as they seem to appreciate, given the more than 6 percent jump in the bank’s stock on Tuesday. It would also, of course, leave thousands of its bankers and traders wondering whether their jobs are safe.Should Mr. Thiam take that route and have even a modicum of success, his new peers on Wall Street and the City of London will be hard pressed to resist following suit.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement