AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Peter Thal LarsenSo much for the banking brain drain. Credit Suisse is hiring Tidjane Thiam from the British insurer Prudential to replace its veteran chief executive, Brady Dougan. It’s a surprising vote of confidence in the Swiss institution, and the industry.Few would have guessed that Mr. Thiam would be tapped as Credit Suisse’s next chief executive before news of his appointment leaked on Monday. Then again, Mr. Dougan was an equally unexpected choice when he took charge in the spring of 2007. Mr. Dougan, a low-key American, weathered the financial crisis and subsequent regulatory storms to become one of the industry’s longest-serving bosses. The bank is nevertheless ready for a fresh perspective as it grapples with high costs, raised capital requirements and low returns.Mr. Thiam, a former McKinsey & Co. consultant, should bring some new ideas. Though he is new to banking, the 52-year-old native of Ivory Coast has plenty of experience in diverting Prudential’s capital from unprofitable areas to businesses that generate a better return. Overseeing the insurer’s large asset management business will also have prepared him for dealing with Credit Suisse’s private banking arm.There’s bound to be some cultural resistance when he walks into the Swiss bank’s headquarters in Zurich. As an industry outsider, he will have to manage the fragile egos of investment bankers and wealth management advisers, an issue far less pressing in the world of insurance peddlers, portfolio managers and actuaries.Regulators could also pose a challenge. Mr. Thiam is no stranger to regulatory battles: Britain’s Financial Services Authority censured him in 2013 for failing to keep it informed about Prudential’s bid to buy the Asian insurer AIA Group. The enduring hostile attitude toward Switzerland’s two big banks, however, will magnify any future missteps.Even so, Mr. Thiam’s decision to turn his back on the fast-growing British insurer and take charge of a bank is a contrarian move. Prudential’s shares have tripled in value since he became the first black chief executive of a large British company in October 2009, comfortably outperforming the sector. By contrast, Credit Suisse’s returns have lagged those of its peers in recent years. Mr. Thiam’s decision may be a signal to shareholders that the relative fortunes of two different financial businesses are turning.Peter Thal Larsen is Asia editor of Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement