By STANLEY REEDMARCH 10, 2015
LONDON — In a deal that could be a lifeline for the gasping British shale gas industry, the private chemical giant Ineos said on Tuesday that it was acquiring a package of stakes in licenses held by Igas Energy, a British onshore oil and gas company.Ineos said that it would pay 30 million pounds, or about $45 million, in cash for the shares in the sites, mainly in northwest England and central Scotland, and that it would agree to fund up to £138 million in drilling and other exploration work in the license areas.While these would be small sums if spent in the North Sea, the site of most British oil and gas production, they are huge commitments in the context of the British shale gas industry, which so far has been led by minnow-size companies with small budgets.Ineos, based in Rolle, Switzerland, is a big fish in the global petrochemical industry with over $50 billion in annual sales, and the company could put significant funds into shale exploration. Jim Ratcliffe, founder of Ineos, wants to use natural gas extracted from shale rock as feedstock for his petrochemical plants in Britain, which are enormous consumers of energy.Advertisement“We believe shale gas could revolutionize U.K. manufacturing, and Ineos has the resources to make it happen,” Gary Haywood, chief executive of the company’s oil and gas unit, said in a statement.AdvertisementShares in Igas were up almost 20 percent in midday trading in London, although they remain nearly 80 percent below their level in June, when there was greater optimism about the prospects of the British shale industry. Igas also has an exploration partnership with Total, the French energy giant.Igas estimates that Ineos will gain about 220,000 exploration acres with 67 trillion cubic feet of gas in place. That is a vast amount, but it is not certain that any can be commercially produced.The government of Prime Minister David Cameron favors shale gas exploration and has taken steps to speed the process, including backing recent legislation that allows wells to be drilled under properties. But operators must still obtain planning permission for drilling and fracking from local authorities, giving them an effective veto on the process. While the government is trying to replace declining North Sea output, environmental activists and local opposition groups have slowed exploration drilling in Britain to a crawl.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Ratcliffe said that Britain was at risk of losing what remains of its manufacturing base in part because energy costs were high and because the production of the gas from the North Sea used in his facilities was in decline.“We think something needs to happen relatively soon because if it doesn’t, we think there will be no gas left in the U.K., and there will be little manufacturing left in the U.K.,” he said in December.As part of the deal, Mr. Ratcliffe would gain control of the acreage around Grangemouth in central Scotland, the site of Ineos’s large petrochemical complex. In 2013, Mr. Ratcliffe threatened to shut down much of Grangemouth in a successful battle to force the labor unions to make concessions on costs.He is planning to bring shale gas from the United States to feed the plants but eventually wants to use fuel produced from the environs of the facility to run the plants. He said that the plant at Runcorn, in northwest England, which produces chlorine for disinfecting drinking water, uses as much electricity as the city of Liverpool.Until recently, Mr. Ratcliffe has lacked an oil and gas production team, but he has retained a group of geologists and drilling experts who formerly worked at Mitchell Energy, which led the development of shale gas in the United States.Kent Bowker, a former Mitchell energy geologist, said in December that the area around Grangemouth seemed promising, not least because a shale oil industry operated there in the 19th century. However, Ineos must first convince the Scottish government, which announced a moratorium on shale gas activity in January.AdvertisementMr. Ratcliffe has said he is prepared to spend $1 billion to develop shale gas in Britain, including generously rewarding local communities and landowners for putting up with the inconvenience and risk of drilling and fracking.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.