AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressThe seventh year of the bull market is off to a rocky start.Stocks took a hard fall on Tuesday, wiping out this year’s gains for the Dow Jones industrial average and the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, as investors worried about the likelihood of the first increase in interest rates in nine years and a plunge in the value of the euro.Investors dumped stocks from the start of trading, and the selling accelerated as the day wore on. All 10 industry sectors in the S.&P. 500 closed lower.The Dow sank 332.78 points, or 1.9 percent, to 17,662.94. The S.&P. 500 fell 35.27 points, or 1.7 percent, to end at 2,044.16. The Nasdaq composite lost 82.64 points, or 1.7 percent, to 4,859.79. The Nasdaq, however, is still up nearly 3 percent so far this year.The prospect of higher interest rates is unnerving investors. The Federal Reserve’s ultra-low-rate policy, in place since 2008, has allowed companies to borrow cheaply and has made stocks more appealing relative to bonds by pushing bond yields lower. The S.&P. 500 has almost tripled since hitting its low on March 9, 2009, during the recession.A Fed rate increase would also be likely to drive up the value of the dollar even more. Though a strong dollar sounds good, it can hurt American companies by making their goods costlier for foreigners and shrinking the value of profits the companies make overseas.“Regardless of whether the Fed hikes in June or September, it’s coming and it’s not very far away,” said Craig Erlam, senior market analyst at Oanda. “That makes the dollar very strong compared to its peers.”On Tuesday, the euro dropped 1.3 percent against the dollar to a 12-year low of $1.07.Central banks in other major countries are trying to jolt their economies into growing faster by lowering borrowing costs. On Monday, the European Central Bank began buying bonds to lower long-term interest rates in a practice known as quantitative easing. The central bank in Japan has a similar effort underway. In contrast, the Fed ended its bond purchases last year.When central banks move in opposite directions, it can cause disruptions in the global flow of capital into bonds and currencies and, in turn, stocks.The hit to American companies from the stronger dollar comes as they struggle to meet high earnings targets. In October, earnings per share for the S.&P. 500 were expected to jump 12 percent in 2015, according to S&P Capital IQ. Now earnings per share are expected to increase just 1.5 percent.Steven Ricchiuto, chief economist at Mizuho Securities, thinks United States markets are in for some trouble as the Fed moves to raise rates.“Earnings are not improving here, and you’re getting weaker potential overseas earnings,” he said.Traders think it is likely that the Fed will raise interest rates in June given the strengthening jobs market. A government report on Tuesday showed that in January, employers advertised the most job openings in 14 years. That followed a report on Friday that the unemployment rate fell to 5.5 percent last month as payrolls increased by 295,000.Among the movers in stocks, Barnes & Noble dropped $2.50, or 10 percent, to $22.36 after reporting fiscal third-quarter profit that fell far short of Wall Street expectations. Revenue also fell because of weakness in its retail and Nook e-reader businesses.Credit Suisse surged after the Swiss bank sought to turn the page on a period of scandals and fines by replacing its chief executive with Tidjane Thiam, the head of the British insurer Prudential. Credit Suisse shares rose $1.57, or 6.7 percent, to $25.11. Equities markets also fell in Europe. The British FTSE 100 index lost the most, 2.5 percent. Investors are concerned that Greece may run out of money soon. Although analysts say that Europe is better protected now than two years ago against a potential Greek default, the possibility continues to create uncertainty. Greece’s lenders are withholding rescue money until it comes up with a list of economic reforms, and Greece is facing a cash squeeze this month.“The Greek government is pushing the envelope with its creditors, and the market is scared by the prospect of another long, drawn-out debt negotiation,” said David Madden, market analyst at IG. Bonds in several European countries rose on Tuesday, sending yields lower. In Germany, France, the Netherlands, Spain and Italy, yields on 10-year government bonds hit record lows, according to data from Tradeweb. The price of oil fell sharply on indications of rising global supplies. Benchmark United States crude fell $1.59 to settle at $50.07 a barrel in New York. Brent crude, a benchmark for international oils used by many refineries, fell $2.14 to settle at $56.39 in London.United States Treasury bonds rallied on expectations of a rate rise from the Fed, as well as the bond-buying program just begun in Europe. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note fell to 2.13 percent from 2.19 percent on Monday, and the price rose 17/32 to 98 27/32.Advertisement