By ANITA RAGHAVANMARCH 10, 2015
The number of hedge funds hit new heights last year, and the amount of money flowing into the funds was the highest since before the financial crisis. Even so, hedge funds’ performance lagged the broader stock market.Last year, the number of hedge funds climbed to 8,377, according to an estimate compiled by Hedge Fund Research, a firm in Chicago that tracks the industry. That was a strong recovery for the industry. After the financial crisis, some hedge funds went out of business, and the estimated number of funds dropped to 6,845 in 2009 from 7,634 in 2007.More important, according to bankers at Wall Street securities firms that cater to the industry, 2014 was a strong year in terms of new money flowing into hedge funds. Hedge Fund Research said that $76 billion of new capital poured into hedge funds, the highest level since 2007 when $195 billion in new capital came into funds. All that money and more flowed out in 2008 and 2009 as the financial crisis and the Ponzi scheme involving Bernard L. Madoff made investors, particularly European ones, skittish.Since the financial crisis, there has been a big swing in the geographic base of investors in hedge funds. “Precrisis, the biggest investors in hedge funds were European, and postcrisis, the biggest investors in hedge funds are American,” said Will Smith, head of capital introductions for Europe and the Middle East at Morgan Stanley in London.AdvertisementAlthough money resumed flowing into hedge funds in 2010, the pace has been patchy. After rising to $70.6 billion in 2011, inflows fell to $34.4 billion in 2012, according to Hedge Fund Research. But now, some stability appears to be emerging.Advertisement“The class of 2014 leading into 2015 was a standout year since the financial crisis in terms of launch size and quality of managers,” said Dean Backer, Goldman Sachs’s global head of prime brokerage, a division at investment banks thathelps hedge funds raise money. “Overall assets under management raised was significantly higher than the previous three years.”Among the hedge funds started last year was one called Darsana Capital Partners by Anand Desai, a former manager at Eton Park Capital Management, with more than $1 billion in assets. (Perhaps a sign of the times, Darsana’s debut was a shadow of Eton Park’s a decade earlier by a former Goldman Sachs whiz kid Eric Mindich. Mr. Mindich succeeded in raising $3.5 billion despite requiring a strict lockup period for investors’ money.)There is no question that the heady era of the late 1990s, when a couple of traders could quit an investment bank and start a hedge fund in a small office with a few computers, are for the most part history.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There are a lot of headwinds to start up a hedge fund,” said Robert Leonard, global head of capital services at Credit Suisse in New York. Some of it is the result of increased regulatory requirements, which are making it more expensive to start a hedge fund. In addition, investors are doing extra due diligence before they pour money into funds. They are also requiring asset managers to follow certain practices,including that investment managers have different people for different functions like overseeing risk or being in charge of compliance.“The days of starting with $25 million and growing from $25 to $50 million and $50 million to $100 million, which was the norm 10 to 15 years ago, don’t happen as much anymore,” Mr. Leonard said.What is increasingly happening, particularly in Europe, is that young traders seeking to start a hedge fund are joining a larger hedge fund group. “We have seen over 100 portfolio managers join the large, predominantly U.S. multi-manager groups in the last two years to run a new book on their platform,” Mr. Smith of Morgan Stanley said.One hedge fund that brought on new traders last year is Millennium Management, a New York firm run by the industry titan Israel A. Englander. Millennium has long operated a platform model, which means that it allocates money to portfolio managers to deploy in a variety of trading strategies. In 2014, it increased its portfolio management teams by 26. And last year in Europe, BlueCrest Capital Management, based in London, hired 40 portfolio managers, traders and analysts for its BlueCrest Equity Strategy Fund, a hedge fund that uses a variety of long-short trading strategies. The fund was started internally in the summer of 2013 with BlueCrest partners’ capital.Nadeem Walji, who ran his own hedge fund, Duma Capital Partners, with about $500 million in assets from 2005 to 2009 and another hedge fund until late 2011, is sitting on the sidelines for now. “We really are deep into the maturation phase of the hedge fund industry that accelerated post 2008,” he said. “Hedge funds are now institutions. After the financial crisis, everyone wants to place their money with established hedge funds.”Mr. Walji pointed to another factor that was dulling the gloss of hedge funds: poor performance. HFRI’s Fund Weighted Composite Index, which tracks more than 2,000 funds, was up 3 percent last year compared with a gain of 13.7percent for the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index with dividends. Unlike investing in an index, which is a low-cost way of playing the stock market, investors in hedge funds typically pay a 2percent management fee and a 20percent performance fee.Advertisement“Too many hedge funds are more concerned with gathering and keeping assets than generating performance,” Mr. Walji said. “The 2percent has become more important than the 20percent.” He said that one of the reasons he was managing his own money was that “from an equity side, it is more effective for me to buy indices than invest in most hedge funds.”Anita Raghavan is the author of “The Billionaire’s Apprentice: The Rise of the Indian-American Elite and the Fall of the Galleon Hedge Fund.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.