By CHAD BRAYMARCH 10, 2015
LONDON — The Aldermore Group, a so-called challenger bank to Britain’s traditional financial powers, said on Tuesday that it had priced its initial public offering, valuing the company at 651 million pounds, or about $982 million.Aldermore, which operates online and does not have branches, priced its offering at £1.92 a share, near the top of its expected range. It sold about 35 percent of its capital in the offering of 117.9 million shares.Shares in Aldermore rose 10 percent, to £2.12, in conditional trading on the London Stock Exchange early on Tuesday. The stock will begin unconditional trading on Friday.“This is an exciting moment for Aldermore,” Phillip Monks, the Aldermore chief executive, said in a news release. “The success of our I.P.O. is testament to the strength of our story as a legacy-free bank focused on providing banking services” to homeowners as well as small- and medium-size businesses.AdvertisementThe lender raised gross proceeds of £75 million in the offering, which Aldermore will use to support the growth of its business in the medium term.AdvertisementThe private equity firm AnaCap Financial Partners, which invested in Aldermore in 2009, also sold shares in the offering.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Founded in 2009, Aldermore is considered a challenger to the larger, more traditional lenders that dominate the banking landscape in Britain. It is the latest of several challenger banks to go public after delaying its I.P.O. last year.OneSavings Bank, which was backed by the private equity firm J. C. Flowers & Company, listed its shares in London in June, and Virgin Money, the British financial services company partly owned by the billionaire Richard Branson, priced its I.P.O. in November.Aldermore focuses on lending to homeowners and small- and medium-size businesses in areas that it believes have been underserved by larger banks in Britain. It has about 850 employees and around 160,000 customers.At the end of 2014, the bank had £4.5 billion in deposits and total loans of £4.8 billion. For the year ended Dec. 31, the bank posted a pretax profit of £56.3 million, excluding I.P.O. costs of £6 million. That compared with a pretax profit of £25.7 million in 2013.A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Aldermore I.P.O.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.