AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaIf the most familiar story in the newspaper industry is the demise of newspapers, the second is that of the passionate, wealthy entrepreneur wielding a potential solution.John A. Catsimatidis, the billionaire owner of the Gristedes supermarket chain, is considering making a bid for The Daily News in New York. There have been rumors that James L. Dolan, the billionaire owner of the New York Knicks, may also be interested.They might look across the country for a cautionary tale. In 2012, Aaron Kushner paid about $50 million, plus the assumption of $110 million in pension obligations, for The Orange County Register, a venerable publication that was once among the most read newspapers in California.Mr. Kushner, 41, a Stanford economics and organizational analysis graduate who sold a web company during the dot-com boom and later ran a greeting card business, planned to start a revolution and reverse the tide in the industry, with ambitious plans to expand, add talent and greatly increase revenues. But on Tuesday, Mr. Kushner resigned from all executive duties at The Register and its parent company, Freedom Communications. His co-owner Eric Spitz, 45, stepped back to become chairman of Freedom. Richard Mirman, a former casino executive who has served as a publisher for the company, was elevated to president and chief executive.Mr. Mirman, said Teri Sforza, a columnist and reporter at The Register, is known for his financial acumen. “He’s saying, ‘Look we’ve gotten into a lot of trouble, and here’s how I am trying to fix things,’ ” she said in a phone interview.It signaled, perhaps, the beginning of the end of an experiment that many hoped would result in the promised land for modern newspapers: a business that thrives despite the expensive, unpredictable and arcane business of journalism.When Mr. Kushner bought the paper, said Gary Warner, a former travel editor who was laid off in 2014 after more than 20 years at the paper, “he got up there and said a lot of things that people were just ecstatic about. We were going to go out and get some real stars and make this a destination newspaper again, like it was in the ’80s.”At first Mr. Kushner aggressively expanded. He hired 440 employee as part of a local print strategy, created two dozen new sections and began publishing a new daily, The Long Beach Register. In November 2013, he bought The Press Enterprise of Riverside for about $27 million. In 2014, he started The Los Angeles Register.He shuttered it just five months later after rounds of layoffs and facing multiple lawsuits.“I don’t feel that Aaron really knew much about the editorial side at all,” Mr. Warner said. “He had a business-side vision, which was that print could still generate a lot of revenue handled the right way, and if he made it a must-read, the readers would follow.” In the end, Mr. Warner said, it never quite became a must-read.A spokesman for Freedom declined to make Mr. Kushner and Mr. Spitz available for an interview.For the year ended in March 2014, The Register had a circulation of 302,802 on Sundays and 182,669 on weekdays, according to the Alliance for Audited Media. Those figures had risen from 290,631 on Sundays and 178,247 on weekdays for the year ended March 2012, around the time Mr. Kushner took over.“It has been an incredible period of ups and downs,” Ms. Sforza said. “In our business, is there going to be anything else for the next 10 or 15 years?”In an interview on Wednesday, Mr. Mirman said, “Eric and Aaron had a vision, and they were entrepreneurs and they went for it, so to speak. I think in a lot of cases, the revenue didn’t materialize.” The business is not profitable but Mr. Mirman thinks it could be within months, not years, he said. Though he has decided to take a more conservative approach, he said, further layoffs are not in his immediate plans.Despite their stepping back, Mr. Kushner and Mr. Spitz do not seem likely to sell anytime soon, Mr. Mirman said. “They’re very passionate, entrepreneurial folks,” he said. “They’re still invested in the company, and they both want to make sure that the paper supports the community, supports readers.”Whether their plan succeeded or failed, he said, “it almost doesn’t matter. It made people think differently.”At a meeting this week to announce the executive changes, Mr. Spitz struck a note that some employees said they found incongruous. He praised Mr. Kushner’s vision, according to people briefed on the meeting, and suggested that the staff might write him a thank-you note.Advertisement