By BEN PROTESSMARCH 11, 2015
With just a point and a click, you can browse a face book of felons, a new government website that will warn of the danger these criminals pose to society.Only these are not the faces of sex offenders and serial killers. These criminals are mortgage schemers and inside traders, most likely armed with nothing more than an M.B.A. or a law degree.Their faces will soon appear online courtesy of the Utah Legislature, which on Wednesday approved a measure to build the nation’s first white-collar offender registry, appending a scarlet letter of sorts on the state’s financial felons. The registry — quirky even by the standards of a legislature that this week reinstated firing squads as a method of execution — will be replete with a “a recent photograph” of Utah’s white-collar offenders and, in case they try to run or hide, their “date of birth, height, weight, and eye and hair color.”“White-collar crime is an epidemic in Utah,” said Sean Reyes, the state’s attorney general who formulated the idea for the registry when he was a defense lawyer, “representing some of these bad guys.” A former mixed martial arts fighter who has a metal plate lodged in his eye socket from a basketball injury, Mr. Reyes noted that while violent crimes were devastating, many “physical wounds heal,” whereas white-collar crimes “can forever deplete your life savings.”AdvertisementWhile some Utah lawmakers fear that the registry is overkill, the idea does tap into a vein of populist outrage over financial misdeeds. As much as sex offender registries spread state by state, so too could a white-collar crime registry find favor across the nation, say its supporters.State Representative Mike K. McKell introduced a bill to establish a registry of white-collar criminals in Utah. While it sailed through the Legislature, some of his colleagues raised concerns.The legislation’s sponsor in the Utah Senate, Curtis S. Bramble, a Republican, plans to promote the idea through his role as president-elect of the National Conference of State Legislatures, an influential group, saying that “the registry could become a best practices for other states.”The Utah registry, which sailed through the Legislature and will soon land on the governor’s desk, escalates a broader backlash against financial crimes. Although no top Wall Street executive went to prison over the 2008 financial crisis, lingering indignation still courses through legislative bodies and federal courts.AdvertisementIn other words, being a white-collar criminal is no longer the trip to “Club Fed” it once was.Exhibit A in their troubles: recent prison sentences. Lee B. Farkas, a former mortgage industry executive accused of masterminding one of the largest bank frauds in history, received a 30-year sentence. Bernard L. Madoff was sentenced to 150 years in prison. And in 2011, a judge handed down an 11-year sentence to the hedge fund magnate Raj Rajaratnam, then the largest penalty ever for insider trading.Under federal guidelines, fraud sentences hinge on the amount of ill-gotten gains and losses that investors suffer. The Dodd-Frank Act, the regulatory law Congress passed in response to the crisis, also instructed the federal sentencing commission to amend the guidelines for punishing securities fraud to reflect “the need for an effective deterrent.”The steep sentences have coincided with Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, making white-collar crimes a central focus of his tenure. And even after a federal appeals court tossed out two of Mr. Bharara’s insider trading convictions, Congress has introduced legislation to officially ban such trading.Against that already onerous backdrop, some defense lawyers are raising concerns about the prospect of white-collar registries spreading to other states.“You’re adding one more punishment without any real showing that it’s needed,” said Susan Brune, who represents white-collar defendants at Brune & Richard in New York. “Enough already.”Since white-collar cases typically garner outsize media attention, Ms. Brune remarked that “Google is already a pretty effective registry.”In passing the bill, it helped that Utah appears to be a hotbed of financial fraud. Lawmakers, for example, recounted the case of Val Southwick, a local businessman convicted of defrauding investors out of more than $100 million.A number of prominent Ponzi schemes have unfolded in Utah, as have investment frauds and multilevel marketing schemes that prey on members of the Mormon Church. The online registry, supporters say, would afford those investors another tool for vetting their financial advisers.AdvertisementLawmakers also note that Utah’s light regulatory touch has in recent years attracted Wall Street firms like Goldman Sachs to its soil, though there is no indication that the banks have done anything wrong.“The schemes change, but the players stay the same,” said Mike K. McKell, a Republican who sponsored the bill in the Utah House. “I’m not ashamed with the fact that we’re going to brand some of these people.”Still, some Utah lawmakers questioned whether the white-collar database was one registry too many.During the debate over the registry, Representative LaVar Christensen recalled that the state’s Legislature passed a law a decade ago to monitor pornographic websites. “Can you imagine going home every night and saying that your full-time, state-paid job was to look at pornography?” Mr. Christensen, a Republican, asked his fellow lawmakers.The pornography registry was created after every state in the country built a sex offender registry. And according to the National Conference of State Legislatures, several states have formed drug-offender registries and even a database of arsonists.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By comparison, a registry of white-collar offenders might seem trivial. Yet the Utah Legislature, where Republicans outnumber Democrats 87 to 17, easily cleared the white-collar registry bill. The House passed it with a lopsided vote of 65 to 7, and the Senate passed it unanimously.When announcing his support for the bill, Gov. Gary Herbert declared that “It doesn’t matter what color collar a criminal wears.”Under the bill, the attorney general’s office must create a website with the names and faces of certain white-collar felons convicted since late 2005. The offenses include securities fraud, mortgage fraud and money-laundering, those typically synonymous with white-collar crime.For a first offense, an offender will appear on the site for 10 years. By the third offense, the offender’s picture will live there permanently.In part, the registry is aimed at recouping cash from the convicts. Indeed, to disappear from the attorney general’s registry, the offenders must pay full restitution to their victims.AdvertisementMr. Reyes, the state’s attorney general, who says he spends free time “shooting guns” and recently joined a secret sting operation in Colombia to rescue child prostitutes, hopes the white-collar registry “becomes as ubiquitous as Yelp.”The registry signals Mr. Reyes’s latest push into tackling white-collar crime. A former DJ whom Bloomberg called the “Rapping Republican Rising Star,” Mr. Reyes helped to found a project called Fraud College, a symposium to educate the public about financial scams.Walter A. Pavlo Jr., a blogger for Forbes convicted of a white-collar offense years ago, supports such efforts to educate the public. He, too, has spoken to business school students about avoiding a life of white-collar crime.But the registry, he says, crosses a line, and runs counter to recent efforts to smooth the transition from prison to the outside world.“The government would further tag you beyond the debt you’ve already paid,” he said. “It’s frightening.”Peter J. Henning contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Utah Passes White-Collar Felon Registry.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.