By ADAM LIPTAKOCT. 14, 2015
WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court on Wednesday heard arguments in a pair of consequential cases in which the thorny legal issues obscured how much was at stake.One case, concerning the federal government’s authority to regulate energy markets, was at least partly driven by power companies concerned about their profits. The case, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission v. Electric Power Supply Association, No. 14-840, involved complicated economic questions that seemed to test the limits of the court’s expertise.“We’re not electricity regulators,” Justice Stephen G. Breyer said. “It’s pretty tough and technical.”The other case, Campbell-Ewald Company v. Gomez, No. 14-857, asked whether courts may dismiss lawsuits when defendants offer to give plaintiffs everything they seek. The answer matters, Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. suggested, because picking off plaintiffs one by one would frustrate their ability to band together in class actions to sue over minor claims.Advertisement“This is all about class certification,” the chief justice said.The energy case concerned a regulatory approach known as “demand response,” which encourages electricity users like schools, hospitals and shopping centers to reduce consumption at peak times in exchange for price breaks.AdvertisementThe approach lowers costs for consumers and decreases the risk of system failures, which can cause blackouts. But it also cuts into the profits of companies that own power plants, which lose money when price spikes are avoided.The main legal question in the case was whether the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission had overstepped its authority by intruding into retail markets. The commission oversees wholesale transactions under the Federal Power Act, but the states regulate retail transactions.Justice Anthony M. Kennedy told Solicitor General Donald B. Verrilli Jr., who was representing the commission, that an economist might answer the question differently than a judge would.“If there were a student in Economics I,” Justice Kennedy said, “it seems to me that he would conclude and his professor would conclude that wholesale affects retail, retail affects wholesale. They’re interlinked, which means you win the case, except that the statute makes a distinction. We have to make a distinction.”Justice Antonin Scalia echoed the point. “I like deregulated markets,” he said. “But the problem is, do you have the authority to do it?”Mr. Verrilli said the regulatory approach was both legal and good policy. It “has saved billions of dollars in wholesale costs,” he said, “and it’s an effective tool against blackouts and brownouts.”Paul D. Clement, a lawyer for the power companies challenging the regulations, said the commission had intruded on authority given to the states. “What FERC was trying to do here,” he said, “was to reduce retail demand by providing payments to retail customers on an otherwise wholesale market in an effort to change the effective price for retail sales.”Advertisement“Now,” he said, “that sure sounds like something that belongs to the states.”Mr. Clement added that the federal regulations had crowded out innovative state approaches to the same problems.Last year, a divided three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled against the commission.“Because FERC’s rule entails direct regulation of the retail market — a matter exclusively within state control — it exceeds the commission’s authority,” Judge Janice Rogers Brown wrote for the majority.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. recused himself from the case before the Supreme Court, presumably because of a financial conflict.Wednesday’s second case arose from a text message on behalf of the Navy that was sent to Jose Gomez in 2006. “Get a career,” the text said. “An education. And a chance to serve a greater cause.” Mr. Gomez was 40 at the time, well outside the age range for Navy recruits.Mr. Gomez sued under the Telephone Consumer Protection Act, which allows people who receive unwanted text messages to recover up to $1,500, and he sought to represent a class of people who had received the message.A Navy contractor, the Campbell-Ewald Company, offered to settle the case for $1,503 for each unsolicited text, court costs and a promise to stop sending such messages. Mr. Gomez did not respond to the offer.The company’s lawyer, Gregory G. Garre, told the justices on Wednesday that the case should have been dismissed as moot because his client had capitulated and offered Mr. Gomez everything he had sought.That legal proposition seemed to resonate with several justices. But there did not appear to be a consensus that the particular offer at issue was good enough.AdvertisementMr. Gomez had asked, for instance, for payment of his lawyers’ fees. Mr. Garre said his client was not required to offer to pay the fees because Mr. Gomez was not entitled to them.That did not satisfy Justice Elena Kagan. “You know,” she said, “‘complete relief’ means what the plaintiff has asked for. The plaintiff has asked for attorneys’ fees here.”Justice Scalia responded that unrealistic demands should not keep a case alive. “I suppose he could ask for the key to Fort Knox,” he said.Mr. Gomez “could ask for a unicorn,” Mr. Garre said, agreeing.Chief Justice Roberts said judicial resources should not be used to decide disputes that had as a practical matter been resolved. “You won’t take yes for an answer,” the chief justice told Jonathan F. Mitchell, a lawyer for Mr. Gomez.Other justices pointed out that a promise to pay was not the same as a certified check, suggesting that they were open to procedures in which payments were guaranteed. It is possible, then, that Mr. Gomez could win in a decision that sketches out acceptable ways for companies to pick off plaintiffs in other cases.Such a decision could deal a blow to class actions. Mr. Garre touched on the issue only briefly, but there was little question that was the issue animating the case.“It’s hard to feel too sorry about the plaintiffs, who have everything that they could possibly ask for,” Mr. Garre said, when “as a practical matter in these sorts of class actions, what they get is pennies on the dollars of their claim. The big money goes to the class-action lawyers.”Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Justices Delve Into Energy Markets and Class-Action Deals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.