AdvertisementSupported byBy Danielle Ivory and Aaron M. KesslerFederal officials released a survey of potentially dangerous guardrails on Wednesday and said that they found no evidence that the guardrails had been quietly changed to make them safer after accusations that earlier changes had made them less safe.Last year, a federal jury found the guardrail manufacturer Trinity Industries liable for defrauding the Federal Highway Administration because it did not disclose design changes it made in 2005 that are suspected of causing the guardrails to jam up and pierce vehicles. Bloomberg News last year reported allegations that the company had changed the design again to address the problem.The highway agency’s survey, which was conducted and released jointly with the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, analyzed measurements from 1,048 guardrails across five states. Final results of eight crash tests the federal agency conducted in recent months are expected soon.“There is no evidence to suggest there are multiple versions,” the agency said in a statement.But safety experts questioned the survey’s methodology.“This reads like they’ve started with a conclusion, which is that the ET-Plus is fine, and then they’ve tried to fit their methods into a way to reach that result,” said Sean Kane, president of Safety Research & Strategies in Massachusetts, referring to the suspect guardrail. “All this report does is raise more questions about why they’re not being transparent and straightforward with the public.”Joshua Harman, a federal whistle-blower who prevailed in a False Claims Act lawsuit against Trinity last year, has alleged that the company enlarged the so-called exit gap on the ET-Plus to avoid the jamming that is at the heart of the guardrail system’s suspected malfunction.Court records from a Virginia patent case brought by Trinity against Mr. Harman in 2013 — which led to the False Claims Act lawsuit — show that Brian Smith, a Trinity executive, testified that the manufacturing range for the ET-Plus’s exit gap was between 1 inch and 1.15 inches.But data released with the highway agency’s report showed that about one-third of the guardrails it measured had exit gaps greater than 1.15 inches. The largest measured 1.75 inches, according to the report, and the national average was 1.16 inches. Though the agency acknowledged that there were variances in the dimensions of ET-Pluses on roadways, it did not address the range cited by Mr. Smith in court testimony. Instead, the federal agency’s report said that the exit gap for the ET-Plus is supposed to be at least one inch. It said later in an email that Trinity had “consistently” described “a design tolerance for the exit gap of one inch or greater.”“This study unfortunately confirms how ham-handed the FHWA’s testing has been,” said Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, referring to the Federal Highway Administration. “The agency’s methods in assessing these guardrails have been dumbfounding and deficient.”The agency took measurements of units in five states, Arizona, California, Illinois, South Carolina and Texas, but said it did not know whether any state had precise numbers on how many guardrails were installed on its roads. About 64 percent of those surveyed in Arizona, more than 43 percent of those surveyed in California and over 32 percent of those surveyed in Texas had exit gaps of more than 1.15 inches, according to an analysis of the agency’s data by The New York Times.Guardrails are not required to carry markings indicating where they were manufactured or when they were installed. As a result, the agency had to guess the origin of most of the units, based on proximity to Trinity’s manufacturing plants, and knew only the dates of installation in South Carolina, which happens to track that information. But the agency listed the installation dates of the South Carolina guardrails as “2012+” or “random,” rather than noting specific dates or years.Trinity on Wednesday said that the federal agency’s report supported its stance that there is only one version of the ET-Plus. “Any claims to the contrary are purely false and misleading,” the company said in a statement.Robert Gebeloff contributed reporting.Advertisement