By GINIA BELLAFANTEMARCH 11, 2015
Last Friday, Gail O. Mellow, the president of LaGuardia Community College, a two-year institution in Queens with 50,000 students, received an unexpected call. It was Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive of Goldman Sachs, who surprised her with the news that the bank was giving the school $2 million. No restrictions applied.Goldman had been involved with LaGuardia for five years through the company’s 10,000 Small Businesses initiative, a program offering management education and support services to new and aspiring entrepreneurs. The gift will nearly double LaGuardia’s small endowment and, Ms. Mellow said, aid the college’s students, many of whom are immigrants and come from families that earn less than $25,000 a year.“What a democratizing influence these community colleges have in the country and in our society,” Mr. Blankfein said in a telephone interview on Wednesday. “And yet students struggle to finish not because they are dumb or not committed but because they are working more than a full-time job, and it takes them two and a half hours to get to it by subway.” Community college, he continued, “is a real accelerator to the middle class, and I can’t think of anything the country needs more than that.”Mr. Blankfein has developed a personal connection to the school. In 2013, he delivered LaGuardia’s commencement address, during which he discussed his journey from housing projects in East New York, Brooklyn, to Harvard to leadership of one of the world’s largest financial firms. He and his senior management team were also struck by a series of articles in The New York Times last year that detailed the struggles of community colleges, including LaGuardia, according to Goldman representatives.AdvertisementThe Goldman gift is a rare example of a top-tier philanthropy providing financial support for a community college. Community colleges educate nearly half the country’s undergraduates and maintain low graduation rates in large part because they are lack sufficient resources, but unlike charter schools, for instance, they have never taken off as recipients of fashionable largess.Goldman has also set aside an additional $1 million to help community colleges across the country. Mr. Blankfein said he foresaw a continuing commitment to two-year schools, assuming results are favorable.Advertisement“By results I mean, Are we affecting a large number of lives for the better?” he said.The college says that it plans to use Goldman’s donation to meet the immediate needs of its students who are at risk of dropping out because they cannot afford basics like books and Metrocards. As a scholarship student at Harvard, Mr. Blankfein said, he had tuition covered but little money for anything else. “If you bought a Coke, it wasn’t in the budget.” Once, realizing he was operating at a deficit of about $500, he went into the financial aid office and was quickly given a check. “It was the first time in my life,” he said, “I wasn’t nickel and dimed.”A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Goldman Sachs Contributes $2 Million to LaGuardia Community College.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.