AdvertisementSupported byBy Robert StraussLarry Johnson keeps himself busy in his retirement — 90-minute indoor cycling classes three times a week and upper-body workouts on the alternate days, taking Saturdays off. In the winter, he goes into the mountains above his Albuquerque home to ski at least once a week.Sometimes those Saturdays bring 35-mile bike rides along Albuquerque’s trails, the better to keep in practice for his cycling competitions.Mr. Johnson, who will turn 95 on April 5, hopes to sweep four cycling events — the 5K, 10K, 20K and 40K — at the National Senior Games in Minneapolis this summer. Make that expects to win: He may well be the only person in the 95-and-over group.“Unless some stranger comes up, I don’t have any competition,” said Mr. Johnson, who retired only 10 years ago from the ski patrol and before that had worked in the nuclear industry. “All I have to do is finish, and that won’t be a problem.”Generations ago, there may have been a few older people participating in sports — “older” meaning maybe age 40 — but now there are age-group sports for almost everything. Age categorization is no longer limited to 40 and up; it extends to 60 and above, 70 and above, even 95 and above, as in Mr. Johnson’s case.And the sports with age-group competitions are not always those typically associated with retirement. Rodeo, for example. Jack Hicken was 35 when some younger friends of his, with whom he rode horses in rural Alberta, told him they competed in the cowboy sport.“It was ego,” said Mr. Hicken, a former teacher who lives in Stirling, Alberta. “If those young guys could rope calves, then I would learn and beat them.”He is now 78 and still ropes calves, in the senior rodeo 68-and-over category. That means jumping off a moving horse after roping a calf, then tying the calf up — a sequence that results in a lot of bruises in a half-minute ride.“I don’t win much anymore because of the younger guys — the 68-year-olds — but it is still just fun,” Mr. Hicken said.He also teams up with a friend, Effie Simpson, in a mixed event called ribbon-rope, in which he ropes the calf, then she grabs a ribbon attached to the calf squirming on the ground. Ms. Simpson is 80 and “tough as nails,” Mr. Hicken said. They compete in the 60-and-over group at rodeos all over Western Canada, Montana, Wyoming and Colorado.“My kids don’t complain,” Mr. Hicken said. “In fact, my son in Colorado always tells his friends I am his hero just for doing it.”According to Emilio Pardo, president of Life Reimagined, a division of AARP, 38 percent of men 55 and older and 33 percent of women in the same age group exercise or play sports regularly, up from 33 percent of men and 31 percent of women three years ago. Census figures suggest that the number in older sports age categories will grow. The number of Americans 70 to 74 is expected to rise to 14.7 million by 2020, up from 10 million in 2012, and the number over 85 is forecast to rise to 6.7 million, from 5.9 million over the same period.Sports are adapting to the demographic changes. “You have more opportunities these days for organized play,” Mr. Pardo said. “The quality of play in these leagues is awesome. It is a new curve of life. There is an aspiration of an extra nine or 10 years our parents didn’t have and we want to do the most we can with them.”Ethel Lehmann played softball when she was young and just decided not to stop. Now, at 85, retired in Largo, Fla., she plays infield for the coyly named Kids and Cubs team — the only woman on an elite 75-and-older men’s team. She gets — and takes — no guff from male opponents and teammates.“They had not expected to have a woman be good, but now they like me to play,” said Mrs. Lehmann, who also does age-group track events in the Senior Games. For this year’s 85-and-older category, she is trying the triple jump for the first time.“The games are fun and the camaraderie is great. For the time we are out there, we aren’t just grandmas, but athletes,” she said.Ruby Rott, 81, doesn’t mind being a grandma when it comes to watching her grandchildren play — several are college athletes in volleyball, baseball or gymnastics. She did not do anything on her own until age 55, when she started taking tennis lessons. Now Ms. Rott of St. Paul is looking forward this year to her 12th semiannual National Senior Games.She is also looking forward to watching her inspiration, her daughter, Katy Call, compete at her first Senior Games, as a 51-year-old volleyball player. “I used to watch her play in college and be amazed, so I knew I had to try something and tennis seemed easy,” Ms. Rott said. “That we will be together as seniors is just the cap.”Isabelle Daniels Holston had a real moment in the sun, placing fourth in the 100-meter dash and getting a bronze medal in the sprint relay in the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne. Most of her friends in the elite running world stopped competing, but she never did, and she will be out there again, doing sprints, the shot put and discus as a 77-year-old in the 75-to-79 age group this summer.“God gave me a gift, so I try to use it,” said Ms. Holston, who grew up, she said, chasing pigs on a Georgia farm. “My brothers couldn’t catch the pigs, but I could, so my daddy convinced me to run.”She now lives in Decatur, just outside Atlanta. “Now it doesn’t matter whether I win,” she said. “Just to compete and meet other people who have outlasted time, that is what is rewarding.”Advertisement