AdvertisementSupported byBy John SchwartzI am an idiot.That, at least, is the impression I get from personal finance websites and magazines and books. They all seem to say I’m doing pretty much everything wrong when it comes to my financial life, basically because I don’t pay that much attention to my finances. Now, I understand that nobody buys a magazine that affirms our choices and tells us we are in good shape. No parenting magazine could last long if it didn’t suggest that its advice will make the difference between raising a future Ivy Leaguer and a basement-dwelling knucklehead. Money advice, to be profitable to the advice giver, must start from the position that you’ll go broke without this help. In publishing, sex may sell, but insecurity sells even better.In my case, they could be right. I wouldn’t know, because — as I said — I don’t pay all that much attention to my finances. Like many of you, dear readers, I am a pre-retirement worker of an economic class well above the poverty line but well below the 1 percent. I set up a 401(k) when I get a job, and set an automatic contribution, and then basically do my best to forget it’s there. This set-it-and-forget-it approach served me well for several decades of gainful employment, but lately my ignorance has been anything but blissful. More and more, it’s all been gnawing at me, a kind of unease that I can’t block out. So I decided to take a hard look at where I stand.Why has it taken until I’m nearly 58 to open my eyes? My excuse is simple: Numbers scare me. I am not alone in this. Scientists who study math anxiety say that the anticipation of crunching numbers can lead to the kind of agitation that, on a brain scan, looks a lot like the perception of physical pain. As a reporter, I can be stirred to learn what I need to know to cover numbers in science and business and other topics; if I don’t, somebody will fire me. (Incentive!) But I’ve largely kept out of my own business. Math isn’t my only problem. I’m uncomfortable thinking about money. And, let’s face it, the future scares me silly. Actually, I find it difficult to make choices of any kind; I agonize over buying a new pair of boots or a coffee maker, endlessly shifting options and then regretting my decision in a way that exasperates my wife, Jeanne. So I’ve put off thinking about retirement beyond that steady trickle of cash into my hands-off accounts. Many people don’t invest for retirement at all, according to a report by the National Institute on Retirement Security. Some 45 percent of working-age households have no retirement account assets, while the overall national median retirement account balance is just $3,000. I’m better off than that, and in fact we’re pretty lucky compared with many Americans. For one thing, I have always worked for companies that pay reasonably well and provide pensions, which they have fully funded. Those companies have also sponsored retirement plans for employees and encouraged them to build 401(k) accounts, and I have. Also, I’ve been able to hold on to jobs over the years in a business that’s seen plenty of layoffs. Our household budgets have been tight, but aside from an ill-fated apartment purchase in my 30s, our family hasn’t suffered the kind of financial setback or catastrophic illness that destroys many a family’s nest egg. My wife and I are also compatibly cheap. Our kitchen does not have fancy pots and pans, no thousand-dollar sets of Calphalon or Demeyere, whatever that is. The dishes are mismatched, some dating from our college days. Our cars are functional, and we drive them into the ground; we’ve never been reluctant to tell our three children, “We can’t afford that.” Still, we struggled under their college loans until just last year, when we cleared the balance sheet by selling our house and downsizing to a cheaper place. Two are out of college, one to go.We had breathing room, but I had no idea where we stood in terms of being able to retire someday. I’d all but stopped looking at the envelopes from Vanguard after 2007, when my funds lost about 40 percent of their value — not an unusual dip, given the economic crisis and recession, but a painful one. I knew that the accounts had bounced back, but hadn’t been tracking them closely and hadn’t worked through whether they would be part of a cushion for my wife and me in our golden years. The gnawing convinced me at last that this was the year to get our finances together. Maybe past time, if the numbers didn’t come out right. And while I hope to have many good years of productive work ahead, I also have to think about retirement and plan for it — to look at whether I’m on the right track for comfort in retirement or ruin, and to begin addressing some of the other issues, including life insurance and a will, that I’ve been avoiding all these years.Where to start? With an industry built around retirement planning, diving in seemed like a good first step. But that choice led to more choices. How do I find a retirement consultant? Those who work on commission might be tempted to sell financial products that increase their incomes, not mine. And those who charge a flat fee might try to keep things quick and easy (for them) to ensure that their time is well spent. I had no intention of being a quick hit on somebody’s conveyor belt.As it happens, the 401(k) accounts I built up at the three publications I have worked for over the last 30 years are all under the same roof, the mutual funds giant Vanguard. That promised to make things relatively easy, and the company offers free counseling from a certified financial planner to clients of employer-sponsored plans who are over 55. So one night in January, I made the call to Vanguard’s 800 number. After navigating the voice command system, I ended up talking to an upbeat guy named Jeff, who told me that I could either set up an appointment for a phone session with one of their certified financial planners, or I could get a more thorough counseling session by first filling out a survey that would give the planner a “more holistic view” of my financial picture before our conversation. The result, he said, would be a “personalized financial plan.”Filling out the survey “takes about 45 minutes,” he said. As I hung up, Jeanne, sitting across the living room on the couch, asked, “Any luck?”“They’re going to send a 45-minute questionnaire,” I said. “We can fill it out together.”“Thrilling,” she said.I found the survey. The very first question stumped me. It asked the age I plan to retire.Well, see, this is part of the problem. These are precisely the questions I’ve been avoiding all these years! Jeanne and I had never discussed it. I love my job — journalism is the kind of career that calls for hard work, but it rarely feels like work. So we were starting with a big, big question. (Jeanne has worked part time for years, so her questions have less impact on our retirement picture.)We knew that Social Security kicks in at 62, but that you can earn more if you hold out longer — say, until 66. Medicare begins at 65. And after hunting around online, it appeared that sticking with gainful employment until 70 would lead to the biggest Social Security benefit. Jeanne, a pragmatist, noted ominously, “Your retirement isn’t under your control, entirely.” My employer has a lot to say about it. But we could project a best case, and decided that sticking it out to 70 would be the likeliest course to set us up in terms of our investments, Social Security and pensions. O.K. So we had an answer! “So that was question No.  1?” Jeanne asked. Yes, I said. She laughed. “That was more than 45 minutes.”It was going to be a long night. The first answer had taken so long that the Vanguard website had logged me out for inactivity. I went back in, entered the answer. And soon came to an ever more difficult question: How long do you expect to live?Well, holy cow. Let me check my appointment book. We had moved abruptly from economics to metaphysics. Here, too, however, we decided to plan for a good outcome while understanding that the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune could make best estimates meaningless. Our four parents are still going strong in their 80s. My father is 88 and still working; he’d have laughed at the idea of quitting at 70. So we again filled in some rather optimistic estimates and then marched on through questions about whether I was likely to sell stocks in a market downturn (no), whether I would invest in a fund based on a casual conversation or tip (heck, no) and suchlike. Then came another stumper: What percentage of our income would we hope to receive in retirement? Another search of websites, and I saw that many people look for about 70 or 80 percent of their working income in retirement, assuming that they will live less expensively. So once again, I plugged in a number in the range of somebody else’s rule of thumb.As Jeanne and I discussed these things, I realized we had never really talked about whatever passed for my investment strategy. I offered to. Jeanne said, “My strategy is not to know your strategy.”Still, I did my best to express my amorphous thoughts on investing. I explained that I’d been skeptical of financial advice programs about hard-core investing by gurus like Jim Cramer. I knew I was not the kind of guy who could beat the market. That’s how I came up with my laissez-faire approach. I had a hard time remembering how much of my income I had assigned to the funds 14 years ago when I came to The Times. (After doing some research, I discovered that it was 10 percent.) Jeanne said, “I approve.” Which, after more than 40 years together, is nice to hear.Proceeding through the questionnaire, I then had to track down what we could expect to receive from Social Security each month at age 70 — a pretty easy figure to find from ssa.gov — and what my various pensions might bring in. That process could not be handled from my easy chair, as I had to ask former employers to come up with estimates. One would answer during the course of a single phone call; the other took weeks to calculate an estimate and send it by mail. Anticipating a slog, I decided I’d had enough for the night.When I shut my laptop, four hours had passed from the time I had started the survey, and I was far from done. But we were thinking about the right questions at last. The next day, Jeanne sent me an email mentioning a conversation she’d had with a co-worker who had asked “a quality-of-life question.” If you wait until you are 70 to retire you might get a bigger payout, but will you be in any condition to enjoy it?I responded:“An excellent question. If 70 is the new 50, yes. If 70 is the old 70, no.”Our parents, as I said, had been very young 70-year-olds. It seemed like a safe bet. But I decided to ask the counselor to look at the numbers under a couple of different retirement ages. Over the next few days, I finished the form. Soon after that, Vanguard came back with a report generated from my answers. It said I should be more heavily invested in bonds; considering my age, I had too much money in stocks. Vanguard had been telling me that for a while, so this advice was no surprise. But then I saw words that seemed to levitate off the page:“You’re on track to meet your retirement goals.”It was a beautiful thing. If we continued the way we were going, if the financial markets didn’t collapse, if the magical fairies that govern employment and health were good to us, we would make it. I was, frankly, surprised. Jeanne was exultant. She said, “We won’t be eating cat food!”A week later, I had the conversation with the financial adviser, an upbeat guy named Greg. We discussed how to get on what he somewhat ominously called the “glide path” to a more balanced portfolio for retirement. He explained that the allocation between stocks and bonds mentioned in the report was, in fact, a big deal — “the most important one you make as an investor,” even bigger than deciding which funds we invest in, since bonds help cushion your investments against stock market drops. And he had some suggestions on Vanguard funds that could get us the balance we need. He also explained what we could expect if we wanted to retire in our 60s. His estimates put us a little closer to the margins, but could, with a little luck, deliver us to comfort if not prosperity.It felt good to be done. But we weren’t, of course. This is only the beginning. We have plugged a bunch of hypothetical numbers into a model and gotten a nice picture back. Much is still left to chance. Every decision leads to others, and opening one door leads on to more. We still don’t have a will. We have to look at life insurance — whether to go beyond the amount that my benefits plan offers at low cost. A hard look at health insurance, long-term care insurance and issues like medical directives and power of attorney are ahead. Answering the next questions won’t give us control over the future, either, but they might offer a buffer against misfortune. It isn’t over. But then nothing ever is, until everything is.John Schwartz is a science writer for The Times and the author of a memoir, “Oddly Normal.” Advertisement