AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesWhen Richard Branson, the entrepreneurial billionaire, announced the formation of Virgin Cruises in December, he promised to “shake up the cruise industry.”Details were scarce, but Bain Capital, the private equity firm backing the project, praised the “strategic vision laid out by our collective team.”But in a lawsuit filed on Wednesday in Federal District Court in the Southern District of Florida, Colin Veitch, the former chief executive of Norwegian Cruise Line, says the idea for the new venture was his own.Mr. Veitch says in the suit that he brought the business plan for a new cruise line to Virgin’s attention in 2011. After the two sides began to disagree on how they would split the profits, he says Virgin stole his intellectual property and shut him out of a deal that could have made him hundreds of millions of dollars.Virgin Cruises would be the latest venture for Mr. Branson, who has made his fortune developing branded book and music labels, telecommunications services, airlines, hotels and even private spaceflight ventures. The public face of the Virgin empire, Mr. Branson has a taste for the flamboyant, often inviting guests to his private tropical island and embarking on adventure travel.In a statement, Virgin acknowledged that it had worked with Mr. Veitch, but denied the allegations.“Richard Branson and the Virgin Group first looked at the cruise market in the late 1970s, and our current team has been exploring the opportunity for more than a decade,” Virgin said. “Over the years, we have been in discussions with a number of parties including the plaintiff, and those discussions ceased in 2012. We strongly believe the claim has no merits.”Mr. Veitch retired as chief executive of Norwegian in 2008. After a brief hiatus, he began work on plans to develop a new product in the cruise industry, which has high barriers to entry.He hit upon the idea of a new company consisting only of “ultra ships” — outsize cruise liners with plush amenities and the potential to generate extraordinary profits.While Royal Caribbean and Norwegian currently each operate one of these ships, no company has focused on them exclusively.“It would be like the Bellagio hotel when it crashed onto the scene in Las Vegas,” Mr. Veitch said in an interview on Wednesday.In 2010, he prepared a document outlining the business opportunity and presented it to Allen & Company, the boutique investment bank.Early the next year, he presented the idea to Virgin, and both sides signed a nondisclosure agreement that stipulated that Virgin could not act on the information it obtained from Mr. Veitch for three years.By May 2011, the two sides had largely come to terms on the financial agreement. With that in hand, Mr. Veitch went about securing the services of ship builders in Germany, and a letter of intent from a bank to provide debt financing for the cost of building the ships.Months later, in August, Meyer Werft, one of the world’s biggest ship builders, began working on the project. About the same time, Mr. Veitch arranged for debt financing from KfW, a German bank “that specializes in financing shipbuilding projects.”At the high point of their relationship in October 2011, Mr. Branson taped a video promotion expounding on the opportunity and mentioning Mr. Veitch.“Cruise has the potential to be one of our biggest, sexiest businesses, hence our excitement,” Mr. Branson said in the video. “We are also pleased to be working with Colin Veitch, the teams of Meyer Werft and KfW IPEX-Bank.”Within weeks of the video being made, Mr. Veitch presented the business plan to Allen & Company’s managing directors, including the former Central Intelligence Agency director George Tenet and Bill Bradley, the former senator.The bank’s founder, Herbert Allen, was enthusiastic about the deal, the complaint says, and Qatar’s sovereign wealth fund was considering investing in it. As late as January 2012, an Allen & Company investor presentation portrays a Virgin-branded “ultra” cruise line, and names Mr. Veitch as a core part of the team.In the suit, Mr. Veitch says the relationship deteriorated when Virgin sought to change the terms of the agreement. Initially, Virgin was content to receive a licensing fee and small percentage of profits.But Mr. Veitch claims that in February 2012, as Virgin realized how lucrative the cruise line could be, it tried to renegotiate its agreements. Instead of asking for a licensing fee and a small portion of profits, it now wanted most of the profits, leaving Mr. Veitch as what he described as “an indentured servant.”“In 2012, it began to dawn on them that this was going to be a real winner, that this was going to be potentially the biggest, most profitable business in their portfolio,” Mr. Veitch said in an interview.Mr. Veitch says that Allen & Company, in an email, anticipated the split. “I also fear that you have done too good a job convincing Virgin of the merits of this opportunity,” a representative of the investment firm told him, he says. “They may end up competing with you down the road.”Mr. Veitch claims that after he refused Virgin’s new terms, the two sides stopped working together. His lawyers, meanwhile, reminded Virgin of the nondisclosure agreement, which it said it would respect.Then, in December, Virgin Cruises was announced.And while the announcement came more than three years after the signing of the original nondisclosure agreement, Mr. Veitch says Virgin had been working on the cruise business without him in the interim.In February 2014, Sky News reported that Virgin had enlisted Allen & Company to help develop a cruise business. The next month, an Australian magazine quoted Mr. Branson as saying, “We are building two large ships quite from scratch and we feel that the Virgin brand will work well with cruises” and that “most of the money is now committed.”In December, Virgin made its plans public. Allen & Company was advising Virgin and Bain Capital was providing financing, but Mr. Veitch’s name was not mentioned. Instead, Virgin had enlisted Tom McAlpin, another former cruise executive, to oversee the project.Virgin Cruises did not reveal much about its plans, but it indicated that each ship would cost more than $1 billion to build, suggesting a size on par with what Mr. Veitch had envisioned.And though Virgin Cruises presented itself as an alterative to the Las Vegas-like atmosphere on many ships today, Mr. Veitch said the concept was nonetheless his own. “What the ship looks like is much less significant than the shape of the deal,” he said in an interview. “You can tell by the amount of money they are raising that is not something they looked at before.”Without his work, Mr. Veitch says, Virgin would never have entered the cruise market.“It’s like showing someone a Picasso and saying ‘I could do that,’ ” he said. “I came up with this idea for the industry because I’ve been doing it for 17 years.”The suit accuses Virgin of breach of contract, misappropriation, violations of Florida’s Deceptive and Unfair Practices Trade Act and unjust enrichment. In addition to seeking damages for Mr. Veitch, it asks for an injunction that would stop Virgin from proceeding with the plan.Advertisement