By MARY WILLIAMS WALSHOCT. 1, 2015
A new front opened in Puerto Rico’s debt battle as the island’s powerful Government Development Bank went to court, seeking $400 million in local property tax revenue it said was being illegally held by a local collection agency.The development bank said the money was crucial to its ability to make coming payments to bondholders.The agency that collects property taxes on the island, the Municipal Revenue Collections Center, or CRIM, appears to have the $400 million in hand. But its board decided late in June not to release the money to the bank. The development bank, which handles Puerto Rico’s borrowing and cash flows, said the move was illegal and asked the Superior Court in San Juan to require the agency to turn over the money. The legal documents were filed Wednesday night.“Through this illegal action, the CRIM is putting the finances of all municipalities in danger, and likely exposing them to claims from their creditors,” the bank’s chief operating officer, Karolee García Figueroa, said Wednesday evening.AdvertisementNo one returned telephone calls or responded to an email message to the tax collections agency on Thursday.AdvertisementThe agency’s website shows that its board is dominated by the mayors of cities on the island, suggesting a majority may have wanted to hold onto the money locally, where it could be used to pay for services to residents, rather than letting the development bank send it to faceless bondholders on the mainland who do not elect local mayors.In a sign of the complicated relationships in the island’s government, the president of the development bank, Melba Acosta Febo, and another official, José V. Pagán Beauchamp, were listed as members of the collection agency’s board. A spokeswoman for the bank said they were unavailable for comment.As the two agencies prepared to battle in court, Puerto Ricans woke on Thursday to a new 4 percent tax on professional services provided to businesses on the island. The tax is expected to apply to engineering companies, lawyers, accountants and others who have not already been paying a 7 percent tax on business services.While the new tax will not appear on cash register receipts for consumer purchases, economists say Puerto Ricans are bound to feel the effect indirectly as companies pass through the cost to their customers. Months earlier, general sales taxes on the island were increased to 11.5 percent from 7 percent. In protest, truck drivers closed a main thoroughfare leading to the governor’s mansion in San Juan this week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Puerto Rico has been struggling with a total $73 billion in debt, roughly $4.1 billion of which was issued by municipalities. In late June — three days before the collections agency resolved not to release the $400 million — Gov. Alejandro García Padilla announced that a debt of that size was “unpayable.”Since then, officials have been working on a restructuring plan and have begun meeting with creditors. Officials have said they hope to negotiate a debt exchange, which would reduce some of the debt burden while respecting the hierarchy of creditors.The Puerto Rican constitution says general obligation bonds have priority over all other government payments — not just to other classes of bondholders, but even payments to government workers and pensioners. That provision is increasingly becoming a sore point as the island’s economy has withered, schools are closed, taxes rise and other public services are cut.Puerto Rico has already defaulted on a type of debt that it calls “moral obligation bonds,” which are backed, in effect, by money that lawmakers were supposed to appropriate every year. This year, the legislature did not appropriate the money, and the Government Development Bank said it therefore had no legal obligation to pay.AdvertisementTwo more debt payments, totaling hundreds of millions of dollars, are due in December and January. The government has warned that it is likely to run out of cash in November, and that it may not be able to make the two payments while providing essential public services. The payment due Jan. 1, 2016, is on general obligation debt, raising the issue of the island’s constitutional guarantee. Senior officials have said they expect to be able to make the payment, but they have not explained where they will get the money.An unknown part of the $400 million now locked up at the collections agency is intended to be used to pay general obligation debt. A 1991 law authorized the agency to collect a special surtax to cover general obligation bond payments, and called for the development bank to establish a trust to hold the money until the payments came due. Although the trust fund was not established until 1997, the bank said that “the funds for paying the debts of the municipalities have always been separate from all other commonwealth government funds, and have always been distributed pursuant to the law.”With a cash squeeze looming, Puerto Rico has also been seeking help from Congress, and Ms. Acosta was among those who testified this week before the Senate Finance Committee. She said Puerto Rico’s economy had contracted by 20 percent in real terms since 2007, but its outstanding public debt had grown by 60 percent, causing a level of pain not known on the mainland United States since the 1930s.The committee’s chairman, Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, called on the island to make more information available about its finances and debts.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Puerto Rico Development Bank Goes to Court for $400 Million in Taxes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.