By EMILY STEELMARCH 11, 2015
About two in five American households now subscribe to a video streaming service like Netflix, Amazon Prime or Hulu Plus, according to a new report from the media measurement company Nielsen that tracked the penetration of the digital offerings.The research sheds light on the popularity of a fast-growing segment of television watching that has been difficult to track because the digital companies release few numbers about how many subscribers they have and what those people are watching. Nielsen, for instance, does not measure the audiences for shows streamed on Netflix or Amazon.Netflix, which counts 40 million paid subscribers in the United States, ranked at the top in terms of penetration, with about 36 percent of households subscribing to the service in November, Nielsen said Wednesday in its Total Audience Report. Amazon Prime came next at 13 percent during the same period, followed by Hulu Plus at 6.5 percent.People in households with subscriptions to video streaming services spend significantly more time in front of a screen than those in other households, the figures showed. Homes with the subscription streaming services spend 2 hours 45 minutes a day on time-shifted television seen with video game consoles, multimedia devices, and DVD or Blu-ray players. Homes without a subscription to those services spend 1 hour 57 minutes a day on the same screens.AdvertisementThe findings could call into question the assumption that Netflix, Amazon and Hulu cause people to cancel their subscriptions to traditional cable or satellite television, also known as cutting the cord. Homes with subscription streaming services spend 66 minutes a day watching time-shifted television, while households without subscriptions spend 56 minutes a day with it.Advertisement“People who like TV, love TV,” said Brian Wieser, an analyst with Pivotal Research. “Just because you get Netflix doesn’t mean that you cut the cord.”Television executives are voicing concerns that streaming services like Netflix are cutting into the amount of time that people spend watching traditional television; analysts estimate that total television viewing declined by almost 10 percent during the third and fourth quarters of 2014. That does not count time spent watching streaming video.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.About a third of households subscribe to just one streaming video service. About 10 percent subscribe to two and only 2.6 percent subscribe to three, the report showed. The penetration of subscription streaming services, like that of high-speed Internet access, strongly correlates with income.More broadly, Nielsen’s Total Audience Report highlighted the continuing, precipitous fall in live television watching, which was particularly pronounced among younger audiences. Adults spent an average of 4 hours and 51 minutes watching live television per day in the fourth quarter of 2014, down 13 minutes from the same period a year earlier.That decline comes as people spend more total time with media, especially the web and smartphones. The average adult spent 1 hour and 25 minutes using a smartphone per day during the quarter, up 18 minutes from the same period in 2013.Dounia Turrill, Nielsen’s senior vice president for insights, said that the changes were creating new opportunities for media companies but that the economics of the digital media business remain challenging for most companies.“With continued and accelerating fragmentation, the risks and rewards are potentially high,” she said. “The ability to stake a claim in the expanding industry pie is central to companies’ growth.”A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Nielsen Charts Reach of Video Streaming.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.