
Breakingviews By                     
JEFFREY GOLDFARB

MARCH 11, 2015
Staying power in the corner suite isn’t always what it’s cracked up to be.Brady W. Dougan’s departure from Credit Suisse leaves JPMorgan Chase, Goldman Sachs and Wells Fargo as the three United States mega-banks with pre-2008 bosses. Jamie Dimon, Lloyd C. Blankfein and John G. Stumpf have overcome all manner of challenges but are also approaching a decade at the helm. One lesson from the crisis was the danger of sticking around too long.The three remaining chiefs have outlasted their peers for good reason. Since they were appointed, shares of their banks have performed better than financial sector indexes. Mr. Stumpf, who was named chief executive in June 2007, has even overseen a better run than the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, a claim neither Mr. Dimon nor Mr. Blankfein, who were tapped to run their companies in December 2005 and June 2006, respectively, can make.As counterparts at Citigroup, Bank of America, Barclays and elsewhere were steadily nudged out, Mr. Blankfein overcame one of the first of many bruising legal settlements to beset the industry, as well as an early beating in Congress. Mr. Dimon fought through the “London whale” fiasco and a personal health setback. Mr. Stumpf, who benefited from the experience of his predecessor, Richard Kovacevich, who was chairman for the start of his term, navigated the mortgage debacle and economic downturn well.Their survival skills are a virtue only up to a point, however. Many of the worst-hit financial institutions were led by longstanding chief executives, suggesting a link between extended tenure, groupthink and complacency. James Cayne led Bear Stearns for 15 years. Richard S. Fuld Jr. ran Lehman Brothers for 14. Marcel Ospel consolidated power in the chairman’s office at UBS for about seven years after running the Swiss group and its predecessor firms for six. At some point, shareholders of JPMorgan, Goldman and Wells Fargo may want to think about cutting a long story short.Jeffrey Goldfarb is United States editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »