AdvertisementSupported bySmall BusinessBy Robert StraussIn the spring of 1978, a big furry green creature with a pot belly and a long snout appeared on a major-league baseball field in Philadelphia and forever raised the bar for the professional team mascot.Beneath that Muppet-like exterior was David Raymond, who donned the costume as a young intern, stepped out on the field on a cool April night and began a career delighting crowds with wild, athletic antics unlike anything baseball had seen before. He spent 16 years as the Phillie Phanatic, the mascot of the Philadelphia Phillies, retiring in 1994.His career — which earned him $25 a game in the early days and ultimately “the low six figures,” he said — might have ended there.But last week, there he was in Trenton, helping students at STEM-to-Civics Charter School turn themselves into a purple streak of lightning, the “Bolt” that has become their school’s team mascot.One of the students was Tanaya Lacour, a freshman. Slim and tall, she barely spoke above a whisper in the classroomlike setting.Then the group went upstairs to the school gym and put on the uniform that one of the school’s founders, Leigh Byron, had bought from a designer.Mr. Raymond started barking commands. “Be happy,” he shouted, and Tanaya jumped and clicked Bolt’s furry purple heels. “Be cocky,” came next, and she spun around a full loop and gave a hip motion with her hands. “Be shy,” was the last, and she folded Bolt’s arms and legs and dropped its head.“Magic,” Mr. Raymond said. “You aren’t Tanaya any more. You are Bolt.”For the last 20 years, Mr. Raymond, now 59, has been the go-to coach for teams, schools and businesses that want a mascot, or want to better train the one they have. Mr. Raymond calls himself the Emperor of Fun and Games for Raymond Entertainment.The idea occurred to him as he was moving into middle age and realized he would not be able to continue doing all the athletic stunts the Phanatic specialized in, especially in what had become almost a daily job — what with games, events and parties that contracted the Phanatic. He realized that the mascot business, spurred by the success of the Phanatic and other early professional sports mascots, like the San Diego Chicken, was starting to boom, so he left the Phillies and his big green animal suit and started consulting, teaching moves and designing costumes.“It’s been a wonderful business, and I get to show people how to have fun, which is what my first boss told me to do in the first place,” he said.That boss was Bill Giles, then the general manager of the Phillies. Mr. Raymond — whose father, Harold R. Raymond, known as Tubby, was the longtime football coach at the University of Delaware — had a summer internship with the Phillies, in part arranged by his father, a friend of Mr. Giles. David Raymond loved the work and wanted to continue his internship the next year while earning a few credits for graduation from Delaware.“I got a call and just assumed they were going to say, ‘Sorry, someone else is getting it this year,’ ” said Mr. Raymond, whose dream had always been to be a sports coach like his father.Then Mr. Giles asked if he could make a commitment to come to every Phillies home game. Mr. Giles had contracted a designer who used to work on the Muppets to come up with a costume. The Phillies had just won two division titles, but they still were not drawing young fans, and Mr. Giles thought a young man like Mr. Raymond dressed like a big green fictional animal would do the trick.“I didn’t actually wear the Phanatic costume until the first night I went on the field,” said Mr. Raymond. “I asked Mr. Giles what I should do. He just said, ‘I want you to go have fun.’ His idea was that if I had fun, then the fans would, too.”That is what Mr. Raymond preaches in his mascot camps, with school groups like the one in Trenton. He also offers one-on-one sessions.For the girls from Trenton, who will split the duties as Bolt, he showed them a video of old Phanatic stunts such as sliding awkwardly on a skateboard ramp, dancing on the dugouts and hugging anyone in sight. When he made them stack cups in odd formations with one hand behind their backs, everyone laughed at their awkwardness. In another drill, he had two girls run across the gym, stop two inches away from each other, start screaming, then stop and try not to laugh.“When you put on that mascot costume, your biggest mission is to make people have fun. You can do things in that costume you wouldn’t do on your own, but that is exactly what you should be doing,” he said.Mr. Raymond’s clients range from small to large. He helped the minor-league Albuquerque Isotopes create Orbit, the Space Dog, and assisted the National Hockey League’s Dallas Stars with Victor E. Green (the Stars’ main color is green). The Toledo Mud Hens, another minor-league baseball team, invented Muddy and Muddonna in consultation with Mr. Raymond, and he built Burnie for the Miami Heat. But he also works with young people like those at STEM-to-Civics, which is in its first year and inaugurating Bolt as a new mascot.Mr. Raymond charges $399 a person for a three-day Mascot Boot Camp, like the one he will be conducting at Kutztown University of Pennsylvania from March 20 to 22. His private Mascot Boot Camps range from $3,500 to $5,000 depending on the number of days and performers the client wants. If a client wants him to create a whole new character and have a consulting contract, it will cost $20,000 to $75,000. (Mr. Raymond contracts out the actual construction of the costume.) And if a client already has a mascot that does not quite work, Mr. Raymond will do what he calls “mascot intervention” for about $2,500.He says he has had offers from investors who claim he could make Raymond Entertainment into an eight-figure business, but he says he likes it the way it is. He has two part-time employees, works out of a home office in West Grove, a western suburb of Philadelphia, and travels to clients and costume makers when he needs to. He said he grossed just short of a million last year, and after paying expenses, his employee salaries and himself, the business earned a $100,000 profit.“I was lucky enough to fall into something out of a college internship that made me one kind of living and for the last 20 years has made me this one,” he said. He says the business left him plenty of time to see his four children grow up, play sports and do other activities.“I have been able to work at having fun my whole life,” Mr. Raymond said. “Why should I ruin it by trying to be too big?”Advertisement