By DAVID GELLESMARCH 11, 2015
Endo International, a big drug firm, has thrown a wrench into Valeant Pharmaceuticals’ plans to acquire Salix Pharmaceuticals, a maker of treatments for gastrointestinal disorders.On Wednesday, Endo sent a letter to Salix’s board, offering $175 a share in cash and stock for the company in a deal that values Salix at about $11.2 billion. That price trumps Valeant’s agreed offer of $158 a share in cash, or about $10 billion.But Endo’s offer introduces a number of uncertainties into what is currently a straightforward sale for Salix.Endo is offering mostly stock, meaning Salix shareholders would largely be betting on the future success of Endo, instead of taking a known amount of cash.AdvertisementShareholders of both Endo and Salix would also have to approve the deal. That stands in contrast to Valeant’s cash offer for Salix, in which neither company’s shareholders have to approve the deal.AdvertisementAnd Endo would have to pay a $356 million break-up fee to Valeant if it succeeds, along with about $60 million in associated fees, diluting the value of the Endo stock that Salix shareholders would receive.Valeant said it was standing by its offer. “We are firmly committed to our all-cash agreed transaction, which delivers immediate and certain value to Salix shareholders,” the company said in a statement.Endo said it believed that its proposal was better because it “would provide Salix shareholders with a substantial premium and immediate cash value, as well as the opportunity to participate in the significant upside potential of a global leader in specialty pharmaceuticals with a highly diversified platform for future growth, through a material equity component.”And in a letter to the Salix chief executive, Thomas W. D’Alonzo, Endo makes the case that it will invest in research and development of Salix drugs. That strategy stands in contrast to Valeant, which is known for cutting costs after it acquires companies.The bidding war continues a strong run for deal making in the health care sector. This year, global health care mergers and acquisitions total more than $92 billion, according to Dealogic, up 63 percent from the same time last year.Endo is offering 1.4607 shares of its common stock, plus $45 in cash, for each share of Salix. Based on Endo’s share price at the end of Tuesday, the stock component was worth about $130 for each Salix share.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Paulson & Company, the hedge fund run by the billionaire John Paulson, owns about 9 percent of Salix and said it was intrigued by the Endo offer.“Very compelling counteroffer,” a spokesman for Paulson said. “Endo offer provides higher value plus 75 percent stock component, providing both more favorable tax treatment for Salix shareholders plus potential further appreciation.”AdvertisementBut after Endo revealed its offer, shares closed down 1.4 percent, slightly lowering the value of the per-share bid.The wavering value of Endo’s offer price could mean that its bid “is unlikely to trump” the Valeant deal, an analyst at Leerink, Jason Gerberry, wrote in a note.Mr. Gerberry noted that “Endo’s stock is trading off on deal announcement — which lessens the value of the equity component of the deal.”The latest offer is not subject to financing conditions, and Endo said it believed it could complete the deal by the end of the second quarter.The move by Endo is the latest potential setback for Valeant, which spent much of last year trying unsuccessfully to acquire Allergan. Actavis, another big drug maker, wound up paying more than Valeant offered.Salix, meanwhile, finds itself in the center of a bidding war, after being left out of last year’s deal frenzy. While Allergan and other companies considered making an offer for Salix, according to people briefed on the matter, none went ahead with an offer until Valeant, which struck its deal last month.Regardless of which company prevails, Salix, which is based in Raleigh, N.C., is likely to be acquired by an overseas competitor. Valeant is based in Canada, and Endo is based in Ireland.That means the United States, which currently collects taxes on Salix’s profits, will most likely see a reduction in the amount it collects from the drug maker.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Endo Confirms Bid for Drug Maker Salix, Topping Offer From Valeant.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.