By SYDNEY EMBERMARCH 11, 2015
A prominent former executive at JPMorgan Chase has left the world of commodity trading for the virtual world of digital transactions.Blythe Masters, who until last year was the head of JPMorgan’s giant commodities unit, is joining Digital Asset Holdings, a Bitcoin-related start-up that is looking to use Bitcoin’s underlying technology to streamline financial transactions.The company, a relative newcomer to the Bitcoin industry, is not a trading platform or an exchange. Rather, it plans to provide software to customers that it says will improve the financial transaction process by making it faster, cheaper and more secure.“We’re not seeking to disintermediate and destroy the current financial system,” Ms. Masters said in an interview on Wednesday. “We’re seeking to make it stronger, better and safer.”AdvertisementLike a number of Bitcoin-related start-ups that have cropped up recently, Digital Asset is not so much interested in Bitcoin as a currency, but in the technology that makes Bitcoin possible. Underlying Bitcoin is the block chain, a decentralized ledger that permanently stores information and is driven by cryptography. Digital Asset intends to allow customers to use the block chain for financial transactions to cut costs and reduce the settlement time.AdvertisementMs. Masters said she had talks with the Federal Reserve, New York State’s Department of Financial Services and the Bank of England about Digital Asset to determine how regulated financial institutions like banks can use the start-up’s technology. There have also been discussions about whether the start-up itself should be regulated, because it may not fit the criteria for regulation that has been proposed by the Department of Financial Services. That proposal, which is currently waiting for public comment, specifies that companies involved in trading and holding Bitcoins will be regulated. Digital Asset, however, essentially intends to provide a network that makes trading easier, Ms. Masters said.Although Digital Asset is focusing more on the block chain, the news that Ms. Masters, a star at JPMorgan, had joined a Bitcoin-related start-up sent ripples through the virtual currency industry. After all, many Bitcoin supporters have been waiting for someone as well known in the financial world as Ms. Masters to show an interest in the virtual currency.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And if anyone could bring legitimacy to Bitcoin and its technology, it might be Ms. Masters, who joined JPMorgan as a college intern about 30 years ago and, at 28, became the youngest managing director the bank had ever had. Later, she helped pioneer credit default swaps, the financial instruments that eventually helped fuel the mortgage crisis. Before leaving the bank last year, she had held a number of prominent roles, including chief financial officer of the investment bank and head of the commodities unit. She announced her intention to leave the bank last April after her commodities operations stopped performing up to expectations.Since its creation in 2009, by a programmer or group of programmers going by the name of Satoshi Nakamoto, Bitcoin has become a technology and financial industry phenomenon. But most Bitcoin companies lack people with any previous financial experience.What Ms. Masters said she hoped to bring to Digital Asset — and the Bitcoin industry as a whole — was the knowledge that came with her decades of experience in the traditional financial world.“You’ve got a lot of smart people and brilliant technologists and venture capital money flocking into this space with a vision that genuinely represents progress,” she said. “There’s a need for people like me.”She also said she was looking forward to solving problems in the financial markets.“The scale of the opportunity is gigantic,” she said. “It’s also fun to be able to work at the cutting edge of deploying today’s amazing modern technology into worlds where it hasn’t been used yet.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.