AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanPeter J. Wallison, the 73-year-old conservative Republican, former White House counsel under President Ronald Reagan and current fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, is determined to change the understanding of the cause of the 2008 financial crisis. It’s an uphill battle.He thinks that big banks have been receiving far too much of the blame and that government housing policies, dating back 25 years, not nearly enough of it. Worse, Mr. Wallison says, the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul law, which emerged in the wake of the crisis to re-regulate Wall Street, is not only “oppressive” but it has also thwarted economic growth by curbing the willingness of banks, both large and small, to make the loans that are crucial to keeping American businesses vibrant.“The Dodd-Frank Act was directed at the wrong target,” he told me on a recent visit to New York to promote his new book, “Hidden in Plain Sight: What Really Caused the World’s Worst Financial Crisis and Why It Could Happen Again.” “It was the result of this view that it was the failure to adequately regulate the financial system that caused the financial crisis. My view is that it was actually government housing policy that caused the financial crisis.”He contends the true story is not being told for the usual reasons: No one in government has stepped up to take responsibility for poor decisions. It’s easier and more fun to blame the big banks that are not in a position to defend themselves because they are regulated by those that are really to blame. And the media has missed the boat on what happened.“Everything I see leads me to believe that unless the American people get a whole re-education on this, they are going to continue to believe forever that the financial crisis was caused by the greedy Wall Street banks in the private sector,” he said. “They don’t make any connection to government policy.”In summary, his argument is that the government housing policies, promulgated by both the executive and legislative branches from the early days of the Clinton administration to the present — with a brief respite at the height of the crisis — encouraged the private sector to make home mortgages of increasingly deteriorating credit quality to people who could not afford them. Officials then encouraged both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the large, quasi-government housing enterprises, to buy those mortgages, package them and sell them as securities to investors worldwide.Because of these faulty government policies, he said, it “became very sensible” for banks to either make or to buy mortgages and sell them to Fannie and Freddie to feed their insatiable appetite for them. Of course, Wall Street deserves its share of the blame for this, Mr. Wallison concedes, but the government deserves more of it.The trouble, Mr. Wallison contends, started in 1992, when Congress passed “affordable housing goals” that instructed Fannie and Freddie, when buying mortgages from banks and other originators, to ensure that at least 30 percent of the purchased mortgages be made to people either at or below the median income level of the communities in which they lived. As a result, he argues, underwriting standards deteriorated drastically and Fannie and Freddie started larding up their balance sheets with subprime mortgages. Banks and other originators reacted to the new goals by supplying the subprime mortgages the government wanted.He contends the underwriting standards deteriorated further after Andrew M. Cuomo, Mr. Clinton’s secretary of Housing and Urban Development and now the governor of New York, increased to 50 percent the target for mortgages bought being made to people at or below the median income in their communities.“H.U.D. was given the authority to not only set the goals, but also to determine what the goals should be,” Mr. Wallison said. By 2008, he said, some 56 percent of the mortgages that Fannie and Freddie were buying were subprime and others of low quality. The two companies did not protest these mandates, he said, because they were afraid of stepped-up regulation from the George W. Bush administration.The idea, of course, was to increase homeownership in America, one of the cornerstones of the American dream and one that both Mr. Clinton and Mr. Bush trumpeted. The tactic worked. As a result of the government policies, at the time of the crisis, homeownership had increased to about 70 percent of American families, from a longstanding level of about 64 percent. Millions of renters had been given a free option on homeownership and took it.“You can create a kind of a bubble in the economy,” Mr. Wallison said. “Things look pretty good for a while. And then you hope you’re out of office when the music stops.”Trying to correct the record as he sees it is not a new passion for Mr. Wallison. In fact, he’s been at it since he famously wrote a 99-page dissent to the voluminous 2011 report on the causes of the crisis by the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, led by Phil Angelides, a liberal Democrat and the former California treasurer. It still rankles him that lawmakers like Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, kick and scream when Wall Street tries to water down the regulatory provisions of the Dodd-Frank law, as they have been doing for years, and claim that the safety of the financial system is being undermined.“Why does she get so much attention for that?” he asked. “Because people generally believe that the Dodd-Frank Act was adopted to protect us against the kinds of deprivations that Wall Street created.” He thinks Wall Street is right to try to continue to gut the Dodd-Frank provisions to get the economy roaring again.Mr. Wallison knows he has a tough sell on his hands and that it could take years to sway public opinion. He compares his lonely quest to that undertaken by the economist Milton Friedman, who in the 1960s — nearly 40 years after the fact — was able to change people’s beliefs about the cause the Great Depression: to the Federal Reserve’s too-tight monetary policy from too much competition among companies.“Maybe 20 years from now, people will have read this book,” he said, “and enough people will have said, ‘Maybe what happened in 2008 wasn’t really the banks, but it was actually government housing policy. Maybe we ought to change the policy.’”He doesn’t seem all that optimistic this will happen anytime soon. “Maybe it’ll take another financial crisis based on the same policies for people to start thinking,” he said.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”Advertisement