By MARGALIT FOXMARCH 10, 2015
It was boyhood in a box, batteries not included.There was the Whirlybird helicopter (“Fly them from battlefield to battlefield!”) and the Barracuda atomic submarine, the Johnny Reb cannon and the Dick Tracy wrist radio, the Screaming Mee Mee-e rifle and Mr. Kelly’s Automatic Car Wash — the literal stuff of youth for the postwar generation. All were made by Remco Industries, the company, begun in a New York City basement, that in the 1950s and ’60s was one of the country’s leading toy manufacturers.Isaac Heller, who died Saturday at 88, founded Remco — later based in Newark and then in Harrison, N.J. — with a cousin, Saul Robbins, in 1949. A former Navy electronics technician, Mr. Heller got his start as a toymaker by buying up mountains of military surplus and transforming it into toys that could zoom, soar or otherwise move. (The name Remco stood for “remote control.”)“Every boy wants a Remco toy,” the company’s omnipresent television commercials intoned in a voice that carried the epochal urgency of a newsreel. In later years, after Remco began offering dolls, the tag line “... and so do girls” was appended. But its ellipses were almost palpable, so closely was the company associated with the construction of midcentury masculinity in miniature.In the 1960s and afterward, Remco was also known for its licensed products, including action figures of the Beatles, complete with combable mop-tops; the Munsters; and “Star Trek” characters.AdvertisementIsaac Heller, known as Ike, was born on July 23, 1926, in Ellenville, N.Y., at the foot of the Catskills, where his family owned a small farm. His parents, Morris Heller and the former Yetta Shapiro, Russian Jewish immigrants, had been settled there by the Jewish Agricultural (and Industrial Aid) Society, a social welfare agency. In the summer, to supplement their income, they rented out the children’s bedrooms to tourists; Ike and his siblings slept in the chicken coop.When Ike was 12 the family moved to Brooklyn, where he studied electrical engineering at Brooklyn Technical High School. He later took night classes at Cooper Union in Manhattan. From 1944 to 1946 he served in the Navy, where he repaired radar equipment along with almost anything else that came to hand. In idle moments, he built toys from spare electronics components for his shipmates to send home to their children.After his discharge, Mr. Heller worked briefly as a toy designer before striking out on his own. As he well knew, warehouses all over New York were filled with military surplus going begging, and he visited each of them, buying up airmen’s earphones. From these, working in the basement of his brother-in-law’s upholstery shop, he built what became Remco’s first product and remained one of its best known: toy walkie-talkies.AdvertisementThe company’s other toys included Mighty Mike motorized trucks, the Shark remote control racecar, the Mighty Matilda aircraft carrier and the Movieland Drive-In Theater, which came with cars, a parking lot and a small projector and screen.Not every Remco product was an unqualified success. In 1964, the company’s Lyndon B. Johnson and Barry Goldwater action figures proved something less than landslide best sellers.In 1970, when Mr. Heller and his cousin were no longer involved with the company, opponents of air pollution picketed Alexander’s department store in Manhattan over a Remco truck that was designed to emit real smoke through its exhaust pipe. (They were protesting the truck’s apparent symbolism, not its actual environmental impact.)Mr. Heller and Mr. Robbins sold Remco in 1966. Afterward, Mr. Heller was an industrial-park developer and philanthropist whose causes included his alma maters and the John Kenney Child Care Center, which he founded in Edison, N.J., in 1987.Mr. Heller’s death, at his home in Scotch Plains, N.J., was confirmed by his son-in-law Jack Romberg. Survivors include his wife, the former Helaine Hirsh, whom he married in 1953; four daughters, Audrey Romberg, Laurie Kaufman, Hollie Heller and Hillary Granfield; a brother, Paul; a sister, Mildred Galen; 10 grandchildren; and three great-grandchildren. Mr. Robbins died in 2010.Remco, which filed for bankruptcy in 1971, closed its doors in 1974. The Remco brand is currently owned by Jakks Pacific, a California toy concern.A measure of the extent of Mr. Heller’s success as a toymaker can be found in a Dec. 15, 1960, article in The New York Times, which quotes an authority better versed in the toy trade than any other. Reported from a Gimbels department store in Valley Stream, on Long Island, it began:“While the snow fell on Monday morning, paralyzing the city, an intrepid little boy climbed into Santa Claus’s lap and piped, ‘I want a Fighting Lady battleship by Remco.’ ”The article continued: “ ‘Nobody asked me for a sled or for ice skates,’ Santa sighed. ‘These days it’s all brand-name merchandise that they’ve seen advertised on TV.’ ”A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Isaac Heller, Toymaker to a Generation, Dies at 88.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.