AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelUnivision fired the talk show host Rodner Figueroa after he said that Michelle Obama looked like someone from the cast of the film “Planet of the Apes.”Mr. Figueroa, a fashion and entertainment commentator on the programs “Sal y Pimienta,” “Primer Impacto” and “El Gordo y la Flaca,” is known for stinging red carpet commentary and fashion critiques.The comment came on Wednesday during a live portion of “El Gordo y La Flaca” (“The Scoop and the Skinny”). Mr. Figueroa and other hosts were discussing a viral video that featured a makeup artist making himself resemble Michelle Obama and other celebrities.“Well, watch out,” Mr. Figueroa said. “You know that Michelle Obama looks like she’s from the cast of ‘Planet of the Apes,’ the movie.”Lili Estefan, a host on the show, asked Mr. Figueroa what he was saying. Another host, Raul de Molina, said that Mrs. Obama was attractive. Mr. Figueroa responded, “But it is true.”In a statement, a Univision spokeswoman, Rosemary Mercedes, said that Mr. Figueroa was “immediately terminated” after making the remarks.“Rodner Figueroa made comments regarding First Lady Michelle Obama that were completely reprehensible and in no way reflect Univision’s values or views,” she said.Univision called the White House on Thursday to inform officials of what had happened, a person with knowledge of the call said.Mr. Figueroa, an Emmy winner who had worked with Univision for 17 years, wrote a letter of apology to Mrs. Obama on Thursday, which was published in Spanish on The Huffington Post. He said that he offered his “sincere apologies” for the comment that had been “misinterpreted.”“I want to clarify that I am not racist in any way. My comment was not directed toward you, but toward the characterization of the artist, who left much to be desired,” he said. “The entire video clip in context proves it.”The letter also accused Univision of “publicly humiliating” him.“I take responsibility for this lack of judgment on my part, but I cannot accept being called a racist by anyone and be dismissed as such,” it said.Advertisement