By RACHEL ABRAMSMARCH 12, 2015
On a weekday afternoon, Flora Bojadziev, a chef from Harlem, browsed through a Toys “R” Us in Manhattan.She was looking for educational toys for her 2 ½-year-old son, who plays with her iPad. But she balked at the idea of spending $130 on LeapFrog’s LeapPad Ultra XDi, an educational tablet for children, on sale in the aisle a few steps away.“With that money, I’ll buy him so many apps,” said Ms. Bojadziev, who is 33.That is precisely the problem for LeapFrog, which built a multimillion-dollar company on children’s devices before babies learned to swipe the screens of iPads.Battered by a growing variety of cheaper alternatives, LeapFrog, a dominant maker of educational toys and games, has watched its sales plummet. It has become the target of short-sellers, investors who bet on a company’s failures, and was most recently sued by shareholders who claimed it had drastically overestimated consumer demand for its products.Advertisement“As each year passes by and more apps are for free and they’re lower priced, it becomes a tougher sell,” said Jim Silver, the editor in chief of TTPM, a toy review website.AdvertisementSlow to adapt, critics say, LeapFrog has become something of a modern-day fable for how quickly technology has unseated the toy industry’s titans.Mike Wood, a lawyer, created the company upon realizing how few educational products existed for his 3-year-old son, who was having trouble learning to read. He founded the company in 1995, and in 1999 introduced the first LeapPad, an electronic book with audio and pen that helped children learn to read.As technology evolved, LeapFrog seized the opportunity to create a tablet just for children: no web-browsing abilities and a limited set of games.It introduced the original LeapPad tablet in 2011 for $100 at a time when the average tablet in the United States sold for about $470, according to data from Euromonitor.Sales skyrocketed. Sean McGowan, an analyst with Needham and Company, estimates that the company sold 1.2 million tablets the first year, and more than doubled that in 2012, when the LeapPad 2 came out. The hardware, combined with its software and content, most likely made up more than half of the company’s revenue, Mr. McGowan said.“Back then, not every family had an adult tablet they were willing to give to their child,” said Gerrick Johnson, an analyst with BMO Capital Markets.Just a few years later, however, the idea of a tablet that appeals precisely because it can do a limited set of tasks seems almost quaint. Older generations of iPads have become hand-me-downs from parents to children, while tablets get cheaper every year. Parents can program their grown-up devices with educational games, instead of buying a separate specialized system.AdvertisementSales of various LeapPads to retailers began to plateau in 2013, according to Mr. McGowan, who estimates that they dropped more than 40 percent in 2014.“You gotta fish where the fish are, and the fish weren’t in the enclosed system anymore,” Mr. Johnson said.LeapFrog has taken steps to make some of its content available on other platforms. Some of its educational apps, like My Robot Pal and Scout’s Shapes and Colors Farm, are available through the Apple iTunes store. But so are hundreds, if not thousands, of competing apps, which makes it harder for LeapFrog, or any company, to cut through the noise.And the competition — not just for LeapFrog — is fierce. Even though Americans most likely bought more than twice as many tablets in 2014 as they did in 2011, they paid $330 on average, according to projections from Euromonitor.That has forced everyone to cut prices. Plenty of manufacturers, like Amazon, RCA and Toshiba, now make tablets that sell for less than $100. And LeapFrog’s latest tablet, the LeapPad Glo, sells for about $40 less than its 2011 predecessor. In addition to the Glo and the $130 Ultra, LeapPad sells the LeapPad3 for $90.“I think it’s a very quick judgment that sales are down because our tablet isn’t open,” said John Barbour, LeapFrog’s chief executive, referring to the fact that LeapPad content cannot be played on other devices. “There’s a maturation of the marketplace that affects all of us.”Technology has revolutionized the toy industry, creating a new breed of small upstarts to challenge established players like Mattel and Hasbro.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And the old guard has tried to adapt to the new environment with varying degrees of success: Mattel’s Fisher-Price line of preschool toys introduces new educational toys each year as part of its Laugh and Learn line, for example, although the brand’s sales have slumped in recent years. Hasbro has fared slightly better, Mr. McGowan said, and its Playskool line brings out new Sesame Street educational items regularly since acquiring rights to make products based on the show three years ago.And there is no question that LeapFrog still beats its educational toy competitors, albeit by a narrower margin. Sales of its preschool toys and games, which include tablets, topped those of VTech and Fuhu, its two biggest competitors, in 2013, according to the most recent data from Euromonitor.AdvertisementBut tablet sales still make up more than half of LeapFrog’s business, according to analysts, and sales of its stand-alone toys have slipped.“I don’t think we had the best products that we potentially could have had,” Mr. Barbour said of LeapFrog’s toy sales last year.Mr. Barbour acknowledged that the company was too reliant on its electronic platforms and was looking for ways to branch out. LeapFrog is busy converting some of its content to work on Android tablets, for example, and plans to start its own Android platform this year.Last year, LeapFrog predicted that sales would reach $220 million to $240 million during the holiday season, buoyed by sales of its LeapTV, a $150 educational video game console similar to Nintendo’s Wii.But there were problems: Product development issues delayed LeapTV’s debut, causing it to miss the back-to-school shopping season. That also gave less time for LeapTV to generate buzz before the holidays, which is especially critical for more expensive toys. And too many products from 2013 remained in stores into last year, which also hurt sales, Mr. Barbour said.Competing with other popular video game systems, the LeapTV systems were left behind on retailers’ shelves after the holidays.“It’s a highly competitive market, yet the system only reaches a very narrow demographic,” Mr. Silver said.Nancy Galustians’ LeapTV, a Christmas gift to her two young children, has sat gathering dust at their home in Glendale, Calif. After an initial burst of interest, the children, more accustomed to playing with their parents’ old iPads and smartphones, returned to their familiar devices.Advertisement“It was kind of cumbersome,” she said. “When there are pads that are so accessible, it’s easier to grab a pad than bring out all your gaming consoles.”Toys “R” Us now sells the LeapTV for $99.In January, LeapFrog reported net sales of $145 million in its fiscal third quarter and a net loss of $124 million. Its shares fell more than 30 percent, prompting shareholders to sue, claiming they had been misled.“We believe that the claims lack merit,” Mr. Barbour said, adding that the company planned to “vigorously defend” against them.Shareholder lawsuits are not rare when a stock suddenly falls. But missing one’s guidance by a wide mark is less common.“It just says that they don’t have a handle on forecasting their business,” Mr. Johnson said. “And in the toy industry, when you have a highly seasonal business, that’s skill No. 1 that you need to have.”A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Tablets in Toyland.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.