By AARON M. KESSLERMARCH 12, 2015
WASHINGTON —  With millions of its cars still under recall but not yet repaired, Honda Motor said on Thursday it was beginning an advertising campaign aimed at persuading owners to get them fixed.The cars have faulty airbags made by the Takata Corporation, the Japanese auto supplier, where the inflater can explode, sending metal shards flying into the passenger cabin. At least six deaths worldwide have been linked to the defect, all in cars made by Honda.The company said its campaign would involve newspaper, radio and social media ads focused on 11 high-humidity states and American territories, where the company says it believes the risk is greatest. About 6.2 million Honda vehicles in the United States have been subject to the Takata recall, and as of this month 14 percent of the inflaters requiring replacement have been repaired.Honda acted as pressure on Takata increased on Capitol Hill. The Senate Commerce Committee sent a letter on Thursday to the company’s chairman demanding that documents requested by the committee last year be immediately turned over.AdvertisementThe letter, sent jointly by the committee’s chairman, John Thune, Republican of South Dakota, and Bill Nelson of Florida, the panel’s top Democrat, said Takata had “not fully addressed several of the committee’s requests” and stated that the company had until Friday to produce the documents.AdvertisementOne challenge for consumers dealing with the defective airbags has been the lack of available replacements. Many owners have waited for weeks, or longer, to get the critical repair.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A spokesman for Honda, Chris Martin, said on Thursday that dealers were “currently completing recall repairs on a daily basis utilizing available parts supplies with some limited delays for parts on order.”Mr. Martin said Honda had contracted with the airbag suppliers Autoliv and Daicel to begin supplementing replacement parts for the airbags “starting in the near future.”“At that point, together with increased production from Takata, we anticipate replacement inflater supplies for Honda and Acura vehicles to quickly catch up with demand,” he said.For now, Mr. Martin said customers waiting for replacement airbags would be dealt with individually, but that an option could be to provide a loaner vehicle.A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Honda Uses Ads in Effort to Hasten Airbag Fixes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.