AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesSAN FRANCISCO — The blizzard continues: “Frozen 2” is coming to theaters.The Walt Disney Company on Thursday used its annual shareholder meeting to make several movie announcements, the biggest being about a big-screen follow-up to “Frozen,” the animated musical that took in more than $1.3 billion globally in 2013.Disney provided no details about the story or a release date but said the directors and producer of the first film would return for the second.A sequel helps assure the long-term viability of what has become one of Disney’s most crucial franchises. Sales of “Frozen”-related merchandise now total roughly $1 billion annually, and helped power Disney to a record $7.5 billion in profit last year. “Frozen” has also been fast-tracked for Broadway, and a Florida theme park attraction is in the works.“We’re going back to Arendelle,” John Lasseter, chief creative officer for Walt Disney Animation Studios, told the crowd, referring to the kingdom in “Frozen.” The film follows two Nordic princesses, one of whom has the magical power — not always controllable — to conjure snowstorms, and their goofball snowman sidekick, Olaf.Disney is trying to use “Frozen” to drive ticket sales for its next live-action movie, “Cinderella,” which opens on Friday and is expected to take in at least $65 million over its first three days. “Cinderella” will be shown with a new animated short called “Frozen Fever,” which finds one of the princesses, Elsa, with a bothersome cold.Disney held its annual meeting at the Palace of Fine Arts Theater here, which is a few blocks from its Lucasfilm unit, and used the moment to reveal that a previously announced “Star Wars” spinoff movie, set for release next year, will be titled “Rogue One.” Additionally, Disney revealed that “Star Wars: Episode VIII” will be released in theaters in May 2017. “Episode VII” arrives this December.The official business portion of the meeting was uneventful. Two shareholder proposals were defeated by wide margins, including one to end a practice of allowing one executive (currently Robert A. Iger) to serve as both chief executive and chairman. All members of the Disney board were comfortably re-elected.The rest of the meeting unfolded as usual. Shareholders questioned a beaming Mr. Iger about perennial concerns ranging from pin trading at theme parks to the disappearance of an obscure character called Figment, a purple dragon from an Epcot ride at Walt Disney World. Mr. Iger was also grilled by a shareholder over depictions of smoking in PG-13-rated films released by the company under secondary labels.And, as always, there was a very specific question from a child, this time from a 6-year-old named Brooke: Who was the first Disney princess to walk on a Disney cruise ship? A surprised Mr. Iger punted to Thomas O. Staggs, who was recently promoted to become the company’s No. 2 executive and was sitting in the front row.“We couldn’t choose just one,” Mr. Staggs said, saving the day.Before the meeting began, the sound system played “Let It Go” from “Frozen” while shareholders posed for photos with costumed characters representing major movie divisions like Pixar (Buzz Lightyear) and Lucasfilm (Stormtroopers).One new twist was that Disney executives marveled at the company’s steadily climbing stock price. Disney shares rose 4 percent on Thursday, to $107.17.Advertisement