By PETER EAVISMARCH 12, 2015
One important number usually remains under wraps when the Federal Reserve conducts its annual health checks of large banks.It is the amount of money that the Federal Reserve effectively stopped the banks paying out to their shareholders and other investors.One of the reasons that the Fed’s so-called stress tests become a source of agitation on Wall Street is that they can determine how much money the banks can distribute through stock buybacks, dividends and other types of transactions.In order to scrape by with a pass, the banks sometimes scale back the size of their requested payouts. But neither the Fed nor the banks publicly divulge the size of those reductions. And knowing the numbers would allow investors to see what they missed out on.AdvertisementWhile the data that is public cannot give definite answers, it can be used to get approximate figures for the banks money left on the table to get a passing grade from the Fed.AdvertisementOn Wednesday, the Fed’s stress test materials showed that Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and JPMorgan Chase all had to pay out less than they requested to avoid failing.Morgan Stanley managed to comply by withdrawing a plan to pay off $4.9 billion of securities that have the features of both a bond and a stock, according to a person briefed on the bank’s stress test. Those securities have a high yield, of 6.4 percent, underscoring why Morgan Stanley would have wanted to pay them off. But withdrawing that request allowed the bank to go ahead with its planned buy back of $3.1 billion of common stock.A calculation using the public data suggested that JPMorgan reduced its proposed payout by $7.6 billion. A person briefed on the bank’s stress test said that figure should ideally be reduced by about 20 to 25 percent. In other words, JPMorgan probably lopped around $6 billion off its request. On Wednesday, after the stress test results came out, JPMorgan announced a plan to buy back up to $6.4 billion. It’s possible, then, that the bank originally asked the Fed to sign off on a buyback plan that was double its ultimate size.That leaves Goldman.A calculation using public data suggests the bank had to cut $3 billion from its request for a capital distribution. That sum would be significant, given that it bought back $5.5 billion of stock last year.The Fed and the banks give out enough data to make some educated assumptions about what investors missed out on.The so-called stress tests assess how much capital a bank would have left after sustaining high losses in an economic and financial cataclysm that ends after nine-quarters. (That period concluded at the end of 2016 in this year’s tests.)The banks also tell the Fed how much capital they would like to pay out. Those proposed payouts are then subtracted from the capital that is left after the stress test losses are applied. If the proposed payout takes the capital below minimums required by the Fed, the bank is in danger of failing. But it then has the chance to submit a lower proposed payout so that capital does not fall below the minimum.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Goldman’s stress test and its payout took its total risk-based capital down to 7.6 percent, below the minimum of 8 percent for that measure of capital. The smaller, resubmitted payout left the capital ratio at 8.1 percent. To arrive at the reduction, it is necessary to calculate the difference between 8.1 percent and 7.6 percent.AdvertisementBut the Fed doesn’t break out the dollar numbers behind the percentages. More work is required.That 8.1 percent is 8.1 percent of Goldman’s risk-weighted assets. The Fed, however, doesn’t give a dollar number for the risk-weighted assets behind the 8.1 percent figure.It does, however, say that, in the test, Goldman’s risk-weighted assets were $666 billion at the end of 2016.Calculating 8.1 percent of the end-of-period assets would be the logical next step, but it might be misleading. The Fed bases the size of a stress test miss on the quarter in the stress period when a bank’s capital fell to its lowest. And the Fed does not say in which of the nine quarters of the test period that happened. It most likely did not occur in the end period.One workaround is to calculate average assets for the period. That can be approximated by also using the risk-weighted asset number from the end of 2014, which is in Goldman’s annual report. Goldman’s annual report says that it had risk-weighted assets of $627 billion at the end of last year. The average of $666 billion at the end of the stress period and $627 billion is $647 billion.So, 7.6 percent of $647 billion is $49.1 billion, which is the hypothetical amount of capital that Goldman would have left after the stressed losses and its first payout request. But after Goldman resubmitted its request, its ratio went up to 8.1 percent, allowing it to pass. Calculating 8.1 percent of $647 billion produces $52.4 billion of capital. The difference between $52.4 billion and $49.1 billion, or $3.3 billion, would theoretically represent the amount by which Goldman reduced its payout in order to pass.The flaw in this approach is that it might use too high an asset number. Indeed, the dollar value of assets might fall relatively early in the stress period as market shocks cause Goldman to mark down its holdings. One way to adjust for that would be to reduce by 10 percent the number used for Goldman’s starting assets. Using that figure arrives at a theoretical capital plan reduction of $2.8 billion.Either way, that’s about $3 billion less money for shareholders than Goldman had hoped for.Goldman declined to comment.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.