AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — Retail sales in the United States fell in February as auto purchases dropped by the most in more than a year and Americans spent less at restaurants and home improvement stores.Retail sales fell 0.6 percent last month, a third straight retreat, including a 0.8 percent decline in January, the Commerce Department said on Thursday. Excluding the volatile categories of autos, gas, building materials and restaurants, sales were flat.Freezing temperatures and snowstorms most likely weighed on sales in February, as the bad weather kept Americans at home. In December and January, steep drops in gas prices dragged down sales numbers, but gas station sales rose last month for the first time since May.Also on Thursday, the agency reported that business stockpiles were unchanged in January, and the Labor Department reported that the number of people seeking unemployment benefits fell sharply last week.Businesses did not add to their stockpiles for a second straight month in January as total business sales fell by the largest amount in nearly six years. Sales in January dropped 2 percent, the sixth straight monthly sales decline and the biggest monthly drop since sales tumbled 2.7 percent in March 2009, during the depths of the last recession.While businesses have slowed their stockpiling in the face of falling sales, economists remain optimistic that activity will rebound in coming months. Solid employment growth and falling gas prices should give consumers more money to spend on other items.Weekly applications for unemployment aid dropped 36,000 last week to a seasonally adjusted 289,000, the Labor Department said. The drop nearly reversed a large increase from last month, which has also been attributed to bad weather.The four-week average, a less volatile measure, fell 3,750, to 302,250. The average has dropped nearly 9 percent in the last year.The decline in sales reflects continuing consumer caution after the recession. Sales fell 1.2 percent at electronics and appliances stores and by the same amount in a category that includes department stores and discount retailers like Walmart. Even restaurants, where business has improved noticeably in the last year, reported a 0.6 percent drop in sales.The data “are not as bad as the headline numbers suggest but neither can we say consumer spending is growing as robustly as some had hoped,” Dan Greenhaus, chief strategist at the brokerage BTIG, said in a note to clients.Consumer spending did jump in the fourth quarter by the most in four years. That has kept businesses confident enough to keep adding jobs, even as overall economic growth has slowed.But shoppers have been surprisingly cautious in the last three months.Gas prices fell in January to nearly a six-year low of $2.03 a gallon, according to AAA. Yet consumer spending rose just 0.3 percent that month, after adjusting for price changes. The saving rate rose to 5.5 percent, the highest level in nearly two years, from 5 percent.Advertisement