AdvertisementSupported byBy William AldenPrivate equity firms have plenty to worry about when buying companies, including improving revenue and keeping costs in check.But what about keeping kosher?Yaakov Y. Horowitz, the chief rabbi of the Manischewitz Company, the matzo maker, is responsible for ensuring that the company stays true to its Jewish principles under its new private equity owner, Sankaty Advisors, an arm of the private equity giant Bain Capital, which bought the company a year ago.“Sankaty is not coming from someplace that is familiar with the sensitivities,” Rabbi Horowitz said Wednesday evening at a Manischewitz event in Manhattan. “There’s a very important educational role that I play.”The 58-year-old rabbi heaped praise on the executives from Sankaty, saying they have “shown a concern for kosher in a special way,” a trait that is “not something private equity firms are famous for.”But as Manischewitz tries to broaden its appeal to mainstream consumers — introducing new products and adding “gluten-free” labels to the packaging, for example — it’s up to the rabbi to keep the company grounded.“You’re walking a little bit of a tightrope,” he said. “You don’t want to dis your core constituency.”And how exactly does he educate the Sankaty executives?“We schmooze a lot,” the rabbi said.The event on Wednesday, an opening party for a three-day affair known as the Manischewitz Experience, was tailored to promote the company’s expansive new mission. Among the attractions was a photo booth, a matzo pizzeria, a chocolate fountain for dipping marshmallows and a giant gumball machine filled with more than 4,000 individually encased mini macaroons.The Pharrell Williams tune “Happy” and “Everything Is Awesome,” the infectious ditty from “The Lego Movie,” blared over the speakers.Reporters were offered opulent gift bags stuffed with Manischewitz products like red velvet cake mix, potato pancake mix, vegetable broth, carrot cake macaroons and gluten-free crackers. There was also a little box of red salmon caviar.The guests included Manischewitz insiders and representatives of vendors like Fairway. One Sankaty executive, who insisted on anonymity to protect his private equity relationships, recalled the process of buying Manischewitz from the investment firm Harbinger Capital Partners, which is run by Philip A. Falcone.The company was in rough shape, and Harbinger suffered a loss on the deal, people briefed on the matter said at the time.“It was a very contentious and drawn-out restructuring negotiation with him,” the Sankaty executive said, referring to Mr. Falcone. “The business has been undernourished — to use a food term — for over a decade,” he added.In an email, Mr. Falcone agreed that the talks were contentious. But the deal “worked out fine,” he said.“We didn’t do media events,” Mr. Falcone added.It’s not clear how much progress Manischewitz has made to improve its finances over the last year, and the company isn’t telling. But in a possible reflection of its improved resources, the bill for the evening’s festivities was paid for by Manischewitz itself, a spokeswoman said.Mark Weinsten, the Manischewitz chief executive who was brought in by Sankaty, was all smiles. A significant part of his work over the last year has been “tactical,” he said, laying the groundwork for the “mainstreaming” of the company.What’s it like working under Sankaty?“Heaven,” Mr. Weinsten said. “Quote me.”Advertisement