AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ProtessPursuing a trail of illicit money from Geneva to Paris with stops in London, the United States authorities built a sweeping crackdown on some of Europe’s biggest banks. On Thursday, that trail led to Commerzbank of Germany, which agreed to pay nearly $1.5 billion and dismiss some of its employees to resolve an array of charges in the United States. The case, the latest black eye for a giant global bank accused of sending tainted money through the American financial system, closes the book on several investigations into Commerzbank, one of Germany’s largest lenders. One strand of the case focused on Commerzbank’s dealings with Iranian companies blacklisted by the United States, showing that the bank processed hundreds of millions of dollars through New York on their behalf. Prosecutors also accused the bank of enabling the Olympus Corporation, the Japanese manufacturer of medical devices and cameras, to orchestrate a huge accounting fraud. Collectively, the investigations were a magnet for federal and state authorities. No fewer than eight regulatory and prosecutorial offices, in addition to the F.B.I. in New York, took aim at the bank, though it still avoided an indictment, the worst outcome. “Financial institutions must heed this message: Banks that operate in the United States must comply with our laws, and banks that ignore the warnings of those charged with compliance will pay a very steep price,” said Leslie Caldwell, head of the Justice Department’s criminal division, which prosecuted the criminal part of the case alongside the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan, the district attorney’s office in Manhattan and federal prosecutors in Washington. Commerzbank agreed to pay nearly $1.5 billion to settle civil and criminal charges related to its role in enabling a huge accounting scheme and other illicit transactions.The overlapping actions, an unusual show of force even by the standards of Wall Street cases, underscore the priority that the United States authorities have placed on money laundering and sanctions violations. Coming months after BNP Paribas settled the biggest of the cases for $8.9 billion, the Commerzbank case signals that the investigation is entering a new and final phase, with only Deutsche Bank, Crédit Agricole, UniCredit and Société Générale left to settle. Standard Chartered settled in 2012 but is under investigation again in connection with new evidence of misconduct.  The cases — which hinge on violations of the Bank Secrecy Act and International Emergency Economic Powers Act as well as New York state banking laws — are a sore spot for many European banks. American banks, of course, have had brushes with the law for manipulating foreign currencies and other misdeeds but have largely avoided the money laundering problems that have dogged their foreign rivals. Under the agreements announced on Thursday, Commerzbank agreed to a battery of punishments. In addition to the $1.45 billion penalty — divided among the New York Department of Financial Services, the Manhattan district attorney’s office, the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan, the Treasury Department, the Federal Reserve and the Justice Department’s criminal division — the bank agreed to admit to its conduct in a statement of facts. The deal with the New York regulator, Benjamin M. Lawsky, also required the bank to install an independent monitor and dismiss individual employees tied to the case, leading to the resignation of the person in charge of money laundering and sanctions compliance in the bank’s New York office.“When there was profit to be made, Commerzbank turned a blind eye to its anti-money laundering compliance responsibilities,” Mr. Lawsky said.Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan who handled the Olympus part of the case, noted that “Commerzbank stands charged with Bank Secrecy Act criminal offenses for its acute, institutional anti-money laundering deficiencies that allowed over a billion dollars of the Olympus fraud to flow through its New York office.” And Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney who focused on dealings with Iran and Sudan, said, “We have sanctions in place to prevent rogue nations and terrorists from accessing the U.S. financial system.”Yet despite all the scrutiny, the bank avoided an indictment or having to plead guilty. Instead, it struck a so-called deferred prosecution agreement, which prosecutors can revoke if the bank misbehaves again.In a statement, Commerzbank said that it had already “improved its compliance function and has implemented remedial steps to address the conduct underlying these enforcement actions.” The bank added that it “also made changes in senior compliance personnel and plans to more than double U.S.-based compliance staff by 2016.”Though costly, the settlement removes a huge burden for Commerzbank, Germany’s second-largest bank after Deutsche Bank, as it continues to recover from near collapse in 2009. The German government still owns a 17 percent stake in Commerzbank that it acquired as part of a bailout.Commerzbank never had as big a role in investment banking as Deutsche Bank, and its legal problems pale in comparison to that of its crosstown rival.Still, in settling the case on Thursday, Commerzbank admitted to a statement of facts that laid bare years of illicit transactions and missed warning signs. From 2002 to 2008, the bank transferred at least $263 million through the United States financial system on behalf of Iranian and Sudanese companies, the authorities said. To cover up the scheme, which Mr. Vance’s office first detected in 2010, the bank deleted data from wire transfers that would have disclosed the true identity of the sanctioned companies.At one point, the bank formed a group in Frankfurt to tinker with the Iranian payments and decided to hide the practice from its New York branch. In a 2003 email, a Commerzbank employee instructed colleagues: “If for whatever reason CB New York inquires why our turnover has increased so dramatically, under no circumstances may anyone mention that there is a connection to the clearing of Iranian banks!!!!!!!!!!!!!.”Mr. Lawsky rebuked the bank’s New York branch for maintaining “ineffective” internal controls. Even when New York employees sounded the alarm, he said, they had to request information from employees in Frankfurt, who “often did not respond to those requests by New York staff for many months or sent inadequate or insufficient responses.” The warnings eventually reached senior management, according to the federal authorities, who cited a 2003 email to an unidentified executive that cautioned, “It raises concerns if we consciously reference the suppression of the ordering party in our work procedures in order to avoid difficulties in the processing of payments with the U.S.A.” The Olympus aspect of the case also exposed holes in the bank’s internal controls. For more than a decade, Olympus carried out what regulators and prosecutors called a “massive accounting fraud designed to conceal from its auditors and investors hundreds of millions of dollars in losses.”Olympus, the authorities said, could not have pulled it off without Commerzbank’s help. Bank employees in Singapore, including one who ultimately pleaded guilty to wire fraud in federal court in Manhattan, helped Olympus create special-purpose vehicles through which the fraud unfolded. The bank also lent money to the Japanese company. And for several years, Commerzbank facilitated transactions through New York totaling more than $1.6 billion, which supported Olympus’s fraud. Over the years, there were many red flags. One employee warned that while the business produced “very substantial” fees for Commerzbank, the arrangement raised suspicions of “fraud, asset stripping, market manipulation and derivative tax offenses.”Another compliance officer, before resigning, told a colleague that compliance was “a time bomb ready to go off.”Jack Ewing contributed reporting.Advertisement