AdvertisementSupported byNews AnalysisBy David GellesEndo International leapt over Valeant Pharmaceuticals’ deal to buy Salix Pharmaceuticals on Wednesday by offering about $1.2 billion more than the $10 billion that was already agreed to.But while Endo’s offer of about $175 a share easily beats Valeant’s offer of $158 a share for Salix, and even though the top Salix investor Paulson & Company called it a “very compelling counteroffer,” some analysts remain skeptical.One factor working in Valeant’s favor is that its bid is all cash.“Valeant’s $158 offer is fixed, fully financed and all cash,” Corey Davis, an analyst at Canaccord Genuity, wrote in a note. “Endo’s $175 offer depends on its share price, and goes down if its stock goes down.”Endo’s share price dipped on Wednesday after it made its surprise offer for Salix, based in Raleigh, N.C., but it bounded back on Thursday, rising about 4 percent as of midday. Nonetheless, the offer from Valeant, based in Laval, Quebec, gives Salix shareholders a known quantity of cash, rather than a large stake in a newly enlarged company.Adding uncertainty is the fact that even if Salix agrees to sell itself to Endo, which is based in Dublin, shareholders of both companies will get to vote on the deal. Endo shareholders will have to decide if they want essentially to give away 40 percent of the combined company. Salix shareholders will choose if they want to accept so much stock as well.Moreover, there is the issue of timing. Salix is facing an important ruling by the Food and Drug Administration in late May, when the agency will decide whether to approve a new treatment for irritable bowel syndrome.The Valeant deal would most likely close before then, and Valeant has said it would proceed with the deal even if the F.D.A. did not approve the treatment. The Endo deal would not be able to close by late May, and Endo has not said it would go ahead with the deal if the treatment was turned down.“We view the likelihood of approval at 85 percent, but it is still a major consideration,” David Steinberg, an analyst at Jefferies, wrote in a note.There is also the matter of what Canaccord Genuity calls “a large” $356 million breakup fee. Endo shareholders, and by extension Salix shareholders, would have to pay this in the event the Valeant deal is turned away.A final point of uncertainty raised by analysts is that Endo does not have committed financing for its bid.“Endo doesn’t have committed financing (yet) and would need to raise $4 billion in debt since it has to ‘make whole’ $3.1 billion in Salix debt,” Mr. Davis at Canaccord Genuity wrote.Salix shareholders may yet prefer an acquisition by Endo. This would give them 40 percent of a diversified pharmaceutical company potentially worth $40 billion or so. And in the deal frenzy gripping the pharmaceutical industry, the combined company could easily be a target for one of the world’s top drug makers.“Given the ‘roller coaster’ that SLXP investors have been on during the last nine months, the certainty of ‘cash-in-hand’ may prove more appealing,” Mr. Steinberg wrote, referring to Salix’s stock symbol.And Salix shareholders may benefit from the bidding war. With Valeant’s offer of $158 more than $11 below Salix’s current share price, Valeant will most likely have to raise its offer, even if only slightly.“While VRX typically does not engage in ‘bidding wars,’ we would be surprised if the company does not increase its bid in this situation, especially if VRX management believes that its original proposal is at risk,” wrote Mr. Steinberg, using the ticker symbol for Valeant.But given the potential shareholder votes, the F.D.A. review, and financial considerations, some analysts believe Valeant remains better positioned to walk away with Salix.“While we expect the Salix board to review Endo’s offer, we believe Valeant’s $158/share all cash offer still remains the soundest bid currently,” wrote Tim Chiang of CRT Research, noting that Valeant’s bid was all cash, that there was no vote, and that the F.D.A. approval wasn’t a factor. “In sum, we believe Valeant has the upper hand in closing its planned purchase of Salix.”Advertisement