By MIKE ISAAC and MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMARCH 12, 2015
Alibaba, the Chinese e-commerce giant, has invested $200 million in Snapchat, according to three people with knowledge of the deal’s terms.Alibaba’s investment values Snapchat, a three-and-a-half-year-old messaging start-up, at $15 billion, according to one of these people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.It is a giant sum for Snapchat, a smartphone app that lets users send disappearing photos, videos and text messages to one another, and places the young company squarely among the most richly valued private tech companies in Silicon Valley.Many young Internet start-ups, some of which have produced little to no revenue, are raising hundreds of millions of dollars at soaring valuations. Nextdoor, a social networking company, recently raised $110 million at a $1.1 billion valuation, though the company does not make any money.AdvertisementSnapchat may have even grander ideas about its own worth. The company has recently fielded investment offers that could value the company at $19 billion, according to a person with knowledge of the discussions. That valuation is nearly double the amount that it sought less than one year ago.AdvertisementAlibaba’s $200 million investment, which was first reported by Bloomberg, was not part of these recent talks, according to a person with knowledge of the deal.But the two companies have long sought to work together in some capacity, having spoken in the past about a potential investment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The investment gives Alibaba, whose e-commerce business dominates the Chinese consumer Internet, a chance to tap into a hot Western company on the rise. It is another in a spree of investments in Western start-ups for Alibaba; last year, the company poured tens of millions of dollars into Tango, a messaging app, and invested more than $100 million in Kabam, a popular mobile game studio. The investments, insiders say, give Alibaba new inroads into Silicon Valley and, potentially, the early chance to spot — and invest in — the next hot start-up.For Snapchat, working with Alibaba could give the young company valuable insight into China, a valuable market teeming with more than 1.3 billion potential customers.Snapchat gained some early notoriety as a place where young users can send nude photos to one another, though its founders, Evan Spiegel and Bobby Murphy, have maintained this is not the intended purpose of the app.Recently, Snapchat has made many internal changes that have positioned it as a platform for watching rich media content. In January, Snapchat introduced a new product called Discover, a section of the app where users can watch daily original content provided by companies like CNN, Vice, National Geographic and a handful of others.It is also Snapchat’s strongest attempt to make money from its service. Some of the content inside the Discover section includes advertising, the revenue from which is split between Snapchat and the media publisher, according to people with knowledge of the deal.Representatives of Alibaba and Snapchat declined to comment. A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Alibaba Is Said to Invest $200 Million in Snapchat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.