By MIKE ISAACOCT. 14, 2015
Jack Dorsey is about to get even busier.On Wednesday, one of the companies Mr. Dorsey runs, Square, the mobile payments start-up, made its initial public offering prospectus public, indicating it is close to a road show to sell stock to investors. The move follows an action-packed 10 days for the technology executive, who was named permanent chief of Twitter last week and who on Tuesday announced that he was laying off 8 percent of the staff at the social networking company as he tries to attract more users to the service.The disclosure of Square’s I.P.O. prospectus is set to quicken the pace for Mr. Dorsey. The document, which Square had previously filed confidentially, gave the first peek at the financial data of a payments business that has had as many naysayers as it has had champions.While the filing revealed that Square’s revenue jumped to $850 million last year, up 54 percent from a year earlier, losses increased to $154 million in 2014, more than in 2013. For the first six months of this year, Square lost $77 million on revenue of $561 million.That means Mr. Dorsey, 38, will need to sell a money-losing Square to investors when I.P.O.s — including recent technology offerings like Pure Storage — have been met with a lackluster reception. In addition, Mr. Dorsey faces questions about whether he can juggle his chief executive roles at Twitter and Square. Taking a company public and navigating the turnaround of another are each tall tasks on their own.Advertisement“You can rarely successfully serve two masters,” said Brendan Miller, an analyst with Forrester Research who studies mobile commerce.AdvertisementIn its prospectus, Square noted Mr. Dorsey’s multiple jobs, saying the dual roles “may at times adversely affect his ability to devote time, attention and effort to Square.”Aaron Zamost, a spokesman for Square, declined to comment on Wednesday. In a statement last week, Mr. Zamost said Mr. Dorsey “has shown for the past several months he has the ability, passion and commitment to lead both companies effectively.”Square filed with an initial offering size of $275 million, which is a place holder figure used to calculate registration fees that may change. That number may be an inside joke to payments wonks: Square takes a 2.75 percent cut of most of the credit card transactions that it processes.Founded in 2009, Square aimed to reinvent payment processing for small and midsize businesses by freely distributing a small, square-shaped piece of hardware. That hardware, used by millions of sellers, processes credit card transactions for business owners.“We believe sellers should be able to accept any type of payment, from cash to cards, Apple Pay to Bitcoin, and whatever the future may bring, so they never miss a sale,” Mr. Dorsey said in a note to investors filed with the prospectus.The executive is deeply invested in Square: The prospectus showed Mr. Dorsey is the biggest shareholder of Square with a 24.4 percent stake. Khosla Ventures, a venture capital firm that backed Square, is the next largest shareholder with a 17.3 percent holding.Square has long faced questions about its I.P.O. prospects. Many criticize payments processing for thin margins and entrenched players. Of the 2.75 percent slice of each transaction that Square collects, a significant chunk goes to credit card networks and other financial intermediaries.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some critics have said Square’s core business does not make enough money to justify the lofty $6 billion valuation that it received from private investors. While Square said that more than two million merchants accepted five or more Square transactions last year, the company’s revenue is not as large as some other technology giants that it is often mentioned alongside.AdvertisementThe filing also presented a rocky picture of a key partnership with Starbucks, the global coffee giant, which the two companies entered into in 2012. Square ended up losing tens of millions of dollars on the countless credit card transactions it processed for Starbucks customers, the filing showed. The deal, which is expected to wind down in 2016, will winnow away a significant portion of Square’s transaction volume.But Square’s processing business is still growing, even if the Starbucks deal is removed, the prospectus revealed. Starbucks declined to comment.Square has also broadened its strategy in recent years to go beyond being a middleman in payments processing. In May 2014, the company introduced Square Capital, a cash advance program for small businesses in which it makes a fixed amount of money per advance. Square has lent more than $225 million in capital extensions since the company began the service last year, according to Securities and Exchange Commission filings.Square has added other subscription services for small businesses such as payroll and scheduling. These efforts, however, are still nascent, yielding relatively little revenue compared to Square’s payments business.In the filing, Mr. Dorsey also struck an ambitious note for where Square fits into the commerce landscape.“By making our services accessible to everyone, we can build a more fair and productive system that serves instead of rules,” Mr. Dorsey said. “This is both good for Square and the right thing to do. We’re off to a strong start.”Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and JPMorgan Chase are advising on Square’s I.P.O, the same underwriters that managed the public offering of Twitter in 2013.Leslie Picker contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Square Makes a Public Move Toward an I.P.O. .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.