AdvertisementSupported byBy Elisabeth MalkinMEXICO CITY — Mexico kicked off the opening of its oil industry to great fanfare. At a packed event at the Technology Museum here seven months ago, maps flashed on a giant screen showing dozens of oil fields that would be put up for bid to private companies for the first time in more than 75 years.With oil fetching around $100 a barrel at the time, the projections were ambitious. Over the next four years, Mexico would attract more than $12 billion in investment a year. By 2018, private companies would be pumping half a million new barrels of oil a day.Now, oil prices have sunk to almost half that level, and the atmosphere has turned anxious.The question is whether private companies will still be eager to invest. Big energy players have been scaling back their investment plans as oil prices have dropped.To encourage investors to bid, the Mexican government last week sweetened the contract terms. It is also contemplating delaying some auctions until the price environment improves.The energy reform is at the core of President Enrique Peña Nieto’s efforts to jump-start the economy after decades of anemic growth. The hope is that private companies will invest heavily in developing new oil and gas fields, creating jobs and adding to the government coffers.“The Peña Nieto administration put all its eggs in the basket of energy reform,” said Luis Miguel Labardini, a consultant at Marcos y Asociados, a Mexico City energy consultancy. “If they mess it up, this administration is doomed.”Attracting private money has taken on new urgency as low oil prices have sped up the decline at the state-owned oil company, Pemex. Squeezed by high taxes and hobbled by government control, Pemex spends — and borrows — more each year to pump less and less oil. Its daily production has slipped to below 2.4 million barrels, a million lower than its peak a decade ago.Adding to Pemex’s woes, the government has sliced the company’s 2015 budget by about $4 billion. The move stymies the company’s push to remake itself as a competitive deepwater producer. Pemex’s chief executive, Emilio Lozoya, said that the company would delay some of its independent exploration plans in the Gulf of Mexico and look for deep-pocketed partners.Mr. Lozoya argues that the company’s problems are manageable. “Pemex would be in a situation of real emergency if the energy reform hadn’t given us the instruments we now have to use money from third parties to carry out our investment projects,” he said in a recent radio interview.As its financial position weakens, Pemex has begun to cut.A long-delayed modernization at three refineries was postponed. The company didn’t renew the contracts of some 10,000 workers employed through outsourcing companies. Pemex also got the union to agree to some $650 million in cuts to perks and benefits, accept early retirement plans for older employees and leave unfilled positions vacant.Pemex is even planning for the unthinkable: layoffs among its 150,000-strong work force, including members of its politically powerful union. “There would have to be a reduction,” Pedro Joaquín Coldwell, the energy secretary, said this week.The government had hoped to move swiftly to open its oil fields to private investment, planning to offer monthly auctions for contracts on 169 different blocks, from the Gulf of Mexico to shale gas deposits on the Texas border. But gathering all the information for investors and designing attractive contracts is proving more complicated than expected.Energy officials admit that a lot is riding on the results of the first auction in July, when the government will award a package of 14 exploration blocks in low-cost shallow waters. “Politically, the success of the first auction is the highest priority,” said Mr. Coldwell. “It’s the national and international reference.”But the low oil price may delay plans for bids on expensive shale and other oil fields that are more complex.“We are aware that certain areas will not be as interesting as they were when the barrel was over $100,” Lourdes Melgar, Mexico’s under secretary for hydrocarbons, said in an interview. “We don’t want because of the current situation to give away areas.”As oil companies decide where to spend shrinking investment budgets, Mexico has an advantage, she argued.“This is a highly productive oil area,” Ms. Melgar said. “We’re talking of an area where we know there are resources, both conventional and unconventional, and where we have a lot of diversity. You’re not talking about a frontier area.”Political factors come into play as well. As a democracy bordering the United States, Mexico “is just in a different world” compared with oil producers such as Iraq and Nigeria, said Carlos Pascual, a former energy envoy for the United States State Department and currently a senior vice president at IHS, a consulting firm.Unlike its Latin American competitors Venezuela and Argentina, which constantly change bidding rules, Mexico’s rules are stable and transparent, said Jorge Piñon, an energy analyst at the University of Texas Austin.Still, the low prices forced the Mexican government to make changes last week on its initial proposed contracts. The new rules for the first exploration package and a second group of shallow-water production blocks to be awarded in September relax the minimum investment requirements. They also loosen restrictions on the types of companies and partnerships that are allowed to bid.Perhaps most important, private investors will keep a larger percentage of their profits as their returns rise, whether because the oil price bounces back or because the field is more productive than expected. Profits are split with the government.“We are under a different market scenario,” said Juan Carlos Zepeda, the president of the National Hydrocarbons Commission, the regulator charged with conducting the auctions.While the changing market hasn’t altered the government’s goal of increasing output by 500,000 barrels a day, “experts say it’s very dubious,” said Jeremy Martin, director of the energy program at the Institute of the Americas in San Diego. Still, he says he believes that many oil companies remain interested in Mexico over the long term.Others are more skeptical. David Shields, an oil analyst here, questioned whether production costs were as low as the government suggested. “The low-cost easy fields are running out,” he said, pointing to Pemex’s problems. “Just how this whole thing is going to play out I don’t know. The value of the exploration and production business has been cut in half.”For now, oil companies are leaving their options open. Some 35 paid for access to a hermetic data room where they can study seismic information on the blocks. Of those, 23 have taken the first steps to qualify for bidding, including Shell, Chevron and Petrobras.“We constantly have to look for additional resources,” said Ali Moshiri, president of Chevron Africa and Latin America Exploration and Production Company. “Mexico is a long-term strategy for us.”But he warned that the “fiscal terms will drive the opportunity.”Although auctions for shale fields in northern Mexico may not go forward, the regulator, Mr. Zepeda, was confident that the deepwater one would. Mexico’s prospective reserves lie under the Gulf of Mexico in a region called the Perdido Fold Belt, where deepwater production has been successful in United States waters just to the north.It takes eight years for a deepwater development to produce the first barrel of oil, he said, so companies look at the long-term price when they weigh their spending. “When you are turning to look at those projects,” he said, “the spot price is not very relevant.”Advertisement