AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesThe literary agent for Harper Lee said Friday that the author was “in full possession of her mental faculties,’’ and delighted that a second novel she wrote will be published this year, rebutting suggestions that Ms. Lee was not capable of assenting the book’s release.Andrew Nurnberg, the agent handling international rights for the new novel, “Go Set a Watchman,” issued a statement responding to the disclosure that the state of Alabama was looking into a complaint of elder abuse involving Ms. Lee, 88, and the publication of the book. Using the author’s legal first name, he said she was well cared for at the assisted living facility where she resides and that the filing of the complaint was “shameful’’ and “sad.’’The complaint, filed with the state’s Department of Human Resources, involves her ability to willfully consent to the publication of “Watchman,’’ and not the care she is receiving.The New York Times reported Thursday that the state had been conducting an investigation into the complaint, and also that Ms. Lee’s friends and acquaintances offered conflicting opinions on whether she was mentally competent enough to understand and agree to the book’s release.On Thursday, the Alabama Securities Commission, which had been assisting the Department of Human Resources, said it was closing its part of the inquiry. Investigators conducting the larger inquiry for the Human Resources agency were continuing their work this week and on Wednesday spoke by phone with the Rev. Thomas Butts, who has known Ms. Lee for many years and had been the pastor of her church.“Watchman,’’ rediscovered last August and the only other known manuscript from Ms. Lee besides her classic, “To Kill a Mockingbird,’’ is scheduled for release in July, with an initial printing of two million copies.Mr. Nurnberg’s full statement is below:“I was surprised to hear that someone had, anonymously, approached the authorities in Alabama to suggest that Harper Lee was being subjected to ‘elder abuse.’ Having spent quality time with her over the last couple of years, I can categorically state that she is in full possession of her mental faculties. We have had wonderful discussions ranging over many subjects from the state of contemporary politics to university life in England — she spent time as an undergraduate in Oxford — about literature, about writing and about specific authors: she does a fine imitation of C.S. Lewis, whose lectures she attended at the time. The fact that she is hard of hearing and suffers from some macular degeneration (entirely common for someone in their late 80s) has no bearing whatsoever on her quick wit or of speaking her mind on all manner of things. That she chose many years ago to lead a quiet life away from the world at large (the last time she spoke to the press was, I believe, in 1964) is her prerogative and should be respected.“She was surprised when the manuscript, which she had presumed long lost, was found last August and she is both delighted and enthused that it will now be published. Contrary to certain press reports, it was not ‘rejected’ at the time: Her putative editor — having read ‘Go Set a Watchman’ — persuaded her to write Scout’s story through the eyes of a child, and the plan was to write a short novel to act as a bridge to ‘Go Set a Watchman.’ This is clear from documentation at the time, which I have seen. This bridging book was never written but, as readers will find, it is not necessary to understand how Scout, her father, her extended family and the politics of segregation in the mid-50s evolved.“Nelle could not be better cared for in the residential home where she lives. To suggest otherwise, anonymously and without any supportive evidence, is as shameful as it is sad. We should rather celebrate the fortuitous discovery of this long-lost novel and share the author’s joy at its imminent appearance.“As widely reported, the Alabama Securities Commission closed the investigation and issued the following statement:‘We made a determination that Ms. Lee, based on our interview with her, was aware that her book was going to be published. She wanted it published. She made it quite clear she did.’”Advertisement