By CHAD BRAYMARCH 13, 2015
LONDON — Sergio P. Ermotti, the UBS chief executive, saw his compensation increase nearly 5 percent in 2014, despite the Swiss bank’s financial performance for the year being “tempered” by legal and regulatory charges, the lender said on Friday.In its annual report, the bank also said that it had revised its annual results down by 105 million francs, or about $104 million, to reflect an increase in provisions for potential legal and regulatory matters. That reflected in part a recent settlement in the United States related to a lawsuit accusing banks of colluding to manipulate foreign currency trading prices.Mr. Ermotti received total compensation of 11.2 million francs for 2014, up from 10.7 million francs in the prior year.His compensation included a base salary of 2.5 million francs and 8.4 million francs in so-called variable compensation, which includes shares in UBS that will be granted to Mr. Ermotti in May, subject to shareholder approval. Those shares would not vest until 2020.AdvertisementUBS said its directors believed that the bank’s financial performance was strong last year under Mr. Ermotti’s leadership, despite the legal and regulatory charges, and that the bank continued to reach “key milestones” as part of a reshaping of the business.AdvertisementThe board of directors “was pleased that Mr. Ermotti successfully steered the firm through turbulent market conditions, demonstrating the strength and resilience of the firm’s strategy and operating model as well as the value of continued de-risking of businesses and the emphasis on our wealth management capabilities,” UBS said in the report.During the year, UBS adopted a new legal structure, establishing a holding company, UBS Group, to better position its businesses to withstand future financial crises and meet stiffer regulatory requirements.In 2014, the bank said, its profit rose 9 percent, to 3.5 billion francs, from 3.2 billion in 2013. That was a downward revision from the 13 percent increase in profit UBS had first reported last month.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bank recently agreed to pay $135 million to settle civil litigation in the United States by people who said they had been harmed by collusion among banks to manipulate foreign currency prices.In November, UBS was among banks that were fined a combined $4.25 billion by regulators in the United States, Britain and Switzerland who accused them of conspiring to manipulate the foreign exchange markets. The bank is still facing inquiries by the United States Justice Department and is cooperating in those matters.In total, the bank’s annual results were reduced by 2.59 billion francs in costs that the lender set aside for potential litigation and regulatory matters. In 2013, UBS set aside 1.7 billion francs for legal and regulatory costs.Last month, UBS warned that it expected legal and regulatory costs to “remain elevated for the foreseeable future” for the industry and added that the bank continued “to be exposed to a number of significant claims and regulatory matters.”That includes recent inquiries from the Securities and Exchange Commission and federal prosecutors in Brooklyn into the possibility of illegal sales of so-called bearer bonds and other unregistered securities to people in the United States. UBS said last month that it was cooperating in those investigations.The sale of bearer bonds has been largely banned in the United States since 1982 because of their potential use in money laundering and tax evasion.AdvertisementThese types of securities were originally issued physically by a business or government, with no requirement that an owner be registered on the bond certificates, allowing anyone holding them to cash them in and the buyer or seller to remain anonymous. Today, when they are sold, they tend to be maintained electronically.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.