AdvertisementSupported byWorkspaceInterview by Patricia R. OlsenA capital spotFox News’s Washington bureau, on North Capitol Street, is a five-minute walk from the U.S. Capitol, which is convenient. It gives us access to members of Congress and puts them closer to us, which makes life easier for us than for some of the other bureaus across town.Who needs the biggest office?My office isn’t the biggest in the building, but it’s the best situated since it’s directly across from the makeup room. That means that any senator, congressman, government official or other guest who’s appearing on a Fox News show here has to walk past my door. I’ve often booked guests for “Fox News Sunday” because of that.1. No ceiling light, pleaseI often have three lamps on while I’m working because I don’t like overhead lighting. I think lamps provide easier light to read in or live in eight hours a day.2. A giant legacy My father, “60 Minutes” correspondent Mike Wallace, passed away in April 2012. Just recently I got his Rolodex, which touches me. It’s not only a sentimental keepsake; if you look at how overstuffed it is, it’s a reminder of how he worked like the dickens into his 70s and 80s. I want to do the same.3. A precious reminderMy older brother Peter died in a mountain climbing accident in 1962 at age 19. I keep his picture in my office to always remember how precious, and fragile, life is.4. Realm of coinsTraditionally, if you were part of a military unit and had a noteworthy achievement, the head of the unit would give you a challenge coin, like a medallion, to indicate that. When reporters visit a military installation, they get one as a visitor. I have 18, which I keep on my desk. They’re wonderful memories of adventures I’ve had and people I’ve interviewed. I got my first when I interviewed the head of the Air National Guard in Washington, D.C., just after 9/11. I parlayed that into becoming the first civilian to go on a combat air patrol.5. Uncle Sam wants youAfter 9/11, I attended an off-camera briefing that Donald Rumsfeld, secretary of defense at the time, gave to reporters on the war on terror. He took us into his office afterward and showed us several mementos from his career, including some patriotic posters, which he handed out.6. Reporter’s relicMy Olympia typewriter, which sits on my office floor, has gone through several incarnations. I had it as a reporter for NBC News in the 1980s. It’s another keepsake and a reminder about how much technology and business have changed over the course of my 45-year career while the basic job of reporting the news has remained the same.7. Beating a champIn 1997 while I was at “Primetime Live,” an ABC newsmagazine, I profiled the Chicago Bulls and got to play one-on-one basketball with Michael Jordan. We played horse, where if you don’t make a basket after your opponent does, you get a letter, and the first person to spell “horse” loses. Jordan proposed we play “dog” instead because it was two letters shorter. We were down to “g” when I made a basket. I heard him say, “Oh, please don’t let him win.” When he missed his shot, I said, “That would be ‘dog,’ wouldn’t it?” Without missing a beat, he said, “Weren’t we playing horse?”8. Man’s best friendI have three photos of my dog Winston, a yellow Lab, in my office. Winston died in 2012, and I really miss him.Interview conducted by Patricia R. Olsen. Comments have been edited and condensed.Advertisement