AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeThis interview with  Stephen J. Immelt, C.E.O. of Hogan Lovells, an international law firm, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Were you in leadership roles when you were younger?A. I was the captain of the football team and president of the student council. I was just always interested in being in the mix, and I felt that I could contribute. Playing a role always appealed to me, but it was more out of curiosity than anything else.Tell me about your parents. Both my parents are still alive, and they grew up in families that were profoundly affected by the Depression. It was a struggle, and so stability — having a good job and being able to buy a house — was really important to them. I can still remember when we moved into our first house and what a celebratory event that was.They were not didactic people, but the lesson from them was, don’t be a victim. You have the opportunity to change what you’re not happy with. If my brother or I would come home with a complaint about something, they would say, “You can fix this.” That was very much the way they raised us.My father also was always asking us questions to push and provoke us. Whatever you said, you had to be prepared to defend it or explain, and then be prepared to have him come back with outlandish counterstrokes. He was always challenging us in a good way. Your brother Jeff is the C.E.O. of General Electric. Not every family has two brothers who grew up to be prominent C.E.O.s. Any theories about that?I don’t have an explanation for it. Maybe it’s just that our parents always encouraged us to think big. There was never a sense that you can’t do this or you can’t do that. And they created in us a huge well of curiosity, and a drive to experience the world.They also instilled in us the importance of being authentic. I don’t think that word ever left my parents’ mouths, but the worst thing they would say about somebody was that they were a phony. The lesson was to just always be yourself.Did you have an idea what you wanted to do for a career when you went to college?I went to Yale, but growing up in Finneytown, Ohio, I had no idea what Yale was at the time. And there was a short window back then when you could afford to go to a school like Yale. The tuition, room and board during my freshman year was something like $3,900.I was a history major. I’ve always been interested in why people do what they do. I wasn’t really thinking about what I would do next. I think at one point my mother stepped in and said, “You actually need to have a plan.” I graduated in 1974, and the economy was pretty grim at the time, and so I decided that I would try law school.What are some leadership lessons you’ve learned over the years?I spent the first 20 years of my career mostly learning the craft of practicing law, and it was only in my late 40s that I began to move into a management role. The key opportunity came 10 years ago when I was asked to lead all of our offices outside the United States.Suddenly I was in a position where I was managing people in London, in Germany, in Paris. That was an eye-opener. I came to appreciate pretty quickly that when you’re in that setting, your own views about how the world is set up go out the window. You really have to become a much better listener, and you learn that there are very different cultural lenses. You have to make sure that everybody who has something to say has a chance to say it.That helped develop my style of management, of trying to be a good listener, and trying to think through the way Americans can be misperceived or perceived, and then trying to take that out of the equation as much as I can so that we can find common ground. That’s a challenge for anybody running a global organization today, and we have 6,000 employees in 25 countries.Clarity of vision is important, too, particularly in a law firm where people are trained to be skeptical. In a setting like that, you have to be clear about what you’re asking people to do and where we are headed. That’s true in any leadership setting, but it’s particularly true in one like ours that is fairly nonhierarchical. How do you hire? What questions do you ask?What brought you here? What were the things you had to overcome? I always ask about their weaknesses, and I listen pretty carefully to that, because it’s often a good gauge as to how self-aware they are. I also listen for how genuine their answer is. Anybody can come up with some throwaway weaknesses. I’m interested in somebody who’s actually thought about themselves and how they interact with the world.I’ll also ask, “Tell me something you did that was really hard, and that you didn’t handle as well as you wish you had.” Part of being a leader involves a willingness to step up and do things that are hard. You don’t always do that perfectly. It’s precisely because they’re hard that they require some willingness to learn and get better.I’m interested in people who share my passion for learning and for changing. I’m much more interested in listening to their narrative for how they dealt with failure rather than some kind of triumphalism. What career advice do you give to graduating college students?My three basic messages are: Be curious; be willing to work outside your comfort zone; and be ready. Even with all the planning in the world, you won’t know which door will open. The important thing is that when a door cracks open, you’re ready to go through it and experience whatever is on the other side.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about the challenges of leading and managing. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice.Advertisement