MARCH 15, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.11 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.03 percent.The following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Board of Education, $247.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $300 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYBeaufort County, S.C., School District, $62.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementBellevue, Wash., School District, $73.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYDouglas County, Neb., School District, $141 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementMissouri Board of Public Buildings, $56 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKMatanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska, $56.4 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Albuquerque, $232 million of water utility debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.California, $150 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.California, $59 million of community college general obligation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Clark County, Nev., $75 million of pollution control refinancing revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority, $50.6 million of refinancing revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.Collier County, Fla., Health Facilities Authority, $64.9 million of residential care facilities revenue bonds. BB&T Capital Markets.Columbia, Mo., School District, $71.5 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Columbus, Ohio, $51.4 million of airport revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission, $81.4 million of bridge system revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.AdvertisementDenton, Tex., Independent School District, $75 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Farmington, N.M., $100 million of pollution control refinancing revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Farmington, N.M., $103.4 million of pollution control refinancing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Farmington, N.M., $55.5 million of pollution control refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Honolulu, $879 million of general obligation bonds. Bank of America.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Illinois Finance Authority, $283 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Kentucky Municipal Power Agency, $192 million of power system revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Lower Colorado River Authority, Tex., $123 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency, $107.2 million of housing bonds. Barclays Capital.Mesquite, Tex., Independent School District, $75.6 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Oppenheimer.McLaren Health Care Corporation, Mich., $263.1 million of health care debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Mississippi Equipment and Facilities Authority, $51 million of revenue refunding bonds. RBC Capital Markets.North Carolina Medical Care Commission, $376 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Oklahoma Development Finance Authority, $194 million of health system revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.AdvertisementOregon, $296 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Phoenix, $89.4 million of education facility revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Pima County, Ariz., $56.5 million of certificates of participation. RBC Capital Markets.Reading, Pa., $52.1 million of general obligation bonds. Janney Scott Montgomery.Richardson, Tex., $54 million of debt securities. Stifel Nicolaus.San Diego County, Calif., $220 million of community college district general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.San Mateo County, Calif., Transit District, $242.5 million of limited tax debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Texas Tech University, $247 million of revenue refinancing and improvement bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Texas Tech University, $75 million of refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Volusia County, Fla., $97.3 million of educational facilities revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Wisconsin, $183 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Yonkers, $62.2 million of debt securities. M&T Securities.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.