AdvertisementSupported byBy Raphael MinderMADRID — The “ghost airport” of Castellón on Spain’s east coast had become a symbol of the country’s reckless spending and its boom-to-bust construction crisis. Could it now turn into an emblem of Spain’s economic revival?Four years after its inauguration, the airport is finally preparing to welcome its first commercial flights in mid-September.Ryanair, the low-cost carrier, said last week that it would fly three times a week between London Stansted and Castellón and twice a week between Bristol and Castellón. The airline said it expected nearly 18,000 passengers to fly the new routes in 2015, gradually rising to about 60,000 passengers a year. Ryanair said it planned to use Boeing 737-800 jets, which have 189 seats.At the time of the airport’s inauguration, in March 2011, Carlos Fabra, the longstanding head of Castellón’s provincial government and the driving force behind the project, shrugged off concerns about spending over 150 million euros, or $157 million, on an airport for which there was no apparent demand. He even suggested that the airport could initially serve as a tourist attraction, with visitors given access to the empty runway and other areas normally off-limits to the public.Separately, following a lengthy trial, Mr. Fabra was convicted of fraud and received a four-year sentence. He entered prison in December.Management of the airport was taken over last year by SNC-Lavalin, a Canadian company with activities ranging from infrastructure to engineering and mining, and the airport was certified for air traffic in December.When it took over, SNC-Lavalin forecast that the Castellón airport would welcome 200,000 passengers in 2017 and 1.2 million in 2029. It also predicted that more Spanish airports would come under private management, even as the sector continued to be dominated by a state-controlled company, Aena, which was floated last month in an initial public offering.As part of the Castellón deal, SCN-Lavalin received €24 million in subsidies from the Spanish authorities to help cover the initial years of operation. The company is to begin repaying the subsidies once the airport starts receiving more than one million passengers a year. Up to now, the only traffic has been some private flights, including with the local soccer team, Villarreal.The modest turnaround for Castellón’s airport comes as Spain is showing broader signs of an economic revival after its gross domestic product grew 1.4 percent last year. But the country continues to struggle with public debt equivalent to almost 98 percent of its gross domestic product. That debt in part reflects the cost of a decade-long construction boom that came to an abrupt halt in 2008, with the world financial crisis, leaving Spain littered with empty highways, half-built sports centers and unsold apartment blocks.Advertisement