
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

MARCH 15, 2015
Michael Russo  is chief executive and co-founder of the British couture house Ralph & Russo.Q. You have a university degree in business communications, with a focus on Internet security. How did you get from there to starting Ralph & Russo?A. I was headhunted when I was 21 by Deutsche Bank to come work in London within their Internet security department, which was a big thing at the time with banks. I’d never left Australia, I didn’t even know what the Tube was. I really came not knowing a single person. I lasted for about six months and then realized very quickly working in a big conglomerate really wasn’t for me. I liked the vibe and the fast pace of everything, but I didn’t like being a little piece in a big puzzle; I wanted to control my own destiny. I had no idea what I was going to do, but I left.I did a bit of soul searching and started working as a consultant. One of the companies I was hired to help — on a one-week contract — about three days in, it went into liquidation. But the people running it suggested we set up a music business together. I set up the business and ran it for about six years, ramping up from two people to about 150, and that was really my first experience.Q. What early lessons did you learn?A. What I found out is that learning business in a book and setting up a business are two different things. [Laughs.] I made a lot of mistakes, and I think a lot came down to naïveté; I was just very young. I didn’t understand how big it could all get. When you start, you don’t really focus on what you could and should get right from the beginning. You don’t think big from the start.AdvertisementOf course, I always had huge aspirations, but when I set up the [music] business I didn’t realize what it would become. I was naïve and in a way got taken advantage of by the investor, who ended up making a lot of money, while I had a very small stake but was really the one building the business.AdvertisementIt was a life lesson. This is why probably when I set up the current fashion business with Tamara [Ralph, who is his life partner as well as business partner], I was very cautious and didn’t want to look for third-party investors, even though I knew it was going to be harder. With hindsight I’m happy what happened, happened, because I learned a lot.Q. What leadership skills did you learn during that early part of your career?A. I think what was key was identifying the weaknesses I had, or areas I didn’t know about and identifying the people that could help me, and then delegate and trust. I didn’t know about H.R., I didn’t know about finance, there were many aspects of the business I needed help with. I think with any entrepreneur it’s always key to understand your weaknesses and offset them with people who can complement you. Sometimes people have a dream but don’t know how to execute it. You need a combination of the two, and that’s where having the right team counts. That’s what splits the successes from the failures. Plenty of people dream big but can’t execute. As an entrepreneur you don’t have to do it all, but you do need to get the right people around you to execute your vision.Q. What types of people do you hire?A. I like people who have big aspirations. In fashion and luxury, it’s easy to find people who think within the box, but I’m looking for people who can think outside the box, or can be molded to think outside the box and haven’t been trained so much in one particular way.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. What is your biggest challenge as a young entrepreneur?A. In my industry: people hiring. Finding the right people, particularly on the craft side. So we have to find a balance between hiring very experienced people and young people that have an interest and can be trained. We invest in a lot of young graduates. Unfortunately the schools are not putting enough emphasis on crafts. All the graduates want to be designers. They all want the stardom. But only a handful will be successful, while there is so much demand for good craftsmen; they can demand their wages and pick and choose the companies they work with.That raises the issue of retaining staff.A. We’re fortunate enough that we’re so high-end, the craftsmen we work with love the product and the quality. They can all see the passion and love that goes into each piece. So, so far — touch wood — no retention problems.Q. How have your views on leadership changed over time?A. I think you really need to inspire people and make them want to work with you, not for you. And that’s something I’ve really tried to work on. I try not to separate myself from the team and put up a barrier. I take an open approach; I like to get involved but also give them the right amount of responsibility to take ownership of the project and really make them realize they’re working toward something great and being part of the success.Q. What advice would you have for young entrepreneurs?A. Think about your cash flow, because that’s a very big thing when you start up; and look for a product or service that is very different or unique. It’s easier to set up a business these days, which makes it a much more crowded market and for your voice to be heard you have to think differently. When we set up our couture house, and going back to the idea of cash flow, I couldn’t see the logic of doing a collection, investing in stock and producing a show, investing all this money in something for which there was no promise. There was nobody at the end of the rainbow saying they were going to buy it. So we invested in a sewing machine and tailor’s dummy. Our only outlay were sketches and toiles, or plain fabric, and we didn’t have these overheads, and one by one, people started buying from the sketches.That’s not the traditional fashion route, which I think a lot of young designers take, thinking they need to borrow $20,000, go to Paris and present a collection when there is no guarantee. That type of different thinking really helped us in a hugely crowded market. For the client it was also something unique, because nobody was coming up to them with a sketch. Luckily Tamara draws beautifully.Q. Talking about Tamara, is it a plus or minus to work with your life partner?A. It’s been a huge advantage and a nice journey along the way. We really complement each other, and one of the reasons we’ve had so much success to date is that we have a lot of trust. We share a common vision, both of us working toward it, but from our own areas. It does help that Tamara does have a business sense. That said, one thing important when you work with a creative is to respect their ideas and never restrict them to the financials, especially at the top of the creative chain. The hold-back should come lower down the chain, when we start manufacturing.AdvertisementQ. What would you tell your 22-year-old self?A. You’ve made a lot of mistakes, but I’m glad you did [laughs].A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »