AdvertisementSupported byNews AnalysisBy Noam ScheiberWASHINGTON — With Donald Trump and other political outsiders towering over Jeb Bush and the rest of the Republican presidential field, Bernie Sanders surging past Hillary Clinton in early polling in New Hampshire, and executives like Don Thompson, the former McDonald’s chief, ousted in the face of declining sales and labor strife, it is clearly not a good time to be an establishment figure.Now there is yet another establishment scalp to consider: the leadership of one of the country’s largest and most important unions, the United Automobile Workers. In voting that ended this week, the union’s members stingingly rejected the national agreement their leaders had painstakingly worked out with Fiat Chrysler Automobiles. It was the first such defeat in decades.In many ways, the tentative contract negotiated by the U.A.W., under its president, Dennis Williams, had much to recommend it. It would have lifted the maximum pay of entry-level workers to over $25 an hour from around $19 an hour, and the pay of many veteran workers to around $30 an hour from around $28 — the first across-the-board raise in roughly a decade. It also gave every worker a ratification bonus of $3,000, and other bonuses worth thousands.“The leadership thinks they got a good agreement,” said Kristin Dziczek, an industry labor expert at the Center for Automotive Research, a nonprofit research group. “I think they did, too.”But the membership worried that the company’s commitments on health care were too vague, and that some domestic production might be moved to Mexico.Above all, rank-and-file workers complained that the union had abandoned a promise to rein in the so-called two-tier system, in which entry-level employees are consigned to a lower salary range with no hope of ascending to the higher pay scale.“People feel like the leadership has insulted them,” said Scott McGinnis, a worker at Chrysler’s plant in Sterling Heights, Mich. “Considering the trust people feel has been broken, they really feel questionable about” the possibility of improvements in future deals.Such was the level of suspicion toward the leadership that some workers uploaded photos of their ballots onto a handful of Facebook pages as evidence in the event the union failed to properly count them.Chrysler and the other two Detroit automakers have been consistently profitable in the last few years. In that context, members believed it was only fair to undo the most unsavory concessions they made when Chrysler lay on its deathbed around the time of the most recent recession.But while the union has some leverage — Chrysler in particular has so little redundancy in its production that a strike at a single plant could cripple its domestic operation — in a globalized economy the U.A.W. may simply not have the power to demand these changes.“There was an inability to manage expectations of the membership,” Ms. Dziczek said, noting that one of the union’s mottos dating back to Mr. Williams’s election last year, “It’s Our Time,” may have unrealistically implied to members that they would be made nearly whole after years of concessions. (A U.A.W. spokesman declined to comment.)Increasingly, the frustrations that result from this disparity between expectations and actual power appears to affect almost every institution set up to provide workers with a measure of economic justice, from labor unions to the government’s fiscal policy apparatus.“The old 20th-century income distribution system has broken down,” said Guy Standing, a professor of development studies at the University of London, whose book “The Precariat” traces the implications of a growing mass of economically insecure workers.Professor Standing noted that while offshoring and outsourcing labor had been undermining workers’ leverage for decades, those forces had in recent years begun to affect a majority of workers, who now experience declining or stagnating real wages. (The book’s title combines “precarious” with “proletariat.”)“You’re getting a huge growth of the precariat, and more people feeling they could join it at any stage,” he said. “When they look to the old institutions, they don’t actually feel that these institutions are relevant for their particular way of life.”That frustration appears to be a major source of energy behind Mr. Sanders’s presidential campaign. But it’s not simply a phenomenon of the left. The Harvard social scientist Theda Skocpol, who has studied the Tea Party extensively, said that adherents tend to be older, white and frightened by spending on programs like the Affordable Care Act, which they see as redistributing resources away from them and toward the young, many of whom are minorities or immigrants.Beyond that, she said, they have “a generalized feeling that the country is being lost,” which helps explain the Trump phenomenon as well. (Professor Skocpol stipulated that the left- and right-wing versions of these populist revolts are not entirely analogous: the right-wing version, she said, has an element of cultural and racial grievance that is unconnected to economics.)In some respects, the rebellion at the U.A.W. looked like nothing so much as the kind of insurrection that House Republicans have directed against their speaker, John A. Boehner, who announced last month that he was resigning from Congress.In showdowns with the White House in late 2012 and late 2013, Mr. Boehner had to shelve his own proposals — which in both cases represented a better deal for the Republican Party than the one it eventually received — because he could not persuade enough of his members to back off their initial demands and support a plan that raised taxes on millionaires or one that didn’t entirely repeal the health care overhaul.Mr. Boehner’s aides repeatedly tried to explain that the desire of the Tea Partiers and their congressional representatives to thwart what they saw as the president’s redistributionist policies far exceeded the House Republican leadership’s ability to deliver it. But the Tea Partiers refused to dial back their ambitions.“His problem was he was speaking about what was realistic,” said former Representative Steven C. LaTourette, a Boehner ally and fellow Ohio Republican. “These guys wanted to go home and say they shut down the government over Obamacare and have the crowd go wild.”Mr. Boehner was haunted by the promises he made to appease his members — for example, an insistence that he would not raise tax rates — whenever it came time to close a deal with the president.Similarly, many autoworkers were irate that the union leadership had indicated in a summary document it distributed tied to its 2011 negotiations with Fiat Chrysler that the company would cap entry-level employees at 25 percent in 2015, only to claim in recent weeks that the promise was, in effect, a misstatement.“If this was in fact something that was not in the 2011 contract, why do so many people have the paperwork?” asked Mr. McGinnis, the Chrysler worker. “But nobody conveniently knows about it.”Both Mr. Williams, the U.A.W. leader, and Mr. Boehner were also hurt by the perception that they were too cozy with their ostensible adversaries. Workers dwelled at length on the hug that Sergio Marchionne, the Fiat Chrysler chief, gave Mr. Williams at a ceremony that began the bargaining in July.Still, in the end, the problem may have been less about any particular aspect of the negotiations than a distrust of any process that involves one side sitting across a table from the other and horse-trading at a time when anxious workers are seeking major improvements in their standards of living.Jonathan Westin, director of New York Communities for Change, a grass-roots organizing group that was heavily involved in the Occupy Wall Street movement, said the only truly significant gains workers had achieved in recent years had come through the application of political pressure, as with the recent near-doubling of the minimum wage for fast-food workers in New York.“A lot of victories won’t be achieved at the bargaining table, they’ll be achieved on the street,” he said. “It’s not till you flip over the table. For me, that’s what’s happening in Chrysler.”News AnalysisAdvertisement