By HIROKO TABUCHIOCT. 14, 2015
Walmart startled investors on Wednesday by slashing its sales forecast for the year, warning that heavy investments in wages and in e-commerce would curb future earnings.The news sent Walmart shares plunging, casting a pall over retail stocks, as analysts worried about broader ripple effects across the economy, and about consumer spending ahead of the holiday season.Walmart’s slowing performance underscored concerns that its superstores, which once upended the way people shopped and for decades dominated the world of retail, are finally succumbing to nimbler rivals in the sprawling world of Internet commerce.Sales will be flat this year, Walmart said at a meeting with investors in New York. The retailer previously said that it expected net sales to grow 1 to 2 percent for the current fiscal year, through January.AdvertisementShares in Walmart fell 10.04 percent to $60.03, their worst one-day slump in 17 years.Doug McMillon, Walmart’s chief executive, said the company needed to invest to return to growth.“We can deliver stronger financial performance in the short term simply by running our core business better, but that won’t be enough,” Mr. McMillon said.AdvertisementIn a bid to soften the blow, Walmart also announced a new $20 billion share buyback program. Still, Walmart, eclipsed by Amazon this year as the world’s biggest retailer by market capitalization, lost more than $20 billion in market value as its shares fell to their lowest level in three years. So far this year, Walmart’s shares are down 30 percent.“Retail history is very clear,” Mr. McMillon said. “Those that are unwilling or unable to change go away. That’s why we’re taking decisive steps now to change and grow our business.”Burt P. Flickinger III, managing director of the Strategic Resource Group, a retail consulting firm, said: “We’ve reached a point of demarcation. As of today, it’s clear Amazon is clearly eclipsing Walmart as the No. 1 growth retailer for the next decade.”Walmart’s executives, Mr. Flickinger said, made many meaningful improvements, including finally pouring serious resources into its online and delivery operations. But as growth continues to stall, investors realized that even those efforts would fall short in the face of the fierce competition facing brick-and-mortar retailers.Walmart’s woes sent ripple effects through the wider retail sector, as worries mounted over what is expected to be weak holiday spending this year.The National Retail Federation, a trade group, said last week that it expected sales in November and December to rise 3.7 percent to $630 billion, less than last year’s 4.1 percent gain. Figures released by the Commerce Department earlier Wednesday showed overall retail sales virtually flat in September.AdvertisementTarget shares fell 3.5 percent, while Dollar General slumped 4.2 percent. Sears fell 3.0 percent.“Amazon’s clearly winning the retail wars with its advanced robotics and so on,” Mr. Flickinger said. “Walmart is already a proverbial light year behind Amazon in online retailing.”Mr. McMillon acknowledged that competition with e-commerce juggernauts, as well as discounters, remained tough. But in a shot at Amazon, he defended the advantages of Walmart’s large physical store over purely online merchants, asking whether it was easier for a brick-and-mortar store to build up e-commerce or for an e-commerce player to build out stores.Walmart’s strength, he said, lay in giving consumers the choice of shopping at its superstores or its increasing number of smaller “neighborhood” stores, or online, with products available for in-store pickup or for home delivery. Only Walmart could provide that wide array of options at a huge, nationwide scale, he said.“We like our chances,” Mr. McMillon said.The retailer will invest $2 billion in its e-commerce arm over the next two years, opening online grocery operations in 20 new markets. It said it planned to pour billions of dollars into making its prices more competitive.Mr. McMillon also said he was willing to close stores that were underperforming, as well as sell assets. That prompted speculation over a potential spinoff of businesses, like Sam’s Club, whose performance has lagged, as well as exits from difficult international markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Though Walmart has bolstered growth in some markets overseas, like Mexico and Canada, it has struggled further afield, including in Britain, where Walmart’s Asda chain has been engaged in a price war in a hypercompetitive grocery business.Walmart’s growth in China and in Brazil has also lost steam as economies slowed in those markets. In the most recent quarter, net sales at Walmart’s international stores fell by almost 10 percent.After years of being a target of labor and consumer groups seeking higher wages and better schedules for retail workers, Walmart is spending $1.2 billion this year to increase pay for its hourly employees to $9 an hour and $1.5 billion next year to raise wages to $10 an hour. The move, executives have said, is necessary to reduce staff turnover and to improve customer experience in its stores, including better restocking of shelves.Walmart has said it is also addressing erratic scheduling practices that have come under fire from labor groups for the destabilizing effect it has on workers’ incomes and livelihoods.AdvertisementBut it still faces pressure to do more to improve the lot of its lowest-paid employees — including committing to raising pay to at least $15 an hour.In ads financed by the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union, which represents workers primarily in grocery and retail stores, that were broadcast during the Democratic presidential candidates’ first debate, former and current Walmart employees call on the retailer to pay a better living wage for the sake of the country’s middle class.“We’re struggling,” one worker says. “We can’t survive on these wages,” says another.Charles Holley, Walmart’s departing chief financial officer, said earnings per share would fall 6 to 12 percent next year before they would recover. He said profits would rebound by fiscal year 2019, when earnings per share were expected to grow 5 to 10 percent a year.The company’s executive vice president, Brett Biggs, is set to succeed Mr. Holley at the end of the year.Mr. Holley also said that the company expected sales to increase in a range of $45 billion to $60 billion over the next three years, the equivalent of the annual sales of many of the country’s biggest corporations. The company trails Amazon by market capitalization, but Walmart’s sales — which reached $482 billion last year — dwarf Amazon’s annual revenue of about $89 billion.Walmart’s size has not calmed investors’ fears or translated into confidence in the retailer’s future. Mr. McMillon acknowledged as much, telling investors in a question-and-answer session that the biggest and the best were not the same.Still, “this is a growth company,” Mr. McMillion said. “It just happens to be a really large growth company.”A version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Walmart Cuts Back Its Forecast .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.