By BEN SISARIOMARCH 16, 2015
A group of radio broadcasters has asked for changes to federal rules about how stations disclose paid programming, raising fresh concerns about one of the music industry’s most enduring scandals — payola.In a petition to the Federal Communications Commission, nine broadcasters — including major ones like iHeartMedia, Cox, Emmis Communications and Entercom — requested a waiver to longstanding requirements that stations say on the air when a sponsor or promoter has paid for a piece of programming, like a song.Instead, the radio companies want to move these disclosures online, arguing that they would be more thorough and convenient there. The change is in the public interest, the broadcasters said, “because it would result in listeners’ having access to more information in a more user-friendly and satisfying way.”The broadcasters’ petition was dated Nov. 26 but not revealed until Friday, when the F.C.C. announced that it would accept public comments on the proposal through April 13. A spokesman for the agency said its backlog of work prevented the petition from being processed sooner.AdvertisementThe proposal has been criticized by musicians and advocates for artists for weakening the prohibitions against payola, the practice of paying for a song to be played on the radio. These restrictions are meant to prevent corruption of the public airwaves by giving artists and record companies a fair chance of having their music heard.Advertisement“If this were to happen, it would seal the deal for commercial radio just being a closed system for large media companies to promote their products,” said Casey Rae, chief executive of the Future of Music Coalition, an advocacy group.The concern reflects the continued importance of radio promotion even in the Internet age. According to Nielsen, an average of 258.4 million people each month listened to AM and FM radio at the end of 2014, up from 257 million the year before. Record executives frequently say that radio play remains the best way for a song to become a big hit.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Federal law permits stations to receive payments for programming if they acknowledge on the air that they were paid. But, over the years, broadcasters and record labels have been punished periodically for not following the rules. Starting in 2003, an investigation by the New York State attorney general uncovered wide evidence of corruption, with record companies offering gifts like vacations and sports tickets as bribes for playing music.“It was no longer like it was in the Alan Freed days, when people delivered cash,” said Bob Donnelly, a longtime music lawyer, referring to the early rock ’n’ roll D.J. whose career unraveled with the first major payola crackdown in the early 1960s. “It was now much more subtle.”In a series of settlements with the state, major record companies paid more than $30 million, and in 2007 a group of broadcasters — including Entercom and Clear Channel, now known as iHeartMedia — paid $12.5 million to settle claims with the F.C.C. The broadcasters also agreed to consent decrees governing their behavior, which expired after three years.The broadcasters argue that online disclosures would better protect the public, because they can be consulted anytime and run at much greater length than disclosures on the air. “This has nothing to do with repealing payola,” said Wendy Goldberg, a spokeswoman for iHeartMedia.Artist groups say the system has never fully been dismantled. The Future of Music Coalition surveyed radio playlists after the New York and F.C.C. settlements, and found that most musicians not associated with major labels had little chance of being heard on commercial stations.“This is a way,” Mr. Rae said on the broadcasters’ proposal, “to bring back payola in ways that will be beneficial for broadcasters.”A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Radio Broadcasters Seek Changes in Disclosure Rules for Paid Programming.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.