By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMARCH 16, 2015
Jonathan D. Gray grew up in the Chicago suburb of Highland Park, just a 40-minute drive from the Sears Tower, one of the most recognizable office buildings in the world.Now, Mr. Gray, the global head of real estate for the Blackstone Group, is betting that his hometown is due for growth — by buying the 110-story property, now known as the Willis Tower.Blackstone announced on Monday that it had purchased the 3.8-million-square-foot office building, the second-tallest building in the United States, paying roughly $1.3 billion to add a premier new property to its growing portfolio. Though Blackstone is perhaps best known for leveraged buyouts, its biggest business is its real estate unit, which has struck huge deals like the takeover of Hilton Hotels in 2007.The latest deal is also a bet that Chicago’s historically flat market for office space will show signs of growth. Nearly 20 percent of the Willis Tower, home to tenants like United Airlines, is now vacant.Advertisement“We are bullish on Chicago as companies expand within and move into the city and look for first-class office space,” Jacob Werner, a managing director in Blackstone’s real estate group, said in a statement.AdvertisementJust four years ago, the building’s current owners, who paid $841 million in 2004, tried to sell the 42-year-old skyscraper, only to call off the process after finding no acceptable offers.The latest sales process went much better for the group, which includes the New York investors Joseph Chetrit and Joseph Moinian and the Illinois-based firm American Landmark Properties.“This is simply a unique asset in real estate in the United States and has been an excellent investment for us,” a representative for the sellers said in a statement. “We are very happy that Blackstone is buying it and know that they will continue to be an excellent steward of this world-famous building.”Though multibillion-dollar price tags for American buildings were once rare, sky-high prices have become more common in recent years. Last month, a Chinese investor paid nearly $2 billion for the Waldorf Astoria in Midtown Manhattan.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But a Chicago skyscraper has not fetched over $1 billion until now. The previous record was held by the 60-story 300 N. LaSalle Street, which was purchased for $850 million last year.The Sears Tower opened in 1973, when Sears was at the height of its retail power. The building, then the tallest in the United States, served as its corporate headquarters and was an unmistakable sign of its might. But in 1988, the company sold it..The tower passed through the hands of several investors, including AEW Capital Management, before the current owners bought control in 2004.When Blackstone officially takes over, the investment firm plans to spend an estimated $150 million to upgrade the tower’s retail space and its famous Skydeck, the 103rd-floor observatory that commands sweeping views of Chicago, particularly from the glass-cube “ledges” that jut out 4.3 feet from the building.AdvertisementTourism has helped other skyscrapers draw additional revenue. The Empire State Building draws nearly half of its revenue from visitors.“We see great potential in further improving both the building’s retail operations and the tourist experience for one of the most popular destinations for visitors to Chicago,” Mr. Werner of Blackstone said.It is unclear if or when Blackstone will change the name of the building, which was rechristened the Willis Tower after the Willis Group, an insurance brokerage, bought the naming rights in 2009.A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Blackstone Group Purchases Landmark Chicago Tower.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.