AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill VlasicDETROIT — While General Motors has settled one potentially explosive lawsuit related to defective ignition switches, the company still faces the possibility of depositions of its employees in a broader class-action case.A number of current and former G.M. employees are scheduled to be questioned under oath, beginning in May, in a sweeping case in federal court in New York.G.M. avoided depositions in the wrongful-death case settled last week with the parents of Brooke Melton, 29, a Georgia woman who was killed in a crash in a Chevrolet Cobalt equipped with a faulty ignition switch.But the lawyers who represented Ms. Melton’s parents said on Monday that legal efforts to collect internal G.M. documents and depose employees would continue nonetheless.The lawyers said that the discovery process begun in Ms. Melton’s case had accelerated similar efforts in the so-called multidistrict litigation, which consolidates a number of lawsuits for injury and death cases, as well as economic losses sustained by owners of defective vehicles.The New York Times has exposed missteps and delays by automakers and federal safety regulators in responding to deadly defects in automobiles during what became a record year for recalls.“The Meltons’ work is done,” said Lance Cooper, one of the lawyers representing Ken and Beth Melton, who sued G.M. twice for manufacturing an unsafe car that caused their daughter’s death.The first lawsuit filed by the Meltons was settled by G.M. for $5 million two years ago.That settlement came after the discovery process revealed that G.M. had been secretly grappling with faulty ignition switches in millions of small cars for about a decade.The case prompted more internal investigations at G.M. and led to the recall of about 2.6 million Chevrolet Cobalts and other cars with defective switches starting in February of last year.After the recalls began, however, the Meltons decided to file a second lawsuit against G.M., and offered to return their $5 million settlement. Their goal, Mr. Cooper said, was “to uncover the truth” about how G.M. failed for years to fix a deadly defect that has now been linked to 67 deaths and 113 injuries.The second lawsuit forced G.M. to produce reams of internal documents, including confidential communications between company officials and their in-house and outside lawyers, Mr. Cooper said. The Meltons’ lawyers had also been pursuing depositions of G.M. officials who had firsthand knowledge of ignition-switch failures.Mr. Cooper said that in January the Meltons were approached by Kenneth Feinberg, G.M.’s hired compensation expert, about filing a claim against the company as part of the overall compensation program set up for victims of accidents related to faulty ignitions.More vehicles, including old models, have been recalled in the United States in 2014 than ever before. Explore the size and scope of the recalls, and find out if your car has been affected.The Meltons ultimately filed a claim and accepted a confidential settlement. “They were emotionally exhausted,” Mr. Cooper said, adding that they chose not to speak publicly on the settlement.A G.M. spokesman, James Cain, confirmed that the company resolved the Meltons’ lawsuit. But he declined to provide any further details.Mr. Cooper said that the original $5 million received in the first lawsuit is part of the settlement. He declined to say how much more money Mr. Feinberg awarded the Meltons.The family’s legal battle with G.M. has been a critical factor in bringing to light G.M.’s lax safety procedures and internal dysfunction. As a result, the company has dismissed 15 employees, reorganized its entire engineering organization, and recalled about 30 million vehicles in total over a number of safety defects.Now the legal focus shifts to the multidistrict litigation, which is set to go to trial in January. Mr. Cooper said that documents produced by G.M. in the Melton case had also been given to lawyers in the multidistrict litigation.Depositions are scheduled in May of a number of current and former G.M. employees, as well as officials of Delphi, the firm that made the ignition switches.Among the first G.M. officials on the deposition list are Alicia Boler-Davis, a senior executive in charge of global quality, and Lucy Clark Dougherty, a top company lawyer. Also on the list is Jaclyn Palmer, one of five G.M. lawyers dismissed for their role in the delayed ignition-switch recall. Advertisement