
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

MARCH 16, 2015
The sweetened $11 billion bid by Valeant Pharmaceuticals for Salix Pharmaceuticals may have scored two knockouts. By coming up with an extra 9 percent over its previous offer, the acquisitive drug maker, now backed by the hedge fund executive William A. Ackman, quickly put an end to a rival bid from Endo International. But the extra cash required, and the debt already on its balance sheet, leave Valeant’s business model looking wobbly.Its rapidly growing $68 billion empire is built around the concept of buying companies, cutting costs and increasing any resulting profit with an ultralow tax rate. Valeant and its supporters argue that this way of operating will secure hefty cash flow and future earnings. Valeant hasn’t shown any consistent ability to do it so far, however, as recurring restructuring costs associated with past deals keep eating into the bottom line.Easy access to credit has aided Valeant’s acquisition habit. The company managed to pay down $2 billion of debt over the last year, but the Salix deal will nearly double its outstanding debt load to about $30 billion. The acquisition means Valeant’s debt will now be about six times its estimated 2015 earnings before interest, taxes and amortization — if the firm can actually bring in as much cash as analysts expect. That’s far higher than is generally considered comfortable for drug makers. Merck, by contrast, has one-fifth the net debt with consistently higher margins.The price paid for Salix is hard to judge. The company admitted last year that it had puffed up revenue growth by sending extra drugs to distributors. And regulators will decide in May whether to approve its medicine for irritable bowel syndrome, a drug that may turn out to be a blockbuster.In all likelihood, though, Valeant will be back to buying more before it’s clear whether Salix was a bargain or overpriced. The company needs to offset revenue lost to cheap generic competitors, given that it spends minimally to develop new drugs. The drug industry’s frenzied mergers and acquisitions mean there are fewer deals to be done, and Valeant’s stock market success has inspired the likes of Endo to copy its strategy. The bidding war for Salix is indicative of how prices are rising. Valeant won the auction, but may have delivered a blow to itself in the process.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »