By MELISSA EDDYOCT. 14, 2015
BERLIN —  A senior Volkswagen executive who was recently tapped to take over the company’s North American division is instead leaving the company after 25 years.In announcing the departure of the executive, Winfried Vahland, the company said on Wednesday that he was leaving over a disagreement about how to structure the North American operations. The company specifically said that his departure had nothing to do with the diesel-emissions scandal that is preoccupying Volkswagen.But the development adds to the turmoil at Volkswagen, which is the subject of investigations on both sides of the Atlantic, including inquiries by the United States Justice Department and state prosecutors from Lower Saxony in Germany.Mr. Vahland, who had been the chief of Volkswagen Group’s Skoda unit, was appointed on Sept. 25 to lead Volkswagen’s newly reorganized North America division. It was part of a shake-up that followed the resignation of Volkswagen’s chief executive, Martin Winterkorn, after the company admitted installing software designed to trick diesel air-quality tests and that was installed on 11 million vehicles worldwide.AdvertisementSeveral executives have been suspended in connection with Volkswagen’s investigation into the fraud, although the company has refused to release any details. On Wednesday, the company said that reports in the German news media that “several dozen” managers had been involved were inflated.AdvertisementMr. Vahland had been expected to take up a position that would have placed overall responsibility for the automaker in the United States, Mexico and Canada in his hands. But because of “differing views on the organization” of the new division, “expressly not related to current events on the issue of diesel engines,” he decided to leave the company, a company statement said.Before taking over Skoda, which is based in the Czech Republic, Mr. Vahland served in various posts at Volkswagen. In 2005, he helped start a major expansion of Volkswagen in China, and he was considered one of the company’s most senior executives.In announcing the reorganization of its operations in North America last month, Volkswagen said that Mr. Vahland would “combine and significantly strengthen” the new North America division. Existing executives, including the company’s top executive in the United States, Michael Horn, would have remained in place, but they would have reported to him.A version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Newly Appointed VW Chief for North America Leaves in Shake-Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.