AdvertisementSupported byFrequent FlierBy Tony ChiI’M a control freak, and I guess I’m proud of that because that means that my clients don’t have to worry — I’ll do that. Since I’m a designer, and principal and founder of Tonychi & Associates, it’s very important for me to go where the jobs are, and my travels can take me anywhere throughout the United States, Europe or Asia.I don’t stress about business travel, but I don’t love it. Security is now dominating the experience, and although I understand the need for it, it’s not comfortable, for me at least.I design in the hospitality space, and I think we need to define hospitality beyond hotels and restaurants. In the United States, the security issues are much more unsettling than what I find in other countries. Connecting flights used to be doable and more pleasant. Now it’s a burden and I, like others, always cut it way too close when trying to make those connections.My most memorable travel experiences involved island-hopping in Indonesia. I used to work there quite regularly. Back in the late 1980s, I was a young designer. The stock market tanked around 1987 and it was tough to find work in New York, so I decided to go to Indonesia.Things were really booming there, and it was a good move. It was not uncommon to go from island to island by a diesel-powered fishing boat and then connect to a small propeller plane. Most people didn’t even have a seat on the plane. We’d just hang out with the cargo, behind a little plastic net.It wasn’t fancy, but in many ways it was a privilege. This travel really engages you and provides you with an intimate connection with the local culture.Today in our large-plane culture, that intimacy may have been lost. So if I’ve learned anything about business travel, it’s that I need to never lose the wonderment that I get from meeting new people and exploring cultures. But I’m still never going to be happy about the process nowadays.As a frequent traveler, you learn to anticipate when a delay is actually a cancellation. Your intuition can smell these like a dead rat, and you figure out creative ways to avoid the worst case. However, you can sometimes be caught off guard.I remember boarding a Northweast plane headed for Tokyo in the mid-1990s, during a major snowstorm. At the time, there was competition between United and Northwest. I felt reassured when the previous Tokyo-bound flight from United took off successfully. However, my luck must have run out.We boarded the flight, and I took my seat and promptly fell asleep. I thought I was going to wake up in Tokyo, but no. After several hours of a wonderful nap, I found myself still on the runway in New York.The weirdest layover occurred in the blizzard that paralyzed New York and the Northeast just after Christmas in 2010. I did not anticipate the intensity of the storm when I arrived at Kennedy Airport. After the snow stopped, nothing was able to leave New York — including me.As told to Joan Raymond. Email: joanraymond@nytimes.comQ. How often do you fly for business?A. Quite a bit. I have about 10 trips per month.Q. What’s your least favorite airport?A. There are too many to list, but J.F.K. and Los Angeles International are certainly on that list.Q. Of all the places you’ve been, what’s the best?A. Istanbul. It has a great combination of both a European feel and an Asian feel. The culture, the vibrancy and textures and aromas of Istanbul are remarkable.Q. What’s your secret airport vice?A. Since I’m really not all that fond of airports, I get to them as late as possible. Fortunately, that’s mostly worked in my favor.Advertisement