By BEN PROTESSMARCH 16, 2015
A white-shoe law firm has poached another Wall Street prosecutor.WilmerHale announced on Monday that it had hired Anjan Sahni, a senior federal prosecutor in the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan, naming him a partner in its white-collar and securities enforcement practices.As head of an elite Wall Street task force at the United States attorney’s office, Mr. Sahni oversaw investigations into Bernard L. Madoff’s accomplices and insider trading across Wall Street. Now, in his role at WilmerHale, Mr. Sahni will represent some of the same sorts of companies and executives he used to prosecute.“The long history that the firm has of hiring government lawyers made it a very appealing place to practice,” Mr. Sahni said in an interview, noting that he was also drawn to WilmerHale because he previously was a young associate there more than a decade ago.Mr. Sahni is the latest Wall Street prosecutor to switch sides. Over the last year, nine prosecutors have departed the Wall Street task force at the United States attorney’s office, most joining big law firms. Marc P. Berger, the former chief of the Wall Street unit, landed at Ropes & Gray.AdvertisementThe job-hopping reflects the natural flow of the so-called revolving door, the metaphorical portal that turns prosecutors into defense lawyers and vice versa. It is a cycle playing out around the legal world, as the demand for white-collar specialists grows from Wall Street banks facing an ever-growing amount of government scrutiny.AdvertisementAt WilmerHale, Mr. Sahni will reunite with Boyd M. Johnson III, who was the deputy United States attorney in Manhattan until he joined the firm in 2011. A year earlier, Stephanie Avakian, a vice chairwoman of the firm’s securities practice, left to be the deputy director of enforcement at the Securities and Exchange Commission.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although the turnover is not unique to New York, the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan happens to house some of the country’s most experienced white-collar prosecutors. The office, run by Preet Bharara, secured more than 80 insider trading convictions, indicted the hedge fund SAC Capital on charges of insider trading, handled the Madoff cases and charged a pair of JPMorgan Chase traders involved in the bank’s “London Whale” trading scandal.The office’s Wall Street task force was at the center of those cases. It is unclear who will replace Mr. Sahni, who worked atop the unit since 2012, though Katherine Goldstein, his current deputy, is a potential choice.Mr. Sahni’s departure caps more than a decade as a prosecutor. After several years in the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan, he became co-chief of the office’s Terrorism and International Narcotics Unit, eventually overseeing the conviction of the would-be Times Square bomber, Faisal Shahzad.An Atlanta native who graduated from Yale Law School, Mr. Sahni will leave the office later this month. Mr. Sahni, who has two young children, will start at WilmerHale in June.In a statement, Mr. Johnson, the former deputy United States attorney turned WilmerHale partner, called Mr. Sahni “one of the finest lawyers” in the Southern District of New York and said he would “enhance the experience we house both in our New York office and across our litigation practices.”A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Wall Street Prosecutor Will Join WilmerHale.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.