AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningSir Isaac Newton’s third law of motion was that “for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.” The response from Congress to an appeals court decision in United States v. Newman, which overturned the insider trading convictions of two hedge fund managers, is perhaps more an overreaction.Two bills would broaden the law to prohibit almost any trading on confidential information. The problem is that the proposed changes could make it even harder to recognize the line between permissible and illegal trades.In December, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan raised the bar for prosecuting the recipients of tips who trade on confidential information. According to the court’s analysis, absent a monetary benefit, the government must show a recpient knew that the tipper received a benefit from a “meaningfully close personal relationship” resulting in an exchange “that is objective, consequential, and represents at least a potential gain of a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature.”In response to that decision, Representative Stephen F. Lynch, Democrat of Massachusetts, introduced the “Ban Insider Trading Act” on Feb. 27, and the Democratic Senators Jack Reed of Rhode Island and Robert Menendez of New Jersey submitted the “Stop Illegal Insider Trading Act” on March 11. Both would make it illegal to buy and sell securities based on information the person knew or should have known was confidential, differing somewhat in the details of how the prohibition would be enforced.Mr. Lynch’s bill would eliminate the requirement that a tipper receive a personal benefit in exchange for passing on the information, the crucial issue in the Newman case. It defines “inside information” as nonpublic information that is obtained illegally, from the issuer of the securities “with an expectation of confidentiality,” or “in violation of a fiduciary duty.” This approach retains to a degree the current focus on breaching a duty to the source of the information.The Senate bill takes a broader approach. It would make it illegal to trade on information that “is not publicly available” but not “information that the person has independently developed from publicly available sources.” The Securities and Exchange Commission would be authorized to adopt rules exempting certain persons, transactions or communications from the rule if that was in the “public interest.”As I noted in an earlier column, the likely congressional response to the Newman decision would be to expand what constitutes insider trading by adopting the “possession theory” that makes it illegal to trade on confidential information regardless of how it was obtained. The appeal of the Senate bill is its apparent simplicity: It makes almost all trading on confidential information subject to an enforcement action.The legislative proposals go much further than just overturning the approach to tipping liability adopted by the appeals court in the Newman case. They jettison much of the law of insider trading that has developed over the last 35 years, since the Supreme Court first dealt with the issue in Chiarella v. United States. That approach focuses on breaching a duty of trust and confidence to the source of the information.But the legislation would create confusion about how much trading would potentially violate the law. The Senate bill creates a gray area about what types of information would be subject to the prohibition. It allows trading on information derived from “publicly available sources” but does not define them.For example, one type of stock research involves “channel checking” a company’s supply chain or distribution networks to estimate whether sales are increasing. Would that violate the law because it involved developing information from sources that might not be publicly available?The Senate bill shifts the focus from improper disclosure of confidential corporate information to whether the information was generally available to the public. This might extend the prohibition to information about the volume of stock orders obtained by high-frequency traders or even the intentions of a particularly influential investor — think Warren E. Buffett — that are not widely known. The potential effect of this approach on stock analysts could be far-reaching.The authority that the Senate bill would grant to the S.E.C. to issue exemptions from the broader prohibition would generate demand from Wall Street and hedge funds for new rules to explain which types of information are subject to the prohibition. They could take years to develop and engulf the agency in a fury of lobbying.The House bill does not avoid the interpretive issues that afflict the Senate legislation. It defines “material information” as that which “would be likely to have a significant effect on the price of a security.” The current definition developed by the courts is not much better, focusing on whether it would affect the “total mix” of information available to a reasonable investor in deciding how to act. The term “materiality” is like atmospheric mercury: easy to spot and hard to pin down.But using “significant” to determine when information is sufficiently important invites arguments about what is enough of a price effect to qualify. High-frequency trading firms thrive on price differences measured in pennies, and an earnings report can have little effect on a company’s shares but still be something investors would like to know.The legislation leaves it up to the courts to decide what is significant, which means judges will be largely responsible for defining the scope of the prohibition. This term has the potential to allow defendants to argue for the “mosaic theory” by contending that inside information was insignificant, even if it was obtained improperly.One persistent complaint about insider trading law is that it was largely created by the courts and subject to the vagaries of the particular judges deciding the cases. The Newman decision involved analyzing the import of what the Supreme Court said about tipper liability in its 1983 decision in Dirks v. S.E.C., so that it is an interpretation of an interpretation. But enacting a law that purports to define insider trading does not necessarily resolve the ambiguity in the law, leaving courts in largely the same position of shaping the contours of the prohibition.The legislative proposals may be intended more to send a message to the appeals court, which is pondering a request by the Justice Department to reconsider its decision in the Newman case or even rehear the appeal altogether. Congress can reverse an appellate decision that interprets the law by changing the language, and the two legislative proposals may be like “friendofthecourt” briefs telling the judges that their decision is being watched closely.It is unclear whether the legislation has much of a chance of passing, apart from the problems Congress has in reaching agreement on many more important issues. The House and Senate sponsors are Democrats, and bills offered by the minority rarely advance far. But a rejection by the appeals court to the government’s request for reconsideration in the Newman case could generate enough negative publicity to push forward an effort to broaden the prohibition on insider trading. After all, who can oppose legislation offered to help level the playing field for investors, even if it does little to clarify the law beyond making more trading subject to prosecution?Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningAdvertisement