By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMARCH 16, 2015
The investment firms Leonard Green & Partners and TPG Capital agreed on Monday to buy Life Time Fitness, a gym operator, for about $4 billion, including the assumption of debt.Under the terms of the deal, the private equity firms will pay $72.10 a share in cash, a 7.3 percent premium to Life Time Fitness’s closing price on Friday. The offer is also a 73 percent premium to the company’s closing price on Aug. 22, the day before Life Time Fitness said it had begun exploring corporate financing options.Life Time Fitness runs 114 centers in the United States and Canada.The leveraged buyout is the latest done together by TPG and Leonard Green, which have banded together to buy the likes of J. Crew and Petco — the latter of which the two acquired two times in the last decade.The consortium of buyers also includes LNK Partners, a previous investor in the company, and the chairman and chief executive of Life Time Fitness, Bahram Akradi, who will roll over about $125 million worth of the stock he already owns. The purchase price values his stake at about $180 million.Advertisement“There are no words to describe my gratitude for the confidence and significant commitment Leonard Green & Partners, TPG and LNK Partners have made to Life Time and our management team,” Mr. Akradi said in a statement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The deal is expected to close by Sept. 30, pending approval by the company’s shareholders.Guggenheim Securities, Wells Fargo and the law firms Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom and Faegre Baker advised Life Time Fitness.Leonard Green and TPG received financial advice and debt financing from Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs, Jefferies, BMO Capital Markets, RBC Capital Markets, Macquarie Capital and Nomura. Latham & Watkins counseled Leonard Green, while Ropes & Gray provided legal advice to TPG.AdvertisementKirkland and Ellis counseled LNK Partners.A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Investors Reach Deal for Life Time Fitness.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.