AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesFaced with the prospect of letting another deal slip through its fingers, Valeant Pharmaceuticals International substantially increased its bid for Salix Pharmaceuticals on Monday, putting a quick end to a bidding war with Endo International.Valeant said it would now pay about $11 billion, or $173 a share, for Salix, a maker of gastrointestinal drugs, up from its previously agreed-to offer of $158 a share. The increase amounts to an additional $1 billion for Salix shareholders, and the boards of both companies approved the revised deal over the weekend.As part of the new agreement, the termination fee that would be payable by Salix to Valeant has been increased by $100 million, to $456 million.Shortly after the revised agreement was announced, Endo said it was withdrawing its $11.2 billion proposal to acquire Salix.“While we are disappointed with this outcome, we have been and will continue to be disciplined in our approach to potential acquisitions,” Endo said in a statement, adding that it would focus on other acquisition opportunities and organic growth.Prevailing in the bidding war is a much-needed win for Valeant and its chief executive, J. Michael Pearson. For much of last year, Valeant engaged in an acrimonious effort to take over Allergan, the maker of Botox. Along the way, Allergan and analysts raised questions about Valeant’s business model, and its ability to successfully integrate acquisitions. Actavis, another drug maker, ultimately succeeded in winning the right to buy Allergan, leaving Valeant with little to show for its efforts. And though it has triumphed this time, Valeant must now come up with $11 billion in cash. To help finance its increased offer, Valeant will issue $1.45 billion in new shares. Doing so will allow the company to pay for the deal without taking on more debt from banks, which could have damaged its credit rating.Endo’s decision to walk away signals a remarkably quick end to the bidding war, but is not entirely unexpected. Endo’s offer, although higher than even Valeant’s revised deal, introduced numerous uncertainties for Salix.Endo’s bid was mostly stock, meaning the Salix shareholders would have largely been betting on the future of new, enlarged drug maker. The Endo deal would also not have closed until later in the year, whereas the Valeant deal could close within weeks.A Salix deal with Endo would also have required votes from the shareholders of both companies; no such votes are needed as part of the sale to Valeant.And because an acquisition by Endo would not have closed for months, a pending ruling by the Food and Drug Administration over whether to allow a new Salix treatment could have become a factor.Mr. Pearson highlighted those uncertainties in trumpeting his company’s offer. “This revised offer provides Salix shareholders with all cash at a significant premium and the certainty to close by April 1,” he said in a statement.But the increased offer is also stretching Valeant financially. Known for its relentless pace of acquisitions, the company, which is based in Canada, has taken on substantial debt to fuel its deals.Although it faltered last year with Allergan, those efforts allowed it to forge an important alliance with Pershing Square, the hedge fund run by William A. Ackman. Mr. Ackman took a roughly 5 percent stake in Valeant this year, saying he would be a passive investor, and was prepared to help the company finance a bid for Salix.Salix, based in Raleigh, N.C., is poised to be acquired by a Canadian company with a substantially lower tax rate than many of its American peers.Both Valeant and Endo are among the drug makers that struck so-called inversion deals in recent years, allowing them to reduce their tax bills while moving abroad. Inversions fueled a deal-making spurt in 2014 even with such deals largely outlawed by new rules issued by the Treasury Department. In just the first two and a half months of 2015, global health care deals are at a record high, according to Dealogic. Advertisement