By EMILY STEELOCT. 14, 2015
Dish Network, the satellite television provider, has urged regulators to reject a pair of deals proposed by its rival Charter Communications totaling $67.1 billion, saying they would “significantly damage” competition and limit consumer access to online video.The company, in a petition filed Tuesday with the Federal Communications Commission, said that Charter’s proposed takeover of Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks would be “no better for the public interest” than Comcast’s failed $45 billion deal for Time Warner Cable, which collapsed under regulatory scrutiny earlier this year.When Comcast tried to acquire Time Warner Cable, regulators found that the combined company would have had both the power and the incentive to harm online video competition. Dish Network, which also opposed the Comcast-Time Warner Cable deal, said the new deal should lead regulators to the same conclusion because of the combined company’s control over broadband.If Charter’s deal is approved, the tie-up would create a new force in the country’s video and broadband market with about 24 million customers in 41 states. The company would control about 30 percent of the country’s high-speed Internet market and 17 percent of video subscribers.AdvertisementIn its filing, Dish cited the potential for the combined company to harm its new Sling TV video service, which offers streaming television without a traditional cable or satellite subscription.AdvertisementThe proposed merger “would cause significant and irreparable harm to emerging competitive online video products and services, as well as the performance of traditional satellite television service, ultimately reducing competition and choice for consumers,” Roger Lynch, chief executive of Sling TV, stated in an accompanying filing. “Accordingly, I believe that the merger as currently constructed is not in the public interest and should be denied.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Charter Communications has argued that its deals would pose no threat to the online video market because its future depends more on broadband than on its legacy video business.“There is no more friendly broadband provider to Sling than Charter,” Justin Venech, a Charter spokesman, said in a statement. “Charter’s slowest speed is 60 Mbps. We have no data caps, no contracts and no modem fees.”Also on Tuesday, AT&T asked regulators in a filing to carefully review the transaction to consider how cable consolidation could affect coordination between cable operators against emerging competition. Public interest groups like Public Knowledge, Common Cause, Consumers Union and Open Media and Information Companies Initiative urged regulators to reject the deal.To date, Charter’s proposed acquisitions have received significantly less criticism than Comcast’s deal for Time Warner Cable, which would have united the two largest cable operators in the country. Several state and local representatives, local chambers of commerce and nonprofit organizations have submitted regulatory filings supporting Charter’s deal.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.