By PAUL TAYLOR | REUTERSMARCH 16, 2015
BRUSSELS —  Once depicted as a “blue banana” stretching from Manchester to Milan, Europe’s industrial heartland has moved eastward just as its political center of gravity has shifted to Germany.The term was coined in 1989 — the year the Berlin Wall fell — to describe the French geographer Roger Brunet’s work identifying a manufacturing megacity, visible from space at night as a band of light curving from England to Italy via the Netherlands, Belgium, West Germany and Switzerland.Mr. Brunet was worried that France, a highly centralized economy dominated by Paris, was fading from  the map. He developed the concept to urge the government to invest in infrastructure to connect the Paris-Lyon-Marseille axis to the highly urbanized European backbone of around 110 million people.A quarter of a century later, the Continent’s industrial geography has morphed. A more fitting image might be a golden football centered on southern Germany and reaching into Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Austria and Romania.Advertisement“We seen a huge relocation and concentration into a central European manufacturing core,” says Michael A. Landesmann, scientific director of the Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies.AdvertisementThe former communist countries that joined the European Union in 2004 and 2007 have become the extended production line of German industry, no longer just supplying raw material and components but assembling cars and some industrial machinery.Manufacturing employment has declined everywhere in Europe as a share of the work force but most sharply in Britain, France and Belgium. The trend, driven by the globalization of supply chains, was accelerated by the post-2008 economic crisis.The shift in the balance of trade inside the European Union in the decade since the beginning of its eastward enlargement offers a striking illustration.The golden football region — Germany, the Netherlands, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Romania — increased its share of trade within the European Union by 5.3 percentage points from 2004 through2013, the latest year for which final data has been published. The biggest gains accrued to Germany: 2.2 percentage points.Over the same period, the Atlantic Arc region encompassing Britain, France, Ireland, Spain and Portugal lost a cumulative 4.4 percentage points in its share of intra-European Union trade, led downward by Spain and Britain. Italy also lost 1.7 percentage points.How much this all matters is open to debate. To some extent, industrial jobs have been replaced by the growth of business services, especially in Britain, which has passed France as the European Union’s second-biggest economic power, after Germany.Manufacturing jobs in advanced economies have become increasingly highly skilled, while those parts of production for which high skill levels are not needed have been shifted to regions with lower labor costs.AdvertisementIn the knowledge economy, location may become increasingly irrelevant and industrial plants may wither in Europe, as coal mines and steel mills largely did in the late 20th century. Yet Germany has built on its economic dominance of Europe by maintaining the largest manufacturing base.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More worryingly, Mr. Landesmann says, the southern periphery has become largely disconnected, industrially, from the core since the eurozone debt crisis forced Greece, Spain and Portugal to seek bailouts.“The periphery and lower-income regions are not linked to cross-border production networks. That is not easily reversible, and it’s not just an exchange rate issue,” Mr. Landesmann said.Economists assume too blithely that such trends will balance themselves out over time, Mr. Landesmann said, arguing that the loss of manufacturing capacity on Europe’s southern fringes calls for policy action to build up the export capacity of peripheral countries.Not everyone is quite so gloomy.The latest figures from Eurostat, the European Union’s statistics office, show exports from Spain, Portugal and Ireland rising again. Ireland was the fastest-growing economy in the eurozone last year, with 4.8 percent growth. Spain grew 2 percent, finally starting to turn the tide of mass unemployment.The Ford Motor Company and General Motors have just made major investments to increase car production in Spain. Because of big gains in productivity, Spain has increased its share of Europe’s industrial gross value-added even as it has lost manufacturing jobs.These shifting patterns pose conundrums for European Union policy makers and the European Investment Bank as they consider how to target a planned strategic investment fund of 315 billion euros, or $330.5 billion, intended to attract private capital to long-term infrastructure projects.Should the priority be to counter the growing north-south economic divide, reindustrialize the rust belt and the olive oil belt, focus on reducing dependence on fossil fuels like imported Russian natural gas, or promote research and development in the industrial heartland?While acknowledging that trying to reverse the tide of industrial concentration would be futile, Vincent Aussilloux and Arno Amabile of the French government’s policy planning agency, France Stratégie, argue in a forthcoming paper that the European Union needs to target strategic investment at the most depressed regions.AdvertisementThey also advocate a specific fund for the eurozone to provide loans and subsidies to develop research, small business and vocational training in the poorest peripheral areas.“This is also a political imperative so that Europe is once again identified with positive, future-oriented projects and not just with enforcing budget austerity,” they say, warning that the widening industrial gap could otherwise cause a political explosion.Paul Taylor is a Reuters correspondent. A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.