AdvertisementSupported byBy Jad MouawadWASHINGTON — With their airlines’ prospects in the United States being threatened, top officials from Emirates and Etihad Airways, the mega-carriers based in the Middle East, defended their businesses on Tuesday and shot back at American rivals who had accused them of unfair competition.The executives praised the virtues of open-skies agreements between countries, saying passengers had benefited from more competition, better service and lower fares. They denied receiving unfair subsidies and said attempts to review the agreements amounted to protectionist measures by United States carriers.Tim Clark, president of Emirates, said that in its 30 years of operations the airline had repeatedly defended itself against allegations of subsidies, which he said were unfounded. Mr. Clark, a British national, called the claims “tosh,” and said the company would provide a response to the specific allegations contained in a 55-page report recently produced by the American carriers. In it, the three major domestic airlines say the gulf carriers have received $42 billion in subsidies. Emirates, which produces quarterly financial reports, has long denied that it receives any state subsidies.“The requirements from the government of Dubai has been and remains the same: There will be no support for your operations, you will be required to make money,” Mr. Clark said in a news conference at the National Press Club.Speaking earlier in the day at an aviation conference in Washington, James Hogan, chief executive of Etihad, said that American carriers were trying to protect their own lucrative trans-Atlantic routes, which they operate through joint ventures with European airlines. To do so, they have been granted antitrust immunity, or ATI, by the United States government to set prices and routes with European airlines.“I think this is a protectionist move to protect the ATI routes across the Atlantic; that’s the irony,” Mr. Hogan said. He added that Etihad abided by the open-skies agreement between the United States and the United Arab Emirates, but that such matters were best left for governments to discuss.“We make no apologies for offering new competitive choice for travelers,” he said. “Open skies should be about customer choice.”Both Mr. Hogan and Mr. Clark met separately with United States government officials in Washington to defend their case. Mr. Clark said the talks were “very constructive.”United States carriers, pilots and flight attendant unions say the three state-owned carriers — Emirates, Etihad and Qatar Airways — have received state subsidies that distort competition. To support their efforts, they have mounted a sophisticated campaign to highlight the perils they believe their rivals pose to American jobs.Delta Air Lines, United Airlines and American Airlines have asked the administration to freeze new flights from Gulf carriers and review open-skies agreements with the United Arab Emirates and Qatar.W. Douglas Parker, chief executive of American Airlines, said the subsidies were “unprecedented in the history of international trade.” The dispute has led to some odd entanglements. American is also a partner with the Gulf airlines it is criticizing. It has a code-sharing agreement with Etihad. It is also a member of the Oneworld global partnership, along with Qatar Airways.The Gulf carriers said that American carriers had also, to various degrees, received government support. That includes the advantages conferred by bankruptcy laws; government bailouts after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001; a large domestic market that is closed to foreign airlines; and government approval of industry consolidation.“Once you talk about fair skies, you enter into a quagmire of definition, and you have to be very careful how you go,” Mr. Clark said. The Gulf carriers have been relative latecomers to the United States. They began adding new destinations beyond New York or Chicago, including Dallas, Houston and Seattle, only in the last two years.Emirates now flies to nine cities in the United States from Dubai. It has three daily flights to New York, as well as a direct flight between New York and Milan. The carrier has said it eventually aims to reach 20 cities. Qatar Airways serves seven cities and Etihad six.Despite the rhetoric, analysts say it is unlikely the Obama administration will seek to renegotiate the agreements, particularly given that the U.A.E. is a major political and military ally and runs a $20 billion trade deficit with the United States, much of which is linked to plane sales from Boeing. Qatar is home to a major American military base.So far, the United States airlines and unions have found few allies. Still, the carriers are mindful of the bipartisan opposition in Congress that scuttled a 2006 deal by a Dubai-owned company, DP World, to manage terminal operations in some of the largest American ports.“It’s an easy target to go after the Arab airlines,” said Danny E. Sebright, president of the U.S.-U.A.E. Business Council. “There is always a concern that someone in Congress could takes it over as a cause célèbre, as happened with Dubai Ports.”Advertisement