
The 30-Minute Interview By                     
 VIVIAN MARINO
 
MARCH 17, 2015
Mr. Wacht, 59, is the president and an owner of Lee & Associates NYC, a commercial real estate brokerage firm affiliated with Lee & Associates Commercial Real Estate Services, which has its headquarters in Newport Beach, Calif. He is also an owner of Sierra Real Estate, a property management company, and the Cogswell Lee Development Group, which specializes in property acquisitions.Interview conducted and condensed byVIVIAN MARINOQ. You’re involved in a few companies. Are they all connected? A.  There’s a common ownership.Q. Is it difficult managing them all? A. It’s difficult explaining it to people.I have a chart on my wall that gives me the various entities, the percentage of ownership. I also have set up a lot of smaller companies — L.L.C.s — for when I find a really good partner and I want to do something with them.AdvertisementQ. Do you at least have one main office for these companies? A. All under the same roof.Q. So let’s start with Lee & Associates NYC. How is business there? A. Booming. We started at the very end of 2011, and our revenues have grown probably fivefold in the last three years.We had 193 transactions last year: 66 were retail, 114 office, five investment and eight industrial. My outlook for 2015 is even more bullish than 2014. I think we’re going to see a tremendous level of activity.Q. Was it difficult recruiting good brokers? A. We now have a total of 37 brokers — we started with 11, most of whom are no longer with us.Recruiting our first group of brokers was tough. We had to incentivize them — we had to pay some signing bonuses. We also made equity available to them in the company. So we have a number of brokers that are partners in the company. But as we started generating business and as we got the name out there, it got easier and easier. Now recruiting is easier because after three years people know who we are.AdvertisementQ. Do you still offer broker incentives? A. For the right person I would.But one thing that distinguishes us from a lot of other brokerage companies is that we allow our brokers to invest in our deals.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. Speaking of which, how big is your real estate portfolio? A. Between management and ownership there are 657 residential units, 118 retail units and over a million square feet of office space.Q. What are your rental rates portfoliowide? A. Probably around $42 a square foot.Q. What are some of the properties you own? A. We’ve been investors in a number of deals that our Chicago office put together for industrial properties in the Midwest. And I own a bunch of buildings in New York. I own an office building on the corner of 31st Street and Sixth Avenue.Q. How much property does Sierra Real Estate manage? A. Right now we’re up to 58 properties.Q. So how do you add value to the buildings you acquire? A. We’ll upgrade the lobby, add a new security system, replace windows. Sometimes you repurpose the building. You basically just upgrade the building and then you just do some good marketing.Q. Your bio says you started out in law. Why the switch to real estate? A. I liked being a lawyer, and I worked for a very good firm that now no longer exists. I had a client — it was a small real estate company called Sierra Realty — and I was coming up to the eighth year of being an associate and I was being considered for a partner and I wasn’t convinced that’s what I wanted to do. There was a part of me that was a little bit more entrepreneurial.So this client, Sierra Realty, with one principal in the company, had no succession plan, and asked if I was interested. I said I would give it a shot. I bought my partner out in the year 2000.Q. What do you do for fun? A. Everything. I’m on the board of a jazz orchestra. My first job out of college I was a disc jockey for a jazz radio station, but I got fired because I was terrible. But I had a real passion for the music, so I got involved with this charity, the Afro Latin Jazz Alliance, eight years ago and we’ve been setting up music programs in public schools. The Afro Latin Jazz Orchestra won a Grammy this year.I also like to sky-dive, although my wife won’t let me do it anymore. It’s like the world’s greatest visceral rush. I calculated the free fall at around 40 seconds and then it took like 10 minutes to get to the ground.A version of this interview appears in print on March 18, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: James R. Wacht.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »