AdvertisementSupported byEconomic SceneBy Eduardo PorterFew people played as critical a role in the construction of the American social safety net as Wilbur Cohen.Mr. Cohen was among the founders of Social Security in 1935, a young aide on F.D.R.’s Committee on Economic Security. Thirty years later, as an under secretary of health under President Lyndon B. Johnson, he was the chief architect of Medicare and Medicaid.In 1973, Mr. Cohen sat down to a debate with the economist Milton Friedman, hero to the free-marketeers of the Chicago School of Economics. Mr. Friedman wanted to privatize Social Security, and he criticized the program as being regressive. The poor, he noted, paid taxes to cover their benefits. In fact, they worked longer and collected fewer benefits than the rich.“You are right,” conceded Mr. Cohen, the champion of the New Deal. “However, a program for poor people will be a poor program.”Here is what he meant: Only universal programs that served all Americans could achieve the broad political support needed to become embedded in society. Programs targeted at the poor would be stigmatized as charity, underfunded and left to wither.Looking back, Mr. Cohen’s prescription looks spot on. Social Security and Medicare remain the most politically robust bits of the United States’ social insurance apparatus — survivors of repeated attempts at privatization. Almost everything else, including food stamps and child subsidies for the poor, is vulnerable.Even Professor Friedman declared himself swayed by the argument. “Look at what has happened to public housing: It’s a program designed for poor people — it’s a poor program,” he said in an interview years later. “Look at what happened to Aid to Families With Dependent Children: It was a program designed for poor people — it was a poor program.”Consider it this way. Bill Clinton, a Democratic president, gave us welfare reform — cutting the main program of assistance to the poor. His Republican successor, George W. Bush, failed to privatize Social Security but expanded prescription drug coverage under Medicare.And yet today Mr. Cohen’s maxim seems to have been relegated to the trash can of history — at best an irrelevant proposition, at worst an unfair one.From the expansion of the food stamp program to the promise of universal preschool and free community college for all, every one of the Obama administration’s economic initiatives has been carefully targeted at the needy. The Affordable Care Act, perhaps the largest expansion of the safety net since Medicaid, was tailored to benefit the near poor.To finance some programs, the administration has turned to the rich. Indeed, one of President Obama’s biggest political victories was to raise the capital gains tax and increase the top tax rate on families earning more than $400,000.And it’s not just President Obama. “President Clinton did the same thing when he raised taxes in 1993,” said Alan J. Auerbach, a specialist in tax policy at the University of California, Berkeley. “The focus is to provide benefits for the poor and shift the burden to pay for them on the rich.”Perhaps this strategy suits the times. Universal programs are expensive; difficult to push through the objections of a Republican Party divided between those who want a small government and those who want it smaller. It will grow tougher as an aging population puts increasing strains on Social Security and Medicare, squeezing other priorities out of the budget.Appearances matter, too: Universal programs financed by broader taxes could appear fundamentally unfair in an era of rampant income inequality separating the very rich from the rest.But the alternative also poses risks. Carefully targeted social insurance financed by progressive taxes is likely to be both stingy and politically weak. And even if some programs like the earned-income tax credit can be hidden from view, as “tax deductions” rather than benefits, there is a point when such subterfuge may no longer work.As the Swedish sociologists Walter Korpi and Joakim Palme put it in their classic “The Paradox of Redistribution:” “We can expect a trade-off between the degree of low-income targeting and the size of the redistributive budget.” They added: “The greater the degree of low-income targeting, the smaller the redistributive budget.”Unsurprisingly, the United States government provides one of the most threadbare social insurance nets among advanced nations. The question is, as we age and put more demands on Social Security and Medicare, will our dependence on narrowly focused, narrowly financed programs unravel what social insurance we have left?In an essay published this year, Lane Kenworthy, a professor of sociology at the University of California, San Diego, evaluated the evidence across the world’s industrialized nations as to whether universal programs were more effective at redistribution than targeted interventions.As globalization put pressure on social policy across the world, he found, redistribution did not decline more in countries with targeted social programs than in those with universal systems of social insurance.He points to research by Robert Greenstein, president of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, that found that despite their supposed political weakness, targeted social welfare programs survived rather well through the Reagan administration.Notably, whereas governments that offered universal public benefits did a better job at reducing income inequality in the 1980s and 1990s, by the 2000s the relationship had disappeared.Still, Professor Kenworthy remains sympathetic to Mr. Cohen’s maxim. “I still believe the fundamental logic of the argument that universalism has advantages,” he told me.One reason that the relationship between universality and redistribution seems to have declined around the world is precisely that targeted programs shrank in the United States — replaced by the broader earned-income tax credit. In other words, universal systems look worse than before because the United States, with its weak social safety net, looks more universal.The shape of the safety net is not unimportant.Hillary Rodham Clinton, the undeclared Democratic front-runner in the presidential campaign, is apparently being pulled in opposing directions by a populist faction advocating aggressive redistribution from rich to poor and a more moderate wing arguing the merits of tackling inequity via education.This is not the only way to frame Mrs. Clinton’s choices. The most critical goal of the next American government may be simply protecting the social insurance we have left.In his new book, “We Are Better Than This,” Edward D. Kleinbard, a law professor at the University of Southern California, suggests we might build a better, more effective government, by raising top tax rates to where they were in the Clinton era and paring some personal tax deductions that benefit the better off.Politically, that would be momentous. And yet it would only raise federal tax revenues to roughly 22 percent from 20 percent of gross domestic product — still the smallest among advanced nations.The incontrovertible fact, as research by Mr. Kenworthy and others finds, is that social insurance in the United States does a worse job of closing the income gap than in any peer nation across the industrial world. The way things are going, it could become worse.As demands on Social Security and Medicare grow over time, pressure will be enormous to cut benefits, mostly at the top. If Mr. Cohen was right, this will drain political support from the only universal programs we have left. They may become poor programs too.The great irony, Professor Auerbach notes, is that “inequality is increasing yet our ability to do anything about it is weakening.” The main job for any Democratic president might not be to bolster the nation’s social insurance apparatus but simply to hold the line.Email: eporter@nytimes.com; Twitter: @portereduardo Advertisement