AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter EavisWells Fargo’s superior financial performance has made it something of a standard-bearer for the banking industry since the financial crisis of 2008.But the bank’s third-quarter results, released on Wednesday, suggested that its lead over its rivals might be slipping.Wells Fargo said it earned $1.05 a share in the third quarter, up 3 percent from the quarter a year ago and exceeding analysts’ forecast for the period by a penny. The bank’s net income was $5.8 billion in the third quarter, which was 1 percent higher than the $5.7 billion it earned in the same period a year earlier.“Wells Fargo’s strong third-quarter results reflected the ability of our diversified business model to generate consistent financial performance in an uneven economic environment,” John G. Stumpf, Wells Fargo’s chief executive, said in a statement.Although small, the profit increase may be welcome to management and shareholders. In this year’s second quarter, Wells Fargo, the fourth-largest bank in the country by assets, reported a yearly decline in net income, the first in many quarters.Wells Fargo’s revenue for the third quarter was $21.9 billion, slightly above what analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters had expected and 3 percent higher than the $21.2 billion reported in the same period a year ago.Wells Fargo does not have a large presence on Wall Street, insulating it from much of the recent turbulence in global markets. It instead makes most of its money from lending to consumers and companies. Investors value Wells Fargo more highly than other banks because it has been significantly more profitable than its rivals.Investors are eagerly awaiting guidance from management about when higher short-term interest rates will impact the banks’ bottom lines.In the third quarter, Wells Fargo’s return on equity — a closely watched yardstick that measures profits as a percentage of shareholders’ equity — was 12.6 percent. That was well ahead of the 7 percent return at Bank of America, which also reported earnings on Wednesday.But it was only slightly higher than the 12 percent reported by JPMorgan Chase, which reported on Tuesday. And Wells Fargo’s return on equity has slipped in recent quarters. A year ago, it was at 13.1 percent.In other words, Wells Fargo may have hit something of a wall. Sluggish revenue growth explains part of its drop in profitability, but the profit margin that Wells Fargo earns on its loans and securities has fallen even as its loans and securities have increased.Wells Fargo had $903 billion in loans in the third quarter, up 8 percent from $839 billion in the third quarter of last year. Loans to companies are growing faster at the bank than loans to consumers.Large banks have businesses that can produce larger-than-expected gains that benefit overall earnings — and perhaps help them exceed analysts’ estimates. In the third quarter, Wells Fargo had $920 million of gains from equity investments, compared with $712 million in the same period a year earlier and $517 million in the second quarter of 2015.On a conference call with investors, John R. Shrewsberry, Wells Fargo’s chief financial officer, said that the gains had come primarily from venture capital and private equity investments. “We are happy to have those businesses,” Mr. Shrewsberry said in a later interview.Wells Fargo’s scope may give it a good eye into how the United States economy is going to perform. Mr. Shrewsberry said he expected its growth rate to pick up slightly next year.“If we are in a 2 percent G.D.P. growth environment this year, then we are in a 2.5 percent growth environment for next year,” he said.Michael Corkery contributed reporting.Advertisement