AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Rob CoxAlmost nothing General Electric does registers with its stockholders. A big asset sale? Shares hardly budge. A multibillion-dollar acquisition? Yawn. Aggressive shrinkage of its irritating financial business? Crickets. It seems investors no longer care about the company, a $254 billion conglomerate run by Jeffrey R. Immelt. If only G.E. had an activist who cared.The problem is that diagnosing General Electric’s “unchanged” problem isn’t so easy. It’s not that the company owns poor assets or harbors an entrenched aversion to reordering its portfolio of businesses. Nor is it a case of demonstrably bad management or terribly allocated capital, the sorts of things that usually exercise investors to grasp the corporate cage and give it a good rattle.Rather, G.E. faces something slightly more existential, and pernicious, as an investment. The market seems to think its shares are dead money. As Microsoft showed in the days before Satya Nadella took over as chief executive, such a perception may be even more difficult to shake off.Mr. Immelt is by no means standing still. Though he has been at the company for nigh on 14 years, its corporate finance department has been a beehive of activity. As Mr. Immelt is quick to accentuate, including in the opening paragraph of his most recent letter to shareholders, issued on Monday: “We have been profoundly changing our company.”Just in the past 12 months, G.E. sold its appliances business to Electrolux for $3.3 billion; began to spin off Synchrony Financial, a $26.5 billion retail financial services company, from GE Capital; and in its largest takeover, agreed to pay $17 billion for the power and grid businesses of France’s Alstom last May. Sure, General Electric is a big company, but this $50 billion flurry of wheeling and dealing merited not even a golf clap.Despite all of the maneuvers and various hints that the company is moving as fast as banking regulators will allow to whittle down its exposure to the financial services business, over the past year G.E. stock has gained precisely 1.35 percent, or to put it in Wall Street parlance, “unch.” As in unchanged.Even on Monday, after announcing the sale of GE Capital’s portfolio of credit cards and consumer loans in Australia for $6.3 billion, it was a snooze-fest for G.E. shareholders. The stock increased 1.5 percent. That may be a lot for a company the size of G.E., but in reality it was just a bit better than the overall market performance.“What’s most notable and concerning to us is that most large, long-term investors seem to have ‘thrown in the towel’ on G.E. stock,” Scott Davis, an analyst who covers the company for Barclays Capital, wrote last year. Mr. Davis cited anecdotal evidence from his own experience: Although General Electric made up a third of the market value for industrial companies in his purview, it amounted to only 5 percent of incoming call volume from investors. A decade ago, it was 80 percent.It’s not that Mr. Davis isn’t worth calling for his views on General Electric. He’s easily one of the best in the business. It’s more indicative that General Electric’s share roster is dominated by index funds and exchange traded funds that mimic the movement of the Dow Jones industrial average, in which General Electric has been a member since its 1896 formation.In short, the G.E. story has about as much flavor as a loaf of white bread. It houses best-of-breed businesses, like aircraft engines and energy turbines. The company hires talented people and trains them, and they generally like working there. Its headquarters are lean (nobody really much uses the helipad in Fairfield, Conn.) and it regularly prunes its portfolio. But Mr. Immelt’s plans to reduce GE Capital’s contribution to less than a quarter of the bottom line mean earnings are basically flat.In a way, General Electric’s conundrum recalls that of another sprawling enterprise not so long ago: Microsoft. Until August 2013, shares of the software company captained by Steven A. Ballmer with a board led by founder Bill Gates had pretty much flatlined for more than a decade. As with General Electric, inertia wasn’t an issue. In that time, Microsoft acquired aQuantive for $6 billion, Nokia’s handset arm for $7.2 billion, Skype for $8.5 billion and a stake in Facebook. It also offered to buy Yahoo for $45 billion.And then, shortly after a quietly pushy investor, ValueAct Capital, took a shine to Microsoft, Mr. Ballmer bowed out and Mr. Gates stepped aside as chairman. The company’s market value swelled by more than $100 billion from the day Mr. Ballmer said he would hand over the C.E.O. role to the time he left the board for good last August. Since taking over, Mr. Nadella hasn’t really done much that could be considered splashy. He spent $2 billion on the maker of video game Minecraft, but otherwise has moved methodically and mostly avoided his predecessor’s mistakes.Microsoft isn’t the sort of comparison Mr. Immelt will relish. Shareholders are nevertheless fickle. Sometimes a change of face is all that’s needed to revisit and reconsider long-held beliefs.Mr. Davis of Barclays recently updated his own view of General Electric two weeks ago with a simple conclusion: “Management changes down the road should help to get folks off the sidelines.”Rob Cox is editor of Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement