By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONMARCH 17, 2015
The nasty battle between Argentina and a group of New York hedge funds has claimed another victim: Citigroup.The bank said on Tuesday that it would shut its custody business in Argentina after a federal judge in New York last week rejected its request to lift an order that prevented the bank from making interest payments to investors holding $2.3 billion in Argentine notes.Citing an “unprecedented international conflict of laws,” Citigroup said its Argentine branch was making plans to close the custody business “as soon as possible,” according to a statement emailed on Tuesday. It will continue to pursue “all legal remedies,” the bank added.The bruising defeat for Citigroup follows a decision by Judge Thomas P. Griesa of the Federal District Court in Manhattan last summer to block all interest payments on Argentine debt, a ruling that set off Argentina’s default last July 31.AdvertisementCitigroup’s action was the latest flash point for the investors and banks on the sidelines of a multiyear court fight that traces back to 2001, when Argentina defaulted on $100 billion of debt. Most investors have since traded in their bonds for discounted exchange notes. A small group of hedge fund managers, led by Paul E. Singer’s NML Capital, chose not to exchange their bonds and instead took Argentina to court in New York to seek full repayment.AdvertisementIn a move that reverberated through the international debt markets, Judge Griesa ruled in the hedge funds’ favor and prevented Argentina from making interest payments to any bondholders until it paid the hedge funds.The ruling has left the South American nation with limited options to raise money from the international banks. It has also put the international banks in charge of handling interest payments on Argentine bonds in a tricky position.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lawyers for Citigroup have compared the situation to having a gun held to its head.In a brief moment of leniency last September, Judge Griesa allowed Citigroup to make a $5 million payment to a small group of investors holding bonds that had been issued under Argentine law.But last week, Judge Griesa made it clear that the payment was for one time only.Argentina has remained defiant. Officials there are considering raising money through banks outside the United States, according to accounts in the Argentine financial news media of a local radio interview with Alejandro Vanoli, the president of the central bank.“We’re analyzing all entities that cannot be judicially affected by U.S. jurisdiction,” Mr. Vanoli was reported as saying. He added that Judge Griesa’s rulings would not be an “obstacle” to a new issuance and mentioned a recent decision by a British judge that favored Argentina, fueling suspicion in one newspaper that the government would try to issue euro-denominated debt.Citigroup sought on Tuesday to distance its custody business in Argentina — which is focused on holding client securities — from its core banking business.“As it is known by the markets and the public in general, the custody business, by its very nature, is one that has no meaningful connection with banking business in general, as it is limited to provide custody services on assets that are indisputable property of clients,” the bank said.Jonathan Gilbert contributed reporting from Buenos Aires.A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Citigroup Unit Bows Out of Argentina as a Hedge Fund Battle Over Bonds Rages On.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.