By CHAD BRAYMARCH 17, 2015
LONDON — British regulators said on Tuesday that they had barred a former trader at the Dutch lender Rabobank from the securities industry after he pleaded guilty to criminal charges in the United States last year related to a conspiracy to manipulate a global benchmark interest rate.The Financial Conduct Authority of Britain said Paul Robson, 45, had been barred from working in the British financial services industry for “lacking honesty and integrity.” The ban was put in place on Feb. 27, the regulator said.In August, Mr. Robson pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit wire and bank fraud in the United States District Court for the Southern District in Manhattan and admitted to misconduct related to the bank’s submissions of the London interbank offered rate, or Libor, as it was tied to the Japanese yen. He is set to be sentenced in 2017.Mr. Robson was the second former Rabobank employee to admit wrongdoing after Takayuki Yagami, a former yen derivatives trader, pleaded guilty to a conspiracy charge in June. In total, four former Rabobank employees have been charged criminally in the United States.AdvertisementRabobank itself admitted in October to criminal wrongdoing by its employees and agreed to pay more than $1 billion in criminal and civil penalties to settle inquiries by United States, British and other authorities. Its chief executive also immediately stepped down.Advertisement“No excuse can be made for Mr. Robson’s behavior, which was particularly serious,” Georgina Philippou, the Financial Conduct Authority’s acting director of enforcement and market oversight, said in a news release.“He was the primary submitter of yen Libor at Rabobank for a number of years and experienced in the market. He knew what he was doing was wrong. This ban reinforces our expectation that individuals and firms take responsibility for ensuring market integrity and reminds them of the consequences if they fall short of our standards.”Mr. Robson could not be reached for comment on Tuesday.In its final notice, the regular said that it determined that Mr. Robson committed “deliberate misconduct” by attempting to manipulate the yen-Libor rate between May 2006 and early 2011.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Robson served as Rabobank’s primary submitter of the yen-Libor rate between January 2006 and November 2008, the Financial Conduct Authority said.Libor helps determine the borrowing costs for trillions of dollars in loans.To set Libor and other rates, banks submit the rates at which they would be prepared to lend money to one another, on an unsecured basis, in various currencies and at varying maturities.Investigations by regulators in the United States, Britain and other countries have uncovered evidence that traders at various banks benefited from falsely reported rates.The barring was the first public enforcement action that the Financial Conduct Authority has taken against a former trader for manipulating Libor submissions, the regulator said.In January, the regulator fined and barred two former senior executives at RP Martin for cultural and compliance failings. The British brokerage firm was fined more than $2 million last year for misconduct related to the manipulation of Libor.Since it emerged publicly in 2012, the Libor scandal has engulfed some of the world’s largest banks and tarnished the reputations of many of Britain’s leading lenders.AdvertisementProsecutors in Britain also have brought criminal charges against 13 individuals related to the manipulation of Libor. The first criminal trial in the inquiry is expected to begin in Britain later this year.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.