By NEIL GOUGHMARCH 17, 2015
HONG KONG —  Chinese banks have extended $16 billion in credit lines to shore up one of the country’s largest and most heavily indebted home builders, as pressure mounts on developers short of cash in a slumping property market.The move by a group of mainly state-run banks to bolster the builder, Evergrande Real Estate Group, which is controlled by the billionaire Hui Ka Yan, is the latest sign of tumult in China’s sprawling housing sector.Developers are rushing to secure financial support as sales volumes and housing prices plunge, weighed down by a growing overhang of unsold homes. The Kaisa Group, once a favorite of foreign investors, nearly defaulted on its offshore debt this year before being rescued by another developer.Evergrande said on Tuesday that since February, it had secured new credit lines totaling 100 billion renminbi, or $16.2 billion. Those included a new 30 billion renminbi commitment on Monday from the Bank of China, which regards the developer as “its most important bankwide long-term partner,” Evergrande said in a news release.After years of increases, home prices in China have begun to drop. This is good news for buyers, but bad news for residents of the Xixi Moho apartment complex that developers stopped building.Evergrande is one of China’s biggest developers, with sales last year of more than 130 billion renminbi. But it is also one of the most indebted, borrowing heavily from foreign investors in the United States dollar offshore market — debts that become more expensive to repay as the renminbi weakens.AdvertisementAnalysts said the support from the banks — which also include the Agricultural Bank of China, Postal Savings Bank of China and the privately controlled China Minsheng Bank — would provide temporary relief but would fall short of addressing the company’s deeper problems.AdvertisementMounting debts and slumping sales “are fundamental challenges that can’t be resolved short term by government’s bailing them out on ‘too big to fail’ pretense,” said Junheng Li, the head of research at JL Warren Capital in New York.“The company has been under financial distress for a long time,” she added.A spokesman for Evergrande did not return phone calls or emails seeking comment on Tuesday.The Chinese leadership is concerned about the health of the country’s property market because it is so deeply interconnected with other parts of the economy. Real estate is an important driver of steel consumption, loan growth and jobs for sales agents and migrant construction workers. A drop in home prices hurts ordinary Chinese because they tend to invest a disproportionate amount of their savings in real estate.On Wednesday, China published monthly property market figures showing that prices fell in February in 66 of the 70 cities surveyed when compared with a year earlier. Data released last week showed that new housing starts, measured by floor space, fell 20 percent in the first two months of the year compared with a year earlier, while new land purchases by developers fell 32 percent.“The market is still undergoing a pretty rough time, and what that means for developers is that the operating environment will remain tough,” Franco Leung, a vice president at Moody’s Investors Service in Hong Kong, said on Tuesday in a phone interview.Mr. Leung said that Evergrande’s new credit lines would help give it another source of liquidity but that the company was already heavily indebted. “We are monitoring their level of debt buildup quite closely,” he said.Evergrande had total borrowings of 151.8 billion renminbi at the end of June, the most recent figure available. But that number did not include an additional 44.5 billion renminbi worth of perpetual bonds, so called because they have no fixed repayment date, which the company carries on its books as equity.AdvertisementEvergrande was founded in 1996 by Mr. Hui, now its chairman and majority shareholder, who also goes by Xu Jiayin. The company started as a builder of middle-class homes outside prime neighborhoods, with projects in and around its home city of Guangzhou, in southern China, before expanding nationally to more than 100 cities.In recent years, it has branched into new businesses, including bottled mineral water and a professional soccer team. Last summer, Mr. Hui sold a 50 percent stake in the soccer club to the e-commerce giant Alibaba Group. Alibaba’s founder, Jack Ma, said at the time that he agreed to the nearly $200 million deal in a snap decision, after Mr. Hui got him drunk.Evergrande’s balance sheet has drawn criticism before. In 2012, the short-seller Citron Research published a report saying the company was insolvent, accusing Evergrande of presenting fraudulent information to investors. In a twist, Hong Kong’s securities regulator late last year accused Citron of publishing false and misleading information about Evergrande. That case is scheduled for a hearing at Hong Kong’s market misconduct tribunal on Wednesday.This month, Evergrande had a run-in with the Australian government. The Australian treasurer, Joe Hockey, ordered the company to sell a $30 million mansion in Sydney called Villa del Mare that it was found to have acquired illegally.Evergrande acquired the villa “via a string of shell companies,” in Australia, Hong Kong and the British Virgin Islands, Mr. Hockey said. The purchase was illegal because foreign investors are required to notify the treasurer before purchasing real estate. They can build new homes but are barred from buying existing ones.“We welcome all foreign investment that is not contrary to our national interest,” Mr. Hockey said in a March 3 news release. Evergrande has 90 days to find a buyer for the property.A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Home Builder Gets Badly Needed Lifeline.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.