AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan SobleTOKYO — Over the last two years, the Japanese central bank governor, Haruhiko Kuroda, has accomplished what a string of more cautious predecessors failed to do: reverse a prolonged and damaging slide in the price of goods and services in Japan.But on Tuesday, Mr. Kuroda acknowledged that his aggressive campaign to create inflation — seen as crucial to rekindling growth in the world’s third-largest economy — had stalled.At a news conference after the central bank’s latest monetary policy meeting, Mr. Kuroda said prices might turn “slightly negative,” meaning a return to deflation, or broadly falling prices, with which Japan has struggled since the late 1990s.His comment followed an official assessment by the Bank of Japan that consumer prices would most likely stop rising “for the time being.”It was the first time that Mr. Kuroda or his institution had formally acknowledged that prices were leveling off, although the bank’s preferred measure of inflation has been declining for about a year.The bank predicted the lull in inflation would be temporary, however. It said in its assessment that prices would eventually start rising, spurred by low unemployment and rising incomes, though it did not say when that might happen. It chose not to modify the expansive bond-buying program it has been using to encourage inflation, keeping its target for purchases of government debt at 80 trillion yen, or about $660 billion, a year.Mr. Kuroda was appointed Bank of Japan governor by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe in 2013, with a mandate to pull Japan out of deflation by whatever means necessary. He immediately ordered a sharp increase in the bank’s bond buying, then expanded it again late last year.Mr. Kuroda and his supporters argue that a “deflationary mind-set” is behind many of Japan’s economic woes. Weak consumer spending and a reluctance by investors and businesses to take financial risks are evidence of that, they say.Changing that mind-set has proved difficult. Mr. Kuroda’s goal of achieving 2 percent inflation by the middle of this year is looking impossible. The Consumer Price Index, or C.P.I., rose by just 0.2 percent in January, the latest month for which nationwide data are available, after excluding the effect of some volatile items and changes in taxes.The main culprit has been the decline in oil prices that began last summer. It has had a paradoxical effect on Japan: Because the country relies heavily on imported energy, most economists agree the fall has helped the economy as a whole. Yet making gasoline and other mainstay energy-related items cheaper has made Mr. Kuroda’s inflationary mission more difficult.He characterized the situation as temporary, however — a pause rather than an outright breakdown in the intended effects of the central bank’s inflation program, which it calls qualitative and quantitative easing, or Q.Q.E.It its written assessment, the Bank of Japan said, “The year-on-year rate of increase in the C.P.I. is likely to be about zero percent for the time being, due to the effects of the decline in energy prices.”One reason Mr. Kuroda thinks inflation will pick up again is the labor market. Unemployment is at its lowest level since 1997, at just 3.5 percent, empowering workers to negotiate higher wages.Toyota, for instance, is preparing to offer its workers the largest pay increase in 13 years, Japanese news media reported on Tuesday.The results of annual wage negotiations between the carmaker and its unions — known as shunto, or spring battle — are scheduled to be announced on Wednesday, and are expected to serve as a benchmark for other large Japanese corporations.Naohiko Baba, the chief Japan economist at Goldman Sachs, said the Bank of Japan was unlikely to undertake any further stimulus measures until the outcome of the annual pay talks and its likely effect on inflation became clearer.Advertisement