By CHAD BRAYMARCH 17, 2015
LONDON — The private equity firm Permira has sold its remaining stake in Hugo Boss after steadily reducing its holdings in the German fashion brand in recent years in anticipation of an eventual exit.Permira, which acquired a majority stake in the brand in 2007, sold 8.4 million shares in a private placement with institutional investors, representing a stake of about 12 percent in the company, the private equity firm said in a news release on Tuesday.That followed the company selling 7.35 million shares, or a 10.4 percent stake, in February, and three separate private placements last year.“The partnership between Hugo Boss and Permira was a very successful one,” Claus-Dietrich Lahrs, the Hugo Boss chief executive, said in a news release. “But the success story of Hugo Boss is far from over. In the past few years, we have strategically repositioned the company and laid the foundation for our future growth. Now we will enter into a new phase in the company’s development, in which we will systematically pursue this course.”AdvertisementAs a result of the latest sale, the publicly traded shares of Hugo Boss will increase to about 91 percent of its share capital, the fashion brand said.AdvertisementShares of Hugo Boss rose 1.2 percent to 116.35 euros, or about $123, in early trading in Frankfurt.Hugo Boss, based in Metzingen, Germany, sells business wear, evening wear and casual apparel for men and women, as well as accessories and fragrances.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Its branded products are available in 7,100 stores worldwide, including more than 1,000 that are operated by the brand. The company posted sales of €2.6 billion in 2014 and employs 12,990 people.“With the backing of the Permira funds, Hugo Boss was transformed from a wholesale supplier into a fast-growing branded retailer,” Jörg Rockenhäuser, a managing partner for Germany and the head of Permira’s office in Frankfurt, said in a news release. “The group is outstandingly positioned today to capture future growth opportunities, particularly as it continues to expand its own retail operations and its women’s wear portfolio.”The company has been focusing on the growth of its women’s wear offerings and in 2013 appointed the New York-based designer Jason Wu, maker of both Michelle Obama’s inaugural ball gowns, as its chief women’s wear designer.After a hiatus, Hugo Boss returned to New York fashion week. At its show in February, celebrities in the audience included Dakota Johnson and Julianne Moore. The clothes are still Wall Street-focused, but now have a cooler, fashionable edge, inspired by architecture and the urban grid.Vanessa Friedman contributed reporting from the Dominican Republic.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.