AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryFor Bank of America, even a decent quarter seems great.On Wednesday, the bank, which is based in Charlotte, N.C., said it was able to weather volatile trading markets, hold down expenses and increase deposits and commercial loans in the third quarter.That helped the company report profit of $4.5 billion, or 37 cents a share, compared with the 33 cents that analysts had predicted. It was the second consecutive quarter that Bank of America had exceeded expectations, and investors, at first, cheered that the company appeared to be making progress.While the stock prices of most large banks fell on Wednesday, Bank of America’s shares were up more than 2 percent at one point. The bank’s share price retreated later, ending the day up less than 1 percent.“We continue to make good progress in the tough revenue environment due to low interest rates in a sluggish economic recovery,” Brian T. Moynihan, chief executive and chairman, told analysts during a conference call.Revenue, however, fell 2.4 percent, to $20.9 billion, from the quarter a year ago, and was a bit shy of analysts’ estimates.Some analysts brushed off the solid third-quarter earnings as the results of events that had little to do with the fundamentals of the underlying business, like loan sales and a tax benefit. Others were willing to give the bank credit for improvement.“Bottom line: “Progress!” wrote Susan Katzke, an analyst at Credit Suisse, in a research note. “This franchise can grow, markets willing.”Mr. Moynihan is under pressure from investors to demonstrate that he can lead the bank to a series of profitable quarters after years of lackluster results and legal and regulatory problems stemming from the financial crisis.Last month, Mr. Moynihan easily won a shareholder vote on a proposal that would have stripped him of his chairman post. The vote was viewed by some as partly a referendum on the company’s performance. The bank’s stock has lagged those of other large banks and is down 13 percent since the start of the year.The third-quarter results were bolstered by a 4 percent decline in expenses and lower charge-offs on loans. The bank also continued to amass deposits, with its overall base up $50 billion from a year ago.Investors are eagerly awaiting guidance from management about when higher short-term interest rates will impact the banks’ bottom lines.A year ago, the bank reported a $232 million loss, as it settled an investigation by the Justice Department into the sale of soured mortgage-backed securities leading up to the financial crisis.Even with legal problems behind it, Bank of America faces a daunting task of trying to increase revenue under regulation that limits its Wall Street and Main Street business lines.Bank of America’s results come after a rough third quarter at JPMorgan Chase, which started off earnings season on Tuesday evening. JPMorgan reported that revenue fell in virtually all of its business units and at a sharper pace than analysts had expected.Like JPMorgan, Bank of America suffered declines in its fixed-income trading unit, with revenue falling 11 percent after excluding one-time debt adjustments. Declines in credit trading revenue was a big factor behind the drop, Bank of America said.But those declines were offset by strength in equities trading, leading Bank of America to stronger overall trading results than one of its chief rivals, JPMorgan.In the second quarter, when profit more than doubled from a year earlier, Bank of America executives heralded the surge as the beginning of more lucrative and stable earnings. One factor feeding those stellar earnings was an accounting treatment that increased the value of the bank’s mortgage bond investments when interest rates rise.In the most recent quarter, that accounting treatment worked in reverse, causing the value of those investments to fall as certain interest rates dropped.The fluctuation shows Bank of America’s sensitivity to interest rates, which helps explain why its share price has suffered in light of the Federal Reserve’s decision to delay a rate increase.The third-quarter conference call with analysts was the debut of the chief financial officer, Paul M. Donofrio, who succeeded Bruce R. Thompson as part of a broader management shuffle this summer.He fielded multiple questions about the bank’s exposure to the oil and gas industry, which has faltered because of the sharp, sustained drop in prices.Mr. Donofrio said Bank of America was bolstering reserves to cushion against losses on the energy loans. But he said the reserve increases were smaller in the third quarter than in previous quarters.“It’s not like we are sitting here overly concerned,” Mr. Donofrio said in a call with reporters.“ We are paying close attention to it.”Advertisement