By DAN HORCHMARCH 18, 2015
SÃO PAULO, Brazil — Eike Batista, the onetime Brazilian billionaire who is on trial on insider trading charges, is facing sanctions from a government regulator.On Wednesday night, Brazil’s securities regulator, the C.V.M., fined him 1.4 million reais ($435,000) over securities violations.The regulator ruled that Mr. Batista had failed to inform the public in a timely manner of developments that affected the stock market prices of four of his companies, including the petroleum exploration company OGX.It was the first time that official sanctions had been imposed on Mr. Batista for his activities in his collapsed business empire.AdvertisementSeveral of Mr. Batista’s lawyers indicated he would appeal the decision to a supervisory council. While the appeals are underway, a process that usually takes three to five years, the fine will be suspended.AdvertisementThe ruling was not related to the insider trading charges on which Mr. Batista faces further administrative proceedings at the C.V.M. as well as a criminal trial that is set to resume soon.Thiago Bottino, a professor of criminal law at the Fundação Getulio Vargas law school in Rio de Janeiro, said the latest regulatory decision could lead to additional criminal charges against Mr. Batista.“The federal prosecutor’s office will certainly pay attention to these rulings,” he said.Unlike the C.V.M., which can only impose fines of up to 500,000 reais for each securities code violation, the courts can impose triple damages and jail time.Mr. Batista’s criminal trial, over accusations of insider trading and stock market manipulation in OGX, has faced unusual issues that have delayed the proceedings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The first judge who presided over the case, Flávio Roberto de Souza, was removed in February after he was filmed driving Mr. Batista’s Porsche, which the judge had ordered seized.Judge de Souza is now under investigation himself on accusations of embezzling about $350,000 in funds seized from Mr. Batista’s home and from an unrelated drug case.The courts last week assigned a new judge to the case, Vitor Valpuesta, and proceedings should resume soon.Among Judge Valpuesta’s first decisions will be whether to maintain Judge de Souza’s order to freeze Mr. Batista’s bank accounts, real estate and investments.AdvertisementMr. Batista was once the eighth-richest person in the world, with a net worth of over $30 billion that came mostly from founding and listing six companies on the São Paulo stock exchange.In 2013, his companies began to fall victim to a mix of high debt, production delays and falling commodity prices.All six have either gone bankrupt, been sold to outside investors or sold off major assets. Creditors were left with over $10 billion in unpaid debts, though the restructured companies may eventually pay off a portion of that sum.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.