AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew E. KramerMOSCOW — General Motors on Wednesday announced plans to largely withdraw from the Russian market by the end of the year, becoming the most prominent company to date to express a lack of confidence in the deeply troubled economy.The move reverses years of G.M. investments in Russia, where car sales had boomed. Now, however, the country is struggling with low oil prices and sanctions on its banks, and its economy is expected to contract 4 percent this year.“This decision avoids significant investment into a market that has very challenging long-term prospects,” G.M.’s president, Daniel Ammann, said in a statement.Since Russia annexed Crimea last year and its economy has faltered, other multinational companies have left. G.M. said it would shutter its main factory in the country and wind down sales of Opel brand cars. The decision, the company said, will cost $600 million this year in severance pay to Russian workers and other one-time expenses.For a time, the Russian automotive market had been expected to surpass that of Germany in sales volume. But in February, car sales were down 38 percent across the board compared with a year earlier.“This change in our business model in Russia is part of our global strategy to ensure long-term sustainability in markets where we operate,” Mr. Ammann added.Largely exiting Russia as it goes into recession even as the rest of Europe is projected to eke out some growth will help the automaker return its overall European division to profitability by next year, the company said.Multinational companies have been nervous about their Russian operations. Last summer, Russian regulators singled out McDonald’s in a campaign of politically hued inspections, raising fears of a potential backlash against American sanctions on Russia for its role in the Ukraine crisis.No signs of wide-scale regulatory pressure, though, have emerged. Instead, the Russian economy has simply slowed because of falling oil prices and sanctions, so that Russian consumers are no longer such a coveted group.Russians’ inflation-adjusted incomes are declining this year for the first time since 2009, and for only the second time during the tenure of President Vladimir V. Putin. Because of the collapse of the ruble in December, Russians’ incomes have plummeted: The average salary peaked in 2013 at $800 a month, and is projected this year to be about $400.The hamburger chain Wendy’s has wound down business in Russia, as has the clothing store Esprit.The announcement from G.M. suggests that the carmaker is abandoning its bets on a rising Russian middle class, as it will cancel low-end models but still market the Cadillac and other expensive cars to the rich.The company will focus on premium brands in its lineup, like Corvette and Tahoe, along with Cadillac, while shuttering its car assembly plant in St. Petersburg, which had been mass-producing midsize Opel vehicles. All Opel sales will end this year.Russian regulation that encourages localization, and job creation, by requiring carmakers to commit to ever-greater use of locally produced parts also appeared to play a role in the decision. Opel said it made no sense to invest in further localization in a shrinking market.In St. Petersburg, a local official blamed the company, saying its cars were not selling well. G.M. had “an unlucky lineup of models,” Maksim Meiksin, the head of a committee for industrial policy in St. Petersburg, told the news agency Tass. Workers would be placed at other factories, he said.Some business will continue. G.M. zoomed into Russia before other carmakers in the 1990s, setting up a joint venture at a storied Russian plant, the Volga Automobile Factory, the maker of Ladas, to manufacture a sport utility vehicle. That venture will go on, but not expand, the statement said.A separate contract with another Russian plant, the Gorky Automotive Factory, in Nizhny Novgorod, will wind down by the end of the year, ending a brief revival there of a long tradition of American and Russian automobile cooperation; Henry Ford sold the first assembly line there to the Soviet Union in the 1930s.In addition to severance pay, the $600 million one-time charge for General Motors’ partial pullout from Russia will cover contract cancellations, restructuring at dealerships and lost tax incentives, the company said.Advertisement