By JAMES KANTERMARCH 18, 2015
BERLIN — European Union officials on Wednesday proposed new rules to try to discourage tax-avoidance deals with multinational corporations, which critics say give some countries unfair business advantages.Some of the bloc’s smaller countries, like Ireland, the Netherlands and Luxembourg, have offered the deals to attract the likes of Apple, Starbucks and Amazon. The companies, in turn, have saved huge sums on their corporate tax bills. But European Union authorities have been trying to curb that practice.The legislation, proposed on Wednesday in Brussels by the European Union’s policy-making arm, the European Commission, aims to dissuade governments from giving special tax breaks by forcing them to publicly disclose more tax information. If approved by member governments this year, the rules would oblige each of the bloc’s 28 national tax authorities to share basic information on tax rulings each quarter, beginning in 2016.Governments now share very little information, and member nations are loath to cede any of their sovereignty in that sphere. Those sensitivities limited the scope for more far-reaching proposals by the European Commission.AdvertisementStill, if the rules are passed, “at least we know what’s going on,” Pierre Moscovici, the European commissioner for economic and financial affairs, said at a news conference in Brussels.Advertisement“Obviously, we want Europe to continue to be attractive,” said Mr. Moscovici. He said he expected the bloc’s governments to agree to the measure without much resistance.Mr. Moscovici said he could not give a figure for the total amount of tax avoided through these kinds of deals, but he said it was “a lot of money.”As the special tax deals between big companies and some governments have come to light, they have generated public indignation. Many European citizens are still struggling economically after years of austerity policies aimed at lowering government debt and budget deficits. Officials in larger member states like France and Germany have criticized the deals as a form of unfair tax competition.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The proposal was immediately criticized by antipoverty groups like Oxfam International as too weak.Alain Lamassoure, a French member of the European Parliament, said the proposal should be merely “a first step.” He called for “maximum possible transparency” so companies and members of the public can also assess the fairness of the deals.European Union officials said they were not yet ready to go that far and first needed to assess whether broader disclosure requirements would discourage multinational companies from setting up, or expanding, operations in Europe.The issue of aggressive corporate tax planning is politically awkward for the commission, whose president is Jean-Claude Juncker. Mr. Juncker was prime minister of Luxembourg for nearly two decades.That country became the focus of scrutiny in November, when the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists published a report accusing more than 300 companies, including the Pepsi Bottling Group, Ikea and FedEx, of benefiting from preferential tax deals with Luxembourg.Mr. Juncker has declined to recuse himself from taking part in the final decisions on the cases in Luxembourg.The legislative push is separate from a series of investigations begun last year into the arrangements involving Apple in Ireland, Starbucks in the Netherlands and Amazon and a unit of the carmaker Fiat in Luxembourg. Those investigations are being led by the European Commission’s antitrust chief, Margrethe Vestager.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; A Proposal to Limit Tax Deals in the European Union.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.