By BEN SISARIOMARCH 18, 2015
The “Blurred Lines” case has resulted in one of the biggest jury verdicts in the history of music copyright, and it’s not closed yet.In the first signs of what may be a protracted post-trial battle, lawyers for both sides have filed documents with the court raising questions about the verdict. Last week, a jury found that Robin Thicke’s “Blurred Lines,” a top hit in 2013, had copied elements of Marvin Gaye’s 1977 song “Got to Give It Up” without permission, and awarded the Gaye family nearly $7.4 million.Late Tuesday, lawyers representing the Gaye family — who inherited Mr. Gaye’s copyright in the song after his death in 1984 — asked the court to “correct the jury’s verdict” by holding more than just Mr. Thicke and Pharrell Williams liable.According to the jury’s decision, only Mr. Thicke and Mr. Williams — two of the song’s three credited writers — were found to have infringed on the Gayes’ copyright. The third writer, the rapper T.I. (whose real name is Clifford Harris Jr.), was not found to be liable, and neither were the record labels that released “Blurred Lines”: Star Trak, Mr. Williams’s label, and Interscope, a division of the giant Universal Music, which distributed it.AdvertisementIn their motion, the Gaye family members asked the judge in the case, John A. Kronstadt of United States District Court in Los Angeles, to add Mr. Harris and the labels to the verdict, arguing that “as a matter of law, all members of the distribution chain are liable for infringement.” Such a change could affect who is responsible for paying the damages.In a separate motion, the Gayes also asked the judge for an injunction to prevent further distribution of “Blurred Lines,” calling that a step in the negotiations over future royalties and credit.After the verdict was delivered, Howard E. King, the lawyer representing Mr. Thicke’s side, said publicly that he expected to fight it in post-trial motions. In a document filed with the court on Monday, Mr. King asked for more time to file a motion for declarative relief, “due to the inconsistent jury verdict and complexity of issues arising therefrom.”A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Skirmishing Continues in ‘Blurred Lines’ Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.