By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMMARCH 18, 2015
Janet L. Yellen, chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, said that while it was unlikely that the Fed would raise a key interest rate at its next meeting in April, there might be increases later.WASHINGTON —  The Federal Reserve on Wednesday moved to the verge of raising interest rates for the first time since the economy fell into recession more than seven years ago, even as officials suggested that the Fed might not pull the trigger until well into the second half of the year.In a statement released after a two-day meeting of its policy-making committee, the Fed said that it would consider raising its benchmark rate as early as June, and it removed from the statement a promise that it would be “patient.”Yet the Fed tempered that message on Wednesday, including the release of economic forecasts by its senior officials that showed they now think the unemployment rate can still fall significantly without setting off higher inflation. That conveyed an impression that Fed officials may feel less urgency about raising interest rates so soon.“Just because we removed the word ‘patient’ from the statement doesn’t mean we’re going to be impatient,” Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, said at a news conference after the statement’s release. Ms. Yellen said the Fed was not declaring an intention to raise rates in June, “although we can’t rule that out.”
            Federal Reserve policy makers, according to their latest projections, have become somewhat less optimistic about the economy but remain confident that growth will continue at a steady clip, unemployment will fall to around 5 percent and inflation will gradually move up toward its goal of 2 percent.        Change in real G.D.P.Unemployment rateInflation+3.5%10%+3.0%PROJECTIONRANGE+3.0+2.58RANGE+2.5+2.06+2.0+1.5+1.54+1.0+1.0PROJECTIONRANGE2+0.5+0.5000’10’15’16’17’10’15’16’17’10’15’16’17PROJECTIONSChange in real G.D.P.Unemployment rateInflation+3.5%10%+3.0%PROJECTIONRANGE+3.0+2.58RANGE+2.5+2.06+2.0+1.5+1.54+1.0PROJECTIONRANGE+1.02+0.5+0.5000’10’15’16’17’10’15’16’17’10’15’16’17PROJECTIONSChange in real G.D.P.+3.5%+3.0RANGE+2.5+2.0+1.5+1.0+0.50’10’15’16’17PROJECTIONSUnemployment rate10%8PROJECTIONRANGE6420’10’15’16’17Inflation+3.0%PROJECTIONRANGE+2.5+2.0+1.5+1.0+0.50’10’15’16’17MARCH 19, 2015
Her remarks suggested that borrowers have a few more months to take advantage of exceptionally low interest rates on mortgages and car loans, while savers face a few more months of exceptionally meager returns on their low-risk investments. And even after the Fed raises its crucial interest rate, borrowing costs may well remain comparatively low well into the future.AdvertisementInvestors celebrated like the recipients of a last-minute reprieve.The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index rose 1.2 percent to close at 2,099.50. Bond prices also jumped, driving the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury bond to its largest one-day decline since October. The yield fell 0.13 points to 1.92 percent.AdvertisementEvan A. Schnidman, chief executive of Prattle Analytics, which analyzes central bank communications, said the Fed surprised many investors because the public remarks of Fed officials over the last year have consistently pointed to an earlier start date for rate increases than the Fed’s official statements.“Although they are individually eager to normalize policy, they are collectively reticent about the possibility of raising rates prematurely,” Mr. Schnidman said.The march toward higher rates may be slow, but it still looks all but certain to begin at some point this year. That reflects the Fed’s optimism that the economy no longer needs quite as much help from central bank stimulus and a sense of fatigue with the Fed’s long-running campaign to encourage faster economic growth.
                The current flatness of the curve shows investors expect mediocre growth.            Many Americans are still struggling to find good jobs, while the sluggish pace of inflation suggests that the economy still has room to grow more quickly without setting off alarm bells that prices will escalate beyond a comfortable level. The Fed acknowledged in its statement that growth had “moderated somewhat” in recent months, and that inflation had sagged even further below its 2 percent target, a level most economists consider appropriate to a healthy economy.There are also growing concerns that the stronger dollar, which has been rising partly on expectations that the Fed will raise rates while other central banks are cutting them, will hurt American exports and reduce corporate investment. The rise of the dollar also appears to be worsening the weakness of inflation. Low inflation is a sign of economic weakness and can also be a cause of it, for example, by making it harder to repay debts.The forecasts published by the Fed showed that 15 of the 17 members of the policy-making committee expect to raise the Fed’s benchmark rate this year. Those projections showed that on average they expect two increases, to roughly 0.75 percent. The Fed has held short-term rates near zero since December 2008.“I think some of the headwinds that have long been holding the economy back are beginning to recede,” Ms. Yellen said at her news conference. Monetary policy exerts a gradual influence on economic conditions, so the Fed must anticipate the trajectory of growth when it makes policy. Ms. Yellen said officials were inclined to raise rates because they expected continued improvement in the labor market and a rebound in inflation that would move it closer to its desirable level.AdvertisementIn place of its recent promise to remain “patient” in deciding when to start raising rates, the committee’s statement said that the Fed would act “when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term.”
            Dropping its promise to remain “patient” on a rate move, the Fed expressed optimism that the economy no longer needs quite as much help.        
March Statement
January Statement
Consistent withBased on its previous statementcurrent assessment, the Committee judges that an increaseit can be patient in the target range forbeginning to normalize the federal funds rate remains unlikely at the April F.O.M.C. Meetingstance of monetary policy. The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise However, if incoming information indicates faster progress toward the Committee’s employment and inflation objectives than the Committee now expects, then increases in the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. This change in the forward guidance does not indicate that the Committee has decided on the timing of the initial increase in the target range. are likely to occur sooner than currently anticipated.  Conversely, if progress proves slower than expected, then increases in the target range are likely to occur later than currently anticipated.
 Read the full March release »The statement said the Fed “remains unlikely” to act at its next meeting, in April, turning the attention of investors to subsequent meetings. A number of analysts said they viewed the Fed’s September meeting as the most likely date.“While the Fed chose to explicitly drop the patient qualifier, the implicit patience remains intact,” Michael Dolega, senior economist at TD Bank, wrote in a note to clients after the release of the statement. “The Fed does not yet appear to be convinced that the economy can withstand higher interest rates at this point, especially in an environment of weak external demand and a surging dollar.”The most striking changes on Wednesday were in the Fed’s quarterly economic forecasts. Officials said they now expected economic output to expand 2.3 to 2.7 percent in 2015, a downgrade from their December estimate of 2.6 to 3 percent. Forecasts for 2016 and 2017 were also revised downward, the latest instance in the Fed’s postcrisis pattern of repeatedly reducing its forecasts.Officials also shaved their estimates of inflation. In 2015, they now project, prices will rise 0.6 to 0.8 percent, and then 1.7 to 1.9 percent in 2016.Most consequentially, officials reduced their estimates of the lowest level of unemployment that is consistent with stable inflation. The average forecast of 5 to 5.2 percent was significantly lower than the December average of 5.2 to 5.5 percent and almost as low as the precrisis average. The changes reflected the reality that the unemployment rate has already reached the top of the old range without any evident sign of faster wage growth.James B. Stewart, on CNBC, discusses the fixation on the word “patient” and dissects his thoughts on the latest statements from the Federal Reserve and its chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen.In keeping with these forecasts, Fed officials also pushed back their expectations about the timing and the pace of interest rate increases. After rates reach 0.75 percent by the end of this year, officials expect them to hit just 2 percent by the end of 2016.The changes move the Fed’s outlook closer to the expectations priced into bond markets in recent months, rewarding investors who bet that the Fed was again allowing its hopes to get ahead of the economic data.Advertisement“It is now clear the bond market is not moving toward the Fed; the Fed is moving toward the bond market,” wrote Tim Duy, a professor of economics at the University of Oregon and a close watcher of the Fed. “By moving toward the markets on the path of rate hikes, the Fed acknowledges that they are eager to let this recovery run on.”Alongside the debate about the timing of rate increases, there is growing concern that whenever the Fed moves, it will disrupt financial markets. At a minimum, The Fed is on track to be the first major central bank to start raising interest rates, and it is also intentionally introducing greater uncertainty. Wednesday’s statement represented the end of the Fed’s crisis-era practice of providing explicit guidance about its plans for interest rates.In a note to clients last week, the hedge fund manager Ray Dalio cautioned that if the Fed did tighten too soon, it would have little ability to correct the mistake because it has already exhausted the standard arsenal of monetary policy.“We don’t know — nor does the Fed know — exactly how much tightening will knock over the apple cart,” Mr. Dalio said in the note, which made the rounds on Wall Street because of his prominence and its unusually foreboding tone. “What we do hope the Fed knows, which we don’t know, is how exactly it will fix things if it knocks it over.”A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Fed Creeps Closer to Higher Rate That May Not Arrive for Months.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.