By CHAD BRAYOCT. 14, 2015
LONDON — Germany’s biggest residential real estate company, Vonovia, said on Wednesday that it had offered to acquire its rival Deutsche Wohnen. The cash-and-share offer values Deutsche Wohnen at about $16 billion, including debt.Vonovia is seeking to derail Deutsche Wohnen’s deal to acquire the residential property company LEG Immobilien, which was announced in September and would create a much stronger competitor to Vonovia.On Wednesday, Vonovia said it would bid for Deutsche Wohnen if that company’s shareholders rejected the proposed deal with LEG Immobilien, calling its offer a “more attractive and strategically sound alternative.”Deutsche Wohnen’s all-share offer for LEG Immobilien values it at around 7.6 billion euros, or about $8.6 billion, including debt. Deutsche Wohnen shareholders are expected to vote on whether to approve the LEG Immobilien deal on Oct. 28.AdvertisementThe Vonovia offer comes amid a consolidation push in the German property sector. If completed, the deal would give Vonovia one of the largest publicly listed real estate companies in Germany.AdvertisementUnder the terms of Vonovia’s bid, Deutsche Wohnen investors would receive €83.14 in cash and seven shares of Vonovia for 11 shares held in Deutsche Wohnen. In euros, that would value the company at €25.86 a share, or about €14 billion, including debt.It would represent a 9.8 percent premium to Deutsche Wohnen’s closing price on Oct. 8, the last trading day before reports emerged that Vonovia might be considering an offer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We are open to a constructive discussion with Deutsche Wohnen once their shareholders have decided on the LEG Immobilien offer,” Rolf Buch, the Vonovia chief executive, said in a news release on Wednesday.Shares of Deutsche Wohnen rose 1.3 percent to €24.44 in early trading in Frankfurt on Wednesday.Deutsche Wohnen is focused primarily on managing and developing residential properties. As of June 30, the company managed about 141,900 residential units and 2,100 commercial properties.In April, Deutsche Wohnen failed in its bid to acquire enough shares from investors to take over Conwert Immobilien Invest, an Austrian real estate company.Vonovia said it believed that it could achieve about €84 million in pretax annual cost savings if the Deutsche Wohnen deal is completed.Vonovia, based in Bochum, Germany, owns about 370,000 apartments across the country.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.