AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedNEW ORLEANS — Last year was by all accounts a banner year for mergers. But as one of the takeover industry’s main conferences prepares to begin here, a new survey has found that significantly fewer deal makers believe that 2015 will prove any better.About 54 percent of deal specialists surveyed by the Brunswick Group, a public relations firm, believe that 2015 will surpass last year in terms of global mergers activity. That compares with a heady 78 percent last year.The remainder of the 115 respondents were evenly split between believing deal activity will decrease and stay the same.The survey, released on the eve of the Tulane Corporate Law Institute, isn’t necessarily surprising. Nearly $3.5 trillion worth of transactions was announced last year, according to Thomson Reuters, including mega-deals like Comcast’s $45 billion bid for Time Warner Cable and AT&T’s $49 billion offer for DirecTV.To be fair, 2015 isn’t exactly off to a slow start. In the past twoanda half months alone, the drugmaker AbbVie has announced a $21 billion takeover of Pharmacyclics and NXP Semiconductors has agreed to buy fellow chip manufacturer Freescale Semiconductor for about $17 billion.And conditions remain ripe for more wheeling and dealing, according to the Brunswick Group survey. Nearly three out of four respondents in North America said that they believed that shareholder activism — in which hedge fund managers or other investors publicly push for changes to corporate strategy — would drive corporate mergers or break-ups. Compare that with the 28 percent of respondents in Brunswick’s 2012 survey who believed the same.And about one of three deal makers believe that activists like Carl C. Icahn and Daniel S. Loeb will demand that companies sell either themselves or divisions of themselves, as opposed to simply calling for seats on corporate boards or buying back shares.Three-quarters of North American deal makers surveyed, meanwhile, say that mega-deals will stay at the same level as last year, or even surpass it. And 65 percent of respondents believe that the health care sector, which produced last year’s $66 billion union of the drug makers Allergan and Actavis, will again be the biggest source of deal-making.One potential font of concern, at least for bankers and lawyers outside North America, is close scrutiny by antitrust regulators. About 65 percent of deal makers in Europe believe that competition concerns will weigh more heavily on transactions in their region this year than last year, and 71 percent of respondents in Asia feel the same.Close to 70 percent of North American deal makers, however, believe that antitrust scrutiny will remain at the same level as last year.Advertisement