By ELIZABETH OLSONMARCH 18, 2015
Elite law schools are not always a glide path to becoming a partner at a big law firm. A new study of partners’ academic pedigrees shows that a large number of graduates who reach the top rung at a law firm do not necessarily come from the top-ranked law schools.The study of 33,000 lawyers at the largest 115 law firms in the country found that the dozen highest ranked law schools, including Harvard, Yale, Columbia and Northwestern, had a high correlation between their status and the number of alumni who made partner.But some of the other 100 schools examined showed greater differences between their ranking and their alumni partner numbers, said Edward S. Adams, a University of Minnesota law professor who co-authored the study.For example, Suffolk University Law School in Boston is not ranked nationally but it has 167 graduates who are partners in top law firms, Professor Adams said. Over all, it trails Harvard, Yale and two other New England law schools in partner numbers, but its strong performance, he said, shows that geographical proximity to a major legal market may be a good predictor of “big law” career success.AdvertisementAlumni who are law firm partners in New York were from, in descending order, law schools at Columbia, Harvard, Fordham, Georgetown, Brooklyn, Yale and University of Pennsylvania. In Washington, the greatest number of partners found in the study came from Georgetown, Harvard, George Washington, University of Virginia and Catholic University. Similarly, in Chicago, the partners graduated from Northwestern, University of Chicago and University of Illinois.AdvertisementThe study “highlights the power of geographical proximity,” Professor Adams said, and “it generally validates that the law school attended matters for ‘big law’ partnership prospects.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Six mid-tier law schools with ties to the major legal markets in New York and Washington had more alumni who were partners than some more prestigious rivals. They include law schools at Villanova, Catholic University, Hofstra, State University of New York at Buffalo, DePaul and Loyola.Catholic University’s Columbus School of Law, for example, is ranked nationally as No. 108 among the 200 accredited law schools, but is listed in the study as No. 32 for the number of alumni who become partners at the largest law firms.Other law schools, such as the one at the University of Minnesota, that are situated in mid-size legal markets lacked proximity to major law firm offices, which could be an impediment to becoming a ‘big law” partner, the study found.Taking everything into account, students doubles their chances of law firm partnership by attending Harvard or the University of Chicago rather than any school with annual tuition of less than $50,000, according to the study, “Does Law School Still Make Economic Sense? An Empirical Analysis of ‘Big Law’ Firm Partnership Prospects and the Relationship to Law School Attended,” which will be published in the May issue of the Buffalo Law Review.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.