By JAD MOUAWADOCT. 1, 2015
Five years after United and Continental merged, the airline’s new chief executive is acknowledging what passengers and employees have long known — the combination is not working well.United’s chief, Oscar Munoz, who took over last month after the abrupt resignation of Jeff Smisek in the face of a federal corruption inquiry, said his main focus would be to re-engage a disaffected work force, fix poor on-time performance and improve customer service.Mr. Munoz was thrust into the spotlight after the departure of Mr. Smisek, who had also been United’s chairman, during an investigation into whether the airline had traded favors with the chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.After spending the last three weeks on a listening tour with employees, Mr. Munoz said in an interview Thursday that the airline would change under his leadership.AdvertisementThe message, which coincided with the five-year anniversary of the merger, was part of a broader public relations push. United placed full-page ads in several newspapers on Thursday saying it had not lived up to the expectations of its passengers or its employees.AdvertisementMr. Munoz, a former railroad executive who has been a board member of Continental since 2004, and later of United, provided a candid assessment of the discontent. He emphasized that the way to improve customer service was to fix employee relations first.“What resonates, and what I feel most of all, is just a complete disengagement of folks,” Mr. Munoz said. “Maybe that’s overly dramatic. It’s not complete disengagement. It’s definitely disenchantment.”But Mr. Munoz said he had not realized the level of discontent until recent weeks, when he started talking to some of the airline’s 84,000 employees. As a board member, he said, “I could have been more aware of how the front-line people were feeling.”“Our investment, our focus, our adulation is going to be focused on those people. Just letting them know that we do like what they do and we recognize it. And ensuring they get the things they have been lacking for some time.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Munoz declined to talk about the investigation that cost his predecessor his job. He also declined to discuss when the board approached him to run United, and whether other candidates had been under consideration.At the time, Mr. Munoz, who was president and chief operating officer at CSX, was about to be named its new chief executive. He pointed out that there were more similarities between running an airline and a freight rail business than most outsiders realized, and decided to take the job on the same weekend his daughter was getting married.Airlines do not often hand the reins to outsiders, but Mr. Munoz is not the first. Glenn Tilton, United’s chairman and chief executive before its merger with Continental, was a former oil executive who ran Texaco for a time. Before Richard Anderson, the current chief of Delta, the carrier was run by a former banker, Leo F. Mullin, who was succeeded by Gerald Grinstein, a railroad executive.Some of United’s problems are self-inflicted. Mr. Munoz pointed out that the flight attendants who worked for United or Continental before the merger did not work under the same contract, meaning the airline cannot assign them to the same flights. He vowed to fix that, but said that unions had to come up with a common position first.AdvertisementImproving the company’s poor on-time rates, which lag behind those of other major airlines, is another focus, Mr. Munoz said. He added that he had not yet set a timetable but noted that United’s performance had improved in the last few weeks.“Reliability has to be the first thing we do,” he said. “If we are getting people from point A to point B more reliably, consistently, that takes care of the bulk of the concerns of the people.”United said that according to one measure of on-time arrival, known as A14, 85.5 percent of flights landed within 15 minutes of their scheduled arrival times in September, up five percentage points from the same period last year. The airline also had its lowest rate of canceled flights since 2009 and its lowest number of misplaced bags ever.Still, Mr. Munoz recognized that the honeymoon period he is enjoying at United might not last long. He knew, he said, “that good will can turn against you.”A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: United’s Chief Says Airline Must Improve.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.