AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz Alderman and Melissa EddyPARIS — Did he flip Germany the bird?What had been a serious debate over Greece’s economic future has taken a side track down a tabloidy, Twitter-paved path.The questions include whether Yanis Varoufakis, Greece’s outspoken finance minister, really did raise a middle finger to Germany in an obscure video dredged up by the German media.Or did a German satirist manipulate the video to fake the gesture — either to stir up more ire against Greece or to tweak Germany’s staid television culture?The original footage of Mr. Varoufakis shows him speaking at a conference in Zagreb, Croatia, in 2013. Still an academic economist at the time, Mr. Varoufakis was making the point that Greece could have defaulted on its debts when the Greek crisis first broke out in 2010 to “stick the finger” to Germany, one of its main creditors.The video clip, which shows Mr. Varoufakis raising his middle finger, has stoked outrage in Germany since it was first broadcast Sunday night on “Günther Jauch,” the country’s leading talk show, named for its host. German media outlets, many already critical of Greece, including the mass-circulation daily newspaper Bild, went into a frenzy.Mr. Varoufakis, who was a guest on Mr. Jauch’s program, via satellite, swiftly denied that the gesture was authentic and said his remarks were being taken out of context. Mr. Jauch told Mr. Varoufakis that he believed the video was from a conference in Zagreb.“That video is faked,” Mr. Varoufakis told Mr. Jauch. “The conference is real, but the finger is doctored.”On Monday, Mr. Jauch’s editorial team issued a statement saying there was “absolutely no indication of manipulation or falsification in the video that was shown during the live show.”On Wednesday night, Jan Böhmermann, the host of the satirical German TV show “Neo Magazin Royale,” posted a lengthy segment from a coming show in which his team had apparently faked the finger footage. The next day, Mr. Varoufakis asked on Twitter whether Mr. Jauch would apologize “for having used a doctored video to silence a conciliatory Greek voice.”A few hours later on Thursday, Mr. Böhmermann and his network, ZDF, said that the disputed video highlighted the way images could go viral on the Internet without anybody bothering to verify their authenticity, aggravating prejudices and stereotypes.In this case, he pointed out, it played into existing nationalistic tensions between the two countries.“But it really strikes a chord,” Mr. Böhmermann said on his program, which aired Thursday night. “That’s how we Germans work. Devastating Europe two times in a century, but going nuts when somebody’s giving us the finger.”Mr. Böhmermann’s comments on Thursday, which spawned a Twitter hashtag, #Varoufake, tapped into the nationalistic tensions that have flared between the two countries ever since Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras swept to power earlier this year, armed with a pledge to roll back a harsh austerity program that many hard-hit Greeks see as having been engineered by Germany.But confusion was still rampant as to whether or not Mr. Varoufakis, in the video, had indeed flashed what Germans call the Stinkefinger.Fingergate, as it has come to be known, quickly acquired its own hashtag, with hundreds of people posting video clips and spoofs of the video playing on the question of whether an insult had been hurled at Germany — or not.The controversy underscores how the debate over Greek debt has devolved into a mostly superficial, divisive, stereotype-driven cacophony that threatens to obscure more serious discussion about the future of the currency union, said Nick Malkoutzis, the deputy editor of the English edition of the Greek newspaper Kathimerini.”The rhetoric has gotten dangerous on both sides, and there are people pandering to the lowest common denominator, using populism and nationalism to cover up for their own deficiencies,” he said. “The problem is that you may use this as a short-term tactic, but it has long-term effects.”The mudslinging is hardly new. Few Greeks have forgotten an incident in 2010 when the German magazine Focus ran a doctored cover photo of the Classical Greek sculpture of Venus de Milo with her middle finger turned up, under the headline, “Swindlers in the Euro Family.”Earlier this month, Greece began demanding that Germany repay billions of euros in reparations from World War II. A motif of Greek street protests has been posters of the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, with a Hitler-style mustache.The “Neo Magazin Royale” broadcast showed a supposed behind-the-scenes video of how the footage was doctored, including an actor whose job was to hold up his middle finger while the producers filmed it and inserted it into the video of Mr. Varoufakis’s speech. “Of course, I’m using several effects, like motion blur, to make it appear more realistic,” one producer says.Mr. Böhmermann then took Mr. Jauch to task, accusing him of downloading the doctored video off the Internet without checking, and taking it out of context “so that the average German could pursue their passion for being angered.”Liz Alderman reported from Paris, and Melissa Eddy from Berlin.Advertisement