By BEN PROTESSMARCH 19, 2015
The Bank of New York Mellon will pay $714 million to settle accusations that it cheated government pension funds and other investors for more than a decade, federal and state authorities announced on Thursday. It is part of a deal requiring the bank to dismiss some employees and make fuller public disclosures of its foreign exchange operation.The settlement resolves lawsuits filed in 2011 by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, and Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York attorney general.The authorities accused the bank of assuring clients that they would receive the best possible rate when executing a currency trade. In reality, the authorities said, the bank did just the opposite: It provided clients “prices that were at or near the worst interbank rates,” enabling the bank to make extra cash during the 2008 financial crisis.The victims included New York City pension funds and prominent private investors, the authorities said. City investors included teachers and police officers, while the private investment funds belonged to the likes of Duke University and the Walt Disney Company.AdvertisementIn a statement, Mr. Bharara noted that clients “trusted the bank to be honest about the financial services it was providing and to deal with them fairly.” But instead, he said, the bank “and its executives, motivated by outsized profits and bonuses, breached this trust.”Mr. Schneiderman said, “Investors count on financial institutions to tell them the truth about how their investments are being managed.” He added, “Today’s settlement shows that institutions and individuals responsible for defrauding investors will be held accountable and face serious consequences for their wrongdoing.”AdvertisementStill, the $714 million settlement amounts to a fraction of the roughly $2 billion in suspected ill-gotten gains that Mr. Schneiderman’s office initially sought as a penalty. And the facts that the bank admitted to were narrower than the accusations prosecutors first leveled in 2011.The settlement, which requires the approval of a federal judge, accounts for only one of the dozens of government investigations currently sweeping Wall Street. The case against the Bank of New York Mellon, for example, is separate from a wider investigation into whether some of the world’s biggest banks, including JPMorgan Chase and Citigroup, colluded to manipulate the foreign exchange market.Under the terms of the Bank of New York Mellon settlement, the bank must “end the employment of certain executives involved in the fraud,” including David Nichols, a managing director at the bank whom Mr. Bharara’s office sued in 2012. The bank must also improve its disclosures to clients, an effort that traces to 2012, when it struck a “partial settlement” with Mr. Bharara’s office that required an overhaul of certain disclosure practices.Mr. Bharara on Thursday also announced a settlement with Mr. Nichols, 60. The settlement requires the bank to “effectuate the separation” of Mr. Nichols, but it does not say when he must leave the bank nor does it require him to pay any financial penalty to the government. A lawyer for Mr. Nichols, Stephen Fishbein, declined to comment.The Bank of New York Mellon — one of the world’s largest so-called custodial banks, which holds and safeguards financial assets for other banks and investors — said in a statement that “we are pleased to put these legacy FX matters behind us, which is in the best interest of our company and our constituents.”The settlement represents an about-face for the bank, which fought the case for years as it attacked what it called “prosecutorial overreach.” That stance eased recently as the bank sought to put the case to rest, years after it resolved similar actions from authorities in Florida and Virginia.AdvertisementThe New York case stemmed from a whistle-blower complaint filed with the New York attorney general’s office in 2009. The whistle-blowers included Harry M. Markopolos, who first sounded the alarm about Bernard L. Madoff’s Ponzi scheme.The case demonstrates the long arm of both the federal government and New York prosecutors.Mr. Schneiderman relied on the Martin Act, a 1921 law that is among the most feared on Wall Street. Mr. Bharara’s office invoked the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989, or Firrea, a once-obscure statute that requires a lower burden of proof than criminal charges and empowers prosecutors to demand large financial penalties.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The $714 million penalty will be split among the many agencies and investors who investigated the bank. Mr. Bharara’s office and Mr. Schneiderman’s office will each collect roughly $167 million, while $30 million is earmarked for the Securities and Exchange Commission and $14 million will go to the Department of Labor. The remaining sum, $335 million, will go to resolving private class-action lawsuits filed by the bank’s clients. Mr. Schneiderman said he would direct his office’s share of the money “to a fund that will compensate B.N.Y.M.’s customers.”The lawsuits outlined the extent to which the scheme, which operated from 2000 to 2011, harmed the bank’s clients. After misleading clients into thinking that they earned close to the best price on a currency trade, the bank would wait until the end of the day to price the trades and routinely chose one of the worst rates of that day. The bank, however, would find more favorable prices for itself, and then set about “reaping large profits on the price differential.”When State Street Bank faced a lawsuit in 2009 for similar misconduct, it unnerved Bank of New York Mellon employees. After seeing an article about the State Street lawsuit, a Bank of New York Mellon managing director emailed the report to colleagues under the subject heading, “Oh No.”One employee who has left the bank asked his former colleagues in an email whether it was “time to retire after raping the custodial accounts.”A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Bank of New York Mellon Will Settle Currency Trade Case for $714 Million.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.