
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

MARCH 19, 2015
The idea of big American banks breaking up will finally get input from the public.The Securities and Exchange Commission is allowing Bank of America shareholders to vote at the firm’s annual meeting on whether executives should contemplate spinning off the Merrill Lynch investment bank. The regulator had previously muzzled similar requests.Bartlett Naylor, who has submitted the Bank of America proposal on behalf of the nonprofit group Public Citizen, isn’t demanding immediate action to offload the investment bank. He simply wants a vote on whether the $170 billion lender should consider setting up a committee of independent directors to make plans for breaking off noncore businesses.That’s pretty uncontroversial. And Bank of America and its main rivals have to run many of the numbers internally anyway as part of their so-called living wills, which outline to watchdogs how financial firms believe that they can be broken up in times of crisis. What’s more, the merits of dismantling a company ought to be a regular topic for any board, given directors’ duty to optimize the business for shareholders.JPMorgan Chase, worth $230 billion, has already taken a stab at defending its banking conglomerate structure. At its investor day last month, its chief executive, Jamie Dimon, and its chief financial officer, Marianne Lake, laid out the case for keeping the company’s various operations together. The rationale included $15 billion of revenue from cross-selling, $3 billion of saved costs and negative factors that would offset the benefit of releasing capital if the lender were broken up.AdvertisementThe trouble is, this wasn’t done because shareholders wanted it. Two years ago, the Securities and Exchange Commission blocked an annual meeting proposal calling for “extraordinary transactions that could enhance stockholder value.” Mr. Dimon and Ms. Lake revealed their math partly because sell-side analysts at Goldman Sachs produced a report dissecting a breakup.It may well be that splitting off big divisions ultimately is not worth it. Goldman came up with a potential boost to JPMorgan shareholder value of 5 percent to 25 percent. The low end of that would not justify the effort, though the high end might.AdvertisementIn any event, regulators would have something to say about any such transactions at a financial firm as big as JPMorgan or Bank of America. Banks may not like the scrutiny, but now shareholders will get a say in the debate, too.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »