AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — The number of people seeking unemployment benefits in the United States basically held steady last week, as the job market continues to outpace broader economic growth.The Labor Department said on Thursday that weekly applications for unemployment aid rose slightly, by 1,000, to a seasonally adjusted 291,000. Jobless claims have been subdued for the last two weeks, after winter storms caused them to spike at the end of February because of closed schools and construction sites.The four-week average, a less volatile measure, increased 2,250, to 304,750. That average has dropped 7.5 percent over the last year.Applications are a proxy for layoffs. When employers keep their workers, it is generally a sign that they expect continued economic growth and will probably increase hiring. Applications below 300,000 are typically consistent with healthy job gains.The relatively modest number of applications contrast with the Federal Reserve's view announced on Wednesday that economic growth had lost some momentum since the start of 2015."These data appear to defy" the Fed's statement, said Ian Shepherdson, chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics. "So far, though, we see no sign of slower hiring either."Also on Thursday, the Conference Board reported that the index of leading indicators rose a modest amount for a second straight month, indicating the economy’s momentum may have slowed. The index is intended to predict the future health of the economy, and it increased 0.2 percent last month, matching the January increase.The gains in both months were the smallest since the index rose by just 0.1 percent in August.Analysts said that the smaller increases over the last two months may be signaling a period of more moderate activity.”Weakness in the industrial sector and business investment is holding economic growth back despite improvements in labor markets and consumer confidence,” Ataman Ozyildirim, Conference Board economist, said on Thursday.The leading index is composed of 10 forward-pointing indicators. Seven of the 10 indicators increased in February; the biggest support came from the spread on interest rates, gains in stock prices and an increase in building permits.The three indicators that subtracted from growth were weekly unemployment benefit applications, weekly manufacturing hours and the index for new orders tracked by the Institute for Supply Management.And the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia said on Thursday that its index of regional factory activity expanded more slowly in March than the previous month as new orders slipped. The index ticked down to 5 this month, from 5.2 in February. Any figure above zero indicates expansion.It was the fourth straight decline after the index reached its highest point in more than two decades in November. It follows a similar survey from the New York Fed this week that also found slightly slower factory growth.The survey covers manufacturing in eastern Pennsylvania, southern New Jersey and Delaware.Advertisement