By CHAD BRAYMARCH 19, 2015
LONDON — Julian Rifat, a former trader arrested nearly five years ago in what was then described as the largest crackdown on insider trading here, was sentenced to more than a year in prison on Thursday after he pleaded guilty in November to insider trading.Mr. Rifat, a former senior execution trader at the hedge fund Moore Capital Management, was among those arrested in a series of raids by the British authorities in March 2010 in an investigation called Operation Tabernula.The Financial Conduct Authority of Britain accused Mr. Rifat of sharing inside information about several companies, including Volkswagen and Barclays, during the financial crisis.He received cash, an expensive vacation in Oman and a Range Rover in exchange for the tips, which netted about 280,000 pounds, or about $413,000, in illicit proceeds.AdvertisementAt a hearing in Southwark Crown Court in London on Thursday, Judge Alistair William McCreath sentenced Mr. Rifat to 19 months in prison. Mr. Rifat was also fined £100,000 and ordered to pay investigation costs of £159,402.AdvertisementMr. Rifat “was privy to highly sensitive information at the heart of some of the largest transactions in the U.K. financial markets during the latter half of 2009,” Georgina Philippou, the acting director of enforcement and market oversight for the F.C.A., said in a news release.“Mr. Rifat’s behavior exploited financial markets during a particularly challenging time just as they were taking steps to recover from the 2008 crisis. The smooth running of our financial markets requires market professionals to play by the rules — Mr. Rifat knew the rules, but he abused them for his own benefit.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Rifat pleaded guilty in November to a single-count indictment that covered eight instances of insider trading.The F.C.A. accused Mr. Rifat of sharing inside information with Graeme Shelley, a former broker at Novum Securities. Mr. Shelley was said to have then traded for their joint benefit.Mr. Shelley pleaded guilty to insider trading last year, admitting to engaging in the crime with Mr. Rifat and another man, Paul Milsom. Mr. Shelley received a two-year suspended sentence last year.A former senior trader at Legal & General, Mr. Milsom pleaded guilty to so-called insider dealing — how the crime of insider trading is described in Britain — and was sentenced in 2013 to two years in prison.In the Operation Tabernula investigation, nine people have been charged criminally in Britain.Since 2009, the F.C.A. and its predecessor agency, the Financial Services Authority, have secured 27 insider trading convictions.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.