AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedNEW ORLEANS — For several years, much of the debate at the big deal maker conference here has been whether shareholder activism is a blight on the corporate landscape.According to the chairwoman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, not necessarily.In a speech at the Tulane Corporate Law Institute, the S.E.C. chief, Mary Jo White, said that the agency did not necessarily look unkindly on investors who buy stakes in companies and then push for changes in corporate strategy.“Reflexively painting all activism negatively is, in my view, using too broad a brush and indeed is counterproductive,” she said. Activist tactics, she added, “can be compatible with the kind of engagement that I hope companies and shareholders can foster.”That’s in contrast to the arguments of several prominent deal makers, notably Martin Lipton, the well-known mergers lawyer, who told the conference last year that he believed that many of these agitators had short-term investment goals that could harm a company.Ms. White acknowledged the debate: “I did say this was a lively topic with many different views.”Many mergers advisers have publicly bemoaned the lack of action by the S.E.C. to address what they believe is a glaring hole in securities laws: tightening the 10-day window in which an investor can quietly and quickly build a stake of at least 5 percent in a company before disclosing it publicly.Several activist investors have used derivatives to quickly build their positions without setting off the securities law requirements, to the consternation of many. No less than Leo E. Strine Jr., the chief justice of Delaware’s Supreme Court — wearing a jaunty trilby hat at the conference this year — argued on a panel in favor of a more sensitive tripwire that involved disclosure within 24 hours.The S.E.C. has recognized disclosure as an issue, noting that last week it brought civil charges against several individuals for failing to update regulatory disclosures in a timely manner.But the commission has no plans at the moment to change that window, Michele Anderson, the agency’s chief of mergers and acquisitions, said.Regardless, the S.E.C. is aware of the principles that it intended to protect — and which parts of the activism discussion in which it would not weigh.“It is an interesting and important debate, but our role at the S.E.C. is not to determine whether activist campaigns are beneficial or detrimental in any given circumstance,” Ms. White said. “Rather, the agency’s central focus is making sure that shareholders are provided with the information they need and that all play by the rules.”Advertisement