AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiA federal judge on Thursday gave preliminary approval to a $10 million settlement of a lawsuit brought by customers of Target, which experienced an online attack involving confidential customer data during the holiday season in 2013.According to documents filed with the United States District Court in Minnesota this month, shoppers affected by the breach could be awarded up to $10,000 each in damages. The settlement includes a draft of the form victims must complete to make claims, processed through a dedicated website.Customers may still file objections to the terms of the proposed settlement, but Judge Paul A. Magnuson set a final hearing on the settlement for Nov. 10.Molly Snyder, a Target spokeswoman, said, “We are pleased to see the process moving forward and look forward to its resolution.” The pending settlement was first reported by CNBC.During the 2013 holiday season Target acknowledged that hackers had stolen credit and debit card information for 40 million of its customers. Early last year, the company revealed that additional personal information, like email and mailing addresses, had been stolen from 70 million to 110 million people and said there may have been overlap between those groups.According to documents filed to the United States District Court in Minnesota this month, shoppers who were affected by the breach are eligible for damages up to $10,000 each.But to claim damages, victims must prove, among other things, that unauthorized charges were made to their credit cards. They must also show that they invested time in addressing the fraudulent charges and incurred costs from correcting their credit report because of higher interest rates or fees, from replacing driver’s licenses or other forms of identification, or from hiring identity protection companies or lawyers.Cyberattacks have become an ever-increasing threat, and the F.B.I. now ranks cybercrime as one of its top law enforcement activities. Here are some of the major attacks on United States businesses in recent years.Target said that it had seen “low levels of fraud” linked to the breach.Matthew A. S. Esworthy, litigation partner at Shapiro Sher Guinot & Sandler, said that many customers would have trouble proving that they had lost money because of the breach.“It’s difficult to figure out how your card was compromised and if it was directly tied to a particular data breach,” he said. “People are buying more online and using their cards so frequently, making fraudulent charges so commonplace.”Still, he said that as such attacks had mounted, courts had become more willing to entertain cases brought by breach victims. Another major retailer, Home Depot, said in September that hackers breached the company’s cash register systems and compromised the account information of 56 million cardholders.Courts have struggled with how someone proves being harmed by a particular breach. “But you’ve seen everybody become a lot more familiar with problems associated with data breaches, and security in general, and the collateral consequences that result from it,” Mr. Esworthy said.Target’s data breach shook customer confidence in the retailer at a critical time, and executives have said it had a noticeable effect on the bottom line. Target’s chief executive at the time, Gregg W. Steinhafel, resigned and was succeeded in July by Brian Cornell, the former chief at PepsiCo Americas Foods.Target has said that its computer security systems alerted it to suspicious activity after hackers had infiltrated its networks, but that it decided to ignore the alert, allowing what would become one of the largest data breaches recorded.As part of the settlement, Target promises to bolster protection of customer data, including setting up a protocol for responding to online security threats and providing data security training to employees. Last month, it named Mike McNamara, a former executive at the British retailer Tesco, its chief information officer, and has named its first chief information security officer.The retailer estimated recently that it had already accrued $252 million in expenses related to the data breach as of the end of January, a figure it said would be partly offset by an expected $90 million in insurance payouts. That estimate was based on the prospect of settling many lawsuits, Target said.Target faces further claims from three of the four major credit card companies, and is likely to face action from the fourth, it said in an annual filing on March 13. State and federal agencies, including the state attorneys general, the Federal Trade Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission, are also investigating the breach, and may seek to impose fines and other penalties, according to Target.Advertisement