
In Debt By                     
STEPHEN J. LUBBEN

MARCH 19, 2015
Beginning next October, corporate reorganization professionals in Britain are going to have do something quite amazing: At the start of a case, they are going to have to estimate what their total fees will be. And if they exceed that amount, they will have to go back to the creditors and obtain further approval.Given the decades of complaints about the costs of Chapter 11 cases in the United States, it’s something that we might want to consider, too.Big cases can run into hundreds of million of dollars, with top partners who specialize in Chapter 11 cases charging $1,000 an hour.For example, General Motors’ two-year bankruptcy case generated $120 million in fees and expenses. That seems paltry compared with the record holder, Lehman Brothers, whose fees went north of $2 billion. The fees for Nortel Networks were $1.3 billion.AdvertisementCompanies also often end up paying legal expenses for lenders and bondholder groups, which can drive up costs.AdvertisementWhether Chapter 11 costs “too much” is a matter of some contention. The most difficult question is “compared to what?” After all, big city law firms are hardly cheap in any practice area.The real question, but the one that is hardly ever asked, is whether bankruptcy is in some way prone to extra expense, costs that would not surface but for some special aspect of Chapter 11.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One commonly identified problem is that the debtor company is spending “other people’s money,” namely cash that could otherwise go to the creditors. This seemingly simple point is actually more complex than would appear at first blush.First, in some sense the argument is true of all corporations, bankrupt or not. As Berle and Means noted long ago, big corporations are run by people who are not the owners.Moreover, no matter whose money is being spent, the real question is whether spending that money generates recoveries that creditors would not otherwise receive. That is, spending on restructuring professionals only takes money from creditors if the cost of those professionals is greater than the extra returns they generate.The “net” is important.Various proposals have been floated to help rein in costs, like greater judicial oversight and fixed fees, but the British proposal may have hit on an intriguing idea. If the “other people’s money” argument is meant to suggest that restructuring professionals are not subject to market forces — either because bankruptcy is so extreme that managers will willingly overspend, or because managers don’t exercise oversight when they have one foot out the door — the British approach could provide real benefits.Namely, if professionals all had to provide reasonably binding cost figures upfront, the parties to a case could make sensible adjustments to staffing, committing to pay for a “just right” amount of reorganization and number of restructuring professionals.The upfront disclosure would facilitate comparison shopping — that is, a true market for bankruptcy professionals.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »