AdvertisementSupported byBy Nancy WartikIt’s early and a line of sleepy folk who just want to grab a soy latte and get to work snakes through Starbucks. But first, the barista behind the counter needs to broach a sensitive subject.“Here’s a venti caramel macchiato for Jake — and has anyone told you about our ‘Race Together’ initiative? Uh huh. Uh huh. No, I’m sorry sir. No, it’s not because you’re bl — No, I just have to give out 30 of these today and — No, you’re right, it’s stupid and I’m sorry. Oh, your drink is the wrong size? Sorry, I’m just so nervous….”Patrick from Wisconsin, a former barista, imagined that exchange and posted it in the comments section of a New York Times article on Starbucks and its recent “Race Together” campaign.The campaign, which began earlier this week, was an effort to spark a conversation about race in America. It seemingly put baristas on the front lines, asking them to give customers “Race Together” stickers, write the phrase on their coffee cups and discuss race issues with customers. The effort elicited a less than rapturous response, especially on social media.Race relations, of course, are serious business. Even so, some Times readers decided humor, the snarky sort, was the best way to explore what might happen if the company’s new initiative caught on.Dan Stackhouse, a commenter from New York, speculated about the kind of exchange he might have with a barista:‘Hey, I see you’re white, do you think black people have it rougher in society today than whites?’‘Ah sure, I’d have to say yes.’‘I see, and sir, do you feel that you’re partially to blame for that, as you are white?’‘No, not in the slightest, I treat everyone equally.’‘Well sir, can you really be believed, as you are part of the empowered group in the country?’‘Ah, my large coffee is ready? OK here’s your $9, bye.’Lindsay, a Starbucks barista from central Washington state, wrote that when she first opened the video that Howard Schultz, the chief executive of Starbucks, asked employees to view, she was excited. But, she said:By the end of the video, I was filled only with concern. The only concrete element of this plan is the writing of ‘Race Together’ on the customer’s cup, which already creates a difficult situation in a highly trafficked store....How do I rattle off a concise (again, very busy location), educated, and relevant response about something so huge and encompassing as race relations without sounding like a young, white, and blonde messenger of Starbucks Corporate?DCBarrister chimed in from the nation’s capital:As a Black man, the only conversation Howard Schultz has started for me begins with this question:Where can I go for a decent cup of coffee and not get hassled over race?And commenting from New York City, Diva said:As an African-American female, I’ve experienced my share of comments and behavior from people who meant well but didn’t realize their own ignorance in regard to race relations. This falls into one of those categories — Mr. Schultz meant well, but didn’t think it through, or realize his own privilege/ignorance in presenting his idea.Not every commenter thought the “Race Together” campaign was misguided. Chris, from Issaquah, Wash., lamented:No good deed goes unpunished.In an America that has turned to the right with a mantra of ‘All Rights, No Responsibilities,’ any act of social good will be rejected.I had a bored view of Starbucks, but now will move my coffee business to them.One commenter, Howard Weiner from Miami, who said he and Mr. Schultz grew up in the same Brooklyn housing project, congratulated the Starbucks chief:Our neighborhood was a true melting pot of races and religions. The many groups of friends who inhabited this group of 26 high-rise buildings were true examples of diversity and unification. We were White, Black, Hispanic, Jew, Catholic, Baptist, etc. We went to the same schools, played in the same park, ate in each others’ homes and most importantly, we never mentioned race or religion in any of our conversations…. Perhaps it is the Howie Schultz who grew up in this positive environment who is trying to send this message to America that if we race together, we can live together. We did it in Canarsie, why not in the rest of America?Advertisement