By SAM ROBERTSMARCH 20, 2015
Walter Channing Jr., who combined careers as a venture capitalist, sculptor and well-regarded vintner on Long Island, died on March 12 in Southampton, N.Y. He was 74.The cause was complications of dementia, his wife, Molly, said.Mr. Channing’s disparate vocations shared common roots. His father was a businessman, and his mother was an artist. As a teenager, he worked as a tree surgeon, and he later became a health care consultant. He sculpted in wood and began installing sculptures of inverted trees in the Bridgehampton fields where he would later plant vines that produced his rosato di merlot, blaufränkisch and other wines.“This South Fork boutique and its winemaker, James Christopher Tracy, have delved so deeply into vineyard and cellar experimentation that every vintage brings new expectations,” Howard G. Goldberg wrote in The New York Times in 2007.Mr. Channing was born in Boston on Sept. 23, 1940, to Walter Channing Sr. and the former Eleine Taylor, the scion of a New England family that included the founders of the Unitarian Church and the Boston Lying-In Hospital, now the Brigham and Women’s Hospital.AdvertisementAfter graduating from Harvard and receiving a master’s degree from Harvard Business School, Mr. Channing worked as a computer consultant in New York City. In 1968 he founded a health care consulting firm, which became known as Channing & Weinberg and later the CW Group. It expanded into the venture capital business, specializing in health care and managed care and biotechnology.AdvertisementMr. Channing became a director of many of the companies his business helped start and served on the board of Outward Bound USA.His childhood fascination with woodworking was revived when, living in Lower Manhattan, he noticed that the city was discarding well-preserved yellow pine timbers while razing a derelict Hudson River pier. He reclaimed as much of the timber as he could, stashed it away and eventually converted it into giant replicas of pencils, furniture and other objets d’art that accentuated the original wood.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He later reclaimed discarded tree stumps from the East Hampton dump, planting some trees upside down and mischievously carving others with chain saws into human forms.Since 1975, his work has been shown at, among other places, the OK Harris Gallery in Manhattan, the Indianapolis Museum of Art and the Handschin Gallery in Basel, Switzerland.Mr. Channing planted his first chardonnay vines in a former potato field in 1982 and uncorked his first 19 cases for friends five years later. About that time, his second wife, the former Rosina Secco, died of cancer. (His earlier marriage to Stockard Channing, the actress, ended in divorce.) Neighbors introduced him to Molly Webb Seagrave, and they married in 1990.Besides his wife, he is survived by four daughters, Francesca Channing-Secco, Isabella Channing-Secco, Sylvia Seagrave Channing and Cornelia Ryan Channing.Mr. Channing called his vineyard, one of the first on Long Island’s South Fork, Channing Daughters Winery.A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Walter Channing Jr., 74; Made Wine and Art.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.