AdvertisementSupported byBy Jessica Silver-GreenbergWhen Hurricane Sandy destroyed her car, Rhoda Branche was desperate for another. But just a year later, she could not wait to get rid of the one that replaced it.For Ms. Branche, 51, the problems began almost immediately after she purchased a 2004 Volvo from a used-car dealership near her home.While the cost of the loan made her wince — the interest rate was nearly 24 percent — Ms. Branche, who has trouble walking, needed a car. Without one, the commute from her home in Coney Island in Brooklyn to her job on Long Island, N.Y., morphed into a nearly three-hour trek: She has to take two buses and three trains, a journey that left her exhausted and in pain.But shortly after she drove the car off the lot, Ms. Branche said, it began to have mechanical problems. First it was the engine, then it was the ignition. In June 2013, after spending more than $3,000 — money that as a single mother, she could not afford — the car stopped working altogether.Her experience is all too common, officials from New York City’s Department of Consumer Affairs say. Ms. Branche is one of hundreds of New Yorkers who are getting auto loans from used-car dealerships, including some that sell loans with terms designed to take advantage of the least sophisticated customers. Others, the department said, push borrowers into expensive add-on products, which drive up the amounts of the loans.The stakes are high. “We know that for many families, especially those with low incomes, a car is the single largest purchase that they will make,” said Julie Menin, the commissioner of the consumer affairs department.Deluged with complaints from frustrated consumers, the Department of Consumer Affairs is introducing the municipal auto loan initiative, a program that will effectively circumvent the dealerships by allowing troubled borrowers to get loans directly from a number of lenders throughout New York.To make the program happen, the department is calling on lenders to submit proposals for a safer auto loan, specifically for low-income consumers. In the request, which was issued this week, the department calls on banks to “ensure New Yorkers can purchase used vehicles with confidence.” Lenders have until mid-April to submit their initial proposals.The loans, the department said in its request, should have a fixed interest rate below 16 percent. Application fees on the loans, the department said, should also be waived or below $25.One of the most important features, though, the department said, is to ensure that terms of the loans are clear.The move from the department comes as auto loans to people with tarnished credit are booming, rising more than 130 percent in the five years since the immediate aftermath of the housing crisis. That growth has fueled another kind of surge: a flurry of concerns from government authorities, including the consumer affairs department, that car dealerships are falsifying borrowers’ credit applications to ensure that anyone, no matter their credit, can buy a car.The department, in many ways, has a special window into the auto lending industry. It licenses more than 850 used-car dealerships throughout New York City and also has subpoena power. As concerns have mounted about potentially predatory loan products, officials have begun an investigation into some of the nation’s largest auto lenders.Still, there is a lot of work left. In the span of one year — between 2013 and 2014 — the department received more than 500 complaints about used-car dealers. And that number, officials say, is likely a fraction of those New Yorkers who have been deceived. Few people have any idea that they have been wronged, officials say.Debt from an auto loan, the department found, weighs heavily on New Yorkers. Surveying New Yorkers who seek help through counseling centers throughout the city, the department found that the average car loan debt can exceed $12,000 — a burden that can prove impossible on an average annual income of just $36,000.For Ms. Branche, the program could not come soon enough. Once her car broke down in 2013, she tried to continue commuting to work, but the travel proved impossible. Problems with her knees made it extremely painful to walk, and her right knee worsened, leading to surgery. Although she needs another car, she cannot afford one. More than that, she says, she is terrified of getting duped again.“It was just horrible,” she said. “I don’t want to go through that again.”Advertisement