By RAVI SOMAIYA and STEPHEN CASTLEMARCH 20, 2015
The Guardian appointed its first female editor on Friday, giving Katharine Viner, the current editor in chief of The Guardian’s United States operation, the job of leading the liberal British newspaper and media group as it seeks to expand its global ambitions.Ms. Viner, 44, will take over from Alan Rusbridger, who will step down in the summer after 20 years as editor. In those two decades, The Guardian has undergone a rapid transformation, switching its focus from print to digital journalism, expanding its United States operations and sharing its first Pulitzer Prize.The appointment was made by the Scott Trust, a nonprofit body and owner of The Guardian, and follows a vote by the news organization’s staff that selected Ms. Viner as the preferred candidate, guaranteeing her a place in the shortlist of interviewees.She was chosen from a final list of two; the other contender was Ian Katz, a former deputy editor of The Guardian who left the organization to edit the BBC News program “Newsnight.”AdvertisementThe editorship of the Guardian, once a British newspaper with a core of devoted readers, now means leading a global news organization that is among the most-read online, and the most-shared on Facebook, by some measures. It is the sixth-largest traditional newspaper site in the United States, according to comScore.Under Mr. Rusbridger, the newspaper has in recent years developed a reputation for withstanding extraordinary pressure from the British and American governments related to its reporting on national security issues. In particular, it published articles based on an archive of documents leaked by the former National Security Agency contractor Edward J. Snowden, and it was also involved with a previous trove of similar secret documents obtained by WikiLeaks.Ms. Viner’s appointment concludes a closely watched competition within The Guardian between a pool of talented and ambitious editors to succeed Mr. Rusbridger, who began his tenure in 1995. Contenders included Janine Gibson, who oversaw the coverage of the Snowden leaks that secured the Pulitzer Prize, and Emily Bell, a former Guardian journalist who left to become director of the Tow Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia University. In a nonbinding ballot organized by the paper’s union, Ms. Viner won 53 percent of the vote.The job of editing The Guardian tends to fall vacant rarely. Mr. Rusbridger’s predecessor was Peter Preston, who occupied the editor’s chair from 1975 to 1995.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Viner has been editor in chief of Guardian US since last year. She studied at Oxford University and joined the newspaper in 1997. She has edited its Weekend magazine, been a features editor and oversaw the start of its Australian edition.With the actor Alan Rickman, she assembled and edited the play “My Name Is Rachel Corrie,” a one-woman drama about a pro-Palestinian activist. It is scheduled to be staged Off Broadway this spring for the first time since an earlier production, nine years ago, caused uproar in parts of the New York theater world.AdvertisementIn a statement released on Friday, Liz Forgan, chairwoman of the Scott Trust, described Ms. Viner as “an inspiring and courageous leader” who has embraced the changes in the media industry. Ms. Viner said she intended to build on Mr. Rusbridger’s legacy, “to lead a media organization that is bold, challenging, open and engaging.”In a statement to colleagues before they voted for their candidate to be editor, Ms. Viner said that the printed newspaper “must not hinder our shift to digital, but we must cherish it while we choose to keep it,” she wrote. She added that, despite having “the ownership model everyone wants, a global reputation and excellent journalists bringing in scoop after scoop,” The Guardian also faced “big challenges.”Its daily print circulation had dropped under 180,000 by August last year, according to figures from the British Audit Bureau of Circulations, published by the newspaper itself. But its web traffic was up 30 percent in the United States between February 2014 and last month, according to comScore, and it has become one of the most-shared sites on Facebook, according to NewsWhip, an analytics firm.It shared its Pulitzer Prize for public service with The Washington Post, for its work on the documents obtained by Mr. Snowden. During that reporting, The Guardian was forced to physically destroy computer equipment with power tools as British officials looked on.Stephen Castle reported from London and Ravi Somaiya from New York.A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Guardian Picks Woman as Its Editor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.