By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMMARCH 20, 2015
DALLAS —  In a decade as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Richard W. Fisher was frequently mistaken in his economic predictions but seldom boring.The departure of Mr. Fisher, who stepped down on Thursday, means that the Fed is losing one of the most outspoken internal opponents of its stimulus campaign just as it is winding down. Mr. Fisher argued right up to his retirement that the central bank was increasing economic inequality, destabilizing financial markets and might yet unleash higher inflation. But he is best known not so much for what he said as for the way he said it.He spoke more often and more colorfully than any of his colleagues at the Federal Reserve, larding his speeches with quotes, anecdotes and metaphors. Among the most memorable was his 2012 description of his breeding bull, Too Big to Fail, as full of liquidity but unable to reach the pretty cows on the other side of the fence.“His speeches have regularly been the most eloquent — a true joy to read his somewhat excessive Texas exuberance in explaining both the successes and the possible excesses of monetary policy,” the former Fed chairman Paul A. Volcker, a mentor to Mr. Fisher, said in a recent introduction.AdvertisementNoting that Mr. Fisher was the rare non-economist among senior Fed officials, Mr. Volcker continued: “In an era in which economists claim a natural right to central banking leadership, Dick has brought a healthy sense of reality, sound judgment, business background and leadership.”Richard W. Fisher, the most outspoken internal opponent of the Fed’s stimulus campaign, talks with Rick Santelli of CNBC about “lazy” traders.But Mr. Fisher also has angered those who think the Fed can and should do more to help unemployed workers.“He was wrong at the beginning, and he’s still wrong now,” said Danny Cendejas of the Texas Organizing Project, a nonprofit group that advocates for lower-income Texans. “He’s ignoring the reality of what’s happening, particularly in the Latino community and in communities of color.”AdvertisementAt the Fed, Mr. Fisher was set apart by his views and his style. He kept a list of roughly 50 executives at corporations ranging from Walmart to American Airlines to “the Bud distributor in North Texas,” and he called several dozen before each Fed meeting. He insisted that those anecdotal reports offered a more accurate and timely window onto the economy than government data and the Fed’s elaborate models.“My local dry cleaner, I would say that if you took him and put him against the whole Fed staff in terms of forecasting, he’s been far more accurate,” Mr. Fisher said.Mr. Fisher now worries that the Fed is waiting too long to raise rates and that its efforts to assist the recovery instead will cause another downturn. He said the consequences of the Fed’s stimulus campaign would not be clear for some time.“How long?” he said, repeating a question. “No idea. And I hope my concerns, which are only expressed as uncertainties, prove to be sleep lost and nothing more.”These warnings have made Mr. Fisher a popular figure among the Fed’s Republican critics, who also insist that the Fed’s attempts to expand employment are doing more harm than good. So did a February speech in which Mr. Fisher told a New York audience that the Fed should change its governance structure to limit the outsize role of the New York Fed.But Mr. Fisher has spoken sharply against calls from Republican lawmakers for new restrictions on the Fed’s authority. He said he wanted the Fed itself to make better decisions.Mr. Fisher rose in Horatio Alger style from childhood poverty to marry the daughter of a prominent congressman and build a fortune of more than $20 million as an investor. He worked his way through Harvard as a cook and a crew member on the yacht of a wealthy alumnus, and by renting his dorm room to amorous couples. Now he sits on Harvard’s Board of Overseers.He was born in Los Angeles in 1949 to a Norwegian mother and an Australian father who met in South Africa and conceived Mr. Fisher in Shanghai before moving to California. A few years later, propelled by poverty, the family moved to Mexico City, where Mr. Fisher learned to speak Spanish fluently.AdvertisementAfter returning to California, he won a scholarship to attend Admiral Farragut Academy, a preparatory school for the United States Naval Academy. After two years at Annapolis, a teacher encouraged him to transfer to Harvard.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He ended up in Dallas after marrying the daughter of a Texas congressman, James Collins. The young couple lived in New York at first, where Mr. Fisher worked as an assistant to the banker Robert Roosa. But Mr. Fisher says that one day, while on a ferry returning from the Statue of Liberty with his infant son, he looked across the water at the New York skyline and decided to leave.“I thought, ‘This place is already made,’” he recalled. “Things were moving my way, but I just thought, ‘This has already been built. I need to go someplace new.’”He made a fortune investing in distressed assets during the rocky years of the Texas economy in the late 1980s and early 1990s. After two failed runs for the United States Senate, he signed on with the Clinton administration as a deputy trade representative in 1997. He remained in Washington until 2005, when he got a call asking him if he’d like to come back to Texas to run the Dallas Fed.The Fed’s 12 regional branches together oversee the banking system, operate payments infrastructure and conduct economic research. Their presidents also participate in setting monetary policy. And the Dallas Fed has a longstanding preference for outspoken leaders.Mr. Fisher’s predecessor, Robert D. McTeer, was known for reciting cowboy poetry and for his disagreements with the Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan. When Mr. Fisher took the job, he changed the hold music on the Dallas Fed’s phone system from country and western to classical.The Dallas Fed’s board has yet to select Mr. Fisher’s successor, but Diane Swonk, chief economist at Mesirow Financial in Chicago, said it was a good bet they would pick someone with a strong voice. “They like to have people who are cowboys,” she said.He was one of the first Fed officials to raise concerns about the health of the housing market. Yet he was also among the last to understand the depth of the resulting financial crisis. He warned throughout most of 2008 that inflation was the primary danger to the economy — a threat that has still not materialized — and that the bleak pronouncements of other Fed officials were fueling an unwarranted sense of panic.In August, as the financial system teetered on the brink of collapse, he voted to raise interest rates, which would have made the situation even worse.AdvertisementIn December that year, when the Fed reduced its benchmark interest rate nearly to zero in a move to spur a recovery, Mr. Fisher cast the only dissenting vote. After the meeting, he decided the moment required solidarity and went to Ben S. Bernanke, the chairman, to change his vote.But Mr. Fisher said in the interview here that he had not changed his mind. He said the Fed should never have pushed interest rates below 2 percent, nor bought so many bonds.Like many of the Fed’s critics on the left, Mr. Fisher emphasizes that he is deeply concerned about the damage caused by the Great Recession. He says he simply does not believe the Fed is helping. He says holding down interest rates has mostly enriched the rich, like his own family.The middle class is being squeezed, he said, “but the Fed can’t fix that.”The Fed’s current chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, sometimes uses the metaphor of a car to talk about monetary policy. Mr. Fisher said he had frequently argued for the substitution of a ship “because there are no brakes.”He told of serving as a student at the Naval Academy on the U.S.S. Truckee, a tanker, as it collided with an aircraft carrier, the U.S.S. Wasp, in June 1968.“The scariest thing was watching all the other ships pull over the horizon,” he said, and then draws the metaphor: The Fed’s portfolio, which has swelled to more than $4 trillion, is “an enormous amount of explosive fuel” and the danger is “an explosion of inflation.”“My successors,” he said, “are going to have to be very careful in steering that ship.”A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Cowboy Leaves the Fed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.