By NICOLA CLARKMARCH 20, 2015
PARIS — In the little more than a year since Ryanair made a belated push into the digital age, the Irish budget airline has adopted an arsenal of tools aimed at improving communications with the flying public.So how was it that Ryanair waited several days to correct its statement to news organizations this week that it was moving forward with plans to offer ultracheap flights between Europe and the United States?“We screwed up,” Michael O’Leary, Ryanair’s chief executive, said by telephone on Friday. “It was a miscommunication.”And so, in the public relations equivalent of sending the plane back to the gate, Ryanair retracted.In a curt statement to the London Stock Exchange that was posted on the airline’s website late Thursday, the company said: “The board of Ryanair Holdings P.L.C. wishes to clarify that it has not considered or approved any trans-Atlantic project and does not intend to do so.”AdvertisementAccording to Mr. O’Leary, the trouble began with a statement the airline’s media office provided to The Financial Times on Monday. The statement followed up on comments about plans that Ryanair’s chief marketing officer, Kenny Jacobs, had made in an interview with the newspaper.AdvertisementThe statement, which was subsequently provided to other news organizations, read: “The board of Ryanair, like any P.L.C., have approved the business plans for future growth, including trans-Atlantic.” It continued: “We see it as a logical development in the European market.”While Mr. O’Leary has never made a secret of Ryanair’s trans-Atlantic ambitions, the account quickly gained attention because it indicated that the company’s board had approved to the plan. The report was given further credence by the details Mr. Jacobs provided in the interview, saying the airline would offer flights, under a separate brand, between about two dozen American and European cities, beginning as early as 2019.To other news organizations, Ryanair confirmed in a statement: “We would like to offer low cost flights between 12-14 European cities and 12-14 U.S. cities. The business plan is there, but it’s dependent on attaining viable long-haul aircraft, and we estimate that’s four to five years away.” Ryanair’s shares fell more than 3 percent on Tuesday as investors digested the news, which broke late Monday. They regained only part of that ground by the end of trading Friday in Europe, off about 1.7 percent from Monday’s closing price.“It wasn’t earth-shattering news in the first place,” Mr. O’Leary said. “I was surprised that it got so much traction. We have been talking about this for years.”The problem, according to Mr. O’Leary, was that while Ryanair executives had, in fact, discussed loose plans to create a trans-Atlantic airline, such a project had never been formally discussed by Ryanair’s board. That, he said, is because the venture would involve the creation of a separate company that would not be subject to the oversight of the Ryanair board.Why did it take so long for Ryanair to correct the record with the public and investors? The airline, after all, has put tremendous effort into its digital platforms. It has redesigned its once-cumbersome website and made available free booking apps for smartphones. It has also embraced social media forums like Twitter, which the airline uses to promote special fares and to offer customized assistance to individual passengers, in real time.AdvertisementIn the interview, Mr. O’Leary attributed the error to the airline’s media relations department, but he declined to provide further details.In an email late Friday, Robin Kiely, Ryanair’s head of communications, declined to comment further on the episode. Ryanair’s official Twitter account has also remained silent on the matter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When asked to explain why, in an age when news reports ricochet across the Internet at light speed, the airline waited so long to clarify the status of its trans-Atlantic strategy, Mr. O’Leary noted that Tuesday had been a public holiday in Ireland. The airline’s headquarters were closed for St. Patrick’s Day.On Wednesday and Thursday, he said, Ryanair’s board was holding its regular quarterly meeting, at which the question of how to clarify Monday’s erroneous statement was first raised.“The board was already scheduled to meet on Wednesday and Thursday,” Mr. O’Leary said. “That was what we considered the appropriate time and place to consider the response to the error that was made.”He added that the clarification was made at the board’s initiative, and not in response to a request from market regulators.Mr. O’Leary — who famously waded into the Twittersphere with a series of posts in late 2013 to kick off Ryanair’s digital charm offensive that backfired slightly — conceded on Friday that the airline’s communications in this instance “may have been a bit slow for some people’s liking.”“I don’t follow social media, I don’t have time for it,” Mr. O’Leary said. “But we learn lessons on a daily basis.”Analysts said they did not expect the episode to have a long-term impact on Ryanair’s reputation with travelers or with investors.Advertisement“At the end of the day, it wasn’t perceived as something that real, at least in the short term,” Stephen Furlong, an airline analyst with Davy Research in Dublin, said of the trans-Atlantic plan.“I don’t think it was necessarily planned, but knowing Michael, any sort of publicity for Ryanair is probably not a bad thing from his perspective,” he said, referring to Mr. O’Leary.“In Ireland,” Mr. Furlong added, “we sometimes get a bit over the top around St. Patrick’s Day.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.