AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesThe Simon Property Group made what it called its “best and final offer” for a rival mall operator, the Macerich Company, on Friday, raising its unsolicited bid to $23.2 billion.But Macerich, which operates luxury shopping centers from New York to California, has shown no signs of interest in striking a deal with Simon. Instead, it revamped its corporate defenses this week after Simon’s initial offer, claiming it substantially undervalued the company.Simon’s new offer of $95.50 a share — half in cash and half in Simon’s common shares — is up from the first offer of $91 a share, which Macerich rejected on Tuesday. The latest bid of $23.2 billion includes the assumption of some $6.4 billion of Macerich debt.Simon said that if Macerich did not agree to meet with it to negotiate by the close of business on April 1, it would withdraw the offer. Simon also said that it would not nominate directors to Macerich’s board “or otherwise prolong this process.”Macerich acknowledged the receipt of the latest offer from Simon and said its board would meet with advisers soon to consider the bid. But its shares fell on Friday, as investors bet against the possibility of a deal getting done.Simon’s initial takeover offer was announced on March 9 after it was privately rebuffed by Macerich. Simon had built a small stake in Macerich, and announced its interest in a takeover of the company during the nomination window for Macerich board members.That put pressure on Macerich to act quickly, and the company did. In addition to rejecting the unsolicited offer, Macerich adopted several steps, including a shareholder rights plan, or a poison pill, to defend itself in the event of a hostile takeover attempt.If Simon were to pursue a proxy fight now, it could take more than a year to change control of the Macerich board. But in a statement, Simon suggested that it wouldn’t pursue a lengthy hostile takeover.“Macerich’s decision to adopt extreme defensive measures is disappointing,” David Simon, Simon’s chief executive, said in a statement on Friday. “We have repeatedly expressed our desire to work with Macerich to reach a mutually beneficial agreement and do not believe a protracted, multiyear proxy battle is in the interests of the shareholders of either company.”Simon, based in Indianapolis, is the largest mall operator in the country, owning the Forum Shops at the Caesars Palace Las Vegas and the Sawgrass Mills shopping center in Sunrise, Fla., among others.Macerich, which has headquarters in California but is incorporated in Maryland, is the third-largest mall operator, but does not compete with Simon in many markets. Among its malls is the Queens Center in New York.Both companies have a high concentration of so-called Class A malls, which are filled with luxury stores like Apple and Prada. Class A malls continue to thrive even as other shopping centers around the country suffer, the victims of overdevelopment and changing shopping habits.Almost no new Class A malls are being built, leading Macerich to believe its properties will become more valuable in the years to come. Moreover, it said it was investing in its properties and had been improving sales per square foot.General Growth Properties, the No. 2 mall operator in the country, agreed to buy some Macerich properties from Simon if it were to strike a deal. Simon said it partnered with General Growth to avoid taking on too much debt. The disposals could also help Simon avoid antitrust scrutiny in the event a deal went through.Although General Growth remained free to make an offer for all of Macerich if it chose, Macerich and its advisers said that the agreement between Simon and General Growth potentially violated antitrust laws, and depressed the potential sale price for Macerich.But Simon contends that it is offering a generous price for Macerich. Late last year, Macerich sold about 11 percent of the company to the Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan for $71 a share.Though Simon said its new offer was its best and final one, it also suggested it was willing to come to the bargaining table if Macerich was willing to negotiate.Advertisement