By CHAD BRAYMARCH 20, 2015
LONDON — Brady W. Dougan, the outgoing chief executive of Credit Suisse, took a slight pay cut in 2014 as the Swiss bank faced what it described as a “challenging” macroeconomic environment and saw its annual results hurt by legacy legal issues.In its annual report on Friday, Credit Suisse, based in Zurich, said Mr. Dougan received total compensation of 9.7 million Swiss francs, or about $9.8 million, in 2014. That compares with 9.79 million francs in 2013.His compensation included a salary of 2.5 million francs and incentive awards of 5.33 million francs. He received 6.2 million in incentive awards in 2013.Mr. Dougan and other members of the bank’s executive board took a voluntary downward adjustment in their long-term incentive awards after the bank admitted in May that its bankers helped wealthy Americans avoid taxes and paid $2.6 billion in penalties to the United States government. The bank paid $2.8 billion in total in 2014 to settle the cross-border tax inquiries.AdvertisementAs a result, Mr. Dougan and other members of the executive board saw their long-term incentive awards reduced by 4.7 million francs in 2014.AdvertisementThe Swiss lender said earlier this month that Mr. Dougan was stepping down as its top executive in June after leading the bank since 2007. He will be succeeded by Tidjane Thiam, who heads the British insurance company Prudential. The British insurer has no connection to the United States company with the same name.In 2013, Credit Suisse said that its profit declined 19 percent to 1.88 billion francs, down from 2.33 billion francs in 2013.Despite the impact of its legacy issues, Credit Suisse said that it made progress in winding down several nonstrategic businesses as the lender emphasized its wealth management business and exited riskier business lines. It also exceeded its target for building up a capital base to weather a future financial storm.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As a particular achievement in 2014, the compensation committee acknowledged Mr. Dougan’s strong leadership in managing the U.S. cross-border settlement and its consequences,” Credit Suisse said in its annual report.The announcement of Mr. Dougan’s compensation comes a week after its larger Swiss rival UBS detailed the pay of its top executive, Sergio P. Ermotti.Mr. Ermotti, the UBS chief executive, saw his compensation increase nearly 5 percent in 2014, despite its financial performance for the year being “tempered” by legal and regulatory charges.He received total compensation of 11.2 million francs for 2014, up from 10.7 million francs in the prior year.Mr. Ermotti received a base salary equal to Mr. Dougan’s 2.5 million francs, but his pay was bolstered by 8.4 million francs in so-called variable compensation.The variable compensation included shares in UBS that will be granted to Mr. Ermotti in May, subject to shareholder approval. Those shares would not vest until 2020.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.