AdvertisementSupported byBy David JollyPARIS — Holcim and Lafarge, the two European cement giants, have broken a deadlock that threatened their merger plans, they said on Friday, expressing confidence that they would close the $46 billion deal this summer.The agreement, announced last year, had faltered in recent weeks as Holcim shareholders complained that they were getting shortchanged in the supposed merger of equals. The companies had also begun to squabble over who would lead the new group, with Holcim no longer willing to back Bruno Lafont, the Lafarge chief executive, for the job.On Friday, the companies said they had solved those problems by revising the terms in a way that sweetened the deal for Holcim shareholders and agreeing that Mr. Lafont would step aside and that another Lafarge executive would be named to the top job after the merger was finalized.“With this amended agreement, the project to combine Lafarge and Holcim to become the most advanced company in its industry has taken another important step forward,” they said in a joint statement. “Both companies are continuing to work intensively on preparing the closing of the transaction and the successful integration post-merger.”The combination of Holcim, based in Jona, Switzerland, and Lafarge, based in Paris, would form the world’s largest cement and construction materials company. They had joint sales last year of around $33 billion and a total of about 131,000 employees worldwide.When the deal was first announced last April, their businesses were in roughly similar shape. But since then, things have turned in Holcim’s favor, partly because of its deeper footprint in places like India and the United States, where growth is relatively strong. Lafarge’s focus on Africa and the Middle East had looked like a strength until oil prices tumbled, sapping demand in parts of those regions.The companies had stunned the market with the news on Tuesday that Holcim was demanding changes to the governance structure and better financial conditions for Holcim shareholders.The companies declined to comment on what had gone wrong between Mr. Lafont and his negotiating partners in Switzerland, but by early this week, it had become clear that the friction was serious enough that Holcim was ready to walk away unless a new candidate for chief executive was agreed. After insisting on Tuesday there could be no changes in the governance structure, Lafarge capitulated.“I don’t think it’s the case that they threw him under the bus,” Robert Muir, an analyst at Berenberg Bank in London, said of Lafarge backing down on Mr. Lafont’s role. “It was more of a question of them looking at it and saying, ‘We’ve invested a lot in this already. Are we really going to let this deal fail on the basis of one individual?’”Addressing the primary complaint of the relative valuation of the two companies, Holcim shareholders will now put in nine shares for every 10 shares of Lafarge, instead of the one-for-one ratio agreed last summer, the companies said in a joint statement. They also agreed that shareholders would get a post-closing dividend of one share in the new company for every 20 shares they own.Mr. Lafont and the Holcim chairman, Wolfgang Reitzle, will serve as nonexecutive co-chairmen of the combined entity’s board.In the statement, Mr. Reitzle praised Mr. Lafont, saying they would “work closely together to ensure that the value creation potential of this merger will be realized for the benefits of all shareholders.” Mr. Reitzle highlighted the Lafarge chief’s “tremendous contribution to getting us this far.”Although a deal appeared in doubt this week, the two companies had made sufficient progress by Thursday that shareholders of CRH, an Irish construction materials company, approved the acquisition of Lafarge-Holcim assets valued at 6.5 billion euros, or about $7 billion, assets the merging companies needed to jettison if they were to receive regulatory approval.Holcim said it would put the merger before shareholders at a meeting in early May. Lafarge will not hold a shareholders’ meeting. A Lafarge a spokeswoman, Sabine Wacquez, said the merger would go ahead if two-thirds of shareholders exchanged their Lafarge shares for shares in the merged company.“Certain key shareholders of both companies have confirmed their support for the revised merger terms,” the companies said in the statement. “The parties expect the transaction to close in July 2015.”With the thorniest issues out of the way, the combination requires regulatory approval in countries including the United States.Holcim shares rose 1 percent in early Zurich trading. Lafarge rose 3.2 percent in Paris.Advertisement