AdvertisementSupported byFair GameBy Gretchen MorgensonLife is not fair, I know, but this is getting ridiculous.Whenever a big corporation settles an enforcement matter with prosecutors, penalties levied in the case — and they can be enormous — are usually paid by the company’s shareholders. Yet the people who actually did the deeds or oversaw the operations rarely so much as open their wallets.Economists have a name for this sort of thing: It’s called a perverse incentive. Essentially, company executives and other major players are encouraged to take outsize risks because they can earn princely amounts from their actions. At the same time, they know that they rarely have to pay any fines or face other costly consequences from taking dangerous actions.Changing this troubling dynamic won’t be easy. But it is the goal of two new proposals worth consideration. One will be put to a vote of Citigroup shareholders at the bank’s annual meeting this year. The other is outlined in a paper in the Michigan State Journal of Business and Securities Law. Let’s take up the Citigroup proposal first. It would require that top executives at the company contribute a substantial portion of their compensation each year to a pool of money that would be available to pay penalties if legal violations were uncovered at the bank. To ensure that the money would be available for a long enough period — investigations into wrongdoing take years to develop — the proposal would require that the executives keep their pay in the pool for 10 years.The proposal would also require that Citigroup advise shareholders of forfeitures that resulted under the program. And the money could be tapped even if the executives contributing to it were not responsible for the wrongdoing.The man behind this proposal is Bartlett Naylor, financial policy advocate at the Congress Watch division of Public Citizen, a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization in Washington.“Bank managers are paid to keep a bank compliant with the law,” Mr. Naylor said in an interview last week. “When the bank is not compliant, those managers should be held accountable. Docking their paycheck is one way to do that.”Mr. Naylor said he began working on the proposal after the Justice Department announced a $7 billion settlement in July with Citigroup over mortgage improprieties. “Citi employees committed these unlawful acts,” Mr. Naylor wrote in a statement supporting the proposal. “They did not contribute to this penalty payment, but instead undoubtedly received bonuses.”Citigroup, not surprisingly, asked the Securities and Exchange Commission for permission to exclude the policy from its 2015 shareholder proxy. The S.E.C. said no, and Citi’s shareholders will vote on the proposal when they meet on April 28.The proposal is nonbinding; Citigroup need not abide by its terms even if a majority of shareholders favor it. Citi has urged shareholders to reject the proposal, saying that its current policies do the job and that the terms of Mr. Naylor’s proposal would put the bank at a disadvantage to its peers. But if broad support for the proposal emerges, Citi might throw in the towel.The proposal has additional heft, Mr. Naylor said, because William Dudley, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, has publicly suggested a similar approach. In a speech in October, he described the benefits of a so-called performance bond to be issued to bank executives.“In the case of a large fine, the senior management and the material risk takers would forfeit their performance bond,” Mr. Dudley said. “Not only would this deferred debt compensation discipline individual behavior and decision-making, but it would provide strong incentives for individuals to flag issues when problems develop.”Another way to overcome this type of perverse incentive is a proposal by Greg Zipes, a trial lawyer for the Office of the United States Trustee, the nation’s watchdog over the bankruptcy system, who also teaches at the New York University School for Professional Studies. Mr. Zipes wrote an article for the Michigan law journal titled “Ties That Bind: Codes of Conduct That Require Automatic Reductions to the Pay of Directors, Officers, and Their Advisors for Failures of Corporate Governance.” (The views in the article do not represent the views of the Justice Department or the United States Trustee Program, Mr. Zipes was quick to point out.)In the article, Mr. Zipes calls for the creation of a contract to be signed by a company’s top executives that could be enforced after a significant corporate governance failure. Executives would agree to pay back 25 percent of their gross compensation for the three years before the beginning of improprieties. The agreement would be in effect whether or not the executives knew about the misdeeds inside their companies.It’s only fitting for executives to hold themselves accountable for costly misdeeds, Mr. Zipes argues, even if they were unaware of them. After all, top managers often take credit — and receive bonuses — for positive corporate activities in which they had little role or knew nothing about.What kinds of governance failings would be covered by the contracts? Mr. Zipes identified nine possibilities, among them imposing a reduction if a company pleaded guilty to a crime. Another might occur if an executive signed a financial document filed with the S.E.C. that subsequently proved false and required an earnings restatement of at least $5 million.Corporate executives are unlikely to sign such codes of conduct of their own volition, Mr. Zipes conceded. But independent corporate directors who are serious about their fiduciary duties to shareholders could push for these kinds of contracts, he argued.If a few corporate executives signed these kinds of agreements, and if they publicized their actions, others might feel compelled to follow. Consumers who are interested in holding executives accountable could also play a role by boycotting products at companies whose executives declined to sign such contracts.“This idea doesn’t require regulation and it doesn’t require new laws,” Mr. Zipes said in an interview last week. “Executives can sign the binding code of conduct or not, but the idea is that the marketplace would reward those who do.”Who knows how many Citi shareholders will support Mr. Naylor’s proposal? But if a significant number do, that would be a big step forward in helping avoid another plague of corporate disasters.Advertisement