AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.01 percent. The six-month rate was 0.10 percent, and the four-week rate was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Board of Education, $247.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $300 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYLos Angeles, $79.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Oklahoma City, $85.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Port of Seattle, $154.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.South Broward Hospital District, Fla., $165.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.University of Kentucky, $259.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Wake County, N.C., $94 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYAnne Arundel County, Md., $331.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New Orleans, $65 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.San Luis Coastal Unified School District, Calif., $50 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYMontgomery County, Md., $156.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAlaska, $94 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. Bastrop, Tex., Independent School District, $53 million of refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Berkeley County School District, S.C., $77.5 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America. California Golden State Tobacco, $1.7 billion of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets. California Health Facilities Financing Authority, $68.7 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America. Cleveland, $86.2 million of debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.Corpus Christi, Tex., $140.5 million of utility system revenue improvement bonds. Morgan Stanley. Denton, Tex., Independent School District, $116.2 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Fort Worth Independent School District, $271 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Fulton County, Ga., $51 million of college revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. Indiana Finance Authority, $59.7 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler.Mecklenburg County, N.C., $118.8 million of limited obligation bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, $100 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital. Mississippi State University, $61 million of revenue bonds. Raymond James.New Hope Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, Tex., $73.7 million of student housing revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets. New York Dormitory Authority, $105 million of St. John’s University revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley. New York Dormitory Authority, $108 million of Barnard College revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.New York Dormitory Authority, $97.4 million of Columbia University revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs. North Carolina Medical Care Commission, $50 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America. North East Independent School District, Tex., $390 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. Pennsylvania, $80 million of public school building debt securities. Janney Montgomery Scott.Philadelphia School District, $130.6 million of general obligation bonds. Bank of America. Philadelphia, $92.9 million of general obligation bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Poway Unified School District, Calif., $88.5 million of special tax revenue refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.San Francisco Community College District, $250 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley. Spartanburg, S.C., School District, $130 million of refinancing revenue bonds. Bank of America.St. Johns County, Fla., $52 million of sales tax revenue and refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets. University of Virginia, $107.5 million of general revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities. Virginia College Building Authority, $636.2 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities. Virginia College Building Authority, $67 million of educational facilities revenue and refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Advertisement