AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew Goldstein and Steve EderSince marrying Chelsea Clinton five years ago, Marc Mezvinsky, a money manager, appears to have settled into his life as Bill and Hillary Clinton’s son-in-law. He has regularly appeared at charitable events, once introducing the former president at the Clinton Foundation’s celebrity poker tournament by dryly saying, “You may have heard of my father-in-law.” And at the recent N.B.A. All-Star Game, Mr. Mezvinsky took a seat next to Mr. Clinton and his partner in charitable endeavors, Dikembe Mutombo, the former basketball star.Beyond the glamour, being part of the Clinton family has provided Mr. Mezvinsky with another perk: access to wealthy investors with ties to the Clintons. When Mr. Mezvinsky and his partners began raising money in 2011 for a new hedge fund firm, Eaglevale Partners, a number of investors in the firm were longtime supporters of the Clintons, according to interviews and financial documents reviewed by The New York Times. Tens of millions of dollars raised by Eaglevale can be attributed to investors with some relationship or link to the Clintons. The investors include hedge fund managers like Marc Lasry and James Leitner; an overseas money management firm connected to the Rothschild family; and people from Goldman Sachs, including the chief executive, Lloyd C. Blankfein. Some of the investors in Eaglevale have contributed campaign money to the former president and Mrs. Clinton, who is widely expected to run for president again in 2016. Some have also contributed to the family’s foundation. Identifying who put money into Eaglevale, a roughly $400 million fund that has had underwhelming returns for much of its brief history, is difficult because hedge funds do not publicly disclose their investors. Still, the overlap between at least some of Eaglevale’s investors and backers of the Clintons illustrates how politics and finance can intersect and shows the fine line the Clinton family must navigate as their charitable and business endeavors come under scrutiny in an election cycle. A person briefed on the matter and close to the firm said the amount of investor money recruited by Mr. Mezvinsky is not large, amounting to less than 10 percent of the firm’s total outside capital. Clinton supporters also say there are more direct ways to cultivate favor with the family, such as giving to the foundation, where Chelsea Clinton is vice chairwoman, than by investing with a hedge fund that her husband co-founded. There are several examples of Eaglevale investors with relationships with the Clintons. Rock Creek Group, a Washington-based investment advisory firm, placed $13 million from the California Public Employees’ Retirement System and another public pension fund with Eaglevale in late 2011 and early 2012. Rock Creek’s chairwoman, Afsaneh Beschloss, attended state dinners at the Clinton White House in the late 1990s and was a panelist in the annual meeting of the Clinton Global Initiative in September in New York. (Her husband, Michael, is a well-known presidential historian and occasional writer for The Times.) For a brief period in 2013, after Eaglevale had been up and running for about a year, Rock Creek sublet temporary office space to Mrs. Clinton after she stepped down as secretary of state. Mr. Lasry, a co-founder of the big hedge fund Avenue Capital and a longtime friend and financial backer of both the former president and Mrs. Clinton, said he invested $1 million in Eaglevale. In an interview in his Park Avenue office, adorned with many photos of him with the former president, he said that he recommended that his relative by marriage, Craig Effron, another hedge fund manager, also invest in the fund. “I gave them money because I thought they would make me money,” said Mr. Lasry, whose $13 billion firm was one of the first places Chelsea worked after graduating from Stanford. A number of other investors reached by The Times declined to be interviewed. Some investors in Eaglevale, and other people briefed on the firm’s management, said that Mr. Mezvinsky’s more veteran partners, Bennett Grau and Mark Mallon, have played crucial roles in raising money for the fund. Mr. Grau and Mr. Mallon have long track records as successful traders at Goldman, and Mr. Grau’s involvement was said to be a particular draw to financial investors who run other hedge funds and money management firms. Mr. Mezvinsky worked for Mr. Grau at Goldman for a while. Mr. Mezvinsky and his partners declined to be interviewed for this article. Kamyl Bazbaz, a Clinton Foundation spokesman, said, “Where our supporters choose to invest is obviously their personal prerogative and has nothing to do with the foundation in any respect.” Mr. Mezvinsky, 37, is the most prominent executive at Eaglevale, a so-called macro fund that makes trades based on global economic and political events. The fund is a relatively small one in an industry with roughly $3 trillion in assets.Mr. Mezvinsky is a Stanford graduate who is the child of political parents himself. His father, Edward M. Mezvinsky, was a two-term member of Congress from Iowa, and his mother, Marjorie Margolies-Mezvinsky, served a term in Congress from Pennsylvania. Donald J. Trump officially accepted the Republican party's nomination on July 22. Hillary Clinton was officially nominated on July 26 at the Democratic Convention.Mr. Mezvinsky worked at Goldman Sachs for eight years before moving to a private equity firm. He is widely credited with spearheading Eaglevale’s big bullish bet on Greek bank stocks and Greek debt. Unfortunately for investors in Eaglevale — named after a bridge in Central Park — that trade has largely resulted in disappointing returns. When Mr. Mezvinsky worked on Wall Street, his responsibilities included pitching investment ideas to hedge funds before he moved onto the trading desk. Among his partners, Mr. Mezvinsky is the one most at ease with appearing on panels to discuss investment strategies, one of which was the firm’s bet on beaten down Greek banks. In 2013, he took part in a small private meeting a Wall Street bank arranged in New York for a number of hedge fund managers with Greece’s prime minister at the time, Antonis Samaras. Goldman Sachs, where Mr. Mezvinsky and his partners had met years earlier, was also important to Eaglevale’s start. Among Eaglevale’s earliest investors were Goldman partners, including Mr. Blankfein, who let his name be used to market the fund. The fund has also relied on multiple Wall Street banks to provide back-office services, including Goldman, which made introductions to investors like Rock Creek. Goldman has a close connection to the Clintons, and its executives have been political contributors over the years. More recently, Goldman has made donations of more than $1 million to the family’s foundation, which in recent years has leased office space in a Goldman building downtown. (A Goldman spokesman, Andrew Williams, said the foundation had asked to break its lease, but the Wall Street company refused.) Mr. Williams, though, said Mr. Blankfein had invested with Eaglevale because of his friendship with Mr. Grau, a longtime colleague and the fund’s chief investment officer. In 2012, Eaglevale raised $15 million from an investment vehicle in the domain of Jacob Rothschild, who with members of his far-flung family has donated to the Clinton Foundation. The investment, financial records show, came before President Clinton spoke at a conference in Oxford that was sponsored by the Rothschild Foundation, of which Mr. Rothschild is chairman. Mr. Rothschild declined to comment through Tom Burns, a spokesman for his firm, RIT Capital Partners. A person briefed on the matter and close to Eaglevale, but not authorized to speak publicly, said Mr. Clinton’s appearance at the conference had nothing to do with the investment from the Rothschild-managed firm, Trading Capital Holdings. Eaglevale’s flagship fund, with about $380 million in assets, is up about 10 percent this year, but that follows a poor performance in 2014. Last year that fund lost 3.6 percent largely because its bets on an economic recovery in Greece failed to pay off. By comparison, hedge funds using the same kinds of macro strategies as Eaglevale on average rose 5.62 percent in 2014, according to Hedge Fund Research, an industry performance tracking firm. Eaglevale had worse luck with a fund that raised $25 million solely to bet on a recovery in Greece. Its 40 percent plunge last year was previously reported by The Wall Street Journal. Some investors in Eaglevale have withdrawn from or reduced their investments. The investment linked to the Rothschild fund, for example, withdrew about half of its allotment. The two public pension investors that invested in Eaglevale at the recommendation of the Rock Creek Group are out of the fund altogether. Calpers left the fund as part of a retreat from hedge fund investments. The other pension fund, whose identity could not be determined, left because of the firm’s poor performance, said another person briefed on the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity. In letters to its investors month after month last year, Mr. Mezvinsky and his partners sounded an upbeat and confident note that Greece would soon be on the path to a “sustainable recovery.” It was not until the end of last year that Eaglevale finally acknowledged, “Our recent predictions regarding Greek politics have proved incorrect.” Eaglevale’s flagship fund has since withdrawn from much of its Greek trading. The firm is now betting big on the United States dollar to outperform a number of foreign currencies. That is a trade some investors attributed largely to Mr. Grau.Advertisement