By THE NEW YORK TIMESMARCH 22, 2015
Here are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week.Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras of Greece is scheduled to meet with Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany in Berlin on Monday as pressure builds on Athens to move forward with a stalled economic overhaul necessary to unlock crucial rescue loans.The meeting follows a mini summit gathering in Brussels on Thursday between Mr. Tsipras and top European Union leaders, after which Greece pledged to send creditors a detailed list of changes within days in a bid to secure the loan money as the country’s cash reserves run dangerously low.The lack of progress has revived talk of a possible Greek default and an exit from the eurozone, which could have broader political and economic repercussions in the single-currency bloc. —Niki Kitsantonis[ Update: Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras and Chancellor Angela Merkel met on Monday in an attempt to calm relations between their countries ahead of attempts to find a deal on Greek debt. ]AdvertisementOn Tuesday, the Labor Department will release the latest data on consumer prices last month. Economists are expecting a 0.2 percent rise in the headline number for the Consumer Price Index in February, with core prices excluding the volatile energy and food sectors to have risen by 0.1 percent.AdvertisementIn terms of the overall number, gas prices rebounded a bit in February while food costs are estimated to have fallen, most likely producing a slight increase in the C.P.I.All told, price gains are likely to be moderate in the months ahead, with the cost of gasoline back on a downward slope in March and the stronger dollar reducing import prices. —Nelson D. SchwartzFacebook, the social network, will hold its annual conference for application developers in San Francisco on Wednesday and Thursday.On the practical side, the company is expected to announce new tools for app makers to get better-targeted ads into their apps, build on top of Facebook services and track the ways their users interact with their apps. But Facebook also hopes to inspire developers with its vision for futuristic services like virtual reality and a world connected to the Internet via drones, lasers and satellites. —Vindu GoelPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Financial Stability Board, an international panel of top central bankers and bank regulators that is working on ways to prevent future financial crises, holds a meeting on Thursday of its plenary members in Frankfurt.Those 54 members represent the United States, Japan, China, the eurozone and most other large economies. Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England and chairman of the Financial Stability Board, will talk to the news media after the meeting ends. —Jack EwingWhen the Federal Reserve’s chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, speaks Friday afternoon in San Francisco, there is good reason to listen a little more carefully. Last week the Fed ended the five-year postcrisis period in which it provided explicit guidance about the future level of short-term interest rates.But the Fed still plans to share more information about its plans than it did before the crisis. Ms. Yellen’s topic — “The New Normal for Monetary Policy” — suggests she may provide insight into the debate among Fed officials about the proper time to start raising interest rates. —Binyamin AppelbaumAdvertisementOn Friday, the Commerce Department releases its third and final estimate of the annualized rate of economic growth in the fourth quarter of 2014. After initially estimating a 2.6 percent rate in January, government statisticians revised that downward to 2.2 percent last month. The final estimate could rise to 2.4 percent, economists say, but a major revision is unlikely.Data for the current first quarter, which ends on March 31, is likely to show much slower growth, however, hurt by lower exports and disappointing retail sales. And while the low gas prices are good for consumers, economists expect the big cutbacks in spending in the energy patch to soon show up in the numbers for overall economic performance. —Nelson D. SchwartzThe Bundesbank, the German central bank, hosts a conference on Friday in Frankfurt on the relationship between debt and financial crises. Speakers include Stanley Fischer, vice chairman of the United States Federal Reserve; Jens Weidmann, president of the Bundesbank; and Wolfgang Schäuble, the German finance minister. Among the topics to be examined are whether regulations introduced in recent years are sufficient to protect taxpayers from having to bear the cost of bank failures. —Jack EwingA version of this schedule appears in print on March 23, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.