By STEVE FRIESSMARCH 23, 2015
Without a trace of bitterness, the billionaire Stephen A. Wynn once described his divorce from Elaine P. Wynn as the most expensive in American history. They evenly split his stake in the casino-resort company they co-founded and seemed to remain compatible leaders of some of the most profitable hotel-casinos in the world.Now that amicability itself may be history — and the fate of the $13 billion enterprise they built together could hang in the balance.After Ms. Wynn filed suit to lift divorce-related restrictions on the sale of her stock, fellow board members voted this month against nominating her for another term — despite her status as a co-founder, the third-largest shareholder and the only director who is not a white man.The board said it was eliminating her seat and is recommending retention of two other directors to the seats they now hold.AdvertisementMs. Wynn, 72, has countered with a direct appeal to shareholders, urging them to choose her, instead, for one of the two remaining seats.AdvertisementThe results of the vote will be announced at an April 24 shareholder meeting in Las Vegas, four days before the 10th anniversary of the opening of Wynn Las Vegas, which is also her birthday.On Monday in New York she accelerated an already extraordinary public relations campaign, outlining a schedule of meetings with institutional investors on Wall Street who will vote in the proxy battle.She is challenging claims by the company’s governance committee that she has conflicts of interest and lacks the independence necessary to work in the best interest of shareholders.“I am the DNA of Wynn Resorts,” said Ms. Wynn, who has retained the proxy specialist firm Abernathy MacGregor and a Democratic political consultant, Mark D. Fabiani.On Friday she opened a website, elaineforwynn.com, which urges her re-election as a “co-founder, industry veteran and independent voice.”“Anybody that has a scintilla of knowledge about my history and my working relationship” with Mr. Wynn, she said in her first interview about the dispute, “knows the vital role that I play.”“If you take me out of the mix, there’s no one at the company who has any kind of operational history in depth that I do,” she said.AdvertisementThe fight is in sharp contrast to the immediate aftermath of her January 2010 divorce from Mr. Wynn, 73, the chairman and chief executive of Wynn Resorts Ltd., after 46 years of marriage.At that time, the two made much of how amicable their dissolution had been by pointing out he had agreed without a fight to give her half of his stake in the company, as well as various real estate holdings and her pick of their celebrated art collection.The move turned her into a billionaire in her own right. She was no mere corporate wife, Mr. Wynn said then, but a critical part of the company’s success.“We’re still partners in the business; I respect and value and really covet her opinion on issues,” he said in March 2010. “She has a real feel for the business that’s terrific.”Yet that agreement also restricted both Wynns from selling any shares of the company without the other’s consent and requires them to vote in concert, although Ms. Wynn received a waiver to sell $10 million worth of stock per year.Each owned about $1.3 billion in stock as of the market’s close on Monday. The stock has nearly doubled since their divorce, with the company’s market capitalization estimated at $13.2 billion.In 2012 Ms. Wynn sued her ex-husband in federal court to alter their arrangement and give her the power to sell her shares at will. The two own a combined 19.3 percent of the company, with the investment firm T. Rowe Price holding the next largest share at about 16.8 percent.The fear is that should Ms. Wynn be allowed to sell as much of her stock as she wishes, the couple could lose their controlling interest and Mr. Wynn’s authority over the company could be jeopardized.AdvertisementMs. Wynn’s continuing lawsuit and apparent desire to sell make her unsuitable for board service because they show her to be acting out of self-interest and not the company’s interest, said Robert J. Miller, chairman of the board’s governance committee.He noted that Ms. Wynn had sold the $10 million in stock she has been permitted to sell every year.“In meetings with Ms. Wynn, she was consistently unable to indicate how her lawsuit benefited any other shareholder, while putting the company and other shareholders’ interests at risk,” Mr. Miller, a Democratic former governor of Nevada and longtime friend of both Wynns, said in an interview.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“From an independent director’s vantage point,” he said, “our obligation is to review any candidacy based on the best interests of the overall shareholders themselves.”Ms. Wynn has said that she has no intention of setting off a power shift but that she wishes to gain control over her assets and may wish to sell some piece of her holdings to fund her philanthropic efforts.Mr. Wynn declined to comment.Because the shareholder agreement remains in effect, Mr. Wynn is contractually obligated to support her candidacy to remain on the board regardless of his personal wishes.She begins her proxy battle, then, with about 19.3 percent of the vote in a three-way race for two seats, so her fate largely depends on investors like Price and seven other firms that combined hold 37.7 percent of the company.Aside from Ms. Wynn, the company’s board is entirely composed of white men, a peculiarity in this age of diversity on corporate boards and an angle Ms. Wynn is aggressively pursuing in her campaign.By contrast, MGM Resorts International, a gambling company of similar market capitalization, has three women on its board, including one who is African-American, as well as Roland Hernandez, a Latino, who is the former chief executive of Telemundo.The issue of diversity could be potent, some experts said, considering that the company is part of the hospitality industry and studies have shown women are the primary decision makers when it comes to travel plans.Advertisement“It may resonate as an important issue because there are so few women on boards and the standard reason is that there aren’t women who have been in executive positions in whatever industry for 30 years or so, but in this case you have a woman with such exceptional experience,” said Erik Gordon, a corporate governance expert at the Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan.A Wynn spokesman, Michael Weaver, said that Wynn Resorts “is engaged in a search for women and other diverse candidates and will expand the board with at least one qualified candidate by the end of the year.”While Ms. Wynn points to her renomination in 2012, after she filed her lawsuit against Mr. Wynn, as evidence that concerns about her independence and board performance are new, personal and unfounded, the corporate governance firm Glass, Lewis & Company recommended against her reappointment then.Given her legal dispute with Mr. Wynn, “we believe her continued presence on the board may prove to distract the other directors from carrying out their duties to shareholders,” the firm said in part.Ms. Wynn had not been aware of that report until Monday. A different assessment, from Institutional Shareholder Services in 2012, recommended that she be reappointed.Since her divorce, Ms. Wynn has been almost entirely focused on philanthropic work. She is the chairwoman of Communities in Schools, a nationwide high school dropout prevention program. In 2013 she was appointed to the Nevada Board of Education by Gov. Brian Sandoval, a Republican; she is now its president.She also drew attention by purchasing a Francis Bacon triptych for $142.4 million last November, then having it shipped not to her Las Vegas home but to Oregon, a move that allowed her to potentially avoid a $11 million state tax bill for the purchase.Last year, after a review of executive compensation requested by Institutional Shareholder Services, the company changed its pay packages to lower Mr. Wynn’s base salary, limit his use of the corporate jet and issue half of his bonus in stock. Mr. Wynn asked Ms. Wynn to grant him a waiver to sell the stock he received in that package, but she refused.AdvertisementHe claimed that she told him she wanted to use the stock as leverage over him, according to sources close to Mr. Wynn.In an interview, she declined to say whether the anecdote was true, but said that her current relationship with Mr. Wynn was far from hostile. She said he still called her to discuss business, family and politics, and recently he left her a voice mail message complimenting her on her oversight of the design of staff uniforms for the new casino property in Macau.“The conflict that may be created in the boardroom is not coming from Elaine Wynn,” she said. “Elaine Wynn is the no-drama queen.”The company has indicated it will fight Ms. Wynn’s campaign in big and small ways that include prohibiting her from using the corporate logo on her website.When the site opened on Friday, the logo was used in place of her last name; over the weekend, after a stern letter from the company’s lawyers, her name was fully written in her own hand.“The company reminded Ms. Wynn that company trademarks are reserved for company business,” Mr. Weaver, the Wynn Resorts spokesman, said.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Proxy Fight Has Roots in a Divorce Settlement.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.