
Frequent Flier By                     
PAIGE BROWN

MARCH 23, 2015
MUCH of my career has been spent flying, mostly internationally. Now I’m an entrepreneur and a founder and chief executive of the technology company Dashbell, which offers a web-based booking solution for independent hotels. My travel schedule can get more than a little crazy since I may not be spending more than a few days in one place. I might be in Germany for a meeting and then have to fly to some other European country or South American spot for another meeting all in the same week.Fortunately, I love what I do, and I love to fly. I am getting to the point where I can just fall asleep on flights. When I was younger, I had a few bad experiences flying, mostly because of turbulence. It took me more than five years to feel truly comfortable on a plane, but now I’m good to go, and most of my flights are just smooth sailing — I mean, flying.Most of my problems occur on the ground.When I was working on my first start-up, Tripeezy, I was in Chile during the 2010 8.8-magnitude earthquake. I was on a bus headed to Pucón to meet some contractors, and when the earthquake started, we were about 50 miles from the epicenter.The bus was a double-decker, and the whole thing was rocking back and forth. I had never been in an earthquake, so I wasn’t quite sure what was going on. I looked out the window and I saw a light pole teetering, and then people started crying. I speak Spanish, and all I kept hearing people say was “terremoto,” which translates to earthquake. I think some people on the bus may have remembered the 1960 Valdivia earthquake, right off the coast of Chile. It was the largest in the 20th century, a 9.5.AdvertisementI had no idea what to do or what not to do, and all I had with me was a little backpack with one night’s worth of clothing. I wasn’t able to go back to Santiago, where I’d been staying, and I wound up taking a 28-hour bus ride to Buenos Aires so I could get back to the United States. The earthquake stirred up the insects, and I was covered in bites and calamine lotion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But here’s what was amazing. It really didn’t matter. Seeing how good people can be to one another in a time of crisis was amazing. And while it was scary, it gave me great insights into the culture of Chile.AdvertisementI consider myself a good traveler, so this is kind of ridiculous: I live out of my suitcase, and I was really excited when I bought a brand new carry-on, which featured a special lock with a code that I had set — my everyday PIN. I had to go to Florence, Italy, to speak at a conference, and I left the bag in my hotel room, locked with my code. My wallet, computer and passport were in the new bag.When I got back to the hotel after my speaking engagement, I tried to open the bag to get my stuff. It wouldn’t open, and I started to panic since I had to leave for Dubai, United Arab Emirates, the next morning, and I needed my passport. It was comical because I was getting myself really worked up trying different combinations that I knew weren’t even remotely right.I then remembered a YouTube video showing how to open a locked suitcase with just a pen. I found a pen and exerted pressure against the zipper, and the teeth separated. I got my hand into the bag and got my passport out. These guys at a shop around the corner from the hotel in Florence fixed the bag free. It was under warranty, but it’s fair to say I’m not that crazy about locked suitcases anymore.As told to Joan Raymond. Email: joan.raymond@nytimes.com. Q. How often do you fly for business?A. On average, about once a week, mostly long-haul international.Q. What’s your least favorite airport?A. Los Angeles International. It’s tough to navigate, and I can never find an outlet to charge my devices.Q. Of all the places you’ve been, what’s the best?A. Thailand. I just went there recently, and the people, the food, the culture and the land itself are overwhelmingly wonderful.Q. What’s your secret airport vice?A. I always travel out of Logan International, since I live and work in Boston. I’ve got the trip from my home to the airport down to about 12 minutes. So it’s fair to say that my vice is spending as little time at the airport as possible, and I’ve cut it very close a few times in making my flights.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Intrepid in an Earthquake, but Rattled by Locking Luggage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »