AdvertisementSupported byOn the RoadBy Joe SharkeyA PROPOSAL is under review that would make La Guardia Airport far more attractive to business travelers by adding domestic long-haul and coast-to-coast trips. So when I got off a short-haul flight at a teeming La Guardia last week, I wondered what this might portend.“Less squalor at La Guardia, one would hope,” said David White, a technology consultant from Britain who had just returned to New York from Chicago and was waiting in a long taxi line, on an afternoon as gray and dismal as the terminal he had just left.Mr. White seemed to have chosen the noun with some thought, since La Guardia is often derided for its overcrowding, limited and dingy amenities, and all-around ... well, squalor.Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. recently put a rather fine point on all of this when he said that La Guardia resembled an airport in “some third world country.” Mayor Bill de Blasio understandably called the wisecrack “inappropriate.”So you could say that La Guardia gets no respect — but that would be overlooking its appeal as the New York-area airport that is most convenient to Manhattan, and as such the airport of choice for many business travelers on domestic flights.“Passengers have a love-hate relationship with La Guardia,” said Jason Rabinowitz, the data research manager at Routehappy, an air travel research company. “We hate being at La Guardia and waiting for a flight, but most New Yorkers also love the fact that they can get to La Guardia in a relatively short period of time.”There are no weekday nonstop coast-to-coast flights at La Guardia, but that would change under a proposal, first reported by The Wall Street Journal, to drop a so-called perimeter rule that limits flights Sundays through Fridays at La Guardia to a distance of 1,500 miles.The rule has a long history, starting in the 1950s with a 2,000-mile limit to encourage long-haul and international growth at Idlewild (later Kennedy), then a fledgling airport. In the 1980s, the limit was changed to 1,500 miles as a way to also manage mounting congestion. (There is one exemption — for flights to and from Denver, which is about 1,600 miles away.)All three major New York airports — Kennedy, Newark and La Guardia — are operated by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which says it is studying the issue and will eventually schedule public discussions on the proposal. The Port Authority is also managing difficulties with a long-delayed project to replace the aging 1964 Central Terminal Building at La Guardia (known as Terminal B) with a bigger, more appealing structure. That project is about six years from its estimated completion.“We think there is going to be a robust debate” over the perimeter rule, Patrick J. Foye, the executive director of the Port Authority, said after the agency’s board meeting last week.Those involved in the debate will certainly include the airlines that would stand to benefit from the possible change — mainly American and Delta, which already have about two-thirds of the available flight slots at La Guardia — and those like United and JetBlue, which have strong transcontinental and long-haul domestic positions at Kennedy, as well as Newark. Hotels and other travel businesses will also be heard from in the debate, as will business travel organizations and, of course, neighborhood groups concerned about potentially increased noise and congestion at La Guardia.Discussions about changing the perimeter rule will occur within a looming donnybrook over a separate but related issue: strict federal allocations of flight-schedule slots — in airspace that is the most heavily congested in the country — first put into effect in 2008 to address chronic delays at all three New York airports. Current caps on flight slots expire on Oct. 29, 2016, and the Federal Aviation Administration says it hopes to then revise the way slots are bought and sold.Over all, the Port Authority’s job with the airports it runs is to “operate them as a system,” said Kevin Mitchell, the chairman of the Business Travel Coalition, which represents corporate travel managers. Any basic changes to La Guardia operations would also require accommodating airlines and passengers at Kennedy and Newark, he pointed out.Any change would also come against this background: All air-travel planning in the United States occurs today within the context of airlines’ carefully designed, and manifestly profitable, strategies. For years, as I frequently point out here, airlines have steadily reduced service that uses smaller airplanes at midsize and small airports to focus more on feeding business travelers into far more profitable long-haul flying, including connections to international flights at major airports.Opening La Guardia to nonstop coast-to-coast and other long-haul domestic nonstop flights would mean reducing the current number of regional flights of 1,500 miles or less, many of them to smaller airports in the East and Midwest, because airlines would use their limited number of gates and strictly limited flight slots for longer trips at higher yields per mile flown.“La Guardia is kind of unique in the New York area in that it serves a lot of smaller regional airports simply because of that 1,500-mile perimeter limit,” Mr. Rabinowitz said. “So if the perimeter rule were lifted, there would definitely be cuts in regional flights.”Email: jsharkey@nytimes.com Advertisement