By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMARCH 23, 2015
After more than a century, the owner of Louisville Slugger is finally handing over the company — whose bats have been used by the likes of Babe Ruth and Jackie Robinson — to a division of a Finnish sports gear maker.Hillerich & Bradsby, whose founder created a line of hardwood bats in the 19th century, said on Monday that it would sell the brand for $70 million to Wilson, which is owned by the Amer Sports Corporation of Finland.Under terms of the deal, Wilson will sell Louisville Slugger bats for Major League Baseball and amateur players alongside its existing baseball gear brands like DeMarini and Atec.Created by John A. Hillerich in his family’s woodworking shop in Kentucky, Louisville Slugger bats eventually became one of the most recognizable symbols of the sport. A majority of professional players use them, and the company has sold more than 100 million since the late 1800s.Football may have eclipsed baseball as America’s pastime, but the market for baseball and softball gear remains sizable: Amer Sports estimates it at about $2.2 billion, about $1.4 billion of which comes from the United States.AdvertisementHillerich & Bradsby — now run by John A. Hillerich IV — said in a statement on Monday that the well-known brand needed a shot in the arm to bolster sales, one that the family-run company could not provide.Advertisement“The decision to sell the Louisville Slugger brand was a difficult and serious one to make,” the statement said. “The Hillerich family, and those closest to the brand, firmly believes that a new business model is necessary to realize the enormous potential of this brand in the future.”Hillerich & Bradsby won’t walk away from Louisville Slugger, however. It will still manufacture the bats, made from hardwood trees from Pennsylvania and New York, in its factory in downtown Louisville. It will also hold on to its Bionic Gloves division and its Powerbilt golf brand, as well as the Louisville Slugger Museum and Factory, which draws more than 300,000 visitors a year.Robert W. Baird and the law firm Dorsey & Whitney advised Hillerich & Bradsby.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Louisville Slugger Sold to Company in Finland.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.