AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningIn a Smith Barney commercial from the 1970s, the actor John Houseman intoned that the firm made money the old-fashioned way: “They earn it.” The question for clients is what standard their brokers should be judged by when making money off them, an issue that has proved to be divisive as the Securities and Exchange Commission considers imposing a higher standard for recommendations.DealBook reported last week that Mary Jo White, the S.E.C. chairwoman, endorsed the adoption of a higher standard for brokers when they provide investment advice. Brokers would owe a fiduciary duty to their customers, the same requirement imposed on investment advisers, which means they must put their clients’ interests first. Under current law, a broker is required in most situations only to recommend investments that are “suitable” for clients, based on factors like age, financial situation and risk tolerance, even if that means the broker earns more money from the transaction.Ms. White’s statement comes on top of President Obama’s support for a rule being proposed by the Labor Department to require brokers who advise clients about retirement investments to adhere to the fiduciary duty standard.The issue seems fairly simple on the surface — more protection should be better for investors. The White House issued a report contending that the current suitability rule results in a 1 percent drop in returns on retirement investments, costing investors billions of dollars each year.But just saying a broker owes a fiduciary duty does not mean investors will avoid risk or be shielded from losses. Bernard L. Madoff’s firm was registered with the S.E.C. as an investment adviser, so it operated under the fiduciary duty standard, yet thousands of its clients’ financial lives were destroyed. There is no way to know how profitable an investment will be, so whether recommendations will cost investors money because brokers do not owe them a fiduciary duty is speculative.The brokerage industry has for the most part resisted efforts to adopt the tougher standard, arguing that it will raise costs for clients and lead firms to shun smaller investors because of the increased record-keeping requirements. A Wall Street Journal editorial opposing the Labor Department rule said, “Brokers are already heavily regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission, which imposes myriad rules to prevent fraud, ensure that fees are disclosed and protect clients from ‘unsuitable’ investments.” In other words, more is not necessarily better.Adopting a uniform fiduciary duty standard will have its greatest effect on investor claims against brokers for mismanaging their accounts by making it easier to prove a violation. The S.E.C. rarely pursues enforcement actions against brokers for misconduct absent evidence of fraud, cases in which the applicable standard makes little difference. A claimed breach of fiduciary duty would be raised in arbitration proceedings, where proving a violation of the higher standard is likely to have a greater potential for recovery than having to prove investment recommendations were unsuitable. (The fact that the fiduciary duty standard would help plaintiffs’ lawyers make more money raises an opposing point because anything that further enriches lawyers is a surefire argument against most rules.)The argument over the appropriate standard for brokers has been taking place for nearly five years, with roots in the negotiations in Congress over the Dodd-Frank Act. The House version of the legislation would have imposed the fiduciary duty standard, but the final version was a compromise that only required the S.E.C. to conduct a study and issue a report before deciding whether to adopt such a requirement.The S.E.C. staff issued a report in January 2011 that called for adoption of a uniform fiduciary duty standard applicable to both investment advisers and brokers. In response, the S.E.C.’s two Republican commissioners said that the study’s “pervasive shortcoming is that it fails to adequately justify its recommendation that the commission embark on fundamentally changing the regulatory regime for broker-dealers and investment advisers providing personalized investment advice to retail investors.”Until Ms. White expressed her support for such a rule last week, the only thing the S.E.C. had done since 2011 was issue a request for data about the costs and benefits of adopting the higher standard. It has been more than four years since the staff report came out, and there is little likelihood of quick action from the agency in light of Ms. White’s comment that “you have to think long and hard before you regulate things differently.”Pushing a rule through the S.E.C. or the Labor Department might not resolve the issue because Republicans on Capitol Hill are staunchly opposed to raising the standard. In October 2013, the House passed legislation — with the curious title of “Retail Investor Protection Act” — that would have prohibited the Labor Department from adopting a rule imposing the fiduciary duty standard until the S.E.C. acted on it, thus slowing the regulatory process.The bill would have thrown up a second roadblock by requiring that the S.E.C. could act only after identifying whether investors were “being systematically harmed or disadvantaged” by the existing standard and whether the higher one “would adversely impact retail investor access” to investment advice. Much like the report required by the Dodd-Frank Act, this would have been legislative death by study, requiring extensive information gathering before any rule could be adopted. It would provide fodder for the brokerage industry to challenge in court the S.E.C.’s conclusions supporting the rule.If the S.E.C. begins to move toward adopting a rule to raise the standard for brokers, Congress can be expected to take steps to block it. The House bill passed in 2013 went nowhere in the Senate, but the Republican majority in that chamber increases the likelihood that any effort by Ms. White to push through a rule will be thwarted. So for those looking for a higher standard under which brokers will advise their clients, don’t hold your breath waiting for a change.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningAdvertisement