By PETER EAVISOCT. 15, 2015
Bank of Internet USA, one of the nation’s top-performing banks, fiercely criticized a lawsuit filed by a former employee that said the bank had not been forthcoming with its regulators.Bank of Internet’s chief executive, Gregory Garrabrants, responded to the lawsuit during a conference call on Wednesday evening that came after a 30 percent drop in the bank’s stock. The lawsuit was filed by Matt Erhart, a former internal auditor at the bank who officially left the company in June. The complaint, filed in federal court in the Southern District of California, said that Bank of Internet had violated federal laws created to protect whistle-blowers.Mr. Garrabrants sharply denied Mr. Erhart’s accusations, saying there were “no issues” in the bank’s relations with regulators. “He wasn’t a great auditor,” Mr. Garrabrants said of Mr. Erhart, and he suggested that the lawsuit might have been financed by investors betting against Bank of Internet’s stock.Carol L. Gillam, Mr. Erhart’s lawyer, denied that she or Mr. Erhart had received money from investors to finance the lawsuit. “I can’t even imagine someone suggesting that about me or my Boy Scout client! Except, of course, Greg Garrabrants!” Ms. Gillam wrote in an email.AdvertisementShares of BOFI Holding, Bank of Internet’s holding company, recovered some of the losses on Thursday, closing up 19 percent, at $118.41.AdvertisementBank of Internet has posted strong profits from its main business of giving high-cost mortgages to wealthy individuals with complex finances. The New York Times in August examined Bank of Internet’s lending activities. Mr. Garrabrants said on Wednesday that business was strong and that he expected to report robust third-quarter results.Bank executives typically refrain from making public comments on relations with regulators, something Mr. Garrabrants seemed to acknowledge during the call on Wednesday. “I have to be very careful about stating what the O.C.C. is doing,” he said, referring to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Bank of Internet’s primary regulator.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, Mr. Garrabrants said that the comptroller would not have signed off on recent acquisitions by Bank of Internet if it had concerns about the bank. “If any of these things were true, we wouldn’t have gotten these deals done,” Mr. Garrabrants said, “We have great regulatory relations.”A spokesman for the comptroller declined to comment.Mr. Erhart’s lawsuit contends that Bank of Internet failed to tell the comptroller about accounts that lacked tax identification numbers after the comptroller had asked for details on such accounts. According to the complaint, Mr. Erhart saw a spreadsheet that contained as many as 200 accounts without tax identification numbers. Mr. Garrabrants said that Mr. Erhart had jumped to the wrong conclusion. The comptroller was asking for information on depositors, Mr. Garrabrants said. Bank of Internet instead had a list of borrowers without tax identification numbers, which was provided to the comptroller, he said.Mr. Erhart’s lawsuit also contends that Bank of Internet was not forthcoming with the Securities and Exchange Commission when it sent a subpoena to the bank seeking information on an account. In an email on Wednesday, Mr. Garrabrants said that a lawyer with the S.E.C. had told the bank that it handled the subpoena properly.Bank of Internet finances its lending by taking in deposits. Banks that rely too much on a few large depositors can be caught short if the depositors withdraw their money. Mr. Erhart’s lawsuit said that he raised concerns last year about deposit concentration. The lawsuit said that four customers at Bank of Internet accounted for roughly 25 percent of total deposits. During the call on Wednesday, Mr. Garrabrants said the four largest depositors accounted for only 3 percent of total deposits.Mr. Erhart, who said in his lawsuit that he had been fired, is not the only internal auditor who has left Bank of Internet. Mr. Erhart’s supervisor, Jonathan Ball, also left this year. When asked why he had left, Mr. Garrabrants said he did not fire Mr. Ball, but he described a conversation with Mr. Ball in which he passed on comments about Mr. Ball’s management.A person close to Mr. Ball, however, said he left Bank of Internet because of concerns about how the bank was responding to regulators. This person, who requested anonymity to avoid potential retaliation by Bank of Internet, said Mr. Ball believed Mr. Erhart’s audit work to be excellent.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.