By SHAILAJA SHARMA | REUTERSMARCH 23, 2015
MUMBAI, India —  India’s debt-laden property developers are turning to deep discounts, free parking spots and even gimmicks like gifts of gold coins and motorbikes as they struggle to sell billions of dollars worth of as-yet unfinished homes.Now outstripping China as the world’s fastest-growing major economy according to official data, India has a real estate market mired in debt piled up in a 2006-7 construction boom that gave way to a slowdown.It now takes developers about four and a half years to turn property inventory into cash, more than a full year longer than it takes developers in China, according to Thomson Reuters Starmine data.That figure is not just bad news for developers in megacities like Mumbai, now seeking ways to offload inventory with increasing intensity.  Many debt-burdened lenders are also finding it harder to pass on interest rate cuts to borrowers, hindering central bank efforts to accelerate growth. India’s central bank has decreased  rates twice this year, with more  reductions expected.Advertisement“It is a buyer’s market,” said Preeti Patil, 28, who works for a large Indian media group and was in the market for a two-bedroom house in the suburbs of Mumbai. “Last week, we turned down a deal. Two days later, we had the builder call us to offer an $8-per-square-foot discount.”AdvertisementEven worse for developers, Ms. Patil is among those who have little confidence that property prices are set to rise.  Despite cut-price offers, she abandoned plans to buy, saying she feared that the investment would not reap near-term returns.Offers of gold coins — prized in Indian culture — motorbikes and even iPhones have begun to feature in developers’ advertising in recent weeks, prospective buyers say. Although it is too early to say whether such tactics will be enough to reel in upwardly mobile professionals and members of the newly wealthy middle class, demand for scores of empty, or under-construction, high-end residences remains flat.At the brokerage firm Kotak Securities, analysts estimate that unsold inventory held by a group of leading Mumbai developers alone now stands at about 534 billion rupees, $8.6 billion — with an additional 368 billion rupees worth of projects  in the pipeline.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That puts the current, unsold area in Mumbai at almost the value of the total sold in the 2014 calendar year. The backlog, analysts estimate, could take more than a decade to clear.“The overall market has slowed down in the last two years,” said Niranjan Hiranandani, managing director of the privately held developer Hiranandani Constructions. “Overall demand has gone down.”Mr. Hiranandani’s own 500-acre residential project in Navi Mumbai, a new suburb east of the city, is gearing up for construction after being stalled for more than two years and does not have a completion date. Mr. Hiranandani declined to provide figures for his company’s inventory, but he said he was comfortable with its position.Issues ranging from a lack of approvals, a cash crunch and low demand mean several other Mumbai projects by developers such as Indiabulls Real Estate and DB Realty have also slowed or stalled. Demand has been squeezed in part by Mumbai residential property prices, which have more than doubled between 2009 and 2012.Part of the trouble is the excess supply of premium homes. Although developers built houses to be sold at price tags of more than $160,000, the huge bulk of demand is in the range of  $8,000 to $32,000, said Akhilesh Tilotia, an analyst at Kotak Securities.Pankaj Kapoor, the chief executive of Liases Foras, a real estate rating and research firm, said, “On one side, there’s a housing shortage, and on another you have rising inventory, and that’s a very big paradox.”A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.