

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

MARCH 25, 2015

The Brazilian investment firm 3G Capital has become a powerhouse in the world of food brands. The firm’s backers include the billionaire financier Jorge Paulo Lemann. The 75-year-old Mr. Lemann, a former tennis champion, is best known for his role in the $52 billion merger of the Brazilian-Belgian beer giant InBev with Anheuser-Busch.
Related Article

The Brazilian investment firm 3G Capital has become a powerhouse in the world of food brands. The firm’s backers include the billionaire financier Jorge Paulo Lemann. The 75-year-old Mr. Lemann, a former tennis champion, is best known for his role in the $52 billion merger of the Brazilian-Belgian beer giant InBev with Anheuser-Busch.
The 2010 deal was the largest leveraged buyout of a fast-food chain ever, according to the market researcher CapitalIQ, and the second for Burger King in eight years.RelatedBurger King Agrees to $4 Billion Private Equity Offer (Sept. 3, 2010)In 2013, the firm formed a partnership with billionaire the investor Warren E. Buffett, a longtime friend of Mr. Lemann, to buy the maker of Heinz ketchup. The deal served as confirmation that merger-making spirits had revived in corporate America and signaled the rising power of investors from once-emerging markets like Brazil.RelatedBerkshire and 3G Capital Buying Heinz for $23 Billion (Feb. 14, 2013)With assistance from Mr. Buffett, Burger King merged with the Canadian doughnuts-and-coffee chain Tim Hortons in 2014. In announcing their deal, the fast-food giants declared their intentions to become a truly global empire whose offerings span from breakfast to dinner.Customers and lawmakers worried that the merger would be a corporate inversion aimed at trimming Burger King’s tax rate. 3G argued that the company’s tax rate would remain about the same.RelatedGlobal Web of Financial Connections in Burger King’s Deal for Tim Hortons (Aug. 26, 2014)Dealing for Doughnuts (Aug. 25, 2014)Kraft Foods and H.J. Heinz announced a merger in a blockbuster deal involving Mr. Buffett and 3G, creating what will be the fifth-largest food and beverage company in the world.Plans to merge Kraft and Heinz have been in the works for years. When 3G Capital and Mr. Buffett took over Heinz, they identified Kraft as an ideal merger partner. But the deal may face antitrust scrutiny.RelatedKraft and Heinz to Merge in Deal Backed by Buffett and 3G Capital (March 26, 2015)Two independent firms — Centerview Partners and Lazard — served as the sole advisers to Kraft and Heinz.The Brazilian investment firm 3G has succeeded so far in rationalizing operations at Heinz, Burger King and other companies. Kraft is next.Warren E. Buffett’s partner in the Heinz deal, the Brazilian-backed investment firm 3G Capital, has, like Mr. Buffett, shown a hankering for iconic American businesses.AdvertisementTwo independent firms — Centerview Partners and Lazard — served as the sole advisers to Kraft and Heinz.The Brazilian investment firm 3G has succeeded so far in rationalizing operations at Heinz, Burger King and other companies. Kraft is next.Warren E. Buffett’s partner in the Heinz deal, the Brazilian-backed investment firm 3G Capital, has, like Mr. Buffett, shown a hankering for iconic American businesses.