AdvertisementSupported byBy Jad MouawadLyle E. Gramley, who served as a White House economic adviser and a Federal Reserve governor in the late 1970s and early 1980s, as the economy fought exceptionally high inflation and a deep recession, died on Sunday at his home in Potomac, Md. He was 88.The cause was complications of spinal stenosis, his wife, Marlys, said.Mr. Gramley had spent more than two decades as an economist at the Federal Reserve when he was named in early 1977 by the newly elected president, Jimmy Carter, as one of three members of the Council of Economic Advisers. In May 1980, he was appointed to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, where he stayed until September 1985. Those were tumultuous years for the economy, which was reeling from the oil shocks of the 1970s. Unemployment was above 10 percent, inflation was in double digits, and the country was suffering through one of its worst economic slowdowns since the Great Depression.Working from the Old Executive Office Building, across the street from the White House, Mr. Gramley was one of President Carter’s most senior economic advisers and forecasters. Economic policy was then focused on a single goal: bringing down inflation. “Inflation drains consumer purchasing power,” Mr. Gramley said in August 1979. But even as he took some blame for the failures of the Carter administration’s economic policies, once he joined the Fed board, Mr. Gramley emerged as one of the Fed chairman Paul A. Volcker’s main allies in pushing for more aggressive action against inflation; heeding the call, the Fed soon raised a benchmark interest rate to 20 percent.In a speech he gave in September 1980, shortly after returning to the Fed, Mr. Gramley indicated how all-encompassing the issue of inflation was.“The problem of inflation is so intractable that no single measure to deal with it will suffice,” he said. “Our only hope for making substantial progress against inflation over the next several years lies in keeping the fight against inflation at the forefront of every economic policy decision.”Some senators criticized the appointment of Mr. Gramley, a Fed insider, to the board as a sign that it had become clubby and inbred.After Mr. Carter was succeeded by Ronald Reagan in 1981, tensions between the White House and the Fed increased until a truce was called four months into the Reagan presidency. According to The New York Times, the White House agreed to mute criticism of the Fed’s monetary policies, and Mr. Volcker agreed in turn that Mr. Gramley would stop publicly expressing doubts about the Reagan economic program.The Fed’s policies to tame double-digit inflation succeeded. Averaging nearly 14 percent in 1980, inflation, as measured by the Consumer Price Index, had fallen below 4 percent by the end of 1982.Lyle Elden Gramley was born on Jan. 14, 1927, in Aurora, Ill., the youngest of four children of Cook Gramley and the former Myrtle Pflugfelder. From 1944 to 1947, he served in the Navy submarine service as an electronic technician.After leaving the Navy, Mr. Gramley attended Aurora University before transferring to Beloit College in Wisconsin, from which he graduated in 1951. He then studied economics at Indiana University, earning a master’s degree in 1952 and a doctorate in 1956. He joined the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City as a financial analyst in 1955. Mr. Gramley was an assistant professor of economics at the University of Maryland from 1962 to 1964, before becoming a senior economist for the Fed. In 1974, he was named director of the Division of Research and Statistics at the Fed.Mr. Gramley married Evelyn Wachtel, a concert pianist, in 1951; she died in 1981. His second marriage, in 1983, to Sandra Royal, ended in divorce. In addition to his wife, the former Marlys Fee Jensen, whom he married in 1989, he is survived by a son, Alan Gramley, and a daughter, Lynn Gramley Dawson, from his first marriage; two stepsons, Michael and Kevin Jensen; and two granddaughters.After leaving the Fed board, Mr. Gramley was named chief economist for the Mortgage Bankers Association. His approach to his work was summed up in words he had used to describe Mr. Volcker. “I think of Paul Volcker as a pragmatic, eclectic economist,” he said shortly before joining the Fed board, “and I would so label myself.”Advertisement