By ANDREW E. KRAMERMARCH 24, 2015
Moscow — Holders of Ukrainian bonds, already beleaguered by the last year of war and upheaval in that country, should expect to lose some of their principal in negotiations with the government, Ukraine’s finance minister said Tuesday.Bondholders including the country’s largest single creditor, the investment fund Franklin Templeton, which is based in San Mateo, Calif., have been holding out for an agreement to extend the bonds’ maturities but not write off principal.Some form of restructuring, though, was inevitable after Ukraine’s security and economic situation unraveled over the last year and a requirement was written into an International Monetary Fund bailout that private sector creditors take some losses.Natalia A. Jaresko, the finance minister, met privately with more than a dozen of the largest creditors from the United States and Britain in recent days, before warning on Tuesday in a series of interviews in London that creditors should not “hold out” against a settlement.AdvertisementAfter all, the I.M.F. made its offer of $17.5 billion in assistance to Ukraine, which desperately needed the money to prosecute the war and keep the economy afloat, contingent on Kiev persuading private creditors to accept $15.3 billion in write-offs or deferred payments over four years. Under the deal, Western governments will extend an additional $7.5 billion in bilateral loans or loan guarantees, bringing the total bailout package to about $40 billion.AdvertisementThe private creditors say Ukraine could meet that requirement by extending the maturities on the bonds and delaying interest payments.Holdouts in Greece’s debt restructuring did come out ahead of bondholders who accepted an earlier deal. Yet in an interview with Reuters on Monday, Ms. Jaresko asserted that strategy would fail in Ukraine, a country teetering more than Greece.The economy could worsen unpredictably because of the war, and the Greek bailout hardly put that country on a path to sustainably repay its debt.“Just maturity extension does not get us within the three goals that we agreed to with the I.M.F.; it doesn’t get us to the level of debt sustainability that I think we need,” Ms. Jaresko said, according to Reuters.And if the I.M.F. conditions are not met, Ms. Jaresko told Bloomberg News, the fund could refuse to issue the second tranche in June. “I’m confident right now, given the conversations we’ve been having, that we will find a common understanding,” she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On her tour of creditors, Ms. Jaresko met the top 15 bondholders except the second-largest creditor, the National Wellbeing Fund, a Russian sovereign wealth fund.The Russians bought about $3 billion in bonds in December 2013 in the final months of the government of Viktor F. Yanukovych, after Mr. Yanukovych rejected a European trade deal and I.M.F. aid package. It was that decision that initiated a street protest movement against him and ultimately ushered in the new government, which inherited the debt.Even as the Ukraine crisis escalated, Franklin Templeton and other bondholders continued to bulk up on the country’s bonds, betting on either a Western or Russian bailout. All these bets eventually went bad as Ukraine sank into deeper turmoil.AdvertisementUkrainian government bonds have lost more than half their value. But Franklin Templeton and the Russian government fund have both rejected a principal reduction and expect to be repaid.Private-sector creditors have little leverage in Ukraine, given the clear support for the government’s position within the I.M.F. and in Western capitals.They could align with Russia and force Ukraine into a destabilizing default that would raise borrowing costs for years and discourage foreign direct investment, undermining some of the expected benefits of the European trade deal that was central to last year’s protests.One creditor, a fund manager, suggested that if Ukraine offered more amenable conditions to the private-sector lenders, they could ease a process of removing cross-default clauses in the bond agreements, allowing Kiev to negotiate the Russian debt separately.The fund manager, who spoke on the condition of anonymity given the sensitivity of the negotiations, said bondholders were disappointed in the I.M.F. for expecting private investors to take such a large loss while governments that had so vocally backed Ukraine were contributing less. The expected government loans in the bailout from the United States, European nations and others of $7.5 billion come to about half the $15.3 billion in losses over four years that bondholders are being asked to accept.“It’s a little ironic that the I.M.F. put together this $40 billion package,” the manager said in a phone interview, “and then more than a third of it is not really public aid, but private sector aid.”A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Bond Trouble.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.