By STEVE FRIESSMARCH 24, 2015
The battle between the co-founders of the Wynn Resorts casino company escalated on Tuesday, when the company urged stockholders in a lengthy letter to reject a bid by Elaine P. Wynn to remain on the board on grounds she was “self-serving” and “ineffective,” and had ceased to act in the company’s best interest.The letter came as Ms. Wynn, 72, began a week of meetings meant to woo institutional investors on Wall Street. She will need their support to win re-election to the board of Wynn Resorts, a $13 billion casino-resort giant she built with her ex-husband, Stephen A. Wynn, the company’s chairman and chief executive.She argues she is vital to the board because of her vast experience with the company, her longstanding ability to challenge Mr. Wynn and the fact that without her the board is entirely white and male.The outcome of the battle, in which the board has sought to eliminate her seat and supports the retention of two other current directors, is expected to be resolved at the annual shareholders meeting in Las Vegas on April 24.AdvertisementMs. Wynn, the third-largest shareholder, is suing Mr. Wynn to be released from a shareholder agreement struck at the time of their 2010 divorce that, while giving her half of his stake in the company, prohibits her from selling more than $10 million of her stock per year without his consent.AdvertisementThe board’s governance committee fears that her desire to be released from the deal — and potentially to increase her sale of stock — illustrates her failure to act in the best interest of the shareholders because that agreement is crucial to Mr. Wynn’s maintaining a controlling interest in the company.“This conflict is mostly and primarily related to the lawsuit and whether potential outcomes put her interests counter to the interests of the rest of the shareholders,” Robert J. Miller, the board’s governance committee chairman, said in an interview over the weekend that echoed the letter’s content. “It has also raised other specific examples of conflicts of interest which have severely diminished her effectiveness on the board.”Ms. Wynn said she had no plan to sell off enough of her shares to bring about a change in control. Primarily, she said, she wants more cash to use in her philanthropic efforts and casts the issue as one of personal liberty.“Those shares are my property, but I don’t really feel like they are my property because I’m not free to exercise judgment on them,” she said.Until Tuesday, the main rationales voiced by the company for declining to renominate Ms. Wynn were related to her lawsuit. But in a slide show issued with the letter, the board claimed that she might have skirted insider trading laws by allowing her charitable foundation to sell her permitted $10 million in shares during a “blackout period” leading up to an earnings report.The slides also imply she could have leaked private information about the company’s bid on land on the Las Vegas Strip to her nephew, Andrew Pascal. Mr. Pascal, who served as Wynn Las Vegas president until 2010 and was once seen as a likely heir to Mr. Wynn at the company’s helm, is a partner with the Australian billionaire James Packer in a planned casino-resort to be built on that land across the street from the Wynn hotel.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Over the course of several years, Ms. Wynn participated in board meetings in which Wynn Resorts’ plans to acquire property in Las Vegas were discussed at length,” the slide states under the headline “Ms. Wynn’s Interests Are Not Aligned With Those of All Other Stockholders.”“At no time did Ms. Wynn recuse herself from the board discussions or inform the board that her nephew was involved in a competing bid,” the slide reads. “Ultimately, the land that Wynn Resorts wanted was purchased by a group that included Ms. Wynn’s nephew.”AdvertisementThere is no evidence made public that Ms. Wynn and her nephew colluded, and Ms. Wynn has stated repeatedly over the years that she has no interest in investing in or advising on competing gambling or hospitality enterprises.Ms. Wynn did not respond Tuesday to either accusation, but in an interview on Monday she asserted that she had more independence and worked harder on behalf of other shareholders than the rest of the board.“Anybody who knows anything about my life with Steve Wynn over these 50 years knows that I’m the only one that has the courage to ask the tough questions,” she said. “Nobody in life deserves a pass, especially if you have your wealth involved and the welfare of your shareholders.”“The men are not comfortable with that sometimes,” she added.She saved her sharpest criticism for Mr. Miller, a former Democratic governor of Nevada, who has been a longtime friend of both Wynns and was appointed to the board at the same time as Ms. Wynn, in October 2002.“I would suggest that Mr. Miller, who gets $500,000 a year in board fees, is probably more dependent on the company and the management than I am,” she said.Mr. Wynn, 73, has not commented on the board battle or the lawsuit. Under the shareholder agreement with Ms. Wynn, he is required to vote with his shares for her appointment to the board regardless of his personal preference. Between them they control 19.3 percent of the voting shares.She is also working to persuade large investment houses with large stakes in the company, such as T. Rowe Price and the Vanguard Group, to support her as well.A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Board Raises Its Objections to the Re-election of a Wynn Resorts Co-Founder.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.