AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — A modest rebound in gas costs and broad gains in other categories lifted consumer prices in the United States for the first time in four months, a sign inflation may be stabilizing.The Consumer Price Index rose 0.2 percent in February, the Labor Department said Tuesday. It dropped 0.7 percent in January, the biggest decline in six years.Also Tuesday, the Commerce Department said that sales of new homes in February climbed to their fastest pace in seven years, as an otherwise dormant American housing market showed fresh signs of life.Gas prices have plummeted since June, drastically lowering inflation. They fell for seven straight months before rising 2.4 percent in February, the government said. Prices at the pump are still nearly 33 percent lower than a year ago.Largely as a result, consumer prices were unchanged in the 12 months that ended in February, after slipping 0.1 percent in January from a year earlier. Yet excluding gas, prices have been more stable.Outside food and energy, core prices also rose 0.2 percent last month. The cost of rents, clothes, new and used cars, and airfares all increased. Core prices have risen 1.7 percent in the past year.Even with February’s uptick in prices, economists expect the strong dollar will keep inflation in check in the coming months because it makes imported goods cheaper. The dollar has risen sharply in value in the past year compared with the euro and yen, as the American economy is growing more quickly than those in Europe and Japan.As gas prices stabilize, the year-over-year inflation rate should eventually start to rise, probably by midyear, economists say. Paul Ashworth, chief economist at Capital Economics, said he expected that core inflation would not reach the Fed’s 2 percent target until the first half of next year.“It is too early to say inflation is turning higher,” said Jennifer Lee, an economist at BMO Capital Markets. The dollar’s strength “takes time to filter through to prices and the recent increase will show up in coming months.”The Consumer Price Index is far below the 2 percent target set by the Federal Reserve, complicating the Fed’s decision on when to raise the short-term interest rate it controls.In February, new-home sales shot up 7.8 percent last month to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 539,000, the strongest performance since February 2008. January sales were revised up nearly 4 percent to a rate of 500,000.Other parts of the housing market have struggled since 2015 got off to a frigid start, despite historically low mortgage rates and a sharp, yearlong upswing in hiring. The shift in purchases of newly built homes may suggest that the job growth is spilling over to other parts of the economy.“The housing market remains in recovery mode and that activity for the rest of the year is likely to improve at a modest, albeit choppy, pace,” said Blerina Uruçi, an analyst at the bank Barclays.The strong increase came from the South and, surprisingly, the Northeast, which was hammered by snowstorms last month. Buying fell in the Midwest and West last month. The median sales price rose 2.6 percent since February 2014 to $275,500.Advertisement