By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONMARCH 24, 2015
As a member of the Federal Reserve’s board, Jeremy C. Stein raised concerns about areas of frothiness in the financial markets.Now, the former governor will be able to offer those insights to the $20 billion hedge fund BlueMountain Capital Management. The hedge fund has hired Mr. Stein as a consultant who will advise managers on issues like the implications of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy, as well as on financial regulation, risk and capital management.Mr. Stein, who resigned from his position at the Fed last May, is following a well-trodden path from Washington policy circles to Wall Street.“We’re very lucky to have the opportunity to work with Jeremy,” Andrew Feldstein, chief executive of BlueMountain, said in a statement on Tuesday.AdvertisementDuring his short tenure at the Fed, Mr. Stein raised concerns about the Fed’s stimulus program. He joined the Fed in 2012 and resigned in May, returning to a tenured professorship at Harvard’s department of economics.Advertisement“I’m excited to be working with the BlueMountain team,” Mr. Stein said, adding that he looked forward to “learning much more about the markets from my collaboration with them.”BlueMountain is perhaps best known for the role it played in the “London whale” trade when it profited from a misstep made by a JPMorgan Chase trader in a bet on corporate debt. The trade cost JPMorgan a multibillion-dollar loss.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BlueMountain later helped JPMorgan to exit its positions.It will not be the first time that Mr. Stein has worked for Wall Street. Previously, he designed quantitative asset-management strategies for Guggenheim Partners from 2005 to 2007. In Washington, Mr. Stein was also a senior adviser to the Treasury secretary and was on the staff at the National Economic Council in 2009.Under the agreement with BlueMountain, Mr. Stein will be paid by the hedge fund but not employed by it. In this way, he will be placing one foot through the revolving door between Washington and Wall Street, a move others like Alan S. Greenspan and Ben S. Bernanke have also made.The list of Washington movers and shakers who have taken lucrative positions in the private sector after leaving public office is long.Mr. Greenspan was hired to consult for Deutsche Bank, the bond investment firm Pacific Investment Management Company and the hedge fund Paulson & Company after stepping down as Fed chairman. Last year, Timothy F. Geithner, the former Treasury secretary, joined the private equity firm Warburg Pincus. William M. Daley, a former White House chief of staff, joined the Swiss hedge fund Argentière Capital as a managing partner.Mr. Bernanke, meanwhile, has been busy on the speaking circuit since he stepped down as Fed chairman last January.A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Former Fed Board Member Heads to a Wall St. Job.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.