By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMARCH 24, 2015
Jared and Joshua Kushner have charted separate careers for years, one as a real estate developer, the other as a technology venture capitalist. But the brothers have teamed up for a new company that combines their two expertises.The Kushner brothers, scions of a New York area real estate dynasty, have founded Cadre, a start-up that aims to make it easier for select clients like family offices and endowments to invest in real estate using technology.The company plans to announce on Tuesday that it has raised more than $18.3 million, led by Joshua Kushner’s Thrive Capital and the venture capital firm General Catalyst. Other investors included Michael Fascitelli, the former chief executive of Vornado Realty Trust; Jon Winkelried, a former co-president of Goldman Sachs; Andrew L. Farkas, a real estate investor; and SL Green, A New York real estate concern.It has also arranged for a backstop of $250 million from an unidentified family office to buttress its liquidity.AdvertisementThe company was born from a belief by the Kushners that the famously opaque market for real estate investments was ripe for disruption, a conviction shared by Ryan Williams, a friend of the brothers who invested in real estate at Goldman and the Blackstone Group.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet how exactly Cadre works is a bit of a mystery. All that Mr. Williams, who serves as chief executive, would say in an interview is that the company’s staff of 10 prescreens potential investments and then loads the properties onto its platform.AdvertisementThe properties available for investment stretch across multiple real estate markets, Mr. Williams said.Cadre will also provide some additional services to its customers after their deals close.So far, Cadre has lined up more than 50 family offices and endowments, Mr. Williams said. Over the last month, it has closed $50 million in investments.“I’ve been surprised at the level of demand without doing any outreach,” he said. “We’re excited about our momentum to date.”A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Start-Up Money.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.