AdvertisementSupported byBy David JollyPARIS — A measure of business sentiment in the eurozone has hit its highest level in nearly four years, providing one more glimmer of hope that a long-awaited European economic recovery might finally be taking hold.Markit Economics, a data analysis firm based in London, said on Tuesday that its March survey of purchasing managers across the 19-nation eurozone showed output expanding at the quickest pace since May 2011.There are still plenty of caveats to signs of recovery, including high unemployment in much of Europe. And data from Britain on Tuesday showed inflation at a new, worrisomely low level.But Tuesday’s data on business sentiment comes on the heels of the highest eurozone consumer confidence reading, released on Monday, since before the 2008 financial crisis. And last week, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development raised its 2015 and 2016 growth forecasts for the region.The purchasing managers’ data provides one of the most closely watched real-time guides to the eurozone’s economic health.“It’s further evidence of a cyclical upturn in the eurozone,” said Janet Henry, chief European economist at HSBC in London. She pointed to a number of positive signs, including recent acceleration in retail spending.The Markit Economics composite index of business activity rose to 54.1 from 53.3 in February. An index reading greater than 50 suggests economic expansion, while a number below that level suggests contraction.Doing their part to aid the economy are a weaker euro against the dollar, low oil prices and the recent bond-buying program begun by the European Central Bank.“The improvement provides welcome news to a region awaiting signs that the E.C.B.’s quantitative easing is stimulating the real economy,” Chris Williamson, Markit’s chief economist, said in a statement, referring to the central bank’s plan to buy 60 billion euros, or about $65 billion, in bonds each month through at least September 2016.In addition to signaling relatively strong German growth, Mr. Williamson said the Markit data provided “signs of a long-awaited recovery in France,” which he said appeared to be expanding at the fastest rate since 2011.The euro, which has been getting back some of the ground it lost since late last year, ticked up 0.3 percent, to $1.0977, after the report. The Euro Stoxx 50 index of eurozone blue chip shares ended up 0.87 percent for the day.On Monday, the European Central Bank’s president, Mario Draghi, told European lawmakers in Brussels that “the basis for the economic recovery in the euro area has clearly strengthened.”Mr. Draghi cited the fall in oil prices, a pickup in external demand, a weaker euro and the central bank’s “accommodative monetary policy,” which has driven down borrowing costs, as the main reasons for optimism. The central bank expects the eurozone’s gross domestic product to grow 1.5 percent this year, accelerating to 1.9 percent next year and to 2.1 percent in 2017.Some economists were quick to raise warning flags. Hopes have been repeatedly raised since the 2008 global financial crisis that the eurozone was finally set to break into a sustained recovery, only for them to be dashed. The eurozone’s economic output remains below its precrisis levels, even though the United States and Britain have regained and surpassed theirs.“There’s a need for caution: We’ve been here before,” said Carsten Brzeski, chief economist at ING-DiBa in Frankfurt. But he said he saw distinctions, too. “What is different this time around is the external environment — the euro is weaker and oil prices are far lower,” he said. “It’s a stimulus package for free.”In the view of Ms. Henry, the HSBC economist, the current momentum is notable mainly because it appears to be led by consumers, spurred by lower oil prices.“The levels aren’t spectacular,” she said, noting that current growth would not be enough either to keep deflationary pressures at bay or to push down the jobless rate in the bloc from the 11.2 percent at which it stood in January. To ramp up growth, she added, Europe needs more investment and external demand.Mr. Brzeski said that another difference in the latest glimmers of a rebound was the commitment of the European Central Bank. That contrasts with the picture in spring 2011, the last time the purchasing managers’ index showed the same level of growth.Back then, the central bank, under its former president Jean-Claude Trichet, began raising interest rates, on the assumption that the postcrisis recovery was firmly established. That proved to be a major miscalculation, especially as the eurozone’s sovereign debt crisis, which peaked in 2012, was still sapping business and consumer confidence.The European Central Bank began its bond-buying program this month, partly out of concern that inflation was too low in the eurozone. Even without tipping into the condition known as outright deflation, in which the general level of prices is declining, a too-low inflation rate may weigh on growth and stress borrowers and lenders. The central bank seeks to keep prices rising at a rate just below 2 percent, but prices have been declining for three straight months, most recently by 0.3 percent in February from a year earlier.The problem of declining consumer prices is being felt not just in the eurozone, but in the United States and around the world. On Tuesday, the British Office for National Statistics reported that its Consumer Price Index showed zero inflation in February, the lowest level on record for that measure.Mr. Brzeski said that the risks on the horizon — including the debt problems of Greece, the military crisis in Ukraine and the Federal Reserve’s desire to begin “normalizing” interest rates this year — made it too early to say Europe had reached a turning point.“The ground is prepared for at least a cyclical recovery,” Mr. Brzeski said. “But it’s far too early to say if it’s going to be enough.”Advertisement