By WILLIAM ALDENMARCH 24, 2015
CHICAGO —  The pits where generations of sweating traders in colorful jackets once bellowed out orders for wheat, corn and cattle contracts, using hand signals and sheer force of personality, are almost empty. The smattering of traders who hung around them on a recent day appeared listless, some glancing at tablet screens, others staring blankly into space.Open-outcry futures trading, a profession that took root here in the mid-19th century, becoming part of the city’s identity and influencing trading systems around the world, is going extinct. Most of the futures pits inside the Chicago Board of Trade building, an Art Deco tower that looms over downtown’s LaSalle Street, are scheduled to close by July after being choked by a decade of technological advancement that has made face-to-face trading largely obsolete.“It’s a computer product now,” said Anthony Crudele, a 37-year-old trader who started as a clerk in Chicago in the 1990s and was an early adopter of new trading technology. He said the planned closing was inevitable. “As far as we’re concerned,” he said, “it’s been closed for many years.”But the official end of the commodity futures pits this summer — including those in New York, where metals and energy contracts are traded — will nevertheless amount to a loss. Gone will be the trading-floor culture that was captured in the 1983 film “Trading Places” and provided the backdrop for a memorable scene in “Ferris Bueller’s Day Off.” Gone will be the feverish habitat where a lexicon of hand gestures survived through the decades and only occasionally devolved into fisticuffs.AdvertisementGone, too, will be dozens of jobs. The CME Group, which runs the pits in Chicago and New York, said that about 50 of its employees who help operate the trading floors would be laid off. As for the remaining futures traders, some may try to find a home in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index futures pit, which will remain open, but a warm welcome is not guaranteed.“They’ll probably be looked at as outlaws coming in,” said Vincent Provenzano, 55, an options trader who puffed a Dominican cigar in Jack Schwartz Importer, an old-fashioned tobacconist on the ground floor of the Chicago Board of Trade building. “It’s going to be more competitive.”AdvertisementPerhaps even more significant for Chicago is the disappearance of a career path that for over 150 years allowed scrappy teenagers and former high school athletes to hustle their way to wealth, or at least excitement. Futures trading — as distinguished from options trading, its more cerebral relative — was for many years a way for those with a blue-collar background to enter the white-collar world.“It’s no longer a way for a working-class guy with street smarts and a huge native intelligence to make a lot of money,” said Caitlin Zaloom, a cultural anthropologist at New York University who has studied futures pits. “It’s now the domain of the kinds of technical specialists who are really winners in other parts of the economy as well.”Futures contracts — agreements to buy or sell something at a certain price in the future — were invented to protect farmers against price movements for grain. In 1848, with Chicago quickly becoming a hub for Midwestern farmers to connect with East Coast money, a group of the city’s merchants set up the Chicago Board of Trade, the first futures exchange in the United States. The board of trade’s archrival during the 20th century, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, known as the Merc, which grew out of the old Chicago Butter and Egg Board, merged with it in 2007.The system for trading futures stayed remarkably consistent. In the pit, traders shouted offers to buy and sell while keeping their eyes and ears open for other offers to jump on before making eye contact with the counterparty and then writing down the trade on a card.“If you could have magically teleported a floor trader from the 1890s” to the 1990s, said Scott H. Irwin, a professor of agricultural marketing at the University of Illinois, “I suggest it would have taken them all of five minutes to get up to speed.”But the technological change, when it came, happened quickly. The Merc introduced some electronic futures trading in the 1990s, and the board of trade opened its own system for electronically trading agricultural futures in 2006. As it became faster and often cheaper for institutions to trade online, orders to the pit began to dry up.AdvertisementThe monthly trading volume in soybean futures, for example, was less than 5 percent electronic in July 2006, according to exchange data collected by Mr. Irwin and Dwight R. Sanders, a professor of agribusiness economics at Southern Illinois University. Eighteen months later, the professors found, more than 80 percent of that trading volume was electronic.These days, according to CME, open-outcry trading accounts for just 1 percent of the total trading volume in futures.Mr. Crudele, using a new system for electronically trading S.&P. 500 futures, started working in the early 2000s with Vince D’Agostino, a trader who worked in the pit, to help each other find better prices. (The two of them now run an online trading room, E-Mini Exchange.) But while Mr. Crudele, who had struggled to find his footing in the pit, embraced the new technology, Mr. D’Agostino, 6-foot-4 with an athletic build, was cast in the classic mold.Now 43, Mr. D’Agostino remembers how, as a young child, he played at trading with the cards that his two uncles, both options traders, brought home from the exchange.“You got multimillionaires and kids that just got out of high school rubbing elbows,” Mr. D’Agostino recalled, sipping a beer at Ceres Cafe in the lobby of the board of trade building. “They’d say the guys in the pit knew you better than your wife.”Ceres, like the Jack Schwartz tobacconist, was once packed wall to wall with traders every day. The barber shop downstairs, Franco’s Hair Salon, would average 20 customers a day in the late 1980s, recalled Franco Calascibetta, the owner, during a long cigarette break in the shop’s back room. Tips could be as high as $50, he said. After one trader lost a fortune in the crash of October 1987, Mr. Calascibetta recalled, he cut his hair for $1 until the trader got back on his feet.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Now the traders are different,” said Mr. Calascibetta, 61, who has an accent from his native Turin, Italy. “The traders who trade every day on the computer, they don’t know what a tip is.”The trading floor today can seem as much like a soundstage as a working exchange. Fox Business has a studio there, and Rick Santelli of CNBC broadcasts in front of the pits. In a twist, the options pits, which traders say were hardly ever as raucous as the futures pits, are now the only place on the floor where anything resembling the old level of activity can be found.Some futures traders keep coming to the floor because it’s effectively “cheap office rent,” said Scott Shellady, a prominent trader who wears a jacket printed with spots to resemble a cow. And sometimes customers still send orders there.“You go back for the people. And you go back to see if there’s something in the pit,” Mr. Crudele said. “You go back, more or less, because it’s been our home for so long.”A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Last Days of the Scrum.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.