AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersUnited States consumer prices recorded the biggest drop in eight months in September as the cost of gasoline fell, but a steady pickup in the prices of other goods and services suggested that inflation was poised to rise.There was good news on the labor market. Other data on Thursday showed new applications for unemployment aid fell back to a 42-year low last week. The very low level of layoffs and gradually firming underlying inflation could keep the door open to an interest rate increase from the Federal Reserve this year.“Today’s reports strengthen our view that the U.S. economy remains on the right track and should help to bolster the Fed’s confidence that it is getting ever closer to meeting both of its mandates. We expect the first rate hike in December,” said Harm Bandholz, chief economist at UniCredit.Research.The Labor Department said its Consumer Price Index fell 0.2 percent last month after slipping 0.1 percent in August. In the 12 months through September, the C.P.I. was unchanged for the first time in four months. It rose 0.2 percent in August.Stripping out food and energy costs, prices rose last month. The so-called core C.P.I. gained 0.2 percent after ticking up 0.1 percent in August. In the 12 months through September, the core C.P.I. increased 1.9 percent, the largest gain since July 2014, after advancing 1.8 percent in August.Expectations of a liftoff in the Federal Reserve’s benchmark interest rate have been dealt a blow by an abrupt slowdown in job growth in the last two months and softening economic activity.The stumble in job growth, however, is at odds with the very low levels of layoffs. In a second report, the Labor Department said initial claims for state unemployment benefits fell 7,000 to a seasonally adjusted 255,000 for the week that ended Oct. 10.Claims were last at this level in July, which was the lowest since November 1973. Nonfarm payrolls growth in August and September averaged 139,000, the weakest two-month rise since January last year.The slowdown is puzzling given job openings are at record highs. Some economists say the step-down in hiring is because employers cannot find qualified workers for the open jobs.The four-week moving average of claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends as it irons out week-to-week volatility, fell to the lowest level since December 1973.While the inflation and jobless claims data allayed some of the concerns about the economy, manufacturing remains a weak spot. Separate reports showed factory activity in New York State and the mid-Atlantic region contracted further in October.Advertisement