By HIROKO TABUCHIMARCH 25, 2015
The Securities and Exchange Commission has opened an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the departure of Dov Charney, the founder of American Apparel who was ousted last year, the retailer said in a filing Wednesday.The American Apparel board fired Mr. Charney as chief executive in June, after an initial investigation asserted that he had misused company funds and had allowed an employee to post naked photographs of a female former employee. Though Mr. Charney denied all the accusations, the board removed him from the company in any capacity in December after further review.American Apparel learned last month that the S.E.C. had begun an investigation “with respect to matters arising from” the internal review into Mr. Charney’s conduct, according to its filing. The retailer said it “intends to cooperate fully” with the S.E.C. investigation.A person briefed on the status of the investigation but not authorized to speak publicly said the matters related to Mr. Charney’s handling of company finances. The board shared its findings with the S.E.C., that person said.Mr. Charney would not comment publicly on news of the inquiry.Additionally on Wednesday, American Apparel reported that it had narrowed its losses in the fourth quarter, but it still booked a loss of 16 cents a share, as it failed to stem a slide in its sales.AdvertisementAmerican Apparel has not turned a profit since 2009, its bottom line weighed down by lackluster sales, problems with a new distribution center and legal expenses related to Mr. Charney’s departure.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Net sales for the quarter through the end of December fell 9 percent compared with a year earlier, to $153 million, as both retail and wholesale sales tumbled, the retailer said in a statement.AdvertisementLegal and consulting fees related to the investigation into misconduct accusations involving Mr. Charney cost the retailer a further $3.8 million in the quarter, American Apparel said.The company had just $8.3 million in cash at the end of the year, it said. For additional liquidity, American Apparel has secured a $15 million loan from Standard General, a hedge fund that Mr. Charney initially teamed up with to amass a large stake in an attempt to regain control of the company.Not giving up on a comeback, Mr. Charney had remained in touch with executives at American Apparel, including its new chief executive, Paula Schneider, according to several people inside the company.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: American Apparel Says S.E.C. Is Investigating Its Ousted Chief.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.