By HIROKO TABUCHIMARCH 25, 2015
The chief executive of American Express said on Wednesday that the company would seek a stay of a ruling that could ban a longstanding Amex practice: prohibiting merchants from encouraging customers to pay with lower-cost cards.Amex does not allow merchants that accept its cards to recommend paying with other cards, like Visa or MasterCard, which charge the merchants lower fees. A federal judge had ruled last month that the practice violates United States antitrust laws.Amex had already said it would appeal the decision, which stemmed from a suit filed in 2010 by the Justice Department and attorneys general in 17 states.“Fighting the suit was the right call in 2010, and continuing to fight it is the right call now,” said Kenneth I. Chenault, Amex’s chief executive, at an investors’ conference in New York.AdvertisementThough credit card fees are usually hidden from consumers, they are incorporated into the prices of most goods and services. The higher fees Amex charges its merchants mean that poorer customers — who often pay with cash or lower-fee cards — end up subsidizing holders of premium-rewards cards like Amex, consumer advocates say.AdvertisementThey say that allowing retailers to ask consumers to use a less expensive card will result in lower prices for all consumers. Advocates also say the ruling could give merchants greater clout to negotiate more favorable agreements with Amex, including cheaper fees.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Judge Nicholas G. Garaufis of the District Court for the Eastern District of New York sided last month with Amex’s critics, ruling the practice “an unlawful restraint on trade,” though he did not lay out a remedy. Amex has since filed a remedy proposal.“The court’s ruling will not provide any benefit to consumers and will, in fact, harm competition by further entrenching the two dominant networks,” Sanette Chao, an Amex spokeswoman, said in a follow-up statement. “We continue to believe that the Department of Justice’s arguments are flawed and believe we should prevail on appeal.”Despite Amex’s popularity among businesses and affluent consumers willing to pay high membership fees, it trails in market share next to MasterCard and Visa. Amex has also suffered several setbacks in recent months; it announced in February that partnerships with the airline JetBlue and the retailer Costco would soon be ending. Amex shares have fallen 14 percent this year.MasterCard and Visa have so far fended off legal action by agreeing to allow their merchants to use incentives to steer customers toward low-cost cards. Amex has chosen to argue in court that such measures are discriminatory.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Amex to Ask for a Stay of Antitrust Decision.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.