AdvertisementSupported byBy Steven ErlangerLONDON — Jeremy Clarkson has reached the end of the road, at least with the BBC.Mr. Clarkson, the popular and moneymaking host of BBC’s “Top Gear,” an entertainment show built around cars and British macho, was told on Wednesday that his contract, which is up at the end of March, will not be renewed, the BBC said.The decision comes after Mr. Clarkson, 54, was accused of verbally and physically attacking a BBC producer, Oisin Tymon, after Mr. Clarkson returned to a Yorkshire hotel after a late-night drinking session to find that there was no hot food served at that hour. Mr. Tymon was treated at a hospital for his injuries but has not pressed charges against Mr. Clarkson.After the BBC was informed of what it initially called “a fracas,” Mr. Clarkson was suspended on March 10 and the last three episodes of this season of the popular “Top Gear” program were postponed.After an investigation, the BBC director general, Tony Hall, said in a statement, “It is with great regret that I have told Jeremy Clarkson today that the BBC will not be renewing his contract.”Mr. Hall said he had not made the decision lightly and realized that it would divide opinion. But “a line has been crossed,” he added, saying he “cannot condone what has happened on this occasion.”The decision comes after a series of disputes with Mr. Clarkson over the content of the show. Some considered its regular references to ethnicity racist, or at least politically incorrect, and they usually produced some form of apology.Last year, the crew fled Argentina after being attacked by local residents during the filming of an episode in which Mr. Clarkson drove a Porsche sports car with the license plate H982 FKL, which some took as a reference to the British victory over Argentina in the 1982 Falklands War. Mr. Clarkson and his team insisted — with a wink — that they had no idea what the license plate meant. But most observers saw it as a typical Clarkson ploy to seem both naughty and patriotic.In May 2014, in film not intended for broadcast, Mr. Clarkson seemed to use a racist term while reciting the “eeny, meeny, miney, moe” rhyme. He denied uttering an offensive word but acknowledged “that it sounds like I did.” He has also been accused of racist comments aimed at Indians, Mexicans and Asians.After Mr. Clarkson’s suspension, more than a million people signed an online petition seeking his reinstatement, and he received remarkable statements of support from prominent friends, including Prime Minister David Cameron.“Top Gear,” which began as a straight show about cars, has in its current incarnation become popular worldwide, watched by about 350 million viewers in 170 countries. It has been called the world’s most popular fact-based program, and it earns millions for the BBC and for Mr. Clarkson himself.Overseas sales are worth an estimated $74 million a year for the corporation’s commercial arm, BBC Worldwide, according to the BBC. The program has three million YouTube subscribers and its magazine has a circulation of 1.7 million.The BBC is expected to continue to make the program with a different host, and Mr. Clarkson is expected to be highly sought-after by other television companies to host a similar program.OpinionKenan MalikAdvertisement