By DAVID GELLESMARCH 25, 2015
The biggest banks on Wall Street were shut out of the biggest deal of the year.The merger of  Kraft and H.J. Heinz will create a company with a market value in excess of $75 billion.But JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Citigroup, Goldman Sachs and Wells Fargo will not get a slice of the millions of dollars in fees generated from the deal. Nor were any of the major international banks like Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank, Barclays or UBS involved with the deal.Instead, two independent investment banks served as the sole advisers to Kraft and Heinz.Centerview Partners, a small advisory firm, was the lone adviser to Kraft. Lazard, a publicly traded bank with a broader range of services, was the exclusive adviser to Heinz.The leading roles for Centerview and Lazard reflect the growing prominence of boutique and independent investment banks in advising on big mergers and acquisitions.Following the merger of Kraft Foods and H. J. Heinz, the billionaire Warren E. Buffett said that the Brazilian investment firm 3G Capital would hold on to their investment.In each of the last six years, boutiques have continued to gain market share in advising on American deals. Boutiques took 18 percent of the advisory business last year, up from 8 percent in 2008, according to Dealogic.AdvertisementIn the case of Kraft and Heinz, it was easy for boutiques to plan an exclusive role because no debt financing was needed for the deal. Had debt been a factor, one of the big banks would probably have been brought on.AdvertisementBut company executives and directors are increasingly valuing the quality of boutiques’ advice, and their discretion. Boutiques have poached a number of top deal makers from big banks in recent years, often offering them better compensation. And because large financing teams are not privy to the details of pending deals, the news can be less likely to leak before being announced.Centerview, in particular, has been on a roll. It advised on 30 deals worth more than $1 billion last year, and has had a role in three of the top six agreed deals in the United States this year. In addition to advising Kraft, it also helped sell Pharmacyclics to AbbVie for about $21 billion, and the sale of Salix Pharmaceuticals to Valeant Pharmaceuticals International for about $11 billion.Selling Kraft is also something of a reprise for Centerview. In 2013, Centerview advised Heinz on its sale to 3G Capital and Warren E. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway. Heinz, under the ownership of 3G and Berkshire Hathaway, is buying Kraft.Founded by Blair W. Effron, the former head of mergers and acquisitions for UBS, and Robert A. Pruzan, former head of investment banking at Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein and president of Wasserstein Perella, Centerview has established itself as one of the top boutique investment banks on Wall Street.Lazard has also fared well this year. As well as advising Heinz, it had a role in Pfizer’s acquisition of Hospira for more than $15 billion, and the merger of Rock-Tenn and MeadWestvaco for more than $8 billion. Lazard also advised 3G Capital and Berkshire Hathaway when it acquired Heinz in 2013.Other boutiques enjoying success include Moelis, Evercore Partners, Paul Taubman’s new firm PJT Partners, Greenhill and Perella Weinberg Partners.The growing prominence of boutique firms does not, however, signal the demise of big banks. JPMorgan, Goldman Sachs and others continue to take the lion’s share of fees from mergers and acquisitions. But for now at least, the biggest deal of the year is in the hands of two independent investment banks.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Banks Miss Out; Boutiques Seal Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.