AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressInvestors dumped highflying technology and biotech companies and sent the stock market down for a third straight day on Wednesday.Major indexes drifted lower in early trading, after news that orders for long-lasting goods sank last month. The selling gathered strength in the afternoon, with companies like Avago Technologies and Skyworks Solutions among the heaviest decliners.Peter Cardillo, chief market economist at Avalon Partners, a New York brokerage firm, said the market’s fall was driven by big investors selling some of their winnings before the first quarter closes next week. The drop in factory orders also raised concerns that a slowdown in economic activity could continue.“A weak first quarter could spill into the second quarter, and that probably leads to a poor earnings season,” Mr. Cardillo said. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index fell 30.45 points, or 1.5 percent, to 2,061.05. The Dow Jones industrial average fell 292.60 points, or 1.6 percent, to 17,718.54, and the Nasdaq fell 118.21 points, or 2.4 percent, to 4,876.52.It was the worst day for stocks since March 10, when speculation over the Federal Reserve’s plans to raise interest rates helped knock the S.&P. 500 down 1.7 percent. Jack Ablin, chief investment officer at BMO Private Bank, said he thought it was going to be tough for the market to sustain a strong run. Major indexes still trade near nominal highs, even though analysts expect earnings to shrink in the first half of the year. That makes the typical stock look pricey.“We’re going to have a difficult time continuing to make new highs if the underlying economy isn’t following the direction of the market,” he said. “At some point we’re going to hit the intersection of reality and expectations.”Before the market opened on Wednesday, the Commerce Department reported that orders to factories for long-lasting manufactured goods fell 1.4 percent in February, dropping for the third time in four months. Demand for commercial aircraft, cars and machinery waned.“You can put this durables report into your Surprise Index as it missed market expectations,” said Christopher Rupkey, chief financial economist at MUFG Union Bank, in a note to clients. “But more important, it is another piece of data that shows the real G.D.P. economy is running 2 percent and not 3 percent.”Among companies making big moves, H. J. Heinz and Kraft Foods announced plans to merge in a deal that would create one of the world’s largest food companies. The merger was engineered by Heinz’s owners; Warren E. Buffett’s holding company, Berkshire Hathaway; and the Brazilian investment firm 3G Capital. It still needs a nod from federal regulators and Kraft shareholders. Kraft’s stock shot up $21.85, or 36 percent, to $83.17.The Apollo Education Group turned in a quarterly loss as enrollment fell at its for-profit University of Phoenix. The company’s stock plunged $7.95, or 28 percent, to $20.04.Indexes closed with losses across Europe. Germany’s DAX dropped 1.2 percent, France’s CAC 40 lost 1.3 percent, and Britain’s FTSE 100 fell 0.4 percent.United States government bond prices fell 15/32 to 110 21/32, pushing the yield on the bellwether 10-year Treasury note up to 1.93 percent from 1.88 percent on Tuesday. In commodities, gold rose $5.60 to settle at $1,197.30 an ounce. The price of crude oil rose in the face of concerns of spreading turmoil in the Middle East after Saudi Arabia reportedly began massing troops near its border with strife-torn Yemen. Benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude rose $1.70 to close at $49.21 a barrel in New York. Brent crude, a benchmark for international oils used in many American refineries, rose $1.45 a barrel to close at $56.56 a barrel in London.Advertisement