AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jeffrey GoldfarbBuyout stragglers are finding their primary path to cashing out impeded. Blackstone, Carlyle, KKR and their peers have had a good run returning heavily indebted portfolio companies to public stock markets. But the lingering crop of initial public stock offerings is now struggling to squeeze out. It bodes poorly for the private equity industry when selling is as tough as buying.Choppy markets around the world have frightened investors into becoming more risk-averse. For the last couple of years, they have blissfully looked past the high leverage levels at the likes of the American art-supplies chain Michaels and the TV ratings company Nielsen and gobbled up the newly available shares. Later arrivals are facing greater scrutiny. From March to July, the percentage of I.P.O.s pricing below the indicated range was in the teens, Thomson Reuters data show. That went up to 50 percent in September and 75 percent this month.The luxury retailer Neiman Marcus, jointly owned by the private equity shop Ares Management and Canada’s largest pension fund, this week postponed its public listing until next year. Albertsons, the American supermarket chain owned by Cerberus, also delayed its nearly $2 billion public offering this week, in part because rival Walmart Stores took a beating after forecasting lower profitability ahead.KKR plowed ahead with the year’s biggest flotation, of the payments processor First Data, but at a discounted price. That could make it harder for buyout firms to proceed with some of the biggest public offerings this year, including those for the pet supplies retailer Petco and the Spanish-language broadcaster Univision.The news isn’t all bad, of course. Worldpay, the British payments processor owned by Advent International and Bain Capital, got its share sale away at a healthy valuation this week. And Blackstone’s Performance Food Group has enjoyed a 16 percent rise since going public this month. Even so, if the I.P.O. window is closing, it could leave private equity firms in an awkward spot.They have been backing up truckloads of cash to investors in their funds, which have turned around and pledged much of it to new buyout vehicles. In the second quarter, for example, Carlyle handed back four times as much as it invested. Finding acquisitions hasn’t been easy, especially with corporate buyers acting so aggressively. It took almost the last three years to equal the same volume of leveraged buyouts worldwide as in the second quarter of 2007 alone, according to Thomson Reuters data.In theory, the same downturn that makes markets unwelcoming to initial public offerings should lead to buying opportunities. The theory didn’t hold up in the aftermath of the financial crisis, however. For now, the uncertain market conditions could leave private equity firms feeling boxed in.Jeffrey Goldfarb is United States editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement