AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelFrancis C. Rooney Jr., who as chief executive of the Melville Corporation transformed it from a shoe company into a retail behemoth embracing CVS, Thom McAn and Marshall’s, died on Tuesday in Greenwich, Conn. He was 93.His family said his death, at Greenwich Hospital, where he had been a trustee, was caused by pneumonia. He lived in Rye, N.Y.Melville had annual revenue of $180 million when Mr. Rooney took over as chief executive in 1964. When he retired 23 years later, he had turned it into a specialty retail business with more than $7 billion in revenue. The company operated thousands of stores, including Thom McAn for shoes, Marshall’s for discounted clothing, Kay-Bee for toys, Linens & Things for home goods and CVS for drugs, cosmetics and other personal products.While Mr. Rooney was chief executive Melville’s earnings averaged more than 20 percent on equity, with its stock’s value increasing to $960 from $16, adjusted for splits.He ran the headquarters with as few executives as possible, maintaining an executive staff of only seven even as sales exploded. He preferred communicating directly, often in person or over the telephone. “I’m allergic to memos,” he often said. He was also known for keeping a close watch on operations, traveling 50,000 miles a year to visit stores across the conglomerate. His Saturday routine was to pile two or three of his children into the car and drive from the family home, then in Larchmont, N.Y., to check on Thom McAn stores, his son Stephen recalled. Mr. Rooney would ask what was and was not working and what customers were seeking.“The manager of the store just would start talking, and some would think he was just a curious customer,” Stephen Rooney said. “When it would come out in the conversation that it was his business, of course the guy would be a little bit shocked.”Francis Charles Rooney Jr. was born at his home on Nov. 24, 1921, in North Brookfield, Mass. He received a diploma from North Brookfield High School, where he was captain of the basketball team, and a bachelor’s degree from the Wharton School of Finance and Commerce at the University of Pennsylvania in 1943, graduating during World War II as an ensign in the Naval Reserve. He was assigned to the battleship North Carolina in the Pacific and served as a gunnery officer in 10 major engagements from 1943 to 1945.Mr. Rooney started his business career in 1946 as a sales trainee at the John Foote Shoe Company in Brockton, Mass. He started working at Thom McAn as a buyer and stylist in 1953. He rose to president of Thom McAn in 1961, then to chief executive of Melville, its parent company, in 1964. (Melville’s name was changed to CVS Corporation in 1996 during a restructuring in which many of its businesses were spun off or sold. It is now called CVS Health Corporation.)Besides his son Stephen, Mr. Rooney’s survivors include his wife of 65 years, the former Frances Heffernan; three other sons, Peter, Michael and William; his daughters, Jean R. Weil, Carol R. Flanagan, Frances R. Cifrino and Clare R. Butler; 27 grandchildren; and five great-grandchildren. Mr. Rooney was a founding trustee of the Inner-City Scholarship Fund, which provides scholarships to Roman Catholic schools in New York City, and served on the boards of Bankers Trust, Collins & Aikman Textile, ADT, AMF, Black & Decker, Dunkin’ Donuts and Neiman Marcus, among other companies. He was also a trustee of United Cerebral Palsy, the March of Dimes, the Smithsonian Institution, the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, the Wharton School, Pace University and Fordham University, his family said.Three years after Mr. Rooney retired from Melville in 1987, he returned to the retail business as chief executive of the H. H. Brown Shoe Company, which had been owned by his father-in-law. Berkshire Hathaway acquired the company the next year, and Mr. Rooney and Berkshire’s owner, Warren E. Buffett, developed a strong relationship. Mr. Buffett singled out Mr. Rooney in a 1991 letter to Berkshire shareholders. “Much of my enthusiasm for this purchase came from Frank’s willingness to continue as C.E.O.,” he wrote. “Like most of our managers, he has no financial need to work but does so because he loves the game and likes to excel.”“Managers of this stripe cannot be ‘hired’ in the normal sense of the word,” he added. “What we must do is provide a concert hall in which business artists of this class will wish to perform.” Advertisement