By KATIE THOMASMARCH 26, 2015
Anthony D. Morrow had been wearing the same brand of contact lenses for years, so when he saw the bill for his latest order last November, he did a double take.Rather than $169 for a one-year supply — the price he had paid, more or less, for the previous three years — the new bill for his Acuvue Oasys lenses was $270, a 60 percent price increase.Mr. Morrow, a marketing consultant in the Los Angeles area who describes himself as a “savvier-than-usual consumer,” started digging around. What he learned upset him even more: The $100 price increase resulted from a new policy by Johnson & Johnson, the maker of Acuvue lenses, which prohibited retailers from charging less than a minimum price set by the company. That meant online dealers like the one he used, Vision Direct, could no longer offer lenses such as the Acuvue Oasys at rock-bottom prices.One by one over the last year and a half, all four of the major contact lens manufacturers have enacted pricing policies that seek to limit what contact lens discounters can charge for certain products, setting minimum retail prices and threatening to cut off supply if dealers do not comply. The manufacturers say the policies are intended to simplify the market and shift conversations between patients and optometrists away from the topic of pricing and toward the clinical benefits of their contact lenses. In addition to Johnson & Johnson, the other manufacturers are Alcon, Bausch & Lomb and Cooper Vision.AdvertisementBut opponents, which include big discounters such as Costco and 1-800 Contacts as well as the nonprofit group Consumers Union, say the policies amount to illegal price-fixing and are restricting consumer choice in an industry that has long been accused of anticompetitive practices.AdvertisementEarlier this month, Costco sued Johnson & Johnson, the industry’s biggest player, for what it says are antitrust violations, and a consumer class action has also been filed. 1-800 Contacts and Costco are lobbying state legislatures around the country in an effort to outlaw the practice, which is known as unilateral pricing. The Federal Trade Commission, which declined to comment, and several states’ attorneys general are investigating the issue, according to Christopher L. Lebsock, a lawyer representing consumers in the class action.How the issue is decided could affect the buying choices of millions of Americans: Nearly 39 million consumers in the United States wear contact lenses, spending $4.2 billion annually, according to 1-800 Contacts. About 20 percent of the products sold by the four biggest manufacturers — who make up about 98 percent of the market — fall under such pricing policies, the company said. Because some of the products are best sellers, 1-800 Contacts said that about 46 percent of its sales in January and February involved products whose pricing was restricted by the new policies.“We want consumers to have meaningful choice — to be able to bargain, to be able to get the lowest price they can and the best quality they can,” said George Slover, a senior policy counsel at Consumers Union.The manufacturers’ real motive, opponents say, is to curry favor with a key interest group: the optometrists who decide the brand that their patients will use. Unlike medical doctors who prescribe a drug and then send their patients to a pharmacy to fill it, many optometrists make money on both the eye exam and the glasses and contact lenses they sell in-house. But ever since a 2003 law required optometrists to give patients their contact lens prescriptions free of charge, many of those sales have moved to online sellers and discounters like Costco, who often charge less.Some company executives have been clear about the ways that the new policies will benefit eye doctors.In July, an executive for Johnson & Johnson told a trade publication, Vision Monday, “This gives the optometrist the ability to improve his or her capture rate in the office.” The executive, Laura Angelini, president of Johnson & Johnson Vision Care, added, “Now the patient has no incentive to shop around.”The optometric community, in turn, has reacted with delight. Gary Gerber, an industry consultant who hosts the industry podcast “The Power Hour,” said in an episode last fall that the policies were “the coolest thing to happen in contact lenses in the last 20 years.” He added, “It allows the doctors to compete and be profitable.”AdvertisementThe impact on consumers, by contrast, is less clear. Johnson & Johnson, which claims about 40 percent of the global contact lens market, said its pricing policy simplified the buying experience for consumers by setting a minimum price and getting rid of rebates. In doing so, the company said, about 60 percent are paying lower prices for their lenses. Company officials also said that some discount retailers, including Vision Direct and 1-800 Contacts, were selling the lenses at prices that exceeded the minimum pricing.“Customers still have a reason to shop around,” said Eric Helms, the senior manager for pricing strategy for Johnson & Johnson Vision Care.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But 1-800 Contacts, the nation’s largest seller of contact lenses, said its research showed that prices on many products had increased substantially. Close to 56 percent of contact lens wearers saw their prices increase after unilateral pricing policies went into effect; some customers saw price increases of 100 percent.Costco said its customers who use contact lenses affected by the new policies had seen their prices rise by a weighted average of 26 percent, with the increases ranging from about 6 to 50 percent.Richard Chavez, a senior vice president at Costco, said the company eventually negotiated a deal where it can offer customers a 10 percent discount — primarily in the form of a cash card that can be used only for products other than contact lenses — but they are not permitted to advertise the deal. “We just said, ‘It’s wrong,’ ” Mr. Chavez, “And not only is it wrong, but it attacks the very nature of our business.”Opponents of the pricing policies say the manufacturers’ recent actions are reminiscent of the industry’s practices in the late 1990s, when dozens of state attorneys general, along with consumers, sued the major manufacturers, claiming that the companies were conspiring with the American Optometric Association to prevent competition from sellers like 1-800 Contacts. The suits were eventually settled, and the manufacturers agreed to allow more competition from outside retailers.Optometrists who support the new pricing policies say the manufacturers are simply leveling the playing field for independent practitioners; by selling contact lenses directly to consumers, they can ensure that patients are using them appropriately. “The industry has to stay vibrant and it has to stay profitable, and the direction that things were going, that really wasn’t the case,” said Dr. Gerber.Minimum-pricing policies were considered illegal until 2007, when the Supreme Court ruled that manufacturers should be allowed to have more leeway in setting prices. In that case, Leegin Creative Leather Products v. PSKS Inc., the court ruled that some discounters could gain an unfair advantage by offering low prices without investing in showrooms or other product demonstrations. The court instructed judges to use a case-by-case approach to assess the policies’ impact on competition.But what sets the contact lens market apart, opponents of minimum pricing say, is that customers have little or no choice in the brand they select. In addition, optometrists are paid for the time they spend testing and educating patients.In 2009, Germany’s federal cartel office fined Ciba Vision, which later merged with Alcon, 11.5 million euros ($12.5 million) for imposing similar policies on retailers in that country. And last year, Chinese authorities fined several contact lens and eyeglass manufacturers — including Johnson & Johnson and Bausch & Lomb — a combined $3 million for retail-pricing policies.AdvertisementMr. Morrow, the marketing consultant, fumed for a while about the higher prices, even posting an angry missive on Twitter. “Call it what you will, but at the end of the day, it just means it’s more expensive for me,” he said. Then, he gave in. “I just took it and paid for it,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Makers Force Higher Price for Contacts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.