
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

MARCH 26, 2015
For the last few months, a disconnect has emerged between Wall Street regulators and prosecutors on the one hand and potential Wall Street whistle-blowers on the other. The authorities have publicly encouraged people who see wrongdoing on Wall Street to come forward and talk with them about it. They insist that witnessing wrongdoing and doing nothing about it is every bit as bad as committing the wrongdoing itself.But when whistle-blowers do come forward, they are too often left to twist in the wind before being fired, leaving them to wonder whether their act of courage was worth it. If, in fact, regulators and prosecutors want the cooperation of the insiders who work on Wall Street, why are they doing so little to protect them from the consequences of whistle-blowing? It’s a conundrum that needs some serious fixing if the authorities have any legitimate hope of getting the cooperation they seek.The most recent in a string of exhortations came this month during a speech by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, delivered to a standing-room-only crowd at Fordham Law School in Manhattan. Mr. Bharara said that when he speaks to business school students, a standard part of his talk is to share with them the unfortunate fact that while they may not engage in wrongdoing, there is a meaningful probability that a few of the people they end up working with will. That, he said, is when their responsibility kicks in.“The biggest problems arise in institutions and in countries and in financial institutions when the good people don’t do anything,” he said. “So it’s not enough to simply make sure that you’re getting rid of the bad folks. You want to make sure that you are empowering and sometimes embarrassing the good folks at any institution that exists to do something when they see something bad going on.”AdvertisementHe pointed out that the most significant recent prosecutions that his office had been involved in — Bernard L. Madoff’s Ponzi scheme and insider trading cases at the Galleon Group and SAC Capital Advisors — were at firms where “lots and lots of people,” long before the F.B.I. or the prosecutors showed up, “knew that something was wrong.” He then asked those who see wrongdoing to come forward and report it. “Good people who do nothing — as the cliché goes, but it’s not a cliché — good people who do nothing bear responsibility for the bad things that go on in their institution,” he said. “And that is just as true in public corruption as it is anywhere else. And so it’s incumbent upon good people at institutions not just to complain that their institution is being mocked and maligned but to do something about it.”AdvertisementMr. Bharara is the latest Wall Street regulator to express this view. Last October, speaking at a forum about the need to change Wall Street’s culture, William C. Dudley, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, also urged people who see wrongdoing at their firms to report it to the authorities.“Firms need to foster an environment that rewards the free exchange of ideas and views,” he said. “Individuals should feel that they can raise a concern and have confidence that the issues will be escalated and fully considered. This is a critical element to prevention. A firm’s employees are its best monitors, but this only works well if they feel a shared responsibility to speak up, expect to be heard and their efforts supported by senior management.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Dudley then gave an example. He recalled the recent scandal involving the London interbank offered rate, known as Libor, in which traders colluded with bank rate submitters to manipulate the interest rate. He suggested that instead of going along with the scheme, the better choice would have been for the person who witnessed the manipulation to report it to authorities. “The submitter says ‘no way,’ tells the trader that this request is inappropriate and that the trader will be reported to compliance,” Mr. Dudley said. “The submitter reports the trader’s attempt at manipulation to legal and compliance. Compliance investigates to confirm the facts. The trader is fired and is fully prosecuted for any criminal actions.”Such idealist suggestions make me wonder whether Mr. Dudley really worked at Goldman Sachs for 21 years.Here’s what really happens on Wall Street: People who report wrongdoing get fired. And the wrongdoing they report is either ignored or covered up. The whistle-blowers are then blackballed from the industry and are rarely able to obtain jobs at the level or pay they earned before they reported the wrongdoing.There is the occasional whistle-blower who is rewarded for reporting wrongdoing — for instance, Sherry Hunt, an employee at Citigroup’s mortgage unit who reported bad behavior and received $31 million — but most end up like her boss, Richard M. Bowen III, who reported wrongdoing up through the bank’s highest levels and instead was rewarded with being fired, no financial windfall and no hero’s welcome. He now teaches accounting at the University of Texas, Dallas.Or they end up like Alayne Fleischmann, a former associate at JPMorgan Chase, who like Mr. Bowen at Citigroup also saw wrongdoing in the mortgages that the bank was packaging into securities and selling to investors. Like Mr. Bowen, within months of discovering and reporting the wrongdoing, she was fired. She is now unemployed, and, like Mr. Bowen, hoping that federal prosecutors will look seriously at the evidence she has provided them before the statute of limitations expires.I have written about Mr. Bowen and Ms. Fleischmann before, but I could have mentioned many other whistle-blowers. I hope I have made my point: Mr. Bharara and Mr. Dudley are living in an alternate reality when they ask people on Wall Street to risk their livelihoods to report wrongdoing. Too often the whistle-blowers end up being castigated rather than celebrated.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »