
Common Sense By                     
 JAMES B. STEWART
 
MARCH 26, 2015
In 2012, I wrote a column about  Bob Page, a lonely voice against a constitutional amendment banning gay marriage in North Carolina. Mr. Page’s company, Replacements Ltd., a used china and tableware retailer, was the only one in the state to take a public stand against the ban.Despite his efforts, the amendment easily passed. Mr. Page, who is gay, fielded angry letters from customers saying they’d never return. A Baptist minister in a nearby town called for gays and lesbians to be quarantined behind electric fences. “I just refuse to hide,” Mr. Page, then 67, told me, when we discussed his willingness to publicly fight the ban. “I did that way too many years, and it’s just not healthy.”Last fall, a federal judge struck down the North Carolina amendment banning gay marriage as unconstitutional. And on Wednesday, the 26th anniversary of their meeting, Mr. Page and his partner, Dale Frederiksen, were married. The ceremony took place at Replacements’ headquarters in Greensboro, with their 15-year-old twin sons, adopted by Mr. Page in 1999, as witnesses.“I never thought I’d live to see this, especially here in North Carolina,” Mr. Page told me after the ceremony. “It feels really great.” The couple can now seek recognition for Mr. Frederiksen as the boys’ legal parent. “He’s been as much a father to the boys as I have,” Mr. Page said. “Denying anyone a loving parent isn’t right for children or parents.”The Common Sense column on Friday, about the marriage of Bob Page, a North Carolina businessman who spoke out against the state’s constitutional amendment banning gay marriage, misspelled the surname of his partner, whom he married on Wednesday, months after the amendment was declared unconstitutional. He is Dale Frederiksen, not Fredericksen.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Update: A Voice for Gay Marriage, Now Wed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »