By JOHN KOBLINMARCH 26, 2015
HBO, the premium entertainment network, is strengthening its relationship with Vice, the maverick media company and news organization.It announced on Thursday that it would broadcast a daily half-hour Vice newscast. The program is to run five days a week for 48 weeks a year. Richard Plepler, chief executive of HBO, said it would have its debut this year.For Vice, which already produces a newsmagazine show for HBO, the deal forges an even closer relationship with a prestigious and successful media brand, a partnership that helped bring Vice an Emmy last year. HBO, in turn, receives many more hours of new programming as it prepares its stand-alone streaming service, HBO Now.“It’s certainly one of our biggest investments with hours on the air,” said Michael Lombardo, the network’s president for programming. “I’ve been at HBO a very long time, and I can’t think of another producer we’ve ever done business with that will have that much time on HBO.”AdvertisementHe said HBO had not yet decided on the new show’s format.Vice’s newsmagazine show on HBO, which began in 2013, will extend its run through 2018, and its yearly episodes will increase to 35 from 14. Likewise, HBO will increase Vice-produced specials.AdvertisementBoth organizations professed admiration for each other. Mr. Plepler said he had watched Vice’s widely discussed 2014 ISIS documentary, “The Islamic State,” and wanted to know why that didn’t have a home on HBO.“We called up our partner and said this should be on HBO,” Mr. Plepler said in an interview. “We would have marketed it aggressively, we would have done screenings in Washington and New York. We thought we could have elevated it even further.”Shane Smith, Vice’s chief executive, said: “We all agreed, it should have been. We just weren’t on the air, so we said let’s fix that.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The announcement comes less than two weeks before the debut of HBO Now, which will be aimed at people who do not have, or do not want, cable TV subscriptions. Vice’s swashbuckling journalistic style has wide appeal among millennials, a demographic HBO hopes to entice with the $15-a-month service. Vice will have a branded and dedicated space on HBO Now as part of the deal.Last year, Vice’s weekly show on HBO won an Emmy in the category of outstanding informational series or special.“There isn’t another news information show that speaks to that audience,” Mr. Lombardo said of Vice’s coveted younger demographic. “The ‘60 Minutes’ audience and the broadcast news network audience is just not that audience, and that’s exciting.”HBO’s parent company, Time Warner, had talks with Vice last year about buying a stake in the company. That deal ultimately fell apart, and Vice took investments from A&E Networks and Technology Crossover Ventures, a venture capital firm.All those hours of Vice programming will provide HBO with something potentially meaningful: a reason for its new subscribers on HBO Now to keep paying.“Calling up to cancel your cable service or to cut off HBO is a miserable experience for the consumer,” said Rich Greenfield, a media analyst with BTIG. “Clicking cancel on Netflix, and presumably for HBO Now, is a one-click, easy-to-do process. So, how do you keep people subscribing? HBO recognizes that it’s important to increase the amount of content and pace of content that comes onto the platform, which would give you a reason to use HBO Now every single day.”A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: With an Eye on Its New Streaming Service, HBO Will Show a Daily Vice Newscast.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.