By DAN HORCHOCT. 15, 2015
SÃO PAULO, Brazil — The troubled energy giant Petrobras has suffered a setback in its effort to put its financial house in order. The company announced on Thursday that it was postponing an offer to sell at least three billion reais, or about $790 million, of debentures in the local capital markets.The company’s statement said it was “interrupting” the offer as a result of “adverse conditions in the Brazilian capital markets.”The offer was the company’s first effort to tap the capital markets since its century bond in June. The century bond was considered a success at the time, but since then its value has plummeted as concerns over the company’s finances mount.Petrobras has about $110 billion in debt, and at current oil prices its cash flow is negative.Wagner Salaverry, a managing partner at the Brazilian asset manager Quantitas, said Petrobras representatives had been shopping the debentures for weeks, but “the price was not enough to compensate for the company’s risk.”AdvertisementThe company had been offering the debt in three separate maturities, of five, seven and 10 years. The shortest-term tranche would have paid investors 185 basis points over the country’s interbank overnight lending rate, which is currently 14.13 percent.AdvertisementThat would have resulted in an interest rate of nearly 16 percent. Interest rates in the Brazilian debt market tend to be high as inflation is over 9 percent. Still, it was not enough to attract buyers.“This is a highly leveraged company,” Mr. Salaverry said. “The government stands behind it, but the government has fiscal problems, too.”The proposed offering was significant not so much for the sum involved, but as a sign of whether or not the company could get access to new capital. Even though the offer was in reais, the company’s bankers had been marketing it to foreign investors as well.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Salaverry said the company was not in any immediate trouble, since it easily has enough cash on hand to make roughly $10 billion in debt payments due next year.“If they move more aggressively to sell assets, cut investments and raise domestic fuel prices, I think the capital markets will open to them,” he said.Petrobras announced in June a plan to raise $15 billion through asset sales by the end of next year, but so far the company has managed to raise only $126 million.Poor capital market conditions obliged the company to call off what would have been the biggest asset sale, a spinoff of its petroleum distribution unit BR Distribuidora, and Petrobras said on Wednesday that it was now looking for a “strategic partner” for the unit.It also said at the end of September that it was in “final negotiations” to sell a 49 percent stake in its natural gas distributor, Gaspetro, to Mitsui Group of Japan.And the company is also turning to China for capital. It announced on Tuesday that the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China was providing it $2 billion in financing over 10 years.A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Petrobras Postpones.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.