AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonOmega Advisors, the $9 billion hedge fund founded by the billionaire investor Leon G. Cooperman, has been subpoenaed by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the United States attorney’s office in New Jersey, according to a letter the hedge fund sent to investors.Regulators are seeking information about the trading of specific securities, Mr. Cooperman wrote in the letter, which was sent on Tuesday and reviewed by DealBook. He added that the inquiries were “at a very early stage, and no one at Omega has been accused of any wrongdoing.”It is not clear which trades regulators might be interested in or when the trades took place. Mr. Cooperman, 71, is a veteran trader on Wall Street and is known for his outspoken views both in the financial world and, more recently, in Washington.In his letter, Mr. Cooperman indicated that the recent visit from regulators had come as a surprise. “Had the authorities asked us to do so, we would have voluntarily provided them with all the information they seek, but they chose instead to pursue a different tack,” Mr. Cooperman wrote.The S.E.C. and the United States attorney’s office did not immediately respond to requests for comment. Mr. Cooperman declined to comment on the letter.Omega recently bought shares in Actavis, Atlas Energy and the digital radio outlet Sirius XM, according to government filings. Actavis, the pharmaceutical drug company, has been a popular trade among hedge funds betting on the sudden boom in merger and acquisition activity in the sector. Last November, Actavis announced it would acquire Allergan for $66 billion.Mr. Cooperman wrote that he was not at liberty to discuss any more specifics but that he was “highly confident” that the hedge fund and its employees “have at all times acted properly and lawfully.”Omega’s disclosure of the subpoenas comes after a tough year in 2014, when it reported a 2.8 percent loss to its investors. In a letter to investors in January, Mr. Cooperman said, “Our 2014 performance was embarrassing and we failed to deliver acceptable returns.”It is not the first time that Omega has dealt with regulators. In 2007, it paid $500,000 to resolve an investigation into bribery related to its investment in Azerbaijan. Omega admitted no wrongdoing but Clayton Lewis, one of its employees, admitted to conspiring to bribe officials.The son of a plumber, Mr. Cooperman grew up in the South Bronx and got his start on Wall Street at Goldman Sachs, where we worked for 25 years before starting Omega Advisors in 1991. He is know for waging a campaign against President Obama in 2011, criticizing the language that the president used in promoting higher taxes on the wealthy. He wrote an acerbic letter to the president, saying his rhetoric was “villainizing the American Dream.”Mr. Cooperman is one of the highest-earning hedge fund managers and made $825 million in 2013, according to Institutional Investors’ most recent annual Rich List. Mr. Cooperman and his wife, Toby, have taken The Giving Pledge, a commitment to give away at least half of their fortune.Advertisement