
Common Sense By                     
 JAMES B. STEWART
 
MARCH 26, 2015
With the euro approaching parity with the United States dollar for the first time in over a decade, it’s time to dust off your passport, grab your wallet and embark on a shopping spree in Europe.That was my thinking last week when I made a quick trip to Germany, France and Italy. While there, I looked for bargains in the European luxury imports — German sports cars, French wine and Italian men’s wear — for which I had searched in vain in the United States.This time I didn’t come back empty-handed. But nothing is simple when it comes to foreign currency fluctuations and their impact on consumer prices. There were indeed some remarkable bargains, but not across the board and not on some of the most expensive items.From a purely macroeconomic standpoint, there could hardly be a better time for Americans (or anyone else with a strong currency) to visit continental Europe. As recently as 2008, the euro was trading at $1.60. While I was in Europe last week, it dipped below $1.05, just a hair above parity. (Among other conveniences, that eliminates the need to use a calculator while shopping or reading a menu.) Goldman Sachs researchers recently predicted that the euro could hit 80 cents. Moreover, the eurozone is suffering from weak consumer demand and is battling the threat of deflation. (In February consumer prices declined 0.3 percent, the third consecutive monthly decline.)AdvertisementBut all prices are a function of supply and demand in the relevant markets, as Antonio Rodriguez-Lopez, assistant professor of economics at the University of California, Irvine and author of the article “Prices and Exchange Rates: A Theory of Disconnect,” reminded me when I spoke with him this week. “Firms set different prices in different markets simply because of differences in demand,” he said.AdvertisementForeigners traveling in Europe are a distinct market. To the extent that the weak euro increases demand from travelers spending dollars, sellers who cater to that market can quickly adjust prices, even if those prices are quoted in euros and the products are sold in Europe. Airfares between Europe and North America are determined by aggregate demand on both sides of the Atlantic, as well as the supply offered by the carriers, and they’re not cheap: The round-trip coach fare between New York and Frankfurt next month on Singapore Airlines was over $1,200, the lowest I found when I checked on Expedia.Hotels, too, cater to foreign travelers and, like the airlines, engage in dynamic pricing, where rates change by the hour. In Milan, the superluxurious Principe di Savoia was quoting a rate of 270 euros for a room next week and €306 a month from now. (That is not exactly cheap, but by comparison, the Beverly Hills Hotel, also part of the Dorchester group of luxury hotels, was quoting a rate for next week of $515.) The Principe di Savoia attracts wealthy foreign customers who may not care much about price. I stayed at the more modest but perfectly adequate Carlyle Brera hotel, where rooms were available for just €78 (and included breakfast). Based on my observations, most guests were Italian or from the European Union (and no one was speaking English), suggesting that the hotel caters to a more local clientele.European luxury cars seem even less affected by currency values. Porsche offers a European delivery program in which American buyers can pick up their new cars at the Porsche factories in Zuffenhausen and Leipzig, drive them around Europe and then have them shipped home. The deal includes airport transfers and a free one-night stay in a hotel. But this isn’t a bargain: The purchase is handled by a local dealer in the United States, priced in dollars.Nor does buying a Porsche in Germany offer any advantages. The standard Porsche Boxster I admired was €50,909 there (about the same as the $51,400 base price in the United States). Buyers also have to arrange and pay for their own shipping, and then the car has to be modified to conform to United States requirements.Porsche didn’t respond to a question about how it sets prices, but the uniformity suggests that the company operates in a largely global market and can adjust its margins accordingly.James B. Stewart, speaking on CNBC, says he found “great deals” on his trip to Europe, as the euro approaches parity with the dollar.Professor Rodriguez-Lopez pointed out that Porsche “cannot set prices that are too different in Germany and the United States because it could encourage shipping firms to try to get an arbitrage profit” by buying cars in Germany, if prices were lower there, and shipping them to the United States. This is likely to be the case for a wide array of high-priced goods that could be shipped from one market to another to take advantage of significant price differences.At lower price points, however, there were bargains. Prices at restaurants, with the exception of some high-end Michelin-starred establishments that cater to wealthy non-Europeans, were extremely reasonable. This was especially true of wine lists, where restaurants don’t seem to mark up the wholesale price the two to three times that’s common in the United States. I never spent over €30 for a bottle, even for some Italian and French wines from prestigious regions like Barolo and Burgundy. And there were wines from many excellent producers that don’t export to the United States.AdvertisementPrices at wine retailers were also low. The 2012 Vieux Télégraphe Châteauneuf-du-Pape red wine I found at Sherry-Lehmann in New York, which is listed on its website at $79.95 a bottle, was just €52.80 at the website of the large French wine retailer Millesimes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Professor Rodriguez-Lopez said that the deep discount probably reflected greater price competition for high-end French wines in France, where supplies are greater, than in the United States, as well as the fact that wine is largely bought and consumed in local markets. Even for so-called trophy wines, which are presumably bought and collected in a global market, price differences were significant. Millesimes was offering the 2009 Chateau Pétrus, a famed Bordeaux, on its website for €3,216; it was $4,995 at Sherry-Lehmann. The saving on one bottle would pay for round-trip airfare to Paris.It was in Milan where I found I really had to clutch my wallet. The city is a global shopping mecca for high-end fashion. Boutiques are clustered on a few streets close to the Duomo and the La Scala opera house, with every high-end Italian men’s wear designer represented — Kiton, Brioni, Zegna, Armani — as well as many names I didn’t recognize.My Italian friends told me that business there had been slow. Americans pretty much disappeared after the financial crisis. Wealthy Russians and Eastern Europeans initially picked up the slack, but they largely vanished after the crisis in Ukraine. Wherever I went, I was pretty much the only customer. Whatever the cause, everything I saw seemed priced to sell, at least relative to prices in the United States. I saw good-looking men’s suits for as low as €500.I was happily window-shopping until I spotted an Isaia boutique, one of the brands I had admired (and nearly bought) in New York, where the window display lured me inside. Isaia sports jackets that were close to $3,000 at Barneys in New York (with some now pushing up toward $4,000, according to Barneys’ website) were €1,000. Suits were €2,000, as opposed to $3,995 in New York. That’s a 50 percent discount.Isaia, which is based in Naples, did not immediately comment about its wholesale and retail pricing strategies, but it doesn’t control retail prices at stores like Barneys, Saks Fifth Avenue and Bergdorf Goodman, where its wares are sold in New York. It does control prices in its own boutiques. (Isaia said it planned to open a branch in New York this fall.) The fact that it sells its jackets for €1,000 in Milan, while presumably making a profit, suggests that United States retailers are getting “ridiculously high markups,” Professor Rodriguez-Lopez said. This is likely to continue, no matter how weak the euro is, “as long as the demand for these suits remain strong and markets remain segmented,” he said.But he noted that the weak euro did give United States retailers the flexibility to offer deep markdowns if items don’t sell at the original high prices. Some Isaia jackets from last year’s fall collection were offered on the Barneys Warehouse sale site this week for $999 — albeit in limited colors and sizes. And that didn’t include tailoring.In Milan, I had the pick of the new spring and summer collection, and the price included tailoring and delivery to my hotel within 24 hours. I settled on a sports jacket made of a featherweight blend of wool, silk and linen. After a rebate of the 13 percent value-added tax, the €1,000 jacket cost me about $870.I couldn’t resist.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: What a Fistful of Dollars Buys in Europe.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »