By CHAD BRAYMARCH 26, 2015
LONDON — The Royal Bank of Scotland said on Thursday that it sold $3.2 billion in shares of the Citizens Financial Group in a larger-than-expected offering as it seeks to reduce its holdings in the American retail bank after an initial public offering last year.In a news release, R.B.S. said that it sold 135 million shares at a price of $23.75 a share on Wednesday, equaling about a 24.7 percent stake in Citizens. If an additional overallotment of shares is fully exercised, R.B.S. could sell as much as $3.7 billion in Citizens stock.After the sale, R.B.S. will hold a 45.6 percent stake in Citizens.“The sale of Citizens is an integral part of the R.B.S. capital plan,” Ross McEwan, the R.B.S. chief executive, said in the news release. “It will help us to create a stronger, safer, U.K.-focused bank that can better serve the needs of its customers.”Shares of Citizens closed down 1.3 percent at $24 in New York on Wednesday.R.B.S. announced plans this week to sell more of its holdings in Citizens as part of a plan to fully exit the American bank by the end of 2016.AdvertisementIn the past few years, R.B.S., based in Edinburgh, has sold or spun off several businesses as part of an extensive reorganization. The bank, which once aspired to be a leader in global investment banking, was forced to take a huge bailout from the British government during the financial crisis.AdvertisementIn September, Citizens raised $3 billion in its initial public offering in New York. It was the second-largest I.P.O. in the United States last year, behind the $25 billion debut of the Alibaba Group, the Chinese online juggernaut.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Under Mr. McEwan’s leadership, the lender is now concentrating on being a British-focused retail and corporate bank and on repaying the bailout. During the financial crisis, R.B.S. received 45 billion pounds, or about $67 billion, from the British government, which owns 81 percent of the company.European regulators have ordered R.B.S. to dispose of Citizens and of its Williams & Glyn branch network as a condition of the bailout. The bank is looking to spin off its Williams & Glyn network of 314 branches in Britain by the end of 2016.Citizens, based in Providence, R.I., posted pretax income of $1.27 billion in 2014. The lender operates 1,200 branches under the Citizens Bank and Charter One brands in 11 states.Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs are serving as global coordinators on the Citizens offering.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.