By NELSON D. SCHWARTZMARCH 26, 2015
The dollar’s sharp rise in recent months has left Robert Stevenson and Eastman Machine, his family’s 127-year-old Buffalo company, feeling the heat on both sides of the Atlantic.Confronted with a steep drop in the value of the euro against the dollar, customers in Europe warn that they can no longer afford to buy Eastman’s American-made cutting equipment without deep discounts. Buyers in America, meanwhile, are demanding lower prices from Mr. Stevenson, too, as European-based rivals take advantage of the suddenly stronger dollar, which allows them to reduce prices on the machines they export to the United States without squeezing profits.In both cases, Mr. Stevenson has been forced to compromise, cutting prices and sacrificing profit margins to avoid losing business. “We are hardly making money, but we need to keep these customers and keep our factory going,” he said. “This wouldn’t have happened a couple of years ago.”Indeed, the sharp rise of the dollar threatens to undercut one of the principal drivers of the recovery in recent years: strong export growth for American companies.AdvertisementAt the same time, it is also raising concerns among policy makers at the Federal Reserve. Last week, Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chairwoman, warned that the stronger dollar was likely to weigh on exports, producing “a notable drag this year on the outlook.”AdvertisementOn Tuesday, McCormick & Company, the spice producer, said the robust dollar would hurt results in the months ahead; other well-known American companies like Tiffany and Oracle made similar pronouncements last week. More warnings are expected as companies begin to report earnings for the first quarter of 2015, which ends on Tuesday.Although the euro has rebounded slightly in recent days, with one euro now worth just under $1.10, the shared currency used by 19 countries in Europe is down sharply from $1.25 in December. Other currencies from different parts of the world, including the British pound, the Australian dollar, the Japanese yen and the Brazilian real, have followed a similar trajectory.Globally, the dollar’s strength means American-made products — unless their manufacturers adjust prices — effectively cost about 15 to 20 percent more to foreign consumers than they did a year ago. Few economists expect the dollar to reverse course anytime soon; many expect the euro and the dollar to reach parity in the coming months for the first time since 2003.Currency swings, though, can serve as a get-out-of-jail-free excuse for executives when their company’s numbers fall short of Wall Street’s expectations.“Every company out there will blame the dollar in some way, shape or form, but there is a reason for that,” said Scott Clemons, chief investment strategist at Brown Brothers Harriman. “Currencies are the hardest thing in the world to figure out because there are so many moving parts.”The exact causes vary from country to country, but in most cases the dollar is surging because the United States remains an island of relative strength in the global economy. Another important contributing factor is the expectation that the Fed will increase interest rates later this year, even as the European Central Bank is keeping them low in a bid to stimulate the long-dormant economy there.That anticipated gap in future yields, along with a desire among global investors for a safe harbor as tumult continues in Russia and the Middle East, is drawing cash from overseas into dollar-denominated investments, pushing the value of the dollar higher.AdvertisementThere are economic benefits, as well as costs, from this shift. Imported goods are cheaper for American consumers, limiting the threat of inflation and potentially giving the Fed more time before a rate rise kicks in. Similarly, travel abroad is becoming more affordable for American tourists.Still, for businesses that depend on sales overseas, and executives like Mr. Stevenson, the dollar’s surge has meant both resignation and adaptation.In Eastman Machine’s case, it has meant cutting costs wherever possible, importing more of the components that go into the products that Eastman’s 125 workers in Buffalo assemble instead of sourcing them domestically, and moving some production to the company’s other factory, near Shanghai.140The trade-weighted U.S. dollar index1301201101009080’95’00’05’10’15MARCH 26, 2015
“We are shopping more overseas,” Mr. Stevenson said. “We’re a microcosm of what’s happening at a lot of U.S. companies. It costs the U.S. jobs, but we’d be foolish not to.”For example, Mr. Stevenson is planning to buy a new control system for his factory that is made in Germany rather than the United States. With a price of several hundred thousand dollars, the currency savings are substantial.And while the machines Eastman sells in the United States and Europe will continue to be made in Buffalo, Mr. Stevenson said, he is shifting production aimed at the fast-growing Indian market to China to gain an edge in pricing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m not losing so much business,” he said, “but it is hurting American jobs and profit margins.” Were it not for the price pressure from European customers and the need to produce more of his products in China to sell to India, he figured, Eastman would employ 10 to 20 more workers in Buffalo than it currently does.“This has nothing to do with the wage scale,” Mr. Stevenson added. “We’re very competitive in terms of productivity. But the Indian market is taking off and we are being forced to manufacture outside of the U.S. to stay competitive there.”Although the weaker euro tends to dominate the headlines when it comes to the dollar’s rise, the decline of other currencies poses similar risks for many American companies.AdvertisementBriggs & Stratton, a publicly traded Milwaukee firm whose products include gasoline engines for outdoor power equipment, as well as Snapper lawn mowers and Simplicity tractors, has raised prices a bit in Australia and Brazil as the dollar has climbed, but it fears losing market share as a result, as do other manufacturers.“We have implemented price increases, but it comes down to competition,” said Todd J. Teske, the company’s chief executive. “At what point does demand suffer because of price? I’m concerned that these currencies will continue to weaken against the dollar.”Only about 30 percent of Briggs & Stratton’s sales come from overseas. So for now, the American market is still where the action is.For much bigger American companies that look abroad for a majority of sales, like Boeing and United Technologies, the threat of a surging dollar might seem greater, but their size and global footprint actually make adaptation somewhat easier.In Boeing’s case, executives said, the huge lead time between orders and delivery in the aviation industry reduces the impact currency swings have on sales. The aircraft market is also priced in dollars for customers globally, further limiting the effect of currency moves.United Technologies, which makes everything from Carrier air-conditioners to Otis elevators, tends to locate production close to customers wherever possible. So elevators for the Chinese market are built there while workers in Europe are paid in euros to make air-conditioners that are sold in euros, insulating the company from some of the impact.Still, sales and profits overseas are converted into dollars to calculate financial results each quarter, so United Technologies has been forced to bring down its estimates for 2015 revenue and earnings.With more volatility expected in the currency markets in the months ahead, many executives admit they have little control over such global economic shifts.Advertisement“It’s not that easy in the short term to move production one way or another, even though we have factories all over the world,” said John Selldorff, who runs the North American operations of Legrand, a global manufacturer of electrical and data products based in France.Some companies employ complex hedging strategies using futures and other financial instruments. But that has costs of its own, Mr. Selldorff cautions, adding that he would rather make bets on what he knows — electrical equipment — than on the dollar’s next move.“In the dozen-plus years I’ve worked here, this stuff ebbs and flows,” he said. “These are trends that you just have to work around.”A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Happy Tourists, Glum Exporters.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.