By SAM ROBERTSMARCH 23, 2015
A. James Clark, the reclusive billionaire “King of Concrete” whose contracting company transformed the District of Columbia and built sports stadiums and convention centers across the country, died on March 20 at his home in Easton, Md. He was 87.The cause was congestive heart failure, according to Robert J. Flanagan, executive vice president of Clark Enterprises, which Mr. Clark led as chairman.From making 10 cents an hour working summers on his grandmother’s Virginia farm and not being able to afford Cornell University’s college of architecture, Mr. Clark amassed a fortune estimated by Forbes magazine at $1.4 billion.His company built Oriole Park at Camden Yards in Baltimore, Petco Park in San Diego, Miller Park in Milwaukee and Nationals Park in Washington. It also helped to construct the building that houses the School of American Ballet and dormitory facilities for the Juilliard School at Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts in New York, as well as an addition to the McCormick Place convention center in Chicago, the Ronald Reagan State Building in Los Angeles, the central terminal at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport and convention centers in Boston, Miami and Nashville.AdvertisementIn the Washington area, his company also built the  National Museum of the American Indian, part of the Smithsonian Institution; the World Bank headquarters; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center; and 28 Metro stations. It also restored the historic Willard Hotel.Current work includes a rail project to connect downtown Washington with Dulles International Airport in Virginia, about 25 miles away, and the Salesforce Tower in San Francisco. At 1,070 feet, the tower, designed by César Pelli, is expected to be, at least briefly, the tallest building west of the Mississippi River.Alfred James Clark was born in Richmond, Va., on Dec. 2, 1927, the son of Woodruff Clark and the former Salley Wray. His father was an insurance salesman and worked for a construction company. His mother was a homemaker.AdvertisementAfter graduating from the University of Maryland with a bachelor of science degree in engineering, he was hired by the George Hyman Construction Company in 1950. He continued taking business courses, he said in a rare interview with the business magazine Warfield’s in 1989, because “I did not want to go out at 5:30 in the morning with my stocking cap and my navy pea coat on and shoot lines and grades for the rest of my life.”Mr. Clark became the company’s president in 1969. He formed Omni Construction in 1977 as a nonunion alternative and merged it with Hyman in 1996 as Clark Construction.He lived on a 450-acre farm on Maryland’s Eastern Shore and typically commuted to the company’s headquarters in Bethesda by helicopter.He was among the largest donors to the University of Maryland, and also a benefactor of engineering programs at Johns Hopkins University and the George Washington University, underwriting buildings and endowing scholarships.He is survived by his wife, the former Alice Bratton, whom he married in 1950; their sons, Paul and A. James Jr.; a daughter, Courtney Clark Pastrick; and 10 grandchildren.An earlier version of this obituary referred incorrectly to Mr. Clark’s tenure as chairman of Clark Enterprises. He remained chairman until his death; he did not leave that post in 1994.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: A. James Clark, 87, Contractor and ‘King of Concrete’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.