By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and QUENTIN HARDYMARCH 27, 2015
Intel is in discussions to buy Altera, a designer of specialized computer chips, a person briefed on the matter said on Friday. It would be one of the company’s biggest deals ever.Specifics including a potential takeover price and timing were unclear, and the person cautioned that talks were continuing and might fall apart.Intel, long regarded as one of the most powerful technology companies, has worked to diversify its customer base as its mainstay business of supplying chips for personal computers has declined as mobile devices have risen in popularity.Earlier this month, it cut its sales forecast for the first quarter by nearly $1 billion, citing weaker-than-expected demand from companies, particularly small businesses, for new personal computers.AdvertisementUnder Brian M. Krzanich, the chief executive who took over less than two years ago, Intel has been scrambling to gain a presence in mobile devices and has become a more flexible manufacturer of different kinds of chips. It is also diving into a range of technologies like smartwatches and security products that rely on the human body.Now it is pursuing Altera, a 22-year-old company best known for field-programmable gate arrays, or F.P.G.A.s, a type of semiconductor whose functions can be adjusted or upgraded after the product is shipped. These are different from the standard chips that go into computers, Intel’s great strength, which are created for specific tasks.Chips that can be reprogrammed in the field generally have less power and complexity than their application-specific counterparts but are popular in autos, consumer devices and aerospace products.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last year, Intel introduced a hybrid F.P.G.A.-application specific chip, promising greater speed and flexibility for certain computing tasks.Altera, based in San Jose, Calif., reported $472 million in profit and $1.9 billion in sales last year. As of Thursday’s market close, a day before The Wall Street Journal reported the merger talks, Altera had a market value of about $10 billion.Intel’s biggest acquisition to date was the $7.5 billion takeover of the security software maker McAfee nearly five years ago. Just six of its deals have been worth more than $1 billion, according to data from Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ.Intel has plenty of resources to do a big deal. The company had $14.4 billion in cash and short-term investments on its books as of late last year.AdvertisementRepresentatives for Intel and Altera declined to comment or were not immediately available for comment.A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Intel Is Said to Weigh Deal to Buy Chip Maker.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.