By HILARY STOUTMARCH 27, 2015
The long line moves slowly. Clutching baskets of detergent, dental floss and such, the errand-running patrons of Walgreens assume their places with resignation, seeking only to pay and get out the door.But when at last they reach the front, a cashier greets each one with a smile and the customer service salutation of our time:“Following guest, please!”It’s one of those head-scratchers of daily life that no one can explain. Somehow, at some point, the queued-up masses at drugstores, grocery checkouts, banks and retail establishments from Uniqlo to Staples became “guests” in the common service lexicon, instead of “customers.”The linguistic turn has spawned eyebrow-raising and the occasional Twitter grumble or Internet rant  over the years. One can easily imagine a “Seinfeld” discourse on the topic if the show were still in production.We decided some reporting was in order get to the bottom of how this tic spread from the turndown service at a hotel to the pumps at a gas station.AdvertisementLet’s stipulate that the two words are not interchangeable, as the Oxford English Dictionary still makes clear:Guest, n: One who is entertained at the house or table of another.Customer, n: One who frequents any place of sale for the sake of purchasing. Advertisement“If I am your guest, I should at least be served tea and cookies,” said Ellen Jovin, a principal at Syntaxis, a New York City company that teaches businesses how to use written and spoken language more effectively. “And allowed to wash my hands in your sink and use your hand towels before we sit down to chat,” she continued. “Swiping a credit card does not have a homey feel to it.”Some annoyed tweets on the subject:
            Bewildered by this new(ish) "following guest, please" at NY stores. I mean, it's Rite Aid: I'm not planning a long stay. 

#customer 
            I will pay extra for cashiers that call NEXT! instead of Associates that say "Following guest please step down."        
            Any cashier that says "following guest" please stop. You sound dumb- it's not English        Clearly the word “guest” is supposed to lend an aura of warmth and welcoming. Yet customer service professionals acknowledge there are some types of businesses for which it really doesn’t work. “If you’re going to the oil change place, ‘customer’ is probably more appropriate,” said Kristina Evey, a “customer experience consultant” based in Grand Rapids, Mich., who has advised some clients to use the word.Still, there appears to be no gazillion-dollar McKinsey-type study that unleashed the term on the American consumer. The evolution was more gradual and organic.Marshal Cohen, a veteran retail analyst, said the first time he remembered being called a guest anywhere outside of a hotel was at a men’s clothing store in Connecticut called Mitchells years ago. The first big-box retailer he observed employing the term was Target.Jack Mitchell, the chairman of Mitchells Family of Stores, said that yes, the store that his mother and father founded in Westport, Conn., in 1958 did indeed consider customers guests and called them so.“Mother started it,” Mr. Mitchell said. “It was a term she always used. It was like welcoming a friend into your home.”His parents, Ed and Norma Mitchell, brought in their home coffeepot each day to serve “guests” who patronized the store, and today employees in the company’s five stores still use the term, though not exclusively. The store was well known in certain circles and patronized by influential people. On its 50th anniversary in 2008, it was the focus of a special supplement in Women’s Wear Daily.AdvertisementBut the original source (a few would say culprit) may be the same company that brought us the “Happiest Place on Earth.”A spokeswoman for Target traced her company’s usage back to 1993, adding that it was inspired by the great hospitality companies. Asked to name them, she replied: “Disney.”We checked in with Disney. Yes, said a spokeswoman after researching the question. Back in 1955, as the original Disneyland theme park was set to open in California, employees taking part in orientation were told “that everybody who worked there was supposed to use term ‘guest’ instead of ‘customer.’ ”Over the years, Disney proudly promoted the term, even publishing a book called “Be Our Guest” that devoted a whole chapter to “Guestology.” (Disney also put the phrase to music in a 1991 Oscar-nominated song by the same name from the film “Beauty and the Beast.”) In the 1980s, the company opened the Disney Institute for executives from a wide range of industries — including, recently, General Motors dealers — to be schooled in the company’s customer service techniques.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“At first glance, Disney’s language may seem contrived or inconsequential,” says the “Be Our Guest” book. “But words create images and corresponding assumptions in people’s minds. Take the word guest. An unhappy guest and an unhappy consumer create two very different images in an employee’s mind. Guests are welcome visitors, whom you host; consumers are statistics. If someone is your guest, don’t you feel a greater obligation to ensure his or her happiness?”It is a notion that companies have embraced even more now as consumers increasingly prefer to buy everything from diapers to designer clothes online or through their phones. Given the trend, the in-person store experience requires treating customers not just as guests but as V.I.P.s, some say.“I insist that my fellow associates audibly refer to our customers as ‘guests,’” said Lesley Hamilton, a “brand ambassador” at a Banana Republic in Fairfax, Va.“We’re not there just to service but to provide a full experience,” she added. “Those are two things we can do when everyone’s going to discount retailers and online.”Some businesses are trying to out-guest one another. “We take it a step further — we capitalize the ‘G’ in guest,” said Michael Mabry, the chief operating officer of Mooyah Burgers, Fries & Shakes, an eight-year-old burger franchise with 60 restaurants in six countries. “If you have the opportunity to read any document or letter to our franchisees, it’s always with a capital ‘G.’”AdvertisementOthers wonder if the term has reached a saturation point. “I wouldn’t be surprised if this has peaked,” said Patricia T. O’Conner, an author of books on language, who also has a blog called Grammarphobia. “There always comes a time with a usage like this, when people become a little fed up with it and it loses its allure and starts to become a manipulation.”Indeed, a Nordstrom spokesman said the company would proudly stick with “customer.”As for the guests themselves, it is unclear whether they care — or notice. A chat with a few shoppers leaving a Target in New York City one recent morning found none even aware that they had been called a guest.“I didn’t notice,” said Gerry Welsh, pushing a red cart heaped with plastic Target bags toward the parking garage.“No, it doesn’t make a difference,” she replied when asked if she might feel more welcome if she were called “guest” instead of “customer” or “shopper.” All that matters, she said, is friendliness.David Hirshman walked out of the store carrying a plastic shopping bag and lit a cigarette. He said he paid no attention whatsoever to what he was called and noted that he was shopping at Target for one reason:“The price is better.”Just this week, Walgreens decided it would stop requiring employees to bid farewell to customers with the words “Be well.” Could the “following guest” be next?A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Guesting of Retail.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.