AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesDow Chemical on Friday took another step to streamline itself in the face of pressure from the activist investor Daniel S. Loeb, agreeing to separate its chlorine business and merge it with the Olin Corporation, another chemical company.The deal will deliver about $5 billion to Dow, including about $2 billion in cash, and it is structured as a tax-efficient Reverse Morris Trust transaction. The enlarged Olin will have revenue of about $7 billion.The shedding of another big Dow business comes just months after the big chemical company agreed to add four new independent directors to its board. That was a breakthrough in what until late November had been an escalating fight between Dow and Third Point, the hedge fund run by Mr. Loeb.Weeks before the companies settled, avoiding a proxy fight, Mr. Loeb set up a website assailing Dow’s management, including its chief executive, Andrew N. Liveris.Under the deal, Dow will divest its United States Gulf Coast chlor-alkali and vinyl, global chlorinated organics and global epoxy businesses, and merge them with Olin.“This milestone is a powerful shift in our portfolio toward targeted, integrated high-performance sectors and end markets that will drive further margin expansion, earnings growth, and return on capital — with a deal structure designed to maximize total shareholder return,” Mr. Liveris said in a statement.“With this transaction, we will exceed our target to divest $7 billion to $8.5 billion of nonstrategic businesses and assets,” he added. “This achievement will allow us to have an ongoing focus to continue to enhance shareholder remuneration, reduce debt and continue to invest in future growth in our high priority and high margin businesses.”Mr. Liveris noted that plans to divest the chlorine business were announced before Mr. Loeb took a stake in Dow.“We began a thorough strategic review of our companies portfolio in 2012, well before any activist entered our stock,” Mr. Liveris said in an interview. “One of the key decisions was that we would excite volatile commodity chemicals, such as chlorine, and we announced that in December 2013.”Dow will receive cash equivalents of $2 billion, the companies will swap debt worth $1.15 billion, and Dow will also get 50.5 percent of Olin common stock, valued at $2.2 billion. Olin will also assume $800 million of Dow pension and debt obligations.Mr. Liveris said that with the chlorine deal done, no other large divestitures were looming. Instead, his focus would be on cleaning up joint ventures, either by selling stakes or taking full control.“Never declare victory because you’re never done,” he said.In a separate but related deal, Dow and Olin agreed to a long-term agreement for Dow to supply Olin with ethylene in exchange for upfront payments.“This transaction is a natural fit to our strategic objectives,” said Joseph D. Rupp, Olin’s chairman and chief executive, who will continue to lead the enlarged company. He added that it creates “a sustainable, long-term growth platform, and enhanced shareholder and customer value.”As part of the deal to elect new directors to the Dow board, Third Point agreed to stop criticizing the company for a year, and to shut down the website with caustic attacks.Barclays and Goldman Sachs advised Dow, and Shearman & Sterling provided legal advice to the company. JPMorgan Chase advised Olin, and Cravath Swaine & Moore provided legal advice.Advertisement