AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryFor the third consecutive quarter, Citigroup’s profits exceeded analysts’ expectations. But the bank also struggled with a drop in revenue in the third quarter because of a rocky period of trading over the summer.Citigroup said on Thursday that after adjusting for certain debt valuations, its third-quarter profit surged 36 percent, to about $4.2 billion, compared with a year ago.On an adjusted, per-share basis, Citigroup earned $1.31, which was higher than the $1.28 expected by analysts, who were polled by Thomson Reuters.Investors are eagerly awaiting guidance from management about when higher short-term interest rates will impact the banks’ bottom lines.“This quarter showed that we’re well equipped to handle what the world throws our way, whether it’s managing our risk, our expenses or our capital,” the company’s chief executive, Michael L. Corbat, told analysts in a conference call on Thursday. “Challenging environments have become the norm.”Citigroup’s profit in the quarter was also bolstered by a decline in legal expenses, which were related to the mortgage crisis — expenses that peaked in the summer of 2014 and have now greatly receded. Investors seemed pleased with the results, which helped raise Citigroup’s share price more than 4 percent.Still, Citigroup joined other big banks in reporting declines in revenue in the third quarter. It said that revenue fell about 8 percent, to $18.5 billion, from a year ago.Citigroup’s revenue was in line with analysts’ expectations, but the drop was steeper than at Bank of America and JPMorgan Chase.Shrinking revenue across Wall Street reveals the challenges that big banks face when markets turn volatile and the world economy shows signs of slowing. At Citigroup, the slowdown in the trading of fixed income, commodities, currencies and credit was even more pronounced than executives had predicted.Total trading revenue fell 7 percent in the third quarter — driven by a 16 percent drop in the fixed-income trading unit. On the consumer side of the bank, revenue was hampered by stagnating growth in some consumer businesses in Asia, where revenue was down 16 percent from the same period last year.Despite the slowdown, Citigroup’s chief financial officer, John C. Gerspach, said in a conference call with reporters that he did not expect the slowdown in Asia to cause “a tidal wave” of credit problems that would suddenly “descend on us.”In North America, Citigroup also reported a 4 percent decline in consumer revenue, driven largely by the lackluster performance of its branded credit cards. The bank has been working to pare down many of its credit card offerings and expand its customer base on fewer cards. That effort has required the bank to invest in acquiring new customers, which is weighing on results.The bank’s overall cost of credit — the drag from delinquent commercial and consumer loans — increased 5 percent in the quarter. It had to set aside more money for credit losses in Latin America and Brazil in the quarter.With the fundamentals of the banking business showing signs of weakness, banks must rely on cost-cutting to bolster profits. In the third quarter, Citigroup said expenses fell 18 percent.Without adjusting for debt and credit valuations, Citigroup reported a profit of $4.3 billion, or $1.35 a share, on revenue of $18.7 billion.Advertisement