By CHAD BRAYMARCH 27, 2015
LONDON — The Royal Bank of Scotland said on Friday that it had agreed to sell the international operations of its Coutts & Company private banking business to the Swiss private bank Union Bancaire Privée.The sale concerns the Coutts International business outside Britain, R.B.S. said. The price to be paid will be determined in part by assets under management on closing, the lender said in a news release.As of Dec. 31, the international business had 32 billion Swiss francs, or about $33.3 billion, in assets under management.The deal is expected to significantly bolster Union Bancaire Privée’s presence in Asia, Central and Eastern Europe, and the Middle East, and to strengthen its business in Switzerland and in Monaco, Union Bancaire Privée said.Advertisement“This acquisition confirms our commitment in further developing our wealth management business and represents a significant milestone in our growth strategy,” Guy de Picciotto, the Union Bancaire Privée chief executive, said in a news release. “This is particularly true for high-potential markets such as Asia, where the international business of Coutts has built longstanding relationships with high-net-worth clients.”AdvertisementR.B.S. said that it expected to take a charge in the first quarter of 200 million pounds, or almost $300 million, primarily related to the write-down of good will associated with the business. But it said it hoped to sell the business at a “premium.”The transaction is subject to regulatory approval and is expected to close in the fourth quarter. The unit will be completely transferred to Union Bancaire Privée in the early part of 2016, R.B.S. said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The sale of Coutts International is the latest in a string of moves by R.B.S. to reshape into a smaller, more British-focused bank. The British government has a roughly 80 percent stake in the bank, after it extended a £45 billion bailout to the lender during the financial crisis.R.B.S. began exploring options for the international private banking business in August.“Last year we set out a clear strategy to create a truly U.K.-focused bank” Alison Rose, chief executive of commercial and private banking at R.B.S., said in a news release. “This announcement is another important step in that process.”She continued, “Following an extensive review, it was clear that the bank we are building would not be the most appropriate owner of the business being sold.”After the sale, R.B.S., based in Edinburgh, will continue to provide services to private bank and wealth management customers in Britain through its Coutts & Company or Adam & Company brands, as well as to certain international clients with a strong connection to Britain.A precursor to Coutts & Company was founded in 1692, and the Coutts family entered the business in 1755. The international arm of Coutts has operations in Monaco, Switzerland, and parts of Asia and the Middle East.The Coutts business in Britain counts Queen Elizabeth II among its clients.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.