
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
MARCH 28, 2015
This interview with Linda K. Zecher the chief executive of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, a publishing house that also provides educational content, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Were you in leadership roles or doing entrepreneurial things early on?A. I grew up in Middletown, Ohio. You can’t get any more middle class than that in the Midwest. I had a paper route, I was a girl scout, and I was involved in a lot of clubs and sports in high school.Tell me about your parents. My mother was a homemaker and my father was very entrepreneurial. He started a variety of businesses — a hotel, restaurants, a trucking company. I was also very close to my grandmother. She was a Rosie the Riveter, and she worked in the steel mill during the war. She was a force to be reckoned with.Did you have an idea of what you wanted to do for a career before you went to college?Not a clue. I was going to be a political science major and ended up being an earth science major.AdvertisementYou’ve worked in so many industries over your career — the oil industry, technology, banking services and now publishing.I’m a risk-taker. I figure that if something looks interesting, I can figure it out. How hard can this be? And I just jump in.So what’s your playbook for going into a company in a brand new industry?Every opportunity is a different challenge, and I will quickly assess what the key issues are, and then I triage based on that. For example, in my current role, I really had to focus on culture. A lot of different companies had been acquired, but never really integrated. People had different badges, different offices, different everything.I also just listen to people. I have a lot of one-on-one meetings. If you sit down with 20 senior people in the company, they’re going to explain their role and why it’s important, and they’re also going to tell you all the things that are wrong with everybody else. So after all those conversations, you can assess what you need to do, who you can rely on and who needs to be replaced.You’ve worked in companies of all sizes, too. Other insights about culture based on those experiences?AdvertisementA lot of big companies want a “one size fits all” approach with their employees. We do product development this way. We do reviews this way. There are no gray areas. Everything is very rigid because that’s the way you do it when you have tens of thousands of employees.One of the things I’ve been able to bring to H.M.H. is that you can have a strong culture, but you can also be open to new ways of doing things, new ideas and one size doesn’t fit all. I don’t think that you should be rigid about bonuses, raises or whether you get a certain-sized office once you get to a certain level.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In large companies, the rigidity sometimes affects the culture in a way that makes it hard to be entrepreneurial and hard to allow people to grow in their roles and do the things they need to do to really build the company.What else have you done in terms of culture since you’ve joined H.M.H.?We had two very distinct corporate headquarters and now we just have one. At our corporate office in Boston, doors were locked on the executive floor, and you couldn’t get in with your badge unless you worked on that floor. Now everyone’s badge works on the floor.I also moved the coffee machine outside my door so people had to walk by my office to get to it. Now I can tell people to stop in and say hi.How do you hire?I don’t spend a lot of time on the résumé because I figure that you wouldn’t be talking to me if you didn’t have the qualifications. So I’m really just trying to understand what you like to do and what you’re interested in, and then see if I connect with you. It’s a gut feel and I’ve been very successful with it. I get along with everyone, so if I connect with you, I figure you’re going to get along with people.And what are some qualities that are particularly important to you?Honesty. I’m very direct. I’m very focused. I don’t pull any punches. I tell you what I think. Sometimes it’s good, sometimes it’s not. I don’t like people taking a long time to get to the point. I just want people to come in and tell me what they need to say, and then move on. I don’t need 45 PowerPoint slides.Just tell me what the problem is. If you made a mistake, just tell me. We’ll figure it out, but just don’t spend a lot of time with the buildup.What behavior do you not tolerate, aside from the obvious ones?Somebody trying to impress everyone with their experience from a previous job. I’m not a big ego person, and I have no tolerance for people who need to establish that they’re important or had some big important job. No one cares.I heard the best leadership advice when I worked a long time ago at Texas Instruments. A mentor of mine there was a former admiral. He told me, “Every day when you go to work, you should ask yourself, ‘What am I going to do for the fleet today?’ And every day when you go home, you should ask yourself, ‘What have I done for the fleet today?’ ”AdvertisementI’ve always kept that in mind. It’s not what you’ve done in the past that matters; it’s what you’re doing right now.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about the challenges of leading and managing. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice.This interview has been edited and condensed.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Danger of ‘One Size Fits All’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »