By THE NEW YORK TIMESMARCH 29, 2015
Here are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week.Greece hopes to gain approval on Monday for a detailed list of economic changes that its international creditors have demanded in exchange for the release of sorely needed rescue financing as the country’s cash reserves run perilously low and speculation mounts about a possible default.Representatives of the creditors and the Greek government discussed the list in Brussels over the weekend, before a Monday deadline for its submission. The proposals include measures to increase tax revenue and investment, and would raise some 3 billion euros, about $3.3 billion, according to Greek officials.If the list satisfies creditors, a meeting of officials of the 19-nation eurozone currency bloc could be called, potentially paving the way for the release of part of a €7.2 billion unpaid loan installment. —Niki KitsantonisReports on the eurozone economy may help to show whether recent green shoots are real. Eurostat on Tuesday will release its unemployment report for February and a first estimate of consumer prices in March.AdvertisementEconomists expect both figures to come in near their previous levels, with a jobless rate around 11.2 percent and annual deflation of 0.3 percent. A better-than-expected showing would add to signs that the European Central Bank’s monetary stimulus and low oil prices are helping the region’s economy to pick up steam. —David JollyAdvertisementThe world’s automakers are preparing for a number of product introductions this week at the annual New York International Auto Show. General Motors plans to show off a broad range of new models, including a large Cadillac sedan and the latest redesign of its top-selling passenger car, the Chevrolet Malibu.Other debuts are expected to include mainstream models like the Nissan Maxima and Kia Optima, luxury sedans from Jaguar and Ford’s Lincoln brand, and new sport utility vehicles from Toyota, including a hybrid gas-electric version of the compact RAV4. —Bill VlasicPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.How much spring is in the step of auto manufacturers at this week’s auto show might depend on how Wednesday’s monthly sales report tallies up. Industry watchers are split on whether the March sales numbers will land automakers in positive or negative territory compared with a year ago.It is looking like a close call, and the results could depend on how many shoppers sign deals during the last big weekend and final days of the month. —Aaron M. KesslerOn Friday, the Labor Department will report the latest data on job creation and unemployment in March. Wall Street is looking for payrolls to have grown by about 250,000, with the unemployment rate unchanged at 5.5 percent. That represents a slight cooling from the state of the labor market in February, when employers added 295,000 jobs and the unemployment rate fell by 0.2 percentage points.But recent economic data has been anemic, and it is likely that hiring has not kept up with the blistering pace of gains reached in late 2014. In fact, some economists say hiring could fall below the 200,000 level because of a combination of bad weather and weakness in certain sectors like drilling and energy production.Another closely watched figure in Friday’s report will be the change in average hourly earnings, with economists looking for a 0.2 percentage point increase in March, up from 0.1 in February. Wage growth lately has been frustratingly slow, despite the falling unemployment rate, and many specialists hope hourly pay finally shows signs of life. —Nelson D. Schwartz A version of this schedule appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Deadline for Greece, and U.S. Jobs Data.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.