MARCH 29, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.04 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.13 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Board of Education, $280 million of debt securities. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $300 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYBellevue, Wash., $96.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Johnston County, N.C., $51.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementOrlando, Fla., $94.9 million of utilities revenue bonds. Competitive.Utah, $223.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementONE DAY THIS WEEKAlaska, $164 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Arizona, $103 million of certificates of participation. Citigroup Global Markets.Arizona, $103 million of university revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Birmingham, Ala., $178.4 million of water revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.California Department of Water Resources, $765 million of power supply revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.California School Financing Authority, $55.7 million of alliance charter school lease revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.California, $500 million of University of California general revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Huntsville, Ala., $77.7 million of taxable general obligation warrants. Raymond James.Illinois Municipal Electric Agency, $585 million of power supply system revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Kansas, $200.7 million of development authority revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Kansas, $260 million of university hospital revenue refinancing improvement bonds. Piper Jaffray.AdvertisementLos Angeles, $150 million of sanitation financing authority capital projects revenue bonds. Bank of America.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lubbock, Tex., $231.4 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Manatee County, Fla., $87.1 million of public utilities revenue refinancing improvement bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Mansfield, Tex., Independent School District, $74.7 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $163.3 million of medical center revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Michigan, $96 million of university general revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Mississippi, $113 million of university revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.New Britain, Conn., $56 million of taxable general obligation refinancing pension bonds. William Blair.New Jersey, $117 million of technology institute general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.New York City Municipal Water Finance Authority, $447.8 million of water and sewer revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.New York, $103.3 million of dormitory authority school revenue bonds. Raymond James.Norfolk, Va., $84 million of water revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.North Carolina Medical Care Commission, $70 million of health care facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler.AdvertisementOhio, $235 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Philadelphia, $180 million of water and wastewater revenue bonds. Bank of America.Philadelphia, $250 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.University of Connecticut, $250.2 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Waco, Tex., $98 million of independent school district unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Oppenheimer.A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.