By NOAM SCHEIBERMARCH 29, 2015
Appearing at a candidate forum in late January, three likely Republican presidential contenders — Senators Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio and Rand Paul — all made a striking confession: They considered “the increasing gap between rich and poor” to be a problem.But on the question of whether the government should intervene to solve it, Mr. Cruz and Mr. Paul rejected that approach, and Mr. Rubio appeared to agree with them.When “government takes over the economy,” Mr. Cruz said, “it freezes everything in place. And it exacerbates income inequality.” He proposed lowering taxes and loosening regulations instead.The responses, even as they reflect an effort to appeal to voters on an issue of increasing importance, put the three men at odds with public opinion. According to a Pew Research Center poll from January 2014, which surveyed about 1,500 adults, Americans not only consider inequality a problem, but 69 percent of them, and almost half of Republicans, say the government should act “to reduce the gap between the rich and everyone else.”It’s not just right-wing presidential aspirants like Mr. Cruz and Mr. Paul whose statements on inequality diverge from public opinion. Hillary Rodham Clinton, though she has been more open to a government role in solving the problem, has yet to mention tax increases as a possible answer. By contrast, more than half of Americans and three-quarters of Democrats believe the “government should redistribute wealth by heavy taxes on the rich,” according to a Gallup poll of about 1,000 adults in April 2013.AdvertisementThere is, however, one group of Americans with whom the Republican contenders and Mrs. Clinton, the likely Democratic front-runner, are generally in step: the wealthy.AdvertisementIn recent years, a small cohort of scholars has begun to study the policy views of the country’s most affluent voters, and the results are especially illuminating on the subject of inequality. In a 2013 paper, Benjamin I. Page and Jason Seawright of Northwestern University and Larry M. Bartels of Vanderbilt University surveyed more than 80 wealthy Chicago-area residents and found that 62 percent felt “differences in income in America are too large” — a figure generally in line with public opinion.But when it came to addressing inequality, the rich were much closer to Mr. Cruz than to the American public. Only 13 percent of wealthy interview subjects said the government should “reduce the differences in income between people with high incomes and those with low incomes.” Only 17 percent said the government should “redistribute wealth by heavy taxes on the rich.” Clearly, Warren Buffett’s belief that the tax code favors the wealthy over average workers makes him an outlier within his class.The views of the rich on other policies that might reduce inequality followed a similar pattern. A mere 19 percent of the wealthy, versus two-thirds of the general public, said the government should “see to it” that anyone who wants a job can find one. Forty percent of the wealthy, versus 78 percent of the public, said the government should make the minimum wage “high enough so that no family with a full-time worker falls below the official poverty line.”More recently, one of Professor Page’s protégés, a Northwestern graduate student named Fiona Chin, has further investigated the subject, conducting interviews with nearly 100 other wealthy Americans across the country. Unlike Professors Page, Seawright and Bartels, whose interviewers typically spent under an hour soliciting their subjects’ views on a range of policy questions, Ms. Chin limited her discussions to inequality and often spoke with her subjects for several hours at a time.Ms. Chin’s findings, which she is scheduled to present at a conference in April, are even more stark. As she puts it, the rich tend to see inequality “as a story about individual hard work, effort and character.”They recognize that growing up poor puts workers at a disadvantage but argue that a middle-class background presents no barrier to economic success and that growing up wealthy can even be a liability because it robs people of their incentive to work hard. In general, Ms. Chin has found, the rich regard those who do not succeed in life as “people who didn’t take advantage of the education system,” not victims of circumstances beyond their control.Some of Ms. Chin’s subjects noted that their views had changed only after they amassed their riches. “Before I had much money, I thought there should be 100 percent estate tax on dynastic wealth,” a 33-year-old Silicon Valley engineer told Ms. Chin, who grants her subjects anonymity. “Once you’re playing the game, it’s game on.”AdvertisementComments like this hint at one of the most intriguing conclusions of the recent avenue of research: Wealth seems to shape people’s views regardless of their age, gender, education, marital status — or even ideology and political party. “There is a sense in which wealth seems to trump partisanship,” Professor Page said in an email.And given the attention candidates of all stripes must lavish on wealthy donors, that might explain why even relatively moderate presidential aspirants are reluctant to propose a prominent role for government in reducing inequality.Jeb Bush, arguably the most outspoken potential Republican candidate on the subject, has struck much the same posture as his more conservative rivals. “We believe the income gap is real, but that only conservative principles can solve it by removing the barriers to upward mobility,” Mr. Bush wrote when announcing the formation of a political action committee this year. Mr. Bush vowed to “celebrate success and risk-taking, protect liberty, cherish free enterprise.”Mr. Rubio is the Republican who has come closest to suggesting an affirmative role for government, proposing that Washington redirect money from programs like food stamps to subsidies for low-wage workers, though he would not increase the total funds available for alleviating poverty. A spokesman said by email that Mr. Rubio “doesn’t think the federal government is very good” at reducing poverty and would like to see those programs reformed. He has indicated that he would cut taxes for the rich rather than raise them.And then there is Mrs. Clinton, who has also largely avoided saying anything that might offend her wealthy supporters.At a policy speech in Washington in May, Mrs. Clinton acknowledged that “the share of income and wealth going to those at the very top — not just the top 1 percent, but the top 0.1 percent or the 0.01 percent of the population — has risen sharply over the last generation.” She warned that “extreme inequality has corrupted other societies.”But Mrs. Clinton was vague when it came to solutions. She promoted the public-private partnerships that the Clinton Foundation was brokering to expand worker training and noted that her husband’s administration had ushered in “broad-based growth and shared prosperity” through increasing the minimum wage and doubling the earned-income tax credit.Though she derided the Republican practice of cutting taxes on the wealthy, she made no mention of tax increases or more aggressive measures, like capping the pay of chief executives or modestly taxing stock market transactions.AdvertisementMrs. Clinton sounded similar notes when discussing inequality at the Aspen Institute in June, during an interview at a conference in February and during a forum last week at the Center for American Progress, a liberal think tank. Before the well-heeled crowd at Aspen, she said, “We have to have a concerted effort to meet a consensus about how to deal with this.” She alluded only elliptically to “hard choices” that her husband’s administration had made, saying that “they’ve become harder than they were even 15, 18 years ago.”Asked whether those hard choices she referred to were tax increases, a Clinton spokesman said he was not sure.None of this surprises Professor Page. “It seems clear that wealthy Americans play a big part in shaping policy discussions and policy itself, from taxes to regulation to social welfare policies,” he said. “Definitely, they affect what candidates can say.”A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: ’16 Hopefuls and Wealthy Are Aligned on Inequality.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.