
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

MARCH 29, 2015
David Foster  is a composer and producer who has been chairman of Universal’s Verve Music Group since 2012. The label manages Diana Krall, Andrea Bocelli, Andrew Lloyd Webber and Bryan Adams, among other artists.Q. Did your upbringing influence your leadership style?A. We were a happy household. We didn’t have any money, but we weren’t poor. My father was a laborer and amateur piano player, my mother a housewife. My father loved filmmaking and maybe that’s where I got my creative side. His gift to himself every two weeks was to buy rolls of film, and he would spend hours editing these. As we had no money, every shot counted and everything was used, not wasting a frame.One thing I learned from my parents was to put money aside. Whenever I made a dollar I would always save 50 cents. I’ve always lived beneath my means, and I’ve always been able to save money.Growing up, my mother had a lot of sayings, like, “It’s not what you know, it’s whom you know,” and, “If you’re not working Saturday and Sunday, someone else is.” Those have stayed with me. For years, my idea of taking the weekend off was not working Saturday night.AdvertisementI have six sisters — I’m in the middle — so you can imagine how it was growing up with seven women; could get cranky at times. I think my mother ran us with an iron fist, but huge love. That’s pretty much my style, too, an iron fist in a velvet glove.AdvertisementQ. Looking back, when did you first develop leadership skills?A. I was 12 or 13 years old and organizing bands and playing at weddings. I specifically remember knocking on the door of one household and the man thought I was there to collect newspaper money, but I told him, “No, I’m the leader of the band that’s going to play at your daughter’s wedding and I want to talk about what music you want, and I want to talk fee.” So it’s always been natural to me to be the organizer, and now that you make me think about it, I may have learned this skill from my mother running her large household.Q. You didn’t finish school; has that been a problem?A. I quit school at 11th grade and went to England to seek my fame and fortune, as they say. School is not for everyone, and I told my children that — two graduated from college, three didn’t go, and it makes no difference to me. That said, I think education is important. The one thing that I’ve missed is having a great vocabulary. I’ve learned because I’m very curious. But that’s one regret I’ve had, not going to school. I do have several honorary doctor of music degrees so I guess that’s something [laughs].Q. In the early 1970s you were part of a band, Skylark, that had a huge hit — “Wildflower” — and then disappeared. How did you cope with failure?A. Yes, we were really a one-hit wonder. It was a failure but also my first major success, and that was unbelievable. But I went from touring with big acts to being a rehearsal pianist for $5 an hour and being dumped on every day. What kept me going is an insatiable drive for success. Throughout my career, I’ve always felt I was moving two steps forward and one step back. Skylark’s lack of a follow-up hit was obviously one step back, but I knew two steps forward were coming.Of course, I get disappointed like everybody else. I’ve written a thousand songs and 900 were stiffs, but then again a hundred were hits, or whatever the number is. In life you have to expect that wins come with losses. And there is no way of appreciating the wins if you don’t have your butt kicked on a regular basis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.My butt is still getting kicked today. The music business is a crazy business — you never quite know what will work. You can do three albums in a row and they’re all successful, and the fourth, you apply all the same rules, all the same hard work and dedication, and it stinks. Failure is a key ingredient to success. Warren Buffett says it best: “The reason why I’m successful is because I’ve had more failure than anybody else.”Q. So how do you measure success?A. Hmm. Maybe it’s the amount of respect people have for you in your profession. I know I’m good, I really do. I have a healthy ego, but I also know there are a thousand people as good as me or better.Q. How do you manage different creative egos?A. You do have to be a father and a mother, a shrink and a friend, the disciplinarian and the taskmaster, the good cop and the bad cop. I think it’s a skill I’ve developed quite well, based on my repeat business — I’ve done five albums with Michael Bublé, five albums with Celine [Dion] — there wouldn’t be repeat business if I didn’t have that skill. But sometimes it’s not pretty. I’ve had some knock-down sessions. Compromises breed mediocrity.AdvertisementQ. Does the iron fist always work?A. I’ve ruled with a sledgehammer, like with the group Chicago in the 1980s, and they still don’t really like me to this day for it, even though we got tremendous success turning their careers around. The album before I produced them sold 100,000 copies, the first album I produced sold three million, the next one five million. But it was with an iron fist; every note on every song, this is the way it’s going to be, and they hated it.I don’t do that anymore because it takes too much energy, and if someone hates you at the end, it’s not a good reward. So my mandate is, if the artist is not happy with the product at the end, then I’ve failed.Q. What’s your natural strength?A. Charisma, if I can say that about myself. I don’t think I’m a great leader because I get tense when I have to make executive decisions — I’ve got to rely on people around me. Or maybe that’s what being a good leader is. You just can’t do everything yourself.Q. What would you tell young executives who want to get into the producing business?A. You’d be surprised how many times I get the question, “How can I become a record producer?” But I don’t believe in people who ask. You should just do. If you need to ask, you’ll never be. Just like Nike — “Just do it,” and don’t do it for the money, do it from the heart.Back at the end of the ’80s, my career started to nose-dive again. Then Natalie Cole asked me to do the “Unforgettable” album with her. And I did it for the absolute right reasons, not thinking it would put my career on track, just because I loved the music and I loved her. Suddenly we have seven million albums and I’m off in Celine [Dion] land, Whitney [Houston] and Toni Braxton.Q. Is there an artist you would have liked to work with, but haven’t?A. Sting. But he doesn’t need me.A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »