By REUTERSMARCH 29, 2015
AMSTERDAM —  The Dutch government will reconsider selling off ABN Amro, the finance minister, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, said on Sunday, after senior managers agreed to give up an increase in pay that had stalled progress on the state-owned lender’s proposed share listing.In the face of a widespread public outcry, the managers said on Sunday that they would forgo raises of 100,000 euros ($110,000) each, which had been approved by the supervisory board for six members of the managing board, though not for the bank’s chief executive, Gerrit Zalm.Lawmakers, whose approval is needed for an initial public offering, had criticized the raises as evidence that the bank’s management culture was still flawed. Mr. Dijsselbloem said on Friday that he would delay the privatization until questions about the increase were resolved.Thousands of bank employees lost their jobs after the bank’s nationalization in 2008, which cost taxpayers billions of euros. Last year, the union representing workers at the bank agreed to a two-year freeze on salaries.AdvertisementMr. Zalm said managers’ annual base salary was increased after a law had limited bonuses in the financial sector to 20 percent.AdvertisementIn a statement on Sunday, the managers said they were “putting the interests of the bank and the public first.”“Now that our remuneration is the subject of discussion and threatens to affect the future of ABN Amro,” the managers wrote, they had “decided to renounce the allowance.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Dijsselbloem responded that he “welcomed the step.”“After completing discussion with Parliament, the cabinet will again discuss the launch of the proposed stock market listing,” he said.ABN Amro’s finances have largely recovered since the crisis. On Feb. 20, it reported an underlying profit last year of 1.55 billion euros, with provisions for bad loans shrinking and the Dutch economy set to grow.Its current book value is about 14.9 billion euros, indicating that a stock market listing would be unlikely to raise enough to repay the roughly 24 billion euros that its nationalization cost taxpayers.The I.P.O., which could take place as early as the second half of 2015, would be the largest to date on the Euronext exchange.The uproar over pay occurred as Dutch lawmakers took a tougher stance than their European peers on compensation for members of the finance industry.Mr. Zalm has said the managers were all hired after the bank’s nationalization.Mr. Zalm’s base pay remains at 759,375 euros, and the other managers, including the chief financial officer, Kees van Dijkhuizen, will remain at 607,500 euros, well below industry averages.A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: ABN Amro Halts Raises, Clearing Barrier to I.P.O.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.