By REUTERSMARCH 29, 2015
BOAO, China — Zhou Xiaochuan, China’s central bank governor, warned on Sunday that the country needed to be vigilant about signs of deflation and said policy makers were closely watching the slowing of global economic growth and declines in commodity prices.Mr. Zhou’s comments are likely to add to concerns that China is in danger of slipping into deflation and to underline increasing nervousness among policy makers as the economy continues to lose momentum despite a series of stimulus measures.“Inflation in China is also declining. We need to have vigilance if this can go further to reach some sort of deflation or not,” Mr. Zhou said at a forum in Boao, on the southern Chinese island of Hainan.Mr. Zhou added that the pace at which inflation was slowing was a “little too quick.”Beijing is determined to keep the Chinese economy, the world’s second-largest, after that of the United States, from taking the same path of recession and deflation that has blighted its neighbor Japan for the past 20 years.AdvertisementThe central bank’s newspaper warned last month that China was dangerously close to slipping into deflation.AdvertisementThe People’s Bank of China has cut interest rates twice since November and taken other steps to support growth, but economists say it will be forced to take more aggressive measures in coming months if prices and the economy weaken further.Mr. Zhou also said that China had a “clear direction” in terms of interest rate liberalization — a long-term goal — although he added that it would be difficult to establish a clear timetable for the move. He pointed to comments made last year, when he said the country’s deposit rates were likely to be liberalized in one to two years.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last week, Mr. Zhou said China could undermine structural overhauls if it adopted an excessively loose monetary policy while pledging to relax capital controls to help make the renminbi currency fully convertible.Mr. Zhou said on Sunday that China hoped to work on streamlining regulations governing foreign exchange this year and that through the adoption of new rules China would eventually be able to achieve capital account convertibility.China is also “cautious” about the wider global slowdown, falling inflation and tumbling commodity prices, Mr. Zhou said.  China is particularly susceptible as the world’s largest  importer of petroleum and iron ore.This month, China announced an economic growth target of about 7 percent for this year, down from 7.4 percent in 2014, already the slowest in 24 years.But weak figures so far in 2015 suggest the new target may already be at risk, with sluggish domestic demand, a cooling property market, industrial overcapacity and high debt levels dragging on activity.China’s annual consumer inflation quickened to 1.4 percent in February from a five-year low of 0.8 percent the previous month.A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.