
On the Road By                     
 JOE SHARKEY
 
MARCH 30, 2015
ALL roads end, and now we come to the end of this one.What a different world it was for business travelers when I first started writing On the Road in March 1999 — 16 years and about 830 columns ago. (I never missed a week, in case you’re doing the arithmetic.)Back then, there were 10 major airlines, all battling for market share by adding capacity and waging fare wars on targeted routes, while using tactics like the reviled Saturday-night stay requirement to discourage business travelers from buying cheap leisure fares.Today, long story short, after layoffs, bankruptcies and tens of billions in losses, the airlines are solidly profitable through severe cost-cutting and consolidation. The Saturday-night stay rule is long gone, but so is intense fare and service competition. Now there are four major airlines with extensive networks. Three of them, Southwest excepted, have gotten rid of most of those 50-seat regional jets they were buying after 1999 and allowed air service to languish in many midsize and smaller cities.The impact of this disruption on the airline work force has been brutal. In 1999, airlines in the United States employed more than 728,000 workers, according to Transportation Department data. That number was about 593,000 last year — even though the number of passengers rose to about 767.4 million in 2014 from about 641.6 million in 1999.AdvertisementBut we’ve been down this road before, haven’t we? So instead, let me wrap this up with one regret, a few memories, and one bit of advice.Here is the regret. Over the years, thousands of readers have written. You shared stories. There were many articulately detailed complaints about airlines, hotels, frequent-flier programs and life in general on the road, including the airport security experience after 9/11. In 2004, for example, large numbers of women writing to me about being manhandled at airport security prompted a column that led to significant changes by the Transportation Security Administration in physical pat-down procedures for female passengers.But as I wrap this column up, my abiding regret is I seldom had the time to reply to reader emails, to at least say thanks for your civility, your enthusiasm, your kindness. I do that now. Thanks.Memories include plunging into a battered air-travel system days after 9/11, talking to the stricken pilots and flight attendants who bravely brought air travel back to its feet in less than a week. And flying the upstart new airlines that defied conventional wisdom and took to the skies from 2003 to 2008. Remember Eos and MaxJet, those wonderful all-business-class trans-Atlantic discount airlines that tried to make it back then? I also remember seeing three of MaxJet’s 767 airliners parked forlornly a few years later at an aircraft storage center in the Arizona desert.I recall the poignant end in early 2006 of a flashy little low-fare upstart called Independence Air. I was on its final flight, from Newark to Washington Dulles, and watched a young flight attendant, only two months on the job, carefully stow soda cans and replace napkins in the galley as that last flight taxied to a stop — even though she knew she was out of a job the moment the engines shut off.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Over the years I had my share of “capers,” to use a delicious term favored by the New York Times columnist David Carr, who died unexpectedly last month. For example, I was lucky enough to be on the last commercial flights of both the British Airways and Air France supersonic Concordes in 2003. When the final trans-Atlantic Air France Concorde landed at Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris, I was thrilled to see a large crowd cheering wildly on the ramps and terminal rooftops while fire trucks blasted arcs of red, white and blue water in tribute.AdvertisementBut I also remember a very close brush with death more than eight years ago. On Sept. 29, 2006, I was one of seven people on a business jet that collided at 37,000 feet with a Brazilian 737 airliner over the central Amazon. The 737, its left wing ripped off, crashed in a dense rain forest, killing all 154 on board. The severely damaged business jet, a new Brazilian-made Legacy 600, somehow flew on for about 25 minutes before an airstrip suddenly appeared deep in the jungle, and the two American pilots managed to wrestle a seemingly doomed airplane down safely. And no, I have no explanation for why fate shrugged on that horrible afternoon in the sky and handed survival to me, while savagely taking it from 154 others.I did, however, develop a profound interest in air travel safety. In a recent interview, Candace Kolander, the safety coordinator at the Association of Flight Attendants, lamented that in recent emergency evacuations of planes in dangerous situations, passengers often ignore flight attendants’ urgent instructions to leave personal possessions behind and move quickly to the exits.We see this regularly in videos taken by evacuated passengers. After the 2013 Asiana Airlines crash that killed two on landing at San Francisco, passengers slid down the emergency chutes carrying bags and even lugging duty-free liquor they had taken the time to retrieve from overhead bins. Similar scenes were repeated this month in the emergency evacuations of a US Airways plane on a taxiway at Denver, and a Delta plane that skidded off the runway at La Guardia Airport in New York.“The passengers seem to be almost thinking that it isn’t really all that important to follow instructions, leave things behind and get to the exits,” Ms. Kolander said.So my advice is simple, and you hear it every time you get on an airplane. It’s important. Pay attention to the safety instructions.Farewell, and safe travels.Email: jsharkey@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Thoughts and Some Advice at the End of the Road.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »