
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

MARCH 30, 2015
A $12.8 billion prescription should address the chronic merger game among pharmacy benefit managers. The UnitedHealth Group is paying a 27 percent premium for the Catamaran Corporation and should generate more than enough savings to cover it.That might sound like something others might want to try. But the buyer is playing catch-up. And its target is usually a buyer. Catamaran’s capitulation indicates that benefit managers no longer need to make deals themselves to stay alive.Pharmacy benefit managers try to negotiate savings for companies and health plans by squeezing drug makers and keeping a chunk of the discount. For example, new hepatitis C treatments carry a list price of close to $100,000 per patient. The largest benefit manager, Express Scripts, set off a price war late last year by negotiating a sharp discount from the drug’s developer, AbbVie. Discounts of greater than 40 percent to list price are now common.Scale is an advantage for a benefit manager. The more patients it represents, the less a drug maker can afford to be left off its list of preferred medications. That would mean a lot of forgone revenue. The result has been a wave of industry consolidation. Catamaran itself is the product of multiple smaller deals.AdvertisementPast deals suggest UnitedHealth should be able to find savings of at least 1 percent of combined revenue. The two firms should have sales of almost $60 billion this year. The $600 million of savings, taxed and put on a multiple of 10, could be worth more than $4 billion today. That’s significantly greater than the $2.7 billion premium UnitedHealth has agreed to pay for Catamaran.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The fact Catamaran chose to sell may signify the sector’s prolific M.&A. days are behind it. The company, after all, has specialized in finding value by taking over rivals. That its executives are now eschewing such potential opportunities by becoming a seller implies there are fewer opportunities worth pursuing.On top of that, the combined company will be the third-biggest benefit manager, behind Express Scripts and CVS Health. These three will control, depending on the statistic measured, two-thirds to three-quarters of the market.AdvertisementRegulators scrutinized Express Scripts’ and CVS’s transactions, and UnitedHealth can expect similar treatment. The prospect of even tougher oversight for any future deals may be an end to the M.&A.wars.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »