By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONMARCH 30, 2015
Federal regulators have accused Lynn Tilton, who calls herself the “turnaround queen,” and her firm, Patriarch Partners, of defrauding investors by hiding the poor performance of assets she managed for them.The Securities and Exchange Commission said on Monday that Ms. Tilton and Patriarch had breached their fiduciary duty to clients by failing to value the assets of distressed companies as outlined to investors in a series of collateral loan obligation portfolios. This allowed Ms. Tilton to collect as much as $200 million in management fees, the S.E.C. said.Patriarch, based in New York, buys troubled companies on the cheap and turns them around. It has helped turn around companies like MD Helicopters, Rand McNally and Stila Cosmetics.“It’s only men I strip and flip; my companies I keep long term and very close to my heart,” Ms. Tilton once said in the pilot for a reality television show called “The Diva of Distressed.”AdvertisementThe agency’s accusations are related to three C.L.O. funds managed by Patriarch, known as the Zohar funds, through which Ms. Tilton raised around $2.5 billion from investors to make loans to struggling companies. Ms. Tilton promised to improve the operations of the distressed companies in the portfolios, letting them slowly pay off their debt and eventually turning them into profitable companies.But when some of the companies in the Zohar funds failed to perform and did not make their interest payments, Ms. Tilton did not inform investors, the S.E.C. said. Instead, the agency said that she “intentionally and consistently directed that nearly all valuations of these assets be reported as unchanged from their valuations at the time the assets were originated.”“Tilton violated her fiduciary duty to her clients when she exercised subjective discretion over valuation levels, creating a major conflict of interest that was never disclosed to them,” said Andrew J. Ceresney, director of the S.E.C.’s enforcement division.Unlike most private equity executives, Ms. Tilton has embraced media attention and is known for her flamboyant outfits, including her trademark five-inch heels. A veteran of the private equity world, Ms. Tilton cut her teeth working for Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs.Ms. Tilton vowed to fight the S.E.C. in an interview several weeks ago with CNBC in anticipation of S.E.C. action.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We are disappointed that the S.E.C. has chosen to bring an enforcement action that is ill-founded and at odds with Patriarch’s investment strategy, which was consistently disclosed since the inception of the funds,” Barbara Laidlaw, a spokeswoman for Patriarch, said on Monday. “We look forward to the opportunity to vigorously defend ourselves against the S.E.C.’s allegations.”AdvertisementMs. Tilton posted on Twitter: “It is my intent to set the record straight. They fail to mention my more than $300 million of fees reinvested.”In recent years, the S.E.C. has turned its attention to private equity firms and how they value the assets they manage for investors.It is not the first time that Patriarch has come under regulatory scrutiny. In 2013, the Justice Department investigated Ms. Tilton over information relating to a former Army official, Col. Norbert E. Vergez, who was hired by Patriarch to take the helm at MD Helicopters. Before Mr. Vergez retired from the Army in 2012, he was in charge of a Pentagon division that bought helicopters for the Army.Investigators were looking at Mr. Vergez’s dealings with Patriarch while at the Pentagon and how he came to be hired by the firm to lead MD Helicopters.In 2011, MD Helicopters won a $186 million contract to supply helicopters to Afghanistan.In a statement on Monday, Patriarch said that the Justice Department “declined to intervene,” adding that “neither MD Helicopters nor Patriarch is the target of any criminal investigation.”A Justice Department spokesman did not immediately respond to a request for comment.A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Accuses Equity Firm of Fraud.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.