By AMIE TSANGOCT. 15, 2015
HONG KONG — China Huarong Asset Management, the largest manager of distressed debt in China, is looking to raise up to $2.5 billion in an initial public offering in Hong Kong this month.The bank is offering 5.77 billion shares at 3.03 to 3.39 Hong Kong dollars, or 39 cents to 44 cents, a share, according to people with direct knowledge of the offering terms. That means it could raise $2.3 billion to $2.5 billion.It has secured commitments worth $1.6 billion from 10 “cornerstone” investors, or large institutional buyers. They will not be allowed to sell their shares for six months from the date of the listing.The biggest cornerstone investor is Fabulous Treasure, a subsidiary of the real estate developer Sino-Ocean Land, which has committed $684 million. State Grid Yingda has committed $300 million. Both are state owned.AdvertisementThe institutional investors could end up with a total of 64.1 percent to 71.7 percent of the offering. If they end up with a higher proportion of the shares, it may be a record for cornerstone allocations. The highest such number to date for an I.P.O. worth more than $500 million is China Railway Signal & Communication’s listing, which raised $1.5 billion in its public offering in July, according to data from Dealogic. Cornerstone investors locked up 67 percent of its shares.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The “bad loan bank” is testing the market after a summer of volatility, along with China Reinsurance, which is looking to raise about $2 billion, and the China International Capital Corporation, which is looking to raise about $1 billion.AdvertisementChina Huarong is one of four state-owned companies set up in the late 1990s to take bad loans off the books of the country’s biggest banks. It will be the second such company to list after Cinda Asset Management raised $2.5 billion in December 2013.The listing comes after the bank managed to attract $2.4 billion from investors including Goldman Sachs and Warburg Pincus last year. It would be the biggest listing since Huatai Securities raised more than $4.5 billion in May.China Huarong expects to price the offering next Thursday.Goldman Sachs, HSBC, the China International Capital Corporation, Citibank, and Industrial and Commercial Bank of China are handling the deal.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.