By RAVI SOMAIYAMARCH 30, 2015
The New York Times Company has appointed Kinsey Wilson, a former NPR executive who joined the newspaper last month as an editor for strategy and innovation, to lead its companywide digital product and technology operations.Mr. Wilson will become executive vice president, product and technology, and will sit on the company’s executive committee, The Times announced on Monday. He will report to both the newspaper’s executive editor, Dean Baquet, and the company’s chief executive, Mark Thompson.“The company’s initial plan was to appoint an executive vice president who would work as a partner to Kinsey in his newsroom role,” Mr. Baquet and Mr. Thompson said in a joint statement. But the two became convinced, they said, “that unifying these responsibilities under his leadership makes better sense and offers us an opportunity to accelerate the progress that is already underway.”In a note to staff members, the two executives said they would continue to ensure “that there is a very clear segregation between our journalism and the commercial interests and activities of the company.”The Times, like all print newspapers, has been struggling to adjust to a rapidly shifting media landscape, as readers moved first to the web, then to smartphones and social networks. The newspaper started a paywall, to charge digital readers, in 2011, and had 910,000 digital subscribers in the last quarter of 2014. Half of its digital readers now come from mobile, the company said.AdvertisementMr. Wilson, 59, said in an interview that one of the core challenges for The Times is that readers “are inundated with information every hour of the day except when they’re sleeping. That needs to inform the way we present the news.”AdvertisementIn that environment, he said, “how people experience The New York Times, the quality of that experience, is just as important as our news report.” He will be working with the newsroom, he said, and with others in the company who are designing and building a portfolio of digital offerings to present the newspaper’s journalism.That will involve, he said, working on the current lineup of apps and other media products, and perhaps adding more new products and channels in the future. “In this environment,” he said, “we’re moving past the point where a single presentation of our news report can satisfy our readers.”The Times also announced that David Perpich, previously general manager of new digital products, will become a senior vice president, product, reporting to Mr. Wilson. Paul Smurl, who had been serving as general manager, core digital products, will leave the company to become chief operating officer and president of the start-up Some Spider L.L.C.A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Executive for Digital Efforts at Times Co.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.