AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayThe Royal Bank of Scotland said on Monday that Rory Cullinan, the recently appointed head of its corporate and institutional bank, was leaving the company at the end of April.Mr. Cullinan, who joined the bank six years ago, was named executive chairman of the corporate and institutional bank in February. Mr. Cullinan served as R.B.S’s internal restructuring expert and had most recently headed its internal “bad bank.”The news comes as R.B.S. announced plans last month to dismantle its global investment bank and shrink its geographic footprint to about 13 countries from 38, resulting in significant job losses, including in the United States.In a news release, R.B.S. said that it had “reached an agreement” with Mr. Cullinan to leave the company, but he would remain with the bank until April 30.“We would like to express our thanks to Rory for his very significant contribution to the rebuild of R.B.S. over the past six years.,” Ross McEwan, the R.B.S. chief executive, said in a news release on Monday. “We wish him every success in the future.”R.B.S., which reported its seventh-consecutive annual loss in 2014, is in the process of reshaping itself from a bank with global ambitions to a much smaller, British focused lender to consumers and businesses.The lender declined to comment on why Mr. Cullinan was leaving at this time.In February, Mr. Cullinan took on responsibility for the corporate and institutional bank in addition to his responsibilities as head of the lender’s “bad bank,” known as Capital Resolution. The “bad bank” is responsible for selling of or closing noncore businesses and other unwanted assets.Mr. Cullinan also oversaw the spinoff of the Citizens Financial Group in the United States in an initial public offering last year.“I am pleased and proud to have played a significant part in restoring R.B.S. to a safe and sound agenda over the past six years,” Mr. Cullinan said in a news release. “I wish all my colleagues continued success.”Following Mr. Cullinan’s departure, Chris Marks, the chief executive of the corporate and institutional bank, and Mark Bailie, the chief executive of its Capital Resolution arm, will serve as co-C.E.O.s of the corporate and institutional bank.Advertisement