By CHAD BRAY and VANESSA FRIEDMANMARCH 30, 2015
The Yoox Group, the Italian online fashion retailer, said on Monday that it was in discussions with Compagnie Financière Richemont of Switzerland about a “potential business combination” with Net-a-Porter, the luxury e-commerce pioneer.The announcement was made more than a year after the first reports that Yoox was exploring a purchase. It also followed speculation last week that Amazon was interested in acquiring Net-a-Porter, and underscored the tech world’s aggressive move into the high-end fashion market.Yoox did not disclose the form or timing of any combination. “The company will update the market as appropriate in due course and cannot comment further at this stage,” Yoox said in a news release Monday.Net-a-Porter has offices in London, New York, Hong Kong and Shanghai. Its parent company, Richemont, owns Cartier, Piaget and Montblanc and other brands.Net-a-Porter’s website sells clothing, jewelry, shoes and other accessories from a variety of top designers and labels, including Alexander McQueen, Dolce & Gabbana and Valentino. It also publishes Porter, a magazine that allows readers to buy featured items.Richemont acquired a majority interest in Net-a-Porter in 2010 from its founder, Natalie Massenet, who remained executive chairwoman, in a deal that valued the e-commerce company at 350 million pounds, or about $520 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yoox, based in Milan, sells off-season luxury goods online in its own stores, as well as trendier brands on thecorner.com, and operates the online stores for more than 30 other luxury brands, including Armani, Lanvin and Valentino. In 2012 it entered into a joint venture with Kering, the French luxury group, to build and power the online stores for brands such as Alexander McQueen and Bottega Veneta.Completing a deal with Net-a-Porter would give Yoox a significant proprietary presence in the high-end fashion market as other technology companies are beginning to move into the sector, whether through wearables such as the Apple Watch or Intel’s collaborations with Gucci and Luxottica. Amazon and its fashion sites, such as Amazon Fashion, East Dane and MyHabit, most of which feature more mass-market brands than Net-a-Porter, have signed on as the title sponsor of men’s New York fashion week this summer.Yoox has a market capitalization of 1.3 billion euros, or about $1.4 billion, and posted revenue of €524 million last year.Its shares were up 10 percent to €23.18 in Milan on Monday.A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: 2 Big Names in Fashion E-Commerce Hold Talks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.