By DAVID GELLESMARCH 30, 2015
Two pharmacy benefits managers are combining forces in an effort to negotiate better deals with pharmaceutical makers, a move that could in theory lead to lower drug prices for consumers.A unit of the UnitedHealth Group said it had agreed to acquire the Catamaran Corporation in an all-cash deal worth nearly $13 billion, the companies announced on Monday.UnitedHealth will pay $61.50 a share for Catamaran, a 27 percent premium over Friday’s closing price of $48.32 a share. It is the latest big acquisition in the health care industry, which is in the midst of a surge of deal activity. And it represents a further consolidation of the pharmacy benefits management business.Last month, Rite Aid, a big pharmacy chain, acquired Envision Pharmaceutical Services, for $2 billion in cash and stock.AdvertisementCatamaran, which is based in Schaumburg, Ill., will be combined with UnitedHealth’s pharmacy services business, OptumRx. Catamaran manages more than 400 million prescriptions each year on behalf of 35 million people — or about one in every five prescription claims in the United States.AdvertisementThe combined company will face off against other big pharmacy benefits managers, including Express Scripts and CVS Caremark.“We believe this combination will create significant value for health plan, government, third-party administrator and employer customers and, most importantly, the individual consumers who depend on us for accurate, affordable and convenient pharmacy benefit products and services,” Larry Renfro, chief executive of Optum, said in a statement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.UnitedHealth said the deal would add 30 cents a share to its net earnings in 2016. UnitedHealth plans to finance the acquisition from existing cash resources and new debt.The deal is subject to approval by Catamaran’s shareholders and regulators, who may take a close look at an increasingly concentrated industry.But even as it consolidates, the business is growing, too. Managing pharmacy benefits is expected to quadruple to a $400 billion market in 2020, up from $100 billion last year.Mark Thierer, Catamaran’s chairman and chief executive, will become chief executive of OptumRx, while Timothy Wicks, the current chief executive of OptumRx, will become president.“Our board of directors carefully considered a variety of strategic options and unanimously concluded that this combination is clearly in the best interests of our shareholders,” Mr. Thierer said. “Together, we believe we will have the talent, scale, technology resources and innovative spirit.”A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: UnitedHealth to Buy Drug Benefits Manager for $12.8 Billion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.