By JENNY ANDERSONMARCH 30, 2015
LONDON —  The Bank of England said on Monday that it would test major British banks on their potential performance against financial shocks including a global slowdown, a sharp drop in inflation and a reduction in worldwide appetite for risk.This year’s test is intended to better reflect the global risks and how those would filter through the system, affecting banks’ capital. It will not include a default by Greece, a Greek exit from the eurozone or Britain’s potentially leaving the European Union. The contagion effects that a Greek default might cause, like a liquidity crisis in emerging markets, are taken into account, Bank of England officials said.The purpose of the test is to measure the soundness of Britain’s banks against severe economic and financial market upheavals, as occurred in 2008. The first such stress test by the British central bank, in 2014, focused more on British risks, including the level of indebtedness of British households.Important differences this year include adding an international focus and taking into account what happens to banks’ illiquid or untradable positions under such stresses.AdvertisementReleasing the parameters of its 2015 test, the British central bank said that under certain situations, banks would have to maintain a 4.5 percent common equity Tier 1 capital ratio, and a 3 percent Tier 1 leverage ratio. Both ratios are measures of a bank’s capital.AdvertisementThe test in 2014 envisioned the pound falling, rising inflation, interest rates spiking to 4 percent, unemployment reaching 12 percent and the economy shrinking 3.5 percent. In that test, one bank failed, one came close to failing and another was forced to raise capital to improve its position.The 2015 version will try to take into account a wider array of global risks, which have risen sharply since the previous evaluation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“By assessing the resilience of the U.K. banking system against a major external shock, we will improve further our ability to identify vulnerabilities and we will ensure that banks have plans in place to address a wider range of possible stresses,” Mark J. Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, said on Monday in a statement.The stress test is not a forecast, but a way to measure banks against unlikely but severe events.The testing model envisions growth in China’s gross domestic product falling to about 1.6 percent, from 7 percent; the British economy contracting 2.3 percent, with unemployment spiking to 9.3 percent; growth in global G.D.P. dropping by 0.7 percent; and the Bank of England’s lowering benchmark interest rates to zero from the current 0.5 percent rate.Among the conditions imagined in the test, liquidity in the market is impaired as investors race to dump risky assets and buy high-quality ones in the United States. This causes an appreciation of the dollar and a devaluation of other currencies, including the Chinese renminbi.Lenders are also required to test how they would react if five other major banks defaulted.In the euro area, the test model imagines weaker demand and falling commodity prices leading to an increase in the rate of deflation. Emerging markets would then suffer, slowing capital inflows and leading to a sharp contraction of domestic credit and demand. In Britain, consumption and investment fall. Residential property prices decline 20 percent and commercial property drops 35 percent.The banks are to publish their results in December. Barclays, HSBC, Lloyds Banking Group, Nationwide, the Royal Bank of Scotland, Santander UK and Standard Chartered will take part. The Co-operative Bank will not, as it is no longer considered systemically significant.A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Bank of England Outlines New Stress Test.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.