AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew Pollack and Reed AbelsonTheranos, a closely watched start-up that vowed to revolutionize medical testing, said on Friday that because of questions raised by the Food and Drug Administration, it had temporarily halted its trademark practice of collecting tiny blood samples from finger pricks.The privately held Theranos has reportedly been valued at more than $9 billion, roughly akin to the laboratory giants Quest and LabCorp. That is based on Theranos’s purported ability to perform dozens of medical tests using only drops of blood from a finger, rather than the conventional larger vials collected from the crook of the arm.Elizabeth Holmes, the company’s 31-year-old founder — who dropped out of Stanford to start the company and has now become one of the youngest self-made female billionaires ever — has often been depicted in photographs holding a tiny tube of blood that the company calls a “nanotainer.”But the company, which is based in Silicon Valley, said on Friday that the F.D.A. believed the nanotainer needed regulatory approval as a medical device. So the company said it had decided to stop using it, except for one test, while it applies for approval.The company’s action was reported by The Wall Street Journal, which said the F.D.A. was concerned about the company’s data and had conducted an unannounced inspection. The Journal also raised questions about the reliability of Theranos’s tests and said that most of the tests the company ran were done on standard laboratory equipment bought from other vendors, not its proprietary system that it has promoted as a disruptive technology in the industry.Theranos, in a statement and interviews, vigorously defended the accuracy of its tests.“The issue here is not an issue relating to the reliability of the tests that are being performed,” David Boies, the company’s outside lawyer, said in an interview. “We haven’t had any indication about a problem of the accuracy of the test, and we’ve done more than three million tests.”Mr. Boies said earlier this year that the company started offering tests in Arizona, not just in California, where its main laboratory is. Under some legal theories, he said, that interstate business would subject the nanotainers to regulation.But he said the nanotainer was only the transport device. The company can still run blood samples collected from the arm on its proprietary testing system. Mr. Boies said that just a minority of the tests were being run on its proprietary machine, but that the plan was to eventually conduct all of the tests on that system. He also said the company was regularly subject to inspections.The F.D.A. declined to comment.The agency typically does not regulate tests that are developed by and performed at a single laboratory. Theranos, unlike most laboratory companies, has said it would voluntarily submit its tests for F.D.A. approval. It has already received one approval, on a test for herpes simplex virus type 1, and will continue to use the nanotainer for that test.Still, it is possible that the F.D.A. is using its review of the nanotainer device as a convenient way to put a check on Theranos because of other concerns. Five years ago, for instance, the agency grew concerned about a genetic test, performed on saliva samples, that was being sold to consumers through Walgreens pharmacies. The F.D.A. put a stop to that in part by saying the saliva collection device needed regulatory approval.While Theranos is privately held, the company and Ms. Holmes have been very much in the public eye. Ms. Holmes, who almost always wears black turtlenecks much like those of Steve Jobs, has appeared on the television show “Charlie Rose,” hosted a visit by Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and has been featured on the covers of magazines including Inc. and The New York Times’s T Magazine.But even before this week there has been skepticism, in part engendered by what some view as the company’s obsession with secrecy. Departing from the norms of medicine, Theranos has not published papers in scientific journals about how its test works and how accurate it is. Its board of directors consists mainly of aging former cabinet members like Henry A. Kissinger and George P. Shultz, and retired military officers, rather than scientists or people with experience in the laboratory business.The company has received endorsements from partners. Most of its 44 blood-drawing centers are in Walgreens drugstores in Arizona, which are expected to be expanded to other states. Walgreens referred questions about the tests to Theranos, but said on Friday, “We have continued to evaluate next steps for further expansion, and that hasn’t changed.”Theranos has also forged separate partnerships with the Cleveland Clinic and with AmeriHealth Caritas, a large insurer specializing in Medicaid. But spokeswomen for both of them said their organizations did not yet have any experience with Theranos’s technology.Advertisement