By MARY WILLIAMS WALSHOCT. 16, 2015
The governor of debt-burdened Puerto Rico gave lawmakers his proposal for creating a fiscal control board, setting up a debate over how best to rebuild credibility with the capital markets while still preserving the island’s sovereignty.Gov. Alejandro García Padilla’s bill would give the control board oversight over nearly all branches of the island’s central government, including agencies and authorities that have issued all but about $17 billion of the island’s $72 billion in debt. The island’s big public utilities that provide electricity and water were excluded from the board’s oversight.The governor’s bill was submitted to the legislature Thursday evening. On Friday, the island’s powerful Government Development Bank issued a summary, stating that the control board would help Puerto Rico “by seeking to restore public confidence in the Commonwealth, while also remaining in compliance with the Commonwealth’s constitution.”Some doubts have emerged, however, because, among other things, the bill called for the governor to appoint all five members of the board. Previous discussions of a control board called for at least some outsiders, to guard against conflicts between the members’ duty to demand difficult fiscal reforms and their loyalty to the governor, who is up for re-election next year.Advertisement“It has pros and cons,” said Douglas Holtz-Eakin, president of the American Action Forum, who recently testified on Puerto Rico’s financial affairs before the Senate Finance Committee. “It has independent financing, broad subpoena powers, a pretty broad mandate — those things are good.”AdvertisementThe main problem that he saw, he said, was that the governor’s control board would be required to oversee the governor’s own five-year plan for fiscal reform and economic growth.“Its effectiveness is as good as you think that plan is, and I didn’t see anything like universal praise for that plan when it first came out,” Mr. Holtz-Eakin said. The five-year plan was issued in September.Puerto Rico has been effectively shut out of the capital markets this year and has warned that it would probably run out of cash in November, with large bond payments coming due in December and January. In urgent need of cash, it has been trying to rebuild its credibility as a borrower, even as it has sought to restructure its $72 billion of outstanding debt.Officials in Puerto Rico could not be reached to comment on the plan.The five-year plan includes a slowdown in debt payments, to make cash available for essential services while the government carries out reforms. The details of how different types of bonds would be affected, and by how much, have not been made public. But one of the control board’s roles, eventually, would be to reassure the affected bondholders that Puerto Rico was using their money as promised, to foster sustainable, long-term growth.The control board is meant to “provide Puerto Rico’s creditors with assurances that conditions agreed to as part of any comprehensive debt restructuring agreement” would be “monitored by an independent, nonpolitical body,” the Government Development Bank said in its summary.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some bondholders said they would probably oppose the governor’s vision of a control board.“Our view is that the effectiveness of any control board is entirely about who is on it,” said one person with knowledge of the bondholders’ thinking, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak for any particular group. “If these people are appointed by the governor, without outside oversight, it could just be a proxy for the governor’s authority.”Mr. Holtz-Eakin, who previously led the Congressional Budget Office, said that control boards could be made to be too independent, as well as not independent enough.“It’s a very tough thing to get right,” he said. A control board that demanded painful measures like tax increases, for instance, might ultimately be accused of infringing on the island’s sovereign authority.AdvertisementControl boards have been used in many distressed American municipalities — currently in Detroit, for example — to make sure bonds are paid on time, budgets remain in balance and money is not spent on politically popular but fiscally unsound programs. Their composition and powers can vary widely.To qualify for the governor’s control board, nominees would need at least 10 years of experience in relevant fields like finance or law, and they could not have held governmental positions within the last five years. They would not qualify if they held Puerto Rican bonds, either directly or indirectly through mutual funds with significant Puerto Rican holdings. All nominees would have to be approved by the Puerto Rican Senate.A new version of the five-year economic plan is due by the end of December; the control board would then vet it and recommend changes until members were satisfied that it was effective and compliant with relevant laws. The lower bodies of government under the board’s control would be required to submit their own budgets to the board by March 1.Puerto Rico has been holding talks with some creditors about a possible debt exchange, in which investors would turn in the Puerto Rican bonds they now hold and receive new ones, with a lower value but a greater likelihood of repayment.A number of creditors have steered clear of the talks so far, thinking they might be better off fighting such a debt exchange in court. Puerto Rico’s constitution explicitly gives general-obligation bondholders first call on the island’s “available resources,” and investors in that type of debt think they could successfully challenge the constitutionality of any attempt to make them accept less.A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Puerto Rico Governor’s Fiscal Oversight Plan Raises Doubts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.