By BROOKS BARNESMARCH 31, 2015
LOS ANGELES – Pushing to broaden its international readership – even if that means the occasional censored article — The Hollywood Reporter said on Tuesday that it had signed an expansive content deal with the Chinese online giant Tencent Holdings.Tencent, a leader in China for social networking and gaming, will pay The Reporter an undisclosed fee to license its entertainment trade news articles and videos.The Reporter and Tencent, which has hundreds of millions of monthly active users, said they also planned to collaborate in the creation of additional editorial content, including award show videos and celebrity news.But there is a trade-off. The Reporter at times leans into the more tawdry end of celebrity news, and Tencent has the ability to block content.AdvertisementTencent “at times may not want to take our content for reasons of relevancy or appropriateness or whatever,” said John Amato, co-president of the entertainment division of Guggenheim Media, which owns The Reporter. “We’re certainly not going to change the way that we produce our content.”AdvertisementTencent has been making deals with American media companies at a steady clip, including a partnership with Time Warner to stream HBO television shows and a separate agreement with Warner Music Group.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Reporter has journalists in Hong Kong who contribute to its weekly magazine and website, but until now most Chinese readers have had “minimal exposure” to the publication, Mr. Amato said.Fueled by the Academy Awards, which came a month earlier this year, The Reporter’s website attracted a record 17 million unique visitors in February, up from 10.9 million in February 2014, according to comScore. (Second-place Variety had 11.4 million, up from 5 million.)“It’s crucial for us expand internationally, where the growth of the box office and the increasing importance of American television is big news,” Mr. Amato said.Does that mean The Reporter will devote more resources to newsgathering in China? Mr. Amato was noncommittal. “There is no end to our ambitions,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.