By MARGALIT FOXMARCH 31, 2015
Carlos Falchi, a Brazilian-born accessories designer famous for his amiably rumpled, highly coveted handbags made of the skins of exotic animals, died on Friday in Durham, N.C. He was 70.The cause was complications of surgery for glioblastoma, a cancer of the brain, his family said.A self-taught artisan who cut an amiably rumpled figure himself, Mr. Falchi (pronounced FAHL-chee) first attracted attention in the arts scene of 1960s New York. There he supplemented his income as a busboy by making hand-sewn leather clothing for the likes of Mick Jagger, Miles Davis, Tina Turner, Patti Smith and Andy Warhol, dyeing the skins himself in the bathtub of his apartment.After shifting his focus to handbags in the 1970s, Mr. Falchi built his bathtub operation into a multimillion-dollar global brand.His bags, available in stores like Bloomingdale’s, Henri Bendel and Saks Fifth Avenue, can sell for thousands of dollars; their devotees have included Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, Sarah Jessica Parker and Madonna. Several of his pieces are in the permanent collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.AdvertisementThe Carlos Falchi brand will continue, his family said.Handmade at his atelier on West 38th Street in Manhattan, Mr. Falchi’s bags are characterized by their supple, bohemian forms; colorful, collagelike patchwork designs; and use of dyed skins from a counterintuitive range of animals — which over the years have included alligator, anaconda, anteater, buffalo, caiman, crocodile, frog, ostrich, python, water buffalo and water snake.Advertisement“I use parts of the alligator no one ever saw,” Mr. Falchi told The New York Times in 1987. “I hate to tell you: its little feet.”In recent years, Mr. Falchi has been offering lower-cost versions of his work through the Home Shopping Network, where prices currently range from about $20 to just under $300. He also designed a line of limited-edition bags for Target.Carlos Antonio Perreira was born on Sept. 26, 1944, in Belo Horizonte, a city in southeastern Brazil. (He adopted the surname Falchi — his mother’s maiden name — after he began his career in the fashion industry, where it behooved one to have an Italian name.)As a youth, Carlos attended military school and worked for the post office in Rio de Janeiro, where he parlayed his artistic ability into designing stamps.After moving to New York in the mid-1960s, he found work as a busboy at Max’s Kansas City, the storied nightclub on Park Avenue South, above Union Square. By day he made his own clothes from diverse scraps of leather — a technique born of necessity, as it wasted almost nothing.At night, his outfits caught the eye of Max’s habitués, who became his first clients.“People would say, ‘Where did you get that jacket with all those fringes everywhere?’ ” Mr. Falchi recalled in a 2011 interview with W magazine. “And I would say, ‘I made it!’ ”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the ’70s, hoping to interest Bendel in his clothes, Mr. Falchi put several garments into a bag of his own design and took them to the store. “They loved the pants, they loved the jacket, but they especially loved the bag,” he told Newsweek in 2002.Bendel’s president, Geraldine Stutz, a highly influential figure in retailing, persuaded him that bags were his calling. By 1980, Women’s Wear Daily was describing Mr. Falchi’s “buffalo bag,” a slouchy satchel that was among his first big hits, as “the most copied bag in the industry.”AdvertisementMr. Falchi’s first marriage ended in divorce. His survivors include a brother, Marcos; his second wife, the former Lee Gunn, known as Missy; and their daughters, Juliet Falchi and Kate Falchi, who is the chief designer and president of Carlos Falchi Couture.His laurels include a lifetime achievement award from the Accessories Council and a Coty Award, a fashion industry honor.If the relaxed aesthetic of Mr. Falchi’s bags seemed to run counter to Gotham’s edgy sensibilities, he was quick to assure people that a little bit of Manhattan, where he lived to the end of his life, was sewn in with every stitch.“I think the people who work here bring New York with them — the tension of time, the nervousness, the subway,” he told The Times in 2009. “All that is in these bags.”A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Carlos Falchi, 70; Made Exotic Handbags.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.