By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMARCH 31, 2015
Etsy, the online marketplace beloved by makers of handmade jewelry and yoga bags, is hoping that Wall Street investors will be equally ardent fans.The company disclosed in an amended prospectus on Tuesday that it hoped to raise as much as $266.7 million in its initial public offering, with expectations of selling shares at $14 to $16 each.At the midpoint of that range, the company would command a market value of about $1.2 billion, about 52 times its adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, for last year. By contrast, eBay trades at roughly 14 times its Ebitda for last year.The anticipated price range is a sign of how ambitious Etsy — born in a Brooklyn loft as a way for one of its founders to sell handmade wooden goods — has become as it seeks to go public. The stock sale would be among the better known offerings so far this year.AdvertisementBut unlike other prominent companies that have held initial public offerings over the last 12 months, including the Alibaba Group of China, Etsy was founded with and appears determined to maintain a quirky culture.AdvertisementEtsy rose to prominence as an online bazaar for all types of artisans to sell their wares directly on the Internet.That has led to strong business performance by some measures. Its sales rose 56 percent last year, to $195.6 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But by generally accepted accounting principles, the company lost $15 million. Using adjusted Ebitda, which strips out accounting costs like those of paying employees in stock, the company earned $23 million.Of the roughly 16.7 million shares that are scheduled to be sold in the offering, only 13.3 million will come from Etsy itself.The remainder will come from several existing investors who are also selling shares in the offering. The venture capital firm Accel Partners is expected to collect as much as $24 million, while Union Square Ventures could make as much as $13.8 million. (Those two firms, along with Index Ventures, will still own roughly 45 percent of the company after the stock sale.)Etsy said it planned to use its share of the proceeds for general corporate purposes like financing additional growth. Some of the proceeds will also go toward Etsy.org, a nonprofit the company created in January to support female entrepreneurs and other underrepresented business owners.Etsy is expected to begin trading within about two weeks on the Nasdaq stock market, under the ticker symbol ETSY.Its offering is being led by Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.