AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelJohn Krasinski was driving on Route 101 to Los Angeles with some friends about two years ago when the global beats of Lionel Richie’s “All Night Long (All Night)” took over the car. The actor and comedian, known for playing Jim Halpert on “The Office,” grabbed an air microphone and started lip syncing.Suddenly, the battle was on. The writer Stephen Merchant dramatically mouthed the words to Will Smith’s “Boom! Shake the Room.” Mr. Krasinski’s wife, the actress Emily Blunt, silently performed Blackstreet’s “No Diggity.” The trio had been brainstorming funny bits for an appearance that Mr. Krasinski was about to make on Jimmy Fallon’s “Late Night” show. The road-trip-inspired concert provided the answer. Mr. Krasinski pitched the idea of a silent singing contest to Mr. Fallon, who was game. Mr. Fallon opened the duel, standing behind the microphone and pretending to belt out Melissa Manchester’s ballad “Don’t Cry Out Loud.” Mr. Krasinski countered with pop-princess dance moves and Katy Perry’s “Teenage Dream.” “As cliché as it sounds, something magical happened,” Mr. Krasinski said, recalling the performance. “Jimmy turned to me and said: ‘Oh my gosh. This is going to be huge.’ ”And huge it has been. Mr. Fallon took the contest with him when he became host of “The Tonight Show,” where it quickly exploded into one of his most popular bits. A battle against Emma Stone and a three-way contest with Joseph Gordon Levitt and Mr. Merchant rank as the most watched of all of Mr. Fallon’s YouTube clips, each drawing more than 41 million YouTube views. Fans have started their own lip sync battles and posted them to the web. Such competitions are also a popular element of “RuPaul’s Drag Race,” in its seventh season on the Logo TV cable channel, and are frequently reposted to the web by fans. Now, that viral sensation is getting a stage of its own with Thursday night’s debut of “Lip Sync Battle,” a 30-minute show on Viacom’s cable network Spike TV. Hosted by the rapper LL Cool J with commentary from the model Chrissy Teigen, the show features a parade of celebrities — Common versus John Legend; Anne Hathaway versus Emily Blunt; Justin Bieber versus Deion Sanders — lip syncing and dancing to the songs of their choice. There are costumes, choreography and backup dancers. At stake are bragging rights and a giant, jewel-encrusted “Lip Sync Battle” championship belt.The premiere episode features Mr. Fallon battling Dwayne Johnson, better known as The Rock. Mr. Fallon does a rendition of Madonna’s “Like a Prayer,” donning a gospel choir robe and backed up by a choir. Mr. Johnson, the former wrestler and star of a number of action-adventure films, shakes his hips to Taylor Swift’s “Shake It Off.” “It is silliness,” LL Cool J said one afternoon in January, standing in front of the stage during a break in rehearsals. “There is so much crazy stuff going on in the world, it is just nice to be part of a TV show that is about just fun.”Spike TV is an unlikely home for a lip sync variety show. Long marketed as the first television network for men, it was known for airing programs like mixed martial arts fights and the reality ride-along show “Cops.” It now is trying to appeal to a broader audience — like women — with a tagline of “the ones to watch” and a programming mix featuring notable names and much-talked-about shows.Mr. Fallon’s company Eight Million Plus Productions, Mr. Krasinski and Mr. Merchant pitched the idea for “Lip Sync Battle” to Spike TV more than a year ago. It was shortly after Mr. Merchant’s “Tonight Show” battle against Mr. Fallon and Mr. Levitt, which quickly spread online. (The team had originally pitched the idea to NBCUniversal, which passed, Mr. Krasinski said).Spike TV executives bought it on the spot. “It was not a complicated conversation,” said Casey Patterson, executive vice president for talent and development production at Viacom Entertainment and Music Group. “What could be better as the network is turning the corner to be a broad general entertainment network than a big, broad modern viral variety show?”In addition to “Lip Sync Battle,” Spike TV is planning its first scripted event series in eight years with “Tut.” About the Egyptian pharaoh Tutankhamen, the mini-series was filmed in Morocco and stars the Academy Award-winning actor Ben Kingsley. The health and fitness guru Jillian Michaels, known for her appearances on “The Biggest Loser,” also will have a nonscripted show on the network called “Sweat Inc.”Spike TV’s makeover comes as cable networks face stiff competition from entertainment on an array of screens, causing big ratings declines and a tough advertising market. Network executives hope that the glamour and silliness of a star-studded “Lip Sync Battle” will become a viral sensation — just like the contest on Mr. Fallon’s show — and generate broader attention for the network.The challenge will be translating that into television viewers, and making sure those viewers not only find the show on Spike TV but also tune in longer than for quick-hit Internet clips.Mr. Merchant said he initially was skeptical that the concept would translate into a half-hour series. “My first instinct was, It was a funny little bit on Jimmy’s show, but why would you want to watch a whole show of it?”But after participating in one episode and watching other tapings, Mr. Merchant said he was convinced that audiences would be swept up in the activity. “The more you make a fool of yourself, the more fun it is, really,” he said.Advertisement