By HIROKO TABUCHIMARCH 31, 2015
A bankruptcy judge gave his blessing on Tuesday to a plan that would keep about 1,700 RadioShack stores open, saying he would approve the plan over a higher cash bid that would probably have liquidated the retailer but raised more money for its creditors.The ruling by Judge Brendan L. Shannon of United States Bankruptcy Court at a hearing in Wilmington, Del., clears the way for RadioShack to sell 1,740 of its locations to a New York hedge fund. That fund, Standard General, intends to co-brand those RadioShack stores as Sprint stores in a bid valued at about $160 million.Salus Capital Partners, RadioShack’s largest creditor, allied with liquidators to put together a competing $129 million cash bid that would have dented some of the creditors’ losses. Salus argued in a heated four-day hearing that its bid was superior to Standard General’s but that it had failed to receive a fair hearing during bankruptcy proceedings, which its representatives called “a sham.”In his ruling, Judge Shannon said he found “no just reason for delay” in moving ahead with Standard General’s plans for the electronics retailer. All parties were given “a reasonable opportunity to object or be heard” during the bankruptcy proceedings, he said at the hearing.AdvertisementRadioShack, a retailer that helped bring personal computers to the masses, filed for bankruptcy protection in February after hemorrhaging money for years in the face of larger rivals, online competitors and the advent of wireless technology.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.RadioShack stores could now live on, albeit as a much smaller chain geared toward selling mobile phones. Sprint is expected to run special “store within a store” departments in RadioShack’s surviving retail spaces. These locations — many in strip malls and in lower-income, underserviced areas — could be well suited to selling prepaid phones to customers with poor or limited credit. The remaining stores are being closed. The deal with Standard General and Sprint is expected to save the jobs of about 7,500 of RadioShack’s 27,000 employees.AdvertisementThe ruling comes as a victory for Standard General, a previously little-known hedge fund that has jumped into the spotlight in the last year by taking on two prominent retail turnaround efforts.The New York fund struck an alliance last year with Dov Charney, the ousted chief executive of American Apparel, helping him amass shares in the company he founded. Standard General and Mr. Charney had a falling-out, however, after the American Apparel board, which includes a Standard General partner, David Glazek, dismissed the founder from the company entirely.Mr. Glazek did not immediately respond to requests for comment. Brian Ruby, a spokesman for Salus, said the firm had no comment.A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Hedge Fund Plan to Keep 1,700 RadioShack Stores Open Is Approved.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.