AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — Home prices continued to rise at a steady pace in January, as the American housing market deals with affordability problems and few properties listed for sale.The Standard & Poor’s/Case-Shiller 20-city home price index rose 4.6 percent in January compared with 12 months earlier, S.&P. said on Tuesday. That is up from growth of 4.4 percent in December.Few Americans have listed their homes for sale, and the tight inventory is keeping prices higher. Robust hiring and low mortgage rates have raised the possibility of stronger sales, yet home prices have appreciated at a significantly faster pace than earnings.“Home prices are rising roughly twice as fast as wages, putting pressure on potential home buyers and heightening the risk that any uptick in interest rates could be a major setback,” said David Blitzer, chairman of the index committee for S.&P. Dow Jones Indices.The Case-Shiller index covers roughly half the homes nationwide. The index measures prices compared with those in January 2000 and creates a three-month moving average. The January figures are the latest available.Housing inventories have been tight since December. The number of homes for sale in February was equal to just 4.6 months of sales, compared with an average of 5.2 months last year. Six months of supply is typical for a healthy housing market.All 20 cities reported higher prices than a year earlier. Denver reported the largest gains, with prices up 8.4 percent. Miami prices jumped by 8.3 percent and Dallas homes appreciated at 8.1 percent. Home appreciation nearly plateaued in Washington, where prices rose just 1.3 percent.Historically low mortgage rates and solid hiring have laid the foundation for stronger sales this year. Average 30-year fixed rates were 3.7 percent last week, according to the mortgage giant Freddie Mac. The average has plummeted from a 52-week high of 4.4 percent, making it cheaper for would-be homeowners to buy.Separately, employers have added 3.3 million jobs over the last 12 months, including 295,000 jobs in February. The hiring spree pace has caused the unemployment rate to drop to 5.5 percent from 6.7 percent. As more people in the economy hold jobs, more paychecks exist to finance home purchases.Also on Tuesday, the Conference Board said its consumer confidence index rose in March, after a dip in February, thanks to the improving job market. The index rose to 101.3, from a revised 98.8 reading in February.Confidence has risen to the highest levels since before the recession started in December 2007. A year ago, the index stood at 83.9.“The strength of confidence, along with improving labor market conditions, indicates that real consumption growth will accelerate over the coming months,” Paul Ashworth, chief United States economist at Capital Economics, wrote in a research note.Advertisement