
Breakingviews By                     
JEFFREY GOLDFARB

MARCH 31, 2015
The United States cable puzzle is starting to take shape. None of the pieces is a snug fit just yet, though.Charter Communications, which is poised to become the country’s second-largest operator, aimed to clarify the picture by agreeing to buy a smaller rival, Bright House Networks, from the Newhouse family of media magnates for $10.4 billion. The deal is contingent on Comcast’s $45 billion takeover of Time Warner Cable. If that deal falls through, the industry’s jigsaw pieces could move again.The Comcast deal has been in limbo for a year, mired not only in a competition analysis by regulators but also the government’s rethinking of how Internet providers and web traffic should be regulated. The market’s implied probability of success has improved over the last six weeks, according to a Breakingviews calculator, but investors nevertheless remain somewhat skeptical.The acquisition announced on Tuesday, which establishes a convoluted new partnership nearly three-quarters owned by Charter to control Bright House and its approximately two million video customers, suggests some additional confidence that the two biggest companies in the sector will secure approval. Charter, which is backed by the cable mogul John C. Malone’s Liberty Broadband, agreed last yearto buy millions of Time Warner Cable’s video subscribers and swap others in a deal intended to restrain Comcast’s expanded market share and thus ease the path with regulators.AdvertisementBright House for the time being remains a small but pivotal fragment of any industry realignment. It was, after all, an unsolicited bid from Charter and Mr. Malone in January 2014 for Time Warner Cable that spurred Comcast to make its move. Presumably, if that deal were to be torpedoed, Charter’s interest in Time Warner Cable would be renewed.Time Warner Cable’s resistance might just as equally be reawakened. And it actually has first dibs on Bright House. Charter cleverly structured its Bright House deal to require only a comparatively small amount of borrowed money, but it would be harder to do the same if trying to buy a reluctant Time Warner Cable enlarged by Bright House.AdvertisementAs with any complex puzzle, completing the cable landscape in the United States could require some patience.Jeffrey Goldfarb is United States editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »