By EMILY STEELMARCH 31, 2015
Michael J. Angelakis, who helped steer Comcast through its acquisition of NBCUniversal and also was instrumental in the attempt to take over Time Warner Cable, is leaving his post as chief financial officer to lead a new Comcast-backed company with $4 billion in firepower for strategic investments.The unexpected management shake-up was announced on Tuesday, and Comcast said that it was starting a search for a new chief financial officer immediately. Mr. Angelakis will remain in his position until a successor is found and later continue to work as a senior adviser to Comcast.The media conglomerate’s proposed $45 billion deal for Time Warner Cable remains in regulatory limbo.Widely respected inside and outside of the company, Mr. Angelakis, 50, joined Comcast in 2007 and oversaw corporate development, strategic planning, investor relations and other financial and administrative areas.AdvertisementBrian L. Roberts, Comcast’s chief executive, said that Mr. Angelakis had “helped transform Comcast into the media and technology company that we are today.”The transition has been in the works for quite some time. Several months ago, Mr. Angelakis told Mr. Roberts that he was interested in setting up his own company. Mr. Roberts responded by suggesting that Comcast should not only invest with him but act as the sole investor. "I’ve seen my father and John Malone keep the entrepreneurial spirit going as they built their companies,” Mr. Roberts said. “That is something that has worked extremely well in the past for Comcast and we want to keep this a strong part of our culture."Mr. Angelakis did not present Comcast executives with an offer to leave for another company, executives said.“As we enter the final phase of the Time Warner Cable transaction, this is a great time to begin a transition, and I am excited to start this new entrepreneurial company,” Mr. Angelakis said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Angelakis will become chief executive of the new company, which has yet to be named. The venture will have up to $4.1 billion in capital commitments. Comcast has committed $4 billion to the venture, and Mr. Angelakis is personally investing $40 million. Other funding is to come from the new company’s management team.Comcast has an exclusive arrangement with the new venture for 10 years as the sole outside investor.The venture will focus on “growth-oriented” companies in the United States and internationally. Other details remain unclear. Comcast already operates a venture group and previously has made investments in companies like the QVC shopping network and SpectrumCo, a joint venture for wireless spectrum licenses.AdvertisementMr. Angelakis will help with the transition to the new chief financial officer and will help start the integration process for Time Warner Cable, if the deal is approved. Last week, Comcast said it expected government regulators to complete their review of the deal in the middle of the year. Previously, Comcast had expected the deal to close in early 2015.“As we enter the final phase of the Time Warner Cable transaction, this is a great time to begin a transition, and I am excited to start this new entrepreneurial company,” Mr. Angelakis said.Before starting at Comcast, Mr. Angelakis was a managing director at Providence Equity Partners, a global private equity firm. He also is the deputy chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and a trustee at Babson College.Comcast decided to make the announcement on Tuesday because it was starting the public search. “It is a real loss for Comcast to see someone as talented as Mike decide that it is time to move on,” said Craig Moffett, an analyst with Moffett Nathanson Research.A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Leading Comcast Executive Will Leave to Start Company.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.