AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaThe billionaire owner of the Gristedes grocery chain and the owner of Newsday and the Madison Square Garden Company have both submitted bids for The Daily News in New York, according to news reports and two people familiar with the negotiations.The reports on Tuesday, in Reuters and The New York Post, said that Cablevision, led by James L. Dolan, who also runs Madison Square Garden, had bid a single dollar for the newspaper. John A. Catsimatidis, the Gristedes owner, submitted a larger bid last week, according to one of the people familiar with the negotiations. The precise details of the bids, which would presumably take into account the fact that the tabloid loses millions each year, were not disclosed. Representatives for Cablevision, Mr. Catsimatidis and The News all declined to comment.Cablevision and Mr. Catsimatidis have been widely considered the front-runners in buying The News from its current owner, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, who said last month that he was considering selling the newspaper after more than 20 years of stewardship.In a memo to staff members last month, Mr. Zuckerman, 77, said that he had been approached about selling the newspaper and “thought it would be prudent to explore the possibility.”He had not come to the decision easily, he said, and believed that “the immense hard work in turning the business around in an extremely challenging period for the industry” had put the newspaper in a strong position, particularly online.In 2010, the Washington Post company sold Newsweek magazine, which had lost $30 million the previous year, to the audio entrepreneur Sidney Harman, at a price of $1. The company also agreed to cover up to $10 million of the magazine’s bills along with some pension liabilities. The News, like many papers, has struggled with a decline in advertising and slumping newsstand sales. Its circulation, once in the millions, fell to 427,452 on weekdays and 558,057 on Sundays for the six months ending last September, the most recent figures available, according to the Alliance for Audited Media.Advertisement