AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GoughHONG KONG — Ordinary Chinese investors are doubling down on stocks, pushing the Shanghai market to seven-year highs — and their brokers are cashing in.The securities companies that have facilitated the stock market boom are capitalizing on their own ballooning share prices by issuing huge amounts of new stock, raising billions of dollars in the process.On Tuesday, GF Securities, one of China’s biggest brokerage firms, raised $3.6 billion in an initial public offering in Hong Kong, the biggest new listing in Asia so far this year.Earlier in March, Orient Securities, Citigroup’s brokerage partner in mainland China, raised $1.6 billion in a Shanghai listing. And in February, shareholders of Haitong Securities, another big Chinese brokerage firm, approved its plan to raise $3.9 billion by selling additional shares in Hong Kong.Many analysts see a bubble in China’s share rally. Stocks are rising even as the economy grows at its slowest pace in decades, and more people are piling into the market. Investors opened a record 1.7 million new share-trading accounts last week. Increasingly, they are turning to margin financing, or borrowing money from brokerage firms to buy stocks — raising the risk of even steeper losses for ordinary investors if the boom goes bust.The problem with bubbles is anticipating how much they can swell before bursting. Chinese investors appear to be making a counterintuitive bet that a slowing economy is good for markets because it will prompt the leadership in Beijing to respond with measures to stimulate growth. On Monday, in an effort to bolster the slumping housing market, the central bank lowered the minimum down payment on mortgages for second homes to 40 percent, from 60 percent or 70 percent previously, causing a surge in real estate shares.“The sharp drop-off in economic activity since the start of the year, along with lower inflation, will encourage greater action from the People’s Bank of China over the coming months,” Chang Liu, a China economist at Capital Economics, wrote Tuesday in a research report, referring to the central bank. “This will most likely push equities even higher this year,” he added. “However, with markets increasingly divorced from economic fundamentals, we expect a partial reversal of these gains in 2016.”Shanghai’s benchmark share index was the best performer in the world last year. And since Nov. 21, when the central bank began its current cycle of easing monetary policy by cutting interest rates, Shanghai stocks have risen 50 percent. On Monday, the index rose to 3,786.6 points, a level not seen since early 2008, before the financial crisis. Shares slipped 1 percent lower on Tuesday.The surge is precarious because it is increasingly being driven by ordinary investors. According to Tom Orlik, a Bloomberg economist, the results of a recent investment survey conducted by a Chinese university showed that two-thirds of all new investors in China’s stock markets had completed only the equivalent of elementary or junior high school before leaving school. That compared with a dropout rate of about a quarter among existing investors. The survey was conducted at the end of last year by the Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, in Sichuan Province, and covered 4,000 households across the country.China’s securities regulator has recently sought to crack down on market manipulation and curtail the excesses of the rally. In January, it announced a temporary ban on new margin financing at several of the country’s biggest brokerage firms, sending shares plunging.But markets have since recovered, and borrowing from brokerage firms continues to fuel the increase. Outstanding margin financing has risen to more than 1.4 trillion renminbi, or about $230 billion, up from about 1 trillion renminbi at the start of the year.That has been good news to brokerage firms, whose own shares are among the best performers in the rally. GF Securities, which is already listed in China’s secondary market based in Shenzhen, was able to price its Hong Kong I.P.O. on Tuesday at 18.85 Hong Kong dollars per share, at the top of the marketed price range, according to a person with knowledge of the matter who declined to be identified because the information was not yet public.The company raised 27.9 billion Hong Kong dollars, or about $3.6 billion. That ranks as the second-biggest I.P.O. globally this year, after that of the Spanish airport operator Aena, which raised around $4.8 billion in a listing in Madrid in February, according to data from the financial information provider Dealogic.GF Securities shares are scheduled to begin trading on April 10.GF Capital, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Bocom International, Deutsche Bank and Bank of America’s Merrill Lynch unit were the lead underwriters of the listing and were among the 22 banks involved in marketing the deal.Advertisement