AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily Steel and David GellesIn the cable business, the big keep getting bigger.The wave of consolidation now reshaping the media industry continued on Tuesday when Charter Communications announced a $10.4 billion deal for Bright House Networks, now the sixth-largest cable operator in the United States.The deal ultimately would create the second-largest cable operator in the country behind Comcast, controlling about 10 million video subscribers. It is part of a long-held strategy by Charter, backed by John C. Malone’s Liberty Media, to build a stronger national player that can fend off new and old rivals, keep pace with vast technical changes and provide more heft in negotiations with television groups over escalating programming costs.“Bright House Networks provides Charter with important operating, financial and tax benefits, as well as strategic flexibility,” said Thomas M. Rutledge, Charter’s chief executive. “Bright House has built outstanding cable systems in attractive markets that are either complete, or contiguous with the New Charter footprint. This acquisition enhances our scale, and solidifies New Charter as the second-largest cable operator in the U.S.”Charter’s bid for Bright House is the latest multibillion-dollar deal this year, as big corporations in industries including technology, media and health care carry out expensive mergers and acquisitions. Already this year, over $843 billion in deals have been announced, according to Thomson Reuters. That is the most in the first quarter of any year since 2007.Other major deals announced include the more than $80 billion merger of Kraft and Heinz, AbbVie’s acquisition of Pharmacyclics, and Valeant’s agreed takeover of Salix Pharmaceuticals. The brisk activity advances a boom in mergers and acquisitions that began last year, as companies dusted off old consolidation plans, the stock markets surged and debt remained cheap.Last year, Charter tried to acquire Time Warner Cable in a hostile bid, which first was spurned then squashed after Comcast stepped in with a $45 billion deal for Time Warner Cable that would unite the two largest cable operators in the country.Charter later found its way back into the Comcast-Time Warner Cable transaction, which now is awaiting regulatory approval. If regulators give that deal the green light, Charter will acquire some markets and subscribers from the enlarged Comcast. But if the merger is rejected and Charter is not able to acquire the disposed assets from Comcast, it will not proceed with the Bright House deal, Charter said. By announcing this deal before regulators have decided on the proposed Comcast-Time Warner Cable merger, Charter executives are expressing their vote of confidence that the deal will not be blocked. “There is increased confidence that all of these deals would be done,” said Amy Yong, a media analyst at Macquarie. “Otherwise, they would not be so bold to strike another deal.”It also could be a strategy to convince regulators there would be a stronger competitor to Comcast, analysts said. Charter is likely to be a major player in any future consolidation, with Comcast already controlling a large, and controversial, share of the video and broadband markets. Charter’s deal with Bright House could provide the company with more financial firepower to pursue a new round of acquisitions.The backdrop for the transaction is a special arrangement that existed between Time Warner Cable and Bright House that allowed Bright House, the smaller cable company, to take advantage of the agreements that Time Warner Cable struck with television groups. Bright House also benefited from Time Warner Cable’s investments in technology.Since the Comcast-Time Warner Cable deal was announced, questions have been raised about whether the relationship between Time Warner Cable and Bright House would continue. That would leave Bright House a small company in a land of giants.The transaction points to the tough time that smaller, independent cable companies are likely to have should regulators approve megadeals in the cable industry. The worry is that television groups will force the smaller cable companies to pay steep increases in programming costs and that the smaller cable companies will be unable to fight back. At the same time, the small cable companies could fall behind in the services they provide as bigger players pool resources to invest in new technologies.“It is getting harder and harder for the small players to have sustainable economics,” said Craig Moffett, a media analyst with MoffettNathanson Research. “It is putting more and more pressure on the distributors to consolidate.”Steven A. Miron, chief executive of Bright House, said that a deal with Charter gives the company “the strongest prospects for the future.”“We share the same vision for the future of our business as Tom and the Charter leadership team, which is to gain market share by offering customers competitive products and excellent service at a tremendous value,” he added. Mr. Miron said that Bright House’s parent company, Advance/Newhouse, had worked with Mr. Rutledge for more than 20 years, and that Mr. Rutledge had managed cable systems that were previously part of one of the company’s partnerships with Time Warner Cable.Under the terms of the deal, Charter will own 73.7 percent of the new company and Advance/Newhouse will own 26.3 percent. Charter will pay Advance/Newhouse a mix of $5.9 billion worth of common stock, $2.5 billion worth of convertible preferred shares that pay a 6 percent coupon and $2 billion in cash.As part of the transaction, Liberty Broadband, the vehicle that Mr. Malone uses to control his stake in Charter, will buy $700 million of newly issued Charter shares when the deal closes. The new company’s 13-member board will include three directors selected by Advance/Newhouse and three selected by Liberty Broadband.Advertisement