By CHAD BRAYMARCH 31, 2015
LONDON — The Bermuda insurer Endurance Specialty Holdings said on Tuesday that it had agreed to acquire the property and casualty reinsurer Montpelier Re Holdings for $1.83 billion.The deal is expected to expand Endurance’s product distribution and give it access to the Lloyds of London insurance marketplace, in which syndicates of specialist companies join together to share the risk in underwriting policies.The transaction would combine two companies that in total wrote gross premiums of $3.6 billion in 2014, Endurance said.The deal is subject to regulatory and shareholder approval and is expected to be completed in the third quarter. The boards of directors of both companies have approved the merger.Advertisement“The acquisition materially increases our breadth of distribution with the addition of a good-sized and scalable Lloyd’s platform and an attractive property catastrophe business that complements our existing reinsurance portfolio,” John R. Charman, the Endurance chairman and chief executive, said in a news release. “The acquisition also provides Endurance with a natural introduction to the business of managing insurance and reinsurance investment products for third-party capital investors.”AdvertisementMontpelier shareholders would receive $9.89 in cash and 0.472 shares of Endurance for each share they hold in Montpelier. That would equal $40.24 a share, or about $1.83 billion, based on Endurance’s closing price on Monday.Shares of Montpelier closed up 2 percent at $38.15 in New York on Monday.After the transaction, Montpelier’s existing shareholders would own about 32 percent of Endurance.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Funds affiliated with the private equity firm Charlesbank Capital Partners have agreed to vote in favor of the proposed transaction, Endurance said.“This transaction with Endurance provides significant value for Montpelier shareholders through up-front cash and an equity interest in a combined Endurance with enhanced scale, greater market presence and substantial product and geographic diversity,” Christopher L. Harris, the Montpelier president and chief executive, said in a news release.Endurance would expand the size of its board and add three of Montpelier’s directors following the deal. The combined company would be led by Endurance’s senior management team.Montpelier, based in Hamilton, Bermuda, is provider of property and casualty reinsurance. The company posted net income of $210.6 million in 2014.Based in Pembroke, Bermuda, Endurance provides property and casualty insurance and reinsurance, including insurance for agriculture, marine and other specialty lines. The company posted net income of $315.7 million in 2014.Endurance was advised by Morgan Stanley and Jefferies and the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, while Montpelier was advised by Credit Suisse and the law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore.A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Insurance Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.