AdvertisementSupported byBy David JollyPARIS — The eurozone continues to flirt with deflation, an official report showed on Tuesday, as consumer prices fell in March for a fourth consecutive month. A separate report, though, showed the unemployment rate in the zone, a 19-nation currency union, dipping slightly in February.While the data gave little reason to cheer, the reports did not alter the view that Europe, despite its problems, is experiencing a miniboom, lifted by low oil prices, a weak euro and aggressive stimulus from the European Central Bank.Consumer prices fell 0.1 percent from a year earlier, Eurostat, the statistical agency of the European Union, reported from Luxembourg. The inflation rate turned negative in December, falling to as low as minus 0.6 percent in January. Energy prices in March led the decline, falling 5.8 percent from a year earlier.The latest reports “did not lift the threat of a prolonged period of deflation in the currency union,” Jonathan Loynes, chief European economist at Capital Economics, said in a research note. He pointed out that the “core” inflation rate, which strips out volatile food and energy costs, actually fell to 0.6 percent from 0.7 percent. The latest reading was the lowest since Eurostat began measuring it in 1997.Fearing the effect that too-low prices could have on the economy, the European Central Bank has undertaken a policy of quantitative easing, under which it will buy up to 60 billion euros, or about $65 billion, a month of bonds, including sovereign debt. The central bank is trying to raise inflation to its target of just less than 2 percent, a level not reached since January 2013.Tuesday’s inflation and jobless figures were in line with economists’ expectations. Eurostat said that the jobless rate in the eurozone fell to 11.3 percent in February from an upwardly revised 11.4 percent in January. That was the lowest unemployment rate for the region since May 2012, but there has been little to suggest that hiring is about to take off.Mr. Loynes noted that unemployment “remains very high by historical standards,” not far from the record 12.1 percent reached in 2013, “signaling the persistence of a large amount of spare capacity in the labor market.”Some economists took heart over the fact that the decline in overall consumer prices had slowed, suggesting that inflation could turn positive again soon, especially if the downturn in energy costs was not sustained. But the measure that matters most to policy makers, core inflation, is still moving in the wrong direction.The lower core rate reinforced expectations that the central bank would keep pushing policies that effectively weaken the euro. The currency, which has lost more than 11 percent of its value against the dollar this year, fell 0.9 percent after the reports to $1.0737 on Tuesday afternoon in trading in Paris. The eurozone equity benchmark index Euro Stoxx 50 was down nearly 1 percent.Derek Halpenny, senior currency economist at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ in London, said the market had taken the European data in stride. The market, he said, was focusing on the performance gap between the United States, where the Federal Reserve seems to be moving toward raising interest rates, and Europe, where the European Central Bank has its work cut out trying to hold off deflationary pressures.“The momentum seems to have shifted back to selling the euro,” Mr. Halpenny said. “The primary element of that is what’s happening inside the United States, and that hasn’t changed at all.”Although declines in the price of commodities like oil can act as a stimulus, economists fear a generalized decline in price levels, known as deflation, could sap growth and make life harder for borrowers. International Monetary Fund economists had argued since even before consumer prices turned negative that Europe’s inflation was too low.Fitch Ratings warned in a report on Monday that eurozone deflation was “the largest potential risk” to global corporate credit ratings because the region’s weight in the world economy meant that falling prices and economic weakness there “will have knock-on effects on other regions.”Still, a gauge of economic output based on a private survey of purchasing managers last week showed the eurozone economy expanding at its fastest rate since May 2011. And a report on Monday from the European Commission showed consumer and business confidence at their strongest in about four years.Economists describe the upturn as a cyclical recovery, noting that important indicators are showing strength, despite the failure of the currency bloc to grow at its potential rate. The eurozone economy has still not recovered its pre-2008 crisis levels, and growth has been too weak to generate the jobs needed to break decisively with the crisis era.Taking the bloc as a whole, however, obscures the fact that member states are diverging widely in their performance. The jobless rate in Germany, the biggest eurozone member, is just 4.8 percent, less than one-fourth that of the bloc’s fourth-largest member, Spain, which at 23.2 percent, has a rate consistent with an economic depression.Italy, the third-largest member, reported an increase to 12.7 percent in its jobless rate, a record. Unemployment in France, the second-largest economy in the eurozone, stood at 10.6 percent, little changed for months.Advertisement