By BEN PROTESSAPRIL 1, 2015
The long-running case against Sergey Aleynikov — a former Goldman Sachs programmer criminally convicted, and then acquitted, only to be charged again — has rarely seemed to bring out the best in his government accusers. Take Wednesday, which was set to be the first day of Mr. Aleynikov’s new trial.Just as the judge and Mr. Aleynikov’s lawyer were settling in the courtroom of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan, the prosecutor from the Manhattan district attorney’s office asked to delay the trial until summer, citing scheduling problems with witnesses who are traveling for business or on honeymoon. Or, as the prosecutor described it, “the mess we are in.”When the judge balked, the prosecutor, Daniel Holmes, proposed a start date of April 20. He acknowledged that prosecutors had failed to clearly communicate the scheduling problem earlier — “I apologize for that,” Mr. Holmes said — but warned that starting the trial now “would prejudice the people’s case.”Justice Daniel P. Conviser applauded Mr. Holmes for “falling on his sword,” and remarked on his “integrity” as a prosecutor. But after a short recess, he rebuffed the request for a long delay, instead ordering the trial to begin on Monday.Advertisement“The only thing I’m hearing, reading between the lines, is you’re not ready,” the judge said. “I’m sorry, but you’ve had this case for two and a half years. At a certain point, that’s your responsibility.”The squabble in the courtroom was an inauspicious start to a trial that has captivated Wall Street and the white-collar defense bar. And with prosecutors now scrambling to put on their case by Monday, they could be operating at a disadvantage in what figures to be one of their most prominent financial cases in years.It is not every day that prosecutors find themselves on the defensive, and on the first day of trial no less. Mr. Holmes, rather than solely directing his arguments against Mr. Aleynikov, instead had to address his office’s own misstep.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A prosecutorial mea culpa might seem odd in any other case. But in the on-again, off-again case against Mr. Aleynikov, who is accused of stealing secret source code from Goldman’s computers in New York, it was merely the latest in a long line of bizarre twists.AdvertisementFirst, a federal appeals court in New York reversed his conviction, ruling that federal prosecutors had misapplied the corporate espionage laws against him. Then, after the Manhattan district attorney’s office took up the case anew, a state court judge tossed out much of the evidence against him, finding that the F.B.I. had conducted an illegal search and arrest of Mr. Aleynikov and that his “Fourth Amendment rights were violated as a result of a mistake of law.”Over the years — nearly six since he was first arrested — Mr. Aleynikov has become something of a cause célèbre in media and defense circles. He was the subject of a sympathetic profile by Michael Lewis in Vanity Fair, and his supporters have long questioned why state prosecutors took up the case after Mr. Aleynikov already served a year in federal prison and saw his marriage crumble.With prosecutors now seeking to delay the case, Kevin Marino, Mr. Aleynikov’s lawyer, asked Justice Conviser to dismiss the case altogether.“Either they’re ready to rock or they’re ready to roll,” Mr. Marino said, adding that he started preparing his witnesses months ago.Then, staring at Mr. Holmes, Mr. Marino shouted: “You didn’t do a damn thing.”An article on Thursday about the long-running case against Sergey Aleynikov, a former Goldman Sachs programmer accused of stealing secret source code from Goldman’s computers, misstated, in some copies, the given name of a prosecutor from the Manhattan district attorney’s office who sought to delay a new trial in the case. He is Daniel Holmes, not David.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: New Stumble in Trial of Former Goldman Programmer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.