AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesThe largest contiguous parcel of undeveloped private land east of the Mississippi River, a vast swath of forest in northern Florida, is going on the market and is expected to bring $1 billion or more when it is sold this year.The enormous tract of land, owned by the Foley Timber and Land Company, is about 560,000 acres, or nearly the size of Rhode Island.The land is almost empty except for the cedar, oak and other hardwood trees that cover close to 900 square miles between Tallahassee and Gainesville along the gulf coast just south of the Florida Panhandle. Foley has modest timber operations on the land that generate about $50 million a year.But for a potential buyer, the land represents an opportunity to develop or sell development rights to a largely uninhabited corner of the state.“The future of Florida is for sale here,” Howard H. Leach, one of the majority owners of Foley, said in an interview. “Growth is going to come, and when it does it is going to be significant.”The land has an unusual history. It was once owned by the consumer products giant Procter & Gamble, which harvested the trees and processed them at a nearby mill to make pulp for Pampers diapers.The land also has a unique distinction for Florida: It has never been hit by a hurricane.In 1994, P.&G. sold the land to an investor group led by Mr. Leach and Robert A. Day, the founder of the Trust Company of the West. Minority investors in Foley include Kenneth G. Langone Sr., a co-founder of Home Depot, and Henry A. Kissinger, the former secretary of state.In addition to owning Foley, Mr. Leach owns apartment buildings in Arizona, California and Oregon. He was previously a partner at Forstmann Little, the private equity firm. He served as America’s ambassador to France from 2001 to 2005, during the first term of George W. Bush.Mr. Leach, 84, declined to disclose how much he paid for the land, but it was a small fraction of what it is worth today. “It’s extremely productive,” he said. “We had all our money out in two years.”Today, the mill once owned by P.&G. is owned by Georgia Pacific, which continues to buy many trees from Foley and turn them into fluff pulp and other paper products.Mr. Leach said that he and Mr. Day had not pursued developing the land yet because there was not sufficient demand. But as Florida continues to grow, more businesses are moving into the area.“It has huge potential for the future,” Mr. Leach said. “We are getting some small companies that are moving into the area. Over the years this will become a more developed part of the state.”To make sure development happened sustainably, Foley worked with the government of Taylor County, where more than three-fifths of the land is situated, on a development plan encompassing 128,000 acres. About two-thirds of that will be designated as open space, while one-third could be developed with housing or commercial properties.“As stewards of that much land, we felt like we had a responsibility to see what it looked like in the future,” Mr. Leach said. “We knew the growth is going to come, and we saw some responsibility to see it happen in an orderly and attractive manner.”People briefed on the sale process but not authorized to speak about it publicly said that the most likely buyers for Foley and its land holdings were pension funds, university endowments, sovereign wealth funds and real estate investment trusts, which are attracted to stable long-term assets like timberland.Foley expects that the buyers will maintain the timber operations and possibly sell chunks of the property to developers in the years to come. Though the land does not have much coastal property, it does include a marina and the opportunity to build nearby.Mr. Leach, who lives in Palm Beach, Fla., says he still visits the Foley land regularly and is parting ways with the company now only because of his age.“If my partner and I hadn’t had so many birthdays, we wouldn’t consider selling it,” he said.Advertisement