AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ProtessA sound that delights regulators and strikes fear in corporations — employees’ blowing the whistle on wrongdoing — is poised to become louder.On Wednesday, the Securities and Exchange Commission penalized the technology and engineering firm KBR for forcing employees to sign “restrictive” confidentiality agreements, the regulator’s first such action against a company suspected of stifling potential whistle-blowers.The S.E.C. has escalated enforcement of its whistle-blower protections as part of an effort by the agency to turn a historical sore spot into an advantage. After missing warning signs about Bernard L. Madoff’s Ponzi scheme, the S.E.C. created a whistle-blower program and vowed to punish companies that muzzle potential tipsters.“By requiring its employees and former employees to sign confidentiality agreements imposing prenotification requirements before contacting the S.E.C., KBR potentially discouraged employees from reporting securities violations to us,” Andrew J. Ceresney, the S.E.C.’s enforcement director, said in a statement. In announcing the enforcement action, which KBR agreed to pay a $130,000 penalty to settle, Mr. Cereseny fired a warning shot about confidentiality agreements. His statement on Wednesday and his past public speeches signaled that the S.E.C. had opened a sweeping review of confidentiality agreements across the corporate world. “We will vigorously enforce” the rules that protect whistle-blowers, he said. Yet KBR’s punishment did not point to a serious offense.For one thing, the company’s confidentiality agreement was in use long before the S.E.C.’s rules took effect. In addition to paying $130,000, a relatively modest sum for a large company, KBR also voluntarily agreed to revise its confidentiality agreements. The company did not admit to or deny the S.E.C.’s accusations.In a statement, the company’s chief executive, Stuart Bradie, said that the “S.E.C.’s order acknowledges that it is not aware of KBR having ever prevented anyone from reporting to the S.E.C., nor has the company taken any action to enforce the agreement, and that is because we have never done so.” Mr. Bradie added, “We are pleased to have amicably resolved this matter and look forward to putting it behind us.”KBR, which is based in Houston, is not the only company to land in the S.E.C.’s cross hairs for its treatment of whistle-blowers. Last year, Paradigm Capital Management, a hedge fund that manages $1.5 billion, became the first to pay a fine for retaliating against an employee who had reported his firm’s misdeeds to the S.E.C. Unlike that case, the action against KBR was the first to focus on a confidentiality agreement. According to the S.E.C., KBR required employees who were witnesses in internal investigations to sign confidentiality statements “warning that they could face discipline and even be fired if they discussed the matters with outside parties.”The S.E.C.’s effort to protect whistle-blowers traces to the financial crisis. Under the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul law, the S.E.C. created a whistle-blower office that pays rewards for valuable tips. Since creating the program, the S.E.C. has paid about $50 million to 15 whistle-blowers.Confidentiality agreements threaten the future of the program, lawyers for whistle-blowers say.“These problematic agreements are widespread and growing,” said Jordan Thomas, a former S.E.C. official who now represents whistle-blowers.Advertisement