AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedLess than a week after agreeing to sell itself to H. J. Heinz in a blockbuster deal, the Kraft Foods Group has found itself the target of a government lawsuit over wheat prices.The Commodity Futures Trading Commission on Wednesday sued Kraft and its former corporate parent, Mondelez, over what the regulator said in a statement were illicit trades of both wheat futures and other violations of commodity trading rules.In its complaint, filed in federal court in the Northern District of Illinois, the C.F.T.C. homed in on trades involving wheat futures in the fall of 2011. As the cash price of wheat rose, Kraft Foods, the former parent of both companies, bought about $90 million worth of futures.The intent was to cause a price drop in the cash wheat market, as sellers were led to believe that Kraft’s trade meant that it would require less of a type of wheat, the commission contended. Yet Kraft never intended to take possession of the wheat tied to the futures contracts, which amounted to a six-month supply for its main mill.Ultimately, Kraft received more than $5.4 million in illicit profits from its trading strategy, according to the complaint.The C.F.T.C. also argued that about that same time, Kraft Foods improperly exceeded the agency’s limits on speculative trading positions on wheat futures without having either a genuine need for the grain or a valid exemption.Both companies were named in the complaint because the trades at the heart of the suit took place before Kraft Foods split into two in the fall of 2012. The current Kraft, which sells grocery-store staples like processed cheese and Oscar Mayer deli meats, was spun out of Kraft Foods; the former parent company changed its name to Mondelez.“This case goes to the core of the C.F.T.C.’s mission: protecting market participants and the public from manipulation and abusive practices that undermine the integrity of the derivatives markets,” Aitan Goelman, the C.F.T.C.’s director of enforcement, said in the statement. “A market participant who is not happy with cash prices available to it may not resort to manipulative trading strategies in an attempt to artificially lower that price.”In a statement, a Kraft representative said that the lawsuit was not expected to have a financially material effect on the company. She added that Mondelez would be responsible for most of the legal costs, including any penalties.A spokeswoman for Mondelez declined to comment, though she added that the company thought that any fine or settlement would not be financially material to investors.Advertisement