By ANDREW E. KRAMERAPRIL 1, 2015
Yukos, the defunct Russian oil giant whose dismantling a decade ago came to define a country’s flawed property rights system, announced on Wednesday that it had reached a final legal settlement with Rosneft, the state oil company that prospered from the breakup.Rosneft had absorbed most of Yukos’s valuable oil fields, refineries, gas stations and pipelines just before the oil boom kicked off in Russia in a series of bankruptcy auctions after Yukos’s founder, Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, was arrested in 2003.The breakup of Yukos unfolded over a period of years as the central drama in Russian business. The fight by Yukos shareholders seemed improbable, given the Kremlin’s reluctance to concede in foreign courts that its bankruptcy process was flawed or that the case was politically motivated because of Mr. Khodorkovsky’s sponsorship of opposition figures, including Boris Y. Nemtsov, who died in February in a contract killing.The shareholders, including American retail investors and pension funds that had committed about $6 billion to the company, sued both Rosneft and the Russian government. While the claims against Rosneft are settled, the claims against the government remain, including a recent $50 billion award that the Kremlin is appealing.As the price of crude oil fluctuates, why some countries are faring much better than others.As of Wednesday, Yukos shareholders in courts outside of Russia had managed to retain or recover about $4.4 billion from Rosneft and the Russian government, including an award that the Russian government has exhausted all appeals on but has not yet paid.Advertisement“It’s a tidy sum,” Claire Davidson, a spokeswoman for the Yukos shareholders, said in a telephone interview.AdvertisementRosneft, which is majority-owned by the Russian government but is publicly traded on stock exchanges in London and Moscow, emphasized that it would not be required to make additional payments and was now clear of the long shadow of Yukos lawsuits.“According to the agreement, the sides have rejected all mutual claims and will halt all existing legal and other disputes, and are also obliged not to make any future claims related to the bankruptcy and liquidation of Yukos,” which happened in 2006, Rosneft said in a statement.The settlement ended lawsuits in Russia, the United States, the Netherlands, Britain and other countries.To defend the shareholders’ claim to the company even as the Russian government liquidated it as a legal entity inside Russia, the overseas branch of Yukos had needed to transform itself into foundations in the Netherlands. These organizations, called stichtings, protected the assets but at the cost of surrendering some control over management.The foundations represent the interests of shareholders but are not directly controlled by them. And under Dutch law, the proceeds from the legal victories that Yukos was clocking up against Rosneft could not be distributed to shareholders until all claims on the foundation’s holdings were resolved, something that could have taken years or even decades.Under the settlement, Rosneft in effect is no longer able to block the release of those awards by drawing out the litigation, while Yukos shareholders give up the remaining $2 billion to $3 billion in claims. However, a lawsuit unrelated to Rosneft remains an obstacle to Yukos shareholders’ seeing a payout.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And the shareholder suits against the Russian government continue in various places. The largest shareholder, the Menatep Group, which owns about 70 percent of the shares, won the $50 billion award last July against the Russian government under a European energy investment treaty, the Energy Charter, though the Kremlin is appealing.That ruling by a tribunal in The Hague — the largest award ever in international arbitration — portrayed the seizure and breakup of Yukos as “devious and calculated expropriation” and a politically driven campaign to neutralize Mr. Khodorkovsky.It is unclear what, if anything, the company’s founder, Mr. Khodorkovsky, who spent a decade in Russian prison camps working in a sewing shop among other jobs, will receive from these lawsuits. Mr. Khodorkovsky surrendered his shares to a business partner while still in prison in Russia.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Investors in Yukos Settle With Rosneft, Russia’s State Oil Company.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.