By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 1, 2015
The Shawbrook Group, the latest challenger to Britain’s traditional banks to go public, said on Wednesday that it has priced its initial public offering, valuing the company at 725 million pounds, or about $1 billion.Shawbrook priced its offering at 290 pence a share. The company sold about 30 percent of its capital in the offering of 75 million shares.Shares of Shawbrook rose 4.5 percent to 303 pence in conditional trading on the London Stock Exchange on Wednesday morning. The stock will begin unconditional trading on April 8.The lender could sell an additional 11.3 million shares if an overallotment of shares is fully exercised.Advertisement“We look forward to the next stage of our journey as Shawbrook continues to deliver on its strategy to become an increasingly well-known name in the specialist world of British banking,” Richard Pyman, the Shawbrook chief executive said in a news release.AdvertisementShawbrook expects to raise gross proceeds of £90 million in the offering. The bank is majority owned by the private equity fund Pollen Street Capital, which will continue to own 59 percent of its shares after the I.P.O.Founded in 2011, Shawbrook is considered a challenger to the larger, more traditional lenders that dominate the banking landscape in Britain. It is the latest of several challenger banks to go public since last year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.OneSavings Bank, which was backed by the private equity firm J. C. Flowers & Company, listed its shares in London in June, and Virgin Money, the British financial services company partly owned by the billionaire Richard Branson, priced its I.P.O. in November.The Aldermore Group, an online bank in Britain, priced its offering in March.Shawbrook focuses on lending to homeowners and small and medium-size businesses. It has about 460 employees.As of December 2013, the bank had £1.46 billion in deposits and total loans of £1.35 billion. It posted a pretax profit of £16.8 million in 2013.The bank, which hasn’t posted its 2014 financial results, said it had total lending of more than £2.3 billion and more than £2.4 billion in deposits in 2014.Merrill Lynch and Goldman Sachs International were joint global coordinators on the offering.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.