AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — Construction spending in the United States slipped in February, pulled down by a drop in single-family home building.Seasonally adjusted construction spending fell 0.1 percent in February after a revised 1.7 percent drop in January, the Commerce Department reported on Wednesday.The result in part reflects bitter winter weather that constrained construction in many parts of the country during the month. It also joined a series of mostly discouraging economic reports, including on manufacturing and jobs, that weighed down the stock market on Wednesday and stoked concerns about corporate profits and global growth.Analysts are hopeful over all for a rebound in construction spending as the economy strengthens in the spring and summer. Still, economists at IHS Global Insight called February’s numbers ”another poor report” and said in a research note that sluggish construction spending was likely to pull down overall economic growth for the first quarter of 2015.In Wednesday’s report, private spending on construction of single-family homes declined 1.4 percent — the biggest drop since 2010, noted Gregory Daco, head of United States macroeconomics at Oxford Economics. Spending on apartments was up 4.1 percent. Nonresidential construction spending rose 0.5 percent, led by a 5 percent jump in hotel construction and a 6.8 percent surge in factory construction.Total private construction spending, which rose 0.2 percent, was offset by a 0.8 percent retreat in public construction spending. State and local governments cut spending by 1.6 percent. They account for more than 90 percent of government spending on construction. The federal government increased construction spending by 9 percent.Overall construction spending was up 2.1 percent from February 2014.On Wednesday, the Institute for Supply Management, a trade group of purchasing managers, said factories in the United States expanded last month at a weaker pace as orders grew more slowly and hiring was essentially flat. The group reported that its manufacturing index slipped to 51.5 in March from 52.9 in February. It was the fifth straight drop. Still, any reading above 50 signals expansion.Domestic manufacturers have faced a drag in recent months from falling oil prices, a rising dollar and winter storms. Paul Ashworth, chief North American economist at Capital Economics, said that the slowdown wasn’t “alarming” because nonmanufacturing companies still appear to be faring well. And there is the expectation that manufacturing will rebound as the impact of the winter weather fades. Production improved slightly between February and March, a sign that growth may accelerate in the spring.“We’re well positioned for the distinct possibility of an uptick, an upswing, in momentum as we go forward, not unlike last year,” which also started with a particularly harsh winter, noted Bradley Holcomb, chairman of I.S.M.’s manufacturing business survey committee.Out of 18 manufacturing industries, 10 reported growth and seven reported an outright decline in March. Among the sectors that declined were apparel, textiles, petroleum and coal, electrical equipment, plastics and rubber products, and furniture. “In balance, we’re still positive,” Mr. Holcomb said.Also on Wednesday, the payroll processor ADP said companies added a seasonally adjusted 189,000 jobs last month. That’s the first month of gains under 200,000 jobs in 13 months, and it’s a decline from the 214,000 jobs added in February. “Job growth took a step back in March,” said Mark Zandi, chief economist of Moody’s Analytics, which analyzed the survey data.The federal government’s report on jobs will be released on Friday, and economists are forecasting an increase of 250,000 jobs. The ADP numbers cover only private businesses and sometimes diverge from the government’s more comprehensive report, which includes government agencies.Several economists say that the ADP survey can be an unreliable indicator of the government jobs report. “ADP is far from infallible,” said Jim O’Sullivan, chief United States economist at High Frequency Economics.Few economists responded to the March setback by changing their yearly forecasts, including Mr. Zandi of Moody’s Analytics. He still expects consumer spending to rebound and the economy to add jobs at an average monthly pace of 250,000, or three million for the year. This would represent a solid improvement in the job market, although it would be less spectacular than the last four months, when monthly gains averaged 321,500 jobs.A burst of hiring in the last year has lifted the number of Americans earning paychecks. But average hourly wages have risen at a sluggish 2 percent pace, possibly making many Americans hesitant to spend their savings from cheaper oil and gasoline.Advertisement