By STEPHANIE STROMAPRIL 1, 2015
McDonald’s announced on Wednesday that it would raise wages and offer new benefits to 90,000 employees in the 1,500 outlets in the United States that it owns and operates, responding to competitive pressure from a tighter job market and to labor campaigns drawing public attention to its pay policies.The decision, however, does not affect the 750,000 employees who work for the more than 3,100 franchisees that operate roughly 12,500 McDonald’s restaurants around the country.The company will increase wages to at least $1 over the local legal minimum wage for workers in restaurants under corporate control to an average of $9.90 an hour by July 1. That average will increase to more than $10 in 2016.Employees who have worked in company restaurants more than a year will also be eligible for paid time off, whether they work full or part time. An employee who works an average of 20 hours a week might accrue as much as 20 hours of paid time off a year, the company said.AdvertisementMcDonald’s will also expand a program intended to help employees of both its own restaurants and those operated by franchisees to take classes online toward earning high school diplomas. The company will cover those costs, as well as assist employees with college tuition.Advertisement“We know that a motivated work force leads to better customer service, so we believe this initial step not only benefits our employees, it will improve McDonald’s restaurant experience,” Steve Easterbrook, who has been chief executive for one month, said in a statement.The decision was the boldest move yet by Mr. Easterbrook, who broke the news in an interview with The Wall Street Journal.Mr. Easterbrook has acted quickly to introduce changes aimed at improving McDonald’s standing with consumers. This week, the company announced plans to offer breakfast all day and to retool a grilled chicken sandwich to use an “artisan” bun and remove ingredients like maltodextrin.The company’s sales in outlets open at least a year were down 4 percent in February, one of the worst performances among the largest restaurants that publicly report their sales.Several large companies that have direct contact with consumers have raised wages over the last year, including Walmart, the TJX Companies and Ikea. There was a risk that McDonald’s could lose its better employees to other companies that compete for low-wage workers. Many of its franchisees face similar challenges, which could ultimately lead to broader wage gains at other McDonald’s fast-food outlets.Mark Kalinowski, an investment analyst who follows McDonald’s at Janney Montgomery Scott, said a restaurant executive he met with recently said he would have to raise wages to keep employees as the labor market improves.“McDonald’s said that one of the reasons they’re doing this is because of competitiveness, and there’s no reason why their franchisees wouldn’t be feeling that same competitive pressure,” Mr. Kalinowski said.AdvertisementMcDonald’s has been under fire for some time from labor groups fighting for a base wage of $15 an hour. Employees and their supporters have held one-day rallies outside restaurants. The Service Employees International Union has been spending millions in a campaign to organize McDonald’s employees and others to press for higher wages, and it plans to hold an array of protest rallies across the country on April 15.The announcement comes as several National Labor Relations Board cases are getting underway based on accusations that McDonald’s is liable for reported labor violations by some of its franchisees.At issue before an N.L.R.B. judge is whether McDonald’s is a “joint employer” of the workers its franchises hire, in that it exercises meaningful control over their workplace.Ebony Hughes works two jobs and still struggles to make ends meet. She is an example of the kind of worker that organizers are trying to galvanize under the banner of civil rights to raise wages.According to Paul Secunda of Marquette University Law School, a joint employer finding would mean franchise employees hoping to improve their working conditions have the right to bring McDonald’s to the bargaining table, rather than negotiating only with the franchises.While this would not in itself make franchise workers eligible for higher wages, it could help them pressure the company, forcing it to explain why it treats similar employees differently.“They’ll say, ‘Someone at the company is doing the exact same job I’m doing at a franchisee, with the same cost of living, and they’re getting paid $10 an hour and I’m getting $8.50,’ ” said Professor Secunda. “It’s a hard argument to respond to. Is it because you want the franchises to be more profitable than you?”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Karen King, senior vice president and chief people officer in the company’s United States division, said in an interview that the announcement was not timed to anything in particular.“Something like this takes us a long time to do,” Ms. King said. “We’re too big and complicated a system to do anything in reaction to a particular group or something happening.”She said the decision came after a survey of its 90,000 employees late last summer showed that their primary priority was better wages and benefits.Advertisement“What we’re doing is just one of many actions we have underway,” Ms. King said. “We are and will be a modern, progressive burger restaurant, and this is just one step toward that goal.”Labor organizers were not impressed with the changes Mr. Easterbrook announced, noting that they fell far short of workers’ goals and left out most McDonald’s workers.“Even for those employees who will benefit, the rate adjustment will still leave many hovering around the poverty line,” Christine L. Owens, executive director of the National Employment Law Project, said in a statement.Ms. Owens noted that McDonald’s had almost $5 billion in profit last year and paid its chief executive $13.8 million in 2012. “McDonald’s can and should do much better,” she said.Workers in a conference call organized by the Fight for $15 campaign dismissed the announcement as a public relations stunt.“Is this an April Fool’s Day joke?” asked Justin Johnson, 21, who works at a McDonald’s in St. Louis and who said he made $7.60 an hour. “After two years of campaigning, McDonald’s raises wages for less than 10 percent of their workers — and only 10 percent of the way toward a living wage?”Despite the rising pressure to lift wages, many McDonald’s franchisees will be torn over whether to go along with the increases at company-owned outlets. Some of the changes the company has been making add cost and complexity to restaurant operations, and franchisees are restive. The company held a special meeting with them in Las Vegas last month, though it said nothing there about its plans to increase wages.But whatever their legal responsibility, franchise owners are likely to feel pressure to raise wages as well, particularly those whose restaurants are near company-owned outlets, which tend to be concentrated in urban areas.Advertisement“It forces the franchisees to raise wages, which means they will raise prices — which in turn will increase revenues for the corporation,” said Richard Adams, a former franchisee who runs a consulting firm for franchise holders. “That’s what this is all about — it’s corporate-mandated inflation.”Franchisees rarely speak without permission from McDonald’s because their contract with the company is written so broadly that the company can punish them for virtually anything they say. One franchisee who spoke on condition of anonymity about Wednesday’s announcement said that business in his restaurants had been “horrible” and that he did not see how he could increase his employees’ pay.And many are worried about the plans to serve breakfast all day. “The grills in the restaurants can’t accommodate all-day breakfast orders and keep up with orders for meals during the rest of the day,” Mr. Kalinowski, the analyst, said.Noam Scheiber contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: McDonald’s to Raise Pay at Outlets It Operates.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.