By JOHN KOBLINOCT. 16, 2015
CBS is refusing to run advertisements for “Truth,” the new movie about a 2004 “60 Minutes II” segment on George W. Bush’s service in the National Guard. The network later said the segment should never have aired.CBS rejected an ad from Sony Pictures Classics on Sept. 28, said Sheri Callan, the president of Callan Advertising, the firm buying advertising time for the movie.The movie, which was released on Friday, has been a source of frustration for CBS. “Truth” portrays the reporting behind — and the unraveling of — a segment based on documents that suggested Mr. Bush got preferential treatment for his National Guard service in the early 1970s.Twelve days after the story was broadcast, in the heat of the 2004 presidential election, CBS said it could not authenticate the documents and apologized. Mary Mapes, the producer of the segment and the author of the book that the movie is based on, was fired. Three other producers resigned. And Dan Rather, who was the correspondent on the piece, announced that he was retiring as CBS’s evening news anchor two months later.AdvertisementMr. Rather and Ms. Mapes acknowledged there were flaws in their reporting but still defend the story. The network said this week that the film had “too many distortions, evasions and baseless conspiracy theories to enumerate them all.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Mapes’s book suggests that Viacom, CBS’s corporate parent at the time, buckled to pressure from the Bush administration when it withdrew its support for the segment, and the movie at times addresses that line of thinking.Thus far, commercials for the movie have run nationally on 13 television networks, including NBC, TBS, ABC, CNN and Fox News, according to the measurement firm iSpot.tv. About half of the studio’s spending has gone to NBC, where the trailer ran during “The Tonight Show” and “Today.”AdvertisementNews of CBS’s decision was first reported by The Associated Press.Sydney Ember contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; CBS Rejects Ads for Film on Flawed Report.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.