By JANET MORRISSEYAPRIL 1, 2015
When Luis Rinaldini, co-founder of Groton Merchant Bankers, wanted to add New York apartment buildings to the firm’s investment portfolio in 2010, he took a chance on two young college graduates to make it happen.It was an unusual and risky bet. After all, Graham Jones and his brother Gregory had no real estate experience and little more than college degrees, unbridled ambition and a lot of chutzpah. It was also a time when the economy had tumbled into the worst recession since the Great Depression. But the two brothers saw a chance to scoop up real estate at bargain prices.“In the midst of chaos is when you really have the ability to create something,” Gregory said in a recent interview. Mr. Rinaldini agreed to mentor them and eventually invested in their first apartment building.Since then, the brothers, through their company GRJ L.L.C., have acquired six more buildings at a cost of about $90 million. Their strategy? Purchase dilapidated buildings at a low price, refurbish them and raise the rents, they said. They now own more than 500 apartment units encompassing 422,000 square feet of real estate in Manhattan, Brooklyn, Philadelphia and Englishtown, N.J.AdvertisementThe progress is striking for two young men who struggled to pay their own rent five years ago. Their story offers an unusual glimpse into the rough-and-tumble real estate world in Manhattan.AdvertisementBut the question now is: Will their approach work in the long run? The urban landscape — especially in Manhattan — is littered with the business corpses of starry-eyed real estate entrepreneurs who forged start-ups that grew too much too fast and later crashed when interest rates changed or the big New York real estate families edged them out.“New York has a lot of old-line families that control a lot of inventory,” said Jordan Roeschlaub, a senior managing director at Newmark Grubb Knight Frank Capital Markets, a real estate advisory firm. They include the Rudins, the Dursts, the LeFraks, the Zeckendorfs and the Brodskys, all of whom have ample power, money and influence to wield against would-be competitors.“Obviously, there are high barriers to entry coming into New York, but we’re young guys. We’re aggressive; we have a lot of energy,” Graham Jones said in an interview.The Jones brothers chose small, rundown buildings, unlikely to be of interest to big companies. And said they picked a specific niche. Their properties were aimed at attracting students and young professionals, since many of the units have small bedrooms best suited for people willing to share their space with others.But their journey has been rocky, strewn with bidding wars, lengthy bureaucratic waits for building permits and angry tenant protests. And with the Federal Reserve poised to start raising interest rates, their toughest hurdles may be yet to come.Graham, now 34, and Gregory, 32, were born in New York, but raised in New Jersey, where their father, Graham O. Jones, is a lawyer whose practice includes real estate deals, and their mother, Gay, is a homemaker. The younger Graham graduated from Bowdoin College with a bachelor’s degree in government and legal studies in 2005 and worked briefly as a White House intern before deciding politics and government weren’t for him. He then took a job at a private equity firm in New York — where he got his first taste of real estate — and then returned to school, getting a master’s degree from the Schack Institute of Real Estate of New York University in 2013.Gregory graduated from Columbia University with a bachelor’s degree in history in 2005, and landed a job in the mergers and acquisitions department of a banking firm. While working, he took night classes, finishing his master’s in business administration at Fordham University in 2010.AdvertisementWhen Gregory finished school, the brothers formed their company.They spent a year studying the New York apartment market, posing as potential tenants to look at competitors’ units, scouring permits for names of contractors and architects, hobnobbing with industry veterans and investors at conferences, cold-calling owners asking them to sell, and quizzing anyone and everyone they could for information. Graham Jones met Mr. Rinaldini, who became a major investor, at the upscale, all-male Racquet and Tennis Club on Park Avenue. They also started a brokerage firm, Dallien Realty, to keep on top of market rents and trends.But all the research couldn’t fully prepare them for the gritty, often ruthless, world of New York real estate.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When they did find a deal, no one would accept their offer because no one knew who they were. And preparing bids cost money. “We had thousands of dollars in legal costs that frankly we couldn’t afford at the time,” Gregory said. “That happened to us three times.”When an offer was finally accepted for a small building at 227 East 89th Street, the brothers made a deposit of a “couple hundred thousand dollars,” which they described as money they had saved, and had 90 nerve-racking days to raise the rest of the $3.5 million purchase price. If they failed, they would lose their deposit. They eventually got investors on board, with Mr. Rinaldini providing the biggest share, and they closed on the property in November 2011. (By April 2013, they had renovated it, raised rents and added so much value that when they refinanced, they were able to return all of the investors’ equity. The building has recently been put up for sale.)Building permits were another hurdle — taking months, rather than the hoped-for days, to secure.And they faced angry tenant protests at some locations. Many of Manhattan’s apartment buildings contain rent-stabilized and rent-controlled units, which limit the annual rent increases a landlord can impose. For the Jones brothers to refurbish apartments and significantly raise rents as part of their business plan, they needed to boot out or buy out tenants in some of the rent-stabilized units. In some cases, they said, they were just weeding out people who were occupying rent-stabilized units illegally.But tenants fought back, saying that many who had lived in their apartments legally for decades were being offered lowball buyouts or had their power or water turned off with little notice while adjacent apartments were being renovated.Tenants at their 50-58 East Third Street property in the East Village were particularly aggressive. They organized demonstrations, posted angry comments on blogs and hired lawyers to fight the evictions.Margaret Sandercock, a lawyer who has represented tenants at three of the brothers’ properties, said one tenant, a retired man in his 70s, had lived in an apartment at 41 West 24th Street for more than 20 years when the Jones brothers bought the building. He didn’t want to take a buyout, she said, but ultimately agreed because he was bothered by the noisy construction and disruption and what she described as frequent phone calls from the landlords.The brothers defended their approach. “We’ve never kicked any elderly people out,” Gregory said. “We don’t do anything illegal. We don’t do anything that’s not within our rights.” Litigation continues at several of their New York properties.AdvertisementMichael Kozek, a partner at Ween & Kozek, who has represented tenants at the brothers’ property at 57 Jay Street in Brooklyn, said tenants often leave if they think they will end up in legal fights, simply because they cannot afford to go to court.Fights over regulated units are not new in New York. Even the real estate giant Tishman Speyer Properties ran into highly publicized tenant battles after it acquired the historic Stuyvesant Town-Peter Cooper Village residential complex for $5.4 billion in 2006. (It later defaulted on the mortgage and handed the property back to creditors in 2010.)Mr. Rinaldini defended the brothers, saying they had never crossed any legal line with the tenants. His last investment with the company was in the Third Street property.As the economy has rebounded, so have prices and competition, making it harder to find deals. “The market is horribly overpriced,” Gregory said. As a result, the brothers began looking outside New York, buying two properties in Pennsylvania and one in New Jersey.They say they have confidence in the future of their business, regardless of what the Federal Reserve does or how tough the market becomes.“You just have to stay disciplined,” Gregory said.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Buying Apartment Buildings in New York and Beyond in a Strategic Bet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.