AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill Vlasic and Aaron M. KesslerThe optimism of automakers introducing models on Wednesday at the New York auto show was tempered by reports of flat sales in the United States last month.Car companies said that they sold 1.55 million vehicles in March, a slight increase from a year earlier, according to the research firm Autodata. Some analysts had predicted sales volume could decline for the first time in more than a year, but the uptick of 0.6 percent spared the industry, at least for now.The sales volume is still considered healthy and follows a blockbuster 2014 in which buyers flocked to showrooms with a growing appetite for big trucks and sport utility vehicles. Auto executives still expect this year’s sales to top the 16.6 million vehicles sold in 2014. But the tiny increase for March indicates growth may slow.“We’re not on a huge growth curve anymore, but we’re not contracting either,” said Mark L. Reuss, the head of product development at General Motors. “No matter where the industry is, we have to continue bringing new models out.”The company was among the most active manufacturers at the auto show’s news media previews on Wednesday, showing off the new Cadillac CT6 sedan and a restyled version of its Chevrolet Malibu midsize car.G.M., the nation’s largest automaker, said it sold 248,000 vehicles in March, a 2.4 percent decline from a year earlier.Industry analysts said the broad trend line probably was for sales to plateau. The double-digit increases the industry had delivered are expected to level off, meaning automakers will have to adjust their notions of success. “It wasn’t a great month by any means, but it’s still a strong market,” said Michelle Krebs, an analyst with the car research site AutoTrader.com. “The key is the companies are all making money because transaction prices continue to go up.”Larry Dominique, executive vice president at TrueCar, said while the industry liked to trumpet growth, the measure of success in the future could focus more on competition within segments than year-over-year increases.“It’s not going to be as much about volume,” he said. “The battlefield will shift more toward market share.”Besides G.M., other automakers reporting sales declines in March from the previous year included Ford Motor, Honda and Nissan.Ford, the second-largest domestic auto manufacturer, said its sales fell 3.5 percent to 234,000 vehicles, with its Ford brand and Lincoln luxury lineup both falling by similar amounts. The automaker continues to feel the pain of sagging F-150 pickup sales as it introduces its mostly aluminum-bodied version of the truck that for years has been the best-selling vehicle in the United States. In March, sales of F-series pickup trucks dropped 4.6 percent.Ford is trying to give Lincoln a boost at the New York auto show by unveiling the Continental, a huge luxury car aimed at buyers in the United States and China. Its cavernous back seat takes its design inspiration from first-class aircraft cabins, and Ford’s chief executive, Mark Fields, said the target was buyers seeking a more classic style, in contrast with the aggressive lines of competitors. The Continental’s tag line is “quiet luxury.”Nissan, which is unveiling a new Maxima at the auto show, said overall monthly sales fell 3 percent last month. The current version of the Maxima has struggled, falling about 50 percent year-to-date compared with 2014, as some analysts have said its younger sibling, the Altima, offers similar styling and performance at a lower price. Nissan hopes its revamped Maxima will set its flagship car back on the right course.Honda, whose sales dropped 5 percent in March, also seeks to inject new life into its Civic, which helped establish Honda as a brand in the United States, but has since become long in the tooth. On Wednesday it unveiled a Civic concept with bolder styling, more advanced features and a turbocharged engine.Karl Brauer, an analyst with Kelley Blue Book, said, “If they all look as good in the showroom as Honda’s concept looked on stage, the Civic should repeat the original model’s success with a new generation of young buyers.”Not all automakers finished March in negative territory.Fiat Chrysler posted a 1.7 percent gain in March, extending its streak of monthly gains to 60 months in a row. Jeep was the savior once again for the company, as the division’s sales surged 23 percent. That helped counter sales declines of 24 percent for the Dodge brand, and flat sales from its normally robust Ram division.Reid Bigland, Fiat Chrysler’s head of sales for the United States, called March a “tough month” for the industry.Advertisement