By VINDU GOELAPRIL 1, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  Technology start-ups do not just have to fight to draw attention, customers and money from investors. Finding reasonably priced office space that attracts employees in a hot labor market, then doing it again when the company grows, is a battle unto itself.Aaron Hall, chief executive of Boatbound, a service that helps boat owners rent their idle vessels, said that when his nascent company moved to San Francisco in 2012, it originally operated from a room above a carwash. But because of the company’s nautical theme, he desperately wanted to move his office to the waterfront.First he tried to rent a houseboat in Mission Bay, an inlet near the AT&T Park baseball stadium that is the center of an industrial zone being redeveloped into office buildings and a medical complex for the University of California. “I jumped over the fence and put fliers underneath the doors but got no response,” he said.Commercial space on the city’s piers was too expensive. Then he saw a listing on Craigslist for a former photo studio. Although it was on a dead-end alley, far from the water, it was cheap: about $3,200 a month.AdvertisementAfter making about $22,000 in improvements, including adding a kitchen and a shower, installing a wooden phone booth, hanging buoys on the wall, and setting up a Ping-Pong table, Boatbound had a comfortable space for its 14 employees. “People hang out here until 10 o’clock at night,” Mr. Hall said.AdvertisementBut this year, after Boatbound adds a few more employees and raises another round of venture financing, it will probably have to move again.Jenny Haeg, the founder and chief executive of Custom Spaces, a commercial real estate firm that works with major venture-financed companies like Airbnb and Uber as well as smaller ones, said start-ups faced a particular challenge because they rarely stay in the same office long. Either they outgrow their space within a couple of years or they no longer need it if their business fails. That creates constant churn.Citywide, the average asking rent for office space was $62.59 a square foot in the fourth quarter, more than double what it was five years ago, according to Newmark Cornish & Carey, one of the region’s largest commercial real estate brokers. (Rents in South Park, the heart of the South of Market district that is the most popular with start-ups, run as much as $120 a square foot.)Elizabeth Hart, senior vice president of Newmark, said that San Francisco’s limits on new construction, combined with increased demand from start-ups flush with venture cash, had pushed the real estate market to a high point. Despite that, she said, most companies try not to be extravagant.Start-ups also want their workplaces to reflect the culture of the company, and if possible, the brand.No company aims to combine the two with as much flair as Airbnb, the home rental service, which rents three floors of a former jewelry mart in the South of Market district. Although Airbnb declined to say how much it was paying for the space, the now-defunct tech blog Gigaom, which had reported extensively on the project, estimated the rent at more than $9 million a year.Airbnb’s slogan is “belong anywhere,” and its headquarters have a quirky, cozy feel, designed to evoke the homes for rent on its site and inspire the company’s roughly 750 San Francisco employees.AdvertisementA dozen or so conference rooms are modeled after Airbnb listings. The Milan room, for example, has a purple rug, a white mini-rocking chair and fancy handbags hanging from hooks on the wall. The Rausch Room, a replica of the first room listed on the site by the co-founders Brian Chesky and Joe Gebbia, features a bar cart and a red Jesus statue, although the rolled-up air mattress for which the company was named has been removed.
            The average asking rent for San Francisco office space has doubled since the bottom of the recession as the vacancy rate has declined.        SAN FRANCISCO OFFICE RENTAL MARKETAverage asking rentper square footVacancy rate$6015%504010302051000’09’10’11’12’13’14’09’10’11’12’13’14APRIL 1, 2015
Even the cafeteria menu changes to honor a different listing daily. On St. Patrick’s Day, it gave a nod to Dublin with cabbage and kohlrabi, meat pie and roasted carrots.The company, which has an in-house environmental design team, is taking its principles a step further: It has remade the area that houses the 50-member marketing, communications and arts staff into an adult version of a grade school classroom.Just as they were in school, the employees are assigned a cubby where they can store their purses, backpacks and files. Various drop-in or communal work spaces are scattered around the room — long tables, stand-up desks, doors laid on sawhorses, even a daybed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“People spend so much time in meetings and so little time in front of monitors pounding away at a document, we didn’t think we needed to provide a desk,” said Aaron Taylor Harvey, who leads the design team. “We thought, what if we cut off half the desk space and give it to the collective?”At smaller start-ups, the line between collective and personal space is almost nonexistent. In San Francisco, many companies with 10 or fewer employees operate out of live-work lofts, Ms. Haeg said. The work spaces resemble one-bedroom apartments, but the living room is filled with desks and the bedroom is usually a conference room.Most important is the kitchen, in particular an oven and stove. “Start-ups seem to love having a stove,” Ms. Haeg said, whether for whipping up breakfast or baking fresh cookies as an afternoon snack.As companies grow, they need dedicated office space, but that does not mean they want to lose their sense of fun about the workplace.ThousandEyes, which makes tools for companies to monitor network performance, is on the 17th floor of an office building right next to the city’s main bus terminal. With gorgeous views of the city and the Bay Bridge, it could just as easily be occupied by bank offices as a tech start-up.AdvertisementBut the company has worked hard to inject a Silicon Valley vibe in the year it has occupied the space. In addition to common perks like a pool table, ThousandEyes has adopted a superhero theme for its internal culture. Every employee picks a Marvel or DC Comics character as an avatar and receives an action figure.“We all do extraordinary things and are extraordinary talents as well,” explained Sanjay Mehta, the chief marketing officer.The company’s conference rooms are decorated with elements from famous comic book locations; Stark Lab, for example, has metal furniture to evoke Iron Man. A Superman poster graces the Krypton Room. Even the ThousandEyes chess set is supersized, with pieces nearly a foot tall.Keeping watch over the whole floor is a larger-than-life hand-painted Batman, who gazes out at a city protected by ThousandEyes technology.Mr. Mehta said the floor, which has clusters of adjustable-height desks and large swaths of open space, is designed to be flexible, promote collaboration and give the company room to grow beyond its about 100 employees.Lacking a cafeteria, ThousandEyes offers catered or delivered lunches five days a week. It also brought in a barista to train employees on how to make their own cappuccino.It is hard to imagine a bank doing that.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page F2 of the New York edition with the headline: Office Space Is Hard to Find for Newcomers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.