By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDAPRIL 1, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO — If GoDaddy was hoping to draw attention for something other than provocative ads, it has succeeded.The company’s shares made their trading debut on Wednesday at $26.15, about 30 percent above the initial public offering price of $20 a share, a dollar more than the top end of the expected range. At the opening price, the company is valued at about $4 billion.The company’s shares traded in a fairly narrow range during the day and by coincidence finished at $26.15, changing hands on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol GDDY.That debut is an auspicious start for GoDaddy as it embarks on new life as a publicly traded company. It hopes to show investors and customers that it is more than just a way to register website domain names or a purveyor of risqué advertising.“It feels good to get credit for the work we’ve been doing,” Blake Irving, the company’s chief executive, said in an interview.AdvertisementSince its takeover by three private equity firms — Silver Lake, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and Technology Crossover Ventures — for $2.25 billion in 2011, GoDaddy has expanded both its line of offerings and its international presence. Domain name registration is still its biggest business, but the company has become one of the biggest resellers of Microsoft’s Office 365 line of products.AdvertisementAnd it has grown to 37 countries, with one-quarter of its sales coming from international operations.Even as small businesses must now worry about more than just setting up a website — they must improve their social media presence, show up on Yelp and improve their visibility in Google searches — so, too, has GoDaddy moved to cater to those needs.“Going public, for us, is an opportunity to show customers the size and scale of the business,” Mr. Irving said. “We provide a continuum of services.”A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: I.P.O. a Go.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.