By HIROKO TABUCHIAPRIL 1, 2015
American Apparel has started laying off about 180 employees, mainly in manufacturing, as part of an effort by its new chief executive to streamline the retailer’s money-bleeding operations.The company has begun telling affected employees that their jobs are being eliminated, American Apparel’s chief, Paula Schneider, said late Tuesday in an interview.The layoffs touch almost every area of the production cycle in the United States, and all employees losing their jobs will be informed by Friday, Ms. Schneider said.Ms. Schneider declined to say whether there would be more layoffs after this round, but said the retailer was continuing to assess its work force. “It’s an ongoing process,” she said.AdvertisementShe stressed, however, that wages had not been reduced, and that the company remained committed to keeping production at its factory in downtown Los Angeles.AdvertisementAmerican Apparel, which says that its products are “sweatshop-free,” says it pays the average sewer about $25,000 a year, or $12 an hour, significantly more than other low-wage jobs in retail.Unpaid furloughs that the company imposed on some employees as its sales slumped and inventories grew were expected to end after the layoffs. Some of those employees are likely to be terminated, while others will return to their jobs.“This is a very sad day,” Ms. Schneider said.“It’s very challenging to go down this route. But we have to conduct business differently in order to survive and to thrive,” she said. “If we continued down the same path, we’d get the same results.”Although the layoffs affect just 1.8 percent of American Apparel’s 10,000 employees, the cuts come at an uneasy time.The board of American Apparel voted to oust the company’s founder, Dov Charney, in June, over accusations of misuse of company funds and other actions. The retailer disclosed last week that the Securities and Exchange Commission has opened an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding Mr. Charney’s departure.Mr. Charney has emphatically denied the accusations, saying that he was the victim of a plot to remove him. He vowed to return, initially teaming up with the hedge fund Standard General to amass a large stake in the company he founded 26 years ago. But Standard General agreed to back his return to the company only if he were cleared of the accusations, and the fund eventually backed his termination.Mr. Charney, who put in place the company’s worker-friendly policies and who often spoke out in favor of fair pay and workers’ rights, also tried to rally garment workers to his cause. Video broadcast by the television program “20/20” last week showed some workers cheering Mr. Charney at an outdoor rally and calling for his return.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m touched,” Mr. Charney says on the clip.Ms. Schneider said that she was focused on the turnaround. “I can’t concern myself with Dov’s agenda,” she said.AdvertisementShe also said the cutbacks were not primarily an attempt to preserve cash, but part of a move to trim the company’s inventory and “declutter” its stores. For that, the company needed to align its work force with its production needs, she said.“We have more than 4,000 styles, many of which weren’t performing,” she said. “So we need style rationalization, and if we carry that forward, it just means less people in the manufacturing side of the business.”American Apparel needs all the cash it can save, however. In an earnings report filed last week, the company said it had lost $28 million in the fourth quarter, and had just $8.3 million in cash at the end of the year. To secure additional liquidity, the company said it had arranged a $15 million loan from Standard General.Ms. Schneider said the company did not plan to lay off workers in its retail stores. “In fact, we hope to grow the store side,” she said. She also said American Apparel continued to invest in many parts of the company, overhauling its design department, for example.That overhaul has involved losing some of Mr. Charney’s closest creative appointees.The senior designer Merrily Lupo, hired by Mr. Charney in 1999 at age 19 to redecorate his work space, said she had been abruptly let go two weeks ago, along with two other longtime creative directors.“It was very sudden,” she said late Tuesday in a phone interview. “The new regime, they want to just replace Dov’s old team with new people,” she said. “There’s a lot of unhappiness.”A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: American Apparel to Lay Off 180 Workers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.