By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 1, 2015
LONDON — Standard Chartered said on Wednesday that Viswanathan Shankar, the head of its business in Europe, the Middle East, Africa and the Americas, was leaving the company as the British bank continues to shake up its top leadership.Standard Chartered said that Mr. Shankar, 57, resigned to “pursue other interests” after 13 years at the bank and would leave the board on April 30. Standard Chartered is based in London, but it generates most of its earnings in Asia.“Shankar has decided to make a change of direction in his career and I wish him all the best,” Peter Sands, the Standard Chartered chief executive, said in a news release.A person with knowledge of Mr. Shankar’s thinking said that he was leaving to set up his own private equity fund.AdvertisementMr. Shankar will receive his base salary and other fixed elements of his compensation until mid-October, but he will not be eligible for a bonus for the 2015 financial year, Standard Chartered said. He also is eligible for a termination payment of about $280,000, the bank said.AdvertisementHis departure is the latest as the bank undertakes a sweeping overhaul of its top management and directors in hopes of turning around its business.Standard Chartered announced in February that Mr. Sands would leave the bank later this year and be replaced by William T. Winters, the former head of JPMorgan Chase’s investment bank. Mr. Sands has been chief executive since 2006.Jaspal Singh Bindra, the bank’s chief executive in Asia, is expected to step down from the board of directors at the end of April and leave the bank soon afterward. Three longstanding directors also will step down this year, and the bank intends to shrink the size of its board.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.John W. Peace, the Standard Chartered chairman, is expected to leave in 2016.The bank has struggled as its core Asian markets have slowed in recent years.Standard Chartered’s profit declined 37 percent to $2.51 billion in 2014 from $3.99 billion in 2013. Higher charges for bad loans and other credit risks, an accounting charge on its Korean business, and a previously announced settlement with the United States authorities dragged down its annual results.As part of its overhaul, the bank said in March that it was seeking cost reductions of $1.8 billion over the next three years, would cut another 2,000 jobs in its retail operations this year, and would further reduce the risk in its loan portfolios and business lines. The lender cut 2,000 jobs in its retail operations in 2014.Standard Chartered also announced three leadership changes on Wednesday.Mark Dowie will become vice chairman of clients and products beginning on Tuesday. He previously served as group head for corporate finance and acting group head for financial markets. He will move to London from Singapore.Jonathan Paul will join Standard Chartered next week as the new head of financial markets and be based in Singapore.Mr. Paul has more than 25 years experience in finance at Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs and Salomon Brothers, and he founded the hedge fund Ardmore Park Capital in 2008. He has most recently held consulting roles with several asset management firms.AdvertisementSumit Dayal, based in Singapore, replaced Mr. Dowie as group head of corporate finance.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.