By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 1, 2015
LONDON — UBS said on Wednesday that its shareholders would, for the first time, vote on the compensation of its directors and its top executives at its annual meeting in May.The Swiss bank has previously held advisory votes by shareholders on its prior fiscal year’s compensation report at its annual meetings, but this year will be the first time that shareholders will be asked to directly approve pay for executives.The shareholder vote comes after Swiss lawmakers enacted new rules in January 2014 intended to limit excessive compensation at companies listed in Switzerland. Swiss public companies are now required to hold votes on pay, and those votes must take place by the second annual meeting after the enactment of the law.In a news release on Wednesday, UBS said shareholders would be asked to vote on the so-called variable compensation, namely annual bonuses, of members of the Group Executive Board for 2014, including Sergio P. Ermotti, its chief executive.AdvertisementInvestors will also be asked to approved the base salaries and other fixed pay of its top executives for the 2016 financial year and compensation for members of its board of directors in 2015.AdvertisementThe board of directors believes that prospective votes regarding the maximum fixed compensation for its Group Executive Board and the directors “provide the firm and its governing bodies with the certainty needed to operate effectively,” UBS said in a news release.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The shareholders’ vote on the aggregate variable compensation for the G.E.B. in relation to the preceding year allows shareholders to make an informed decision on compensation considering pay in light of actual performance achieved,” the news release added.Mr. Ermotti is set to receive total compensation of 11.2 million Swiss francs, or about $11.5 million, for 2014, up from 10.7 million francs in the previous year.The figure includes 8.4 million francs in variable compensation, which includes shares in UBS that will be granted to Mr. Ermotti subject to shareholder approval. Those shares would not vest until 2020.The annual meeting is set for May 7 in Basel.UBS also said that Helmut Panke, the former chairman of the German automaker BMW’s management board, is to step down from the board of directors this year because of regulatory provisions regarding his term of office. Mr. Panke has served as a director since 2004.Shareholders, as previously announced in December, will be asked to approve James E. Staley, the former head of JPMorgan Chase’s investment bank, as a director at this year’s annual meeting.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Vote on Pay.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.