
Breakingviews By                     
JOHN FOLEY

OCT. 16, 2015
What may soon be streaming at the Chinese video site Youku Tudou are tears of relief.Alibaba, China’s biggest e-commerce company, has offered to buy the 82 percent of Youku that it doesn’t already own, at a 30 percent premium to the market price. A deal would end Youku’s unprofitable run as a public company and help Alibaba realize its multiscreen strategy. The move should also create value. Though that bit is most likely an afterthought.Youku is the dominant force in Chinese online video — effectively the YouTube of the People’s Republic. Like YouTube, it has never reported a profit. Aside from advertising fees, Youku is now charging users to watch its best content, but that means giving them something worth watching.The fees Youku paid for content increased 78 percent over the last year to 744 million renminbi, or about $117 million, in the latest quarter. Larger rivals like Baidu, a search engine that also owns an online video site, can swallow those costs with ease. That’s not the case for tiny Youku.It may seem petty to consider whether the deal creates value for Alibaba shareholders, but, as it happens, it probably does. The 30 percent premium is worth around $1.2 billion. Yet Youku’s bandwidth costs alone — what it pays for telecoms and data storage — are an annualized $213 million. If the data colossus Alibaba can eliminate those, the savings, taxed at Youku’s 15 percent rate and capitalized, are worth more than $1.8 billion.Beyond that, the benefits of the deal are fairly abstract. Perhaps Alibaba will create a Chinese answer to Netflix. Perhaps it will sell more video advertising spots to its online merchants. Alibaba and Youku may even be able to use data about shoppers’ online habits to create programming relevant to their activities.But really, who cares? Youku is less than 3 percent of the combined companies’ market value. And approval is more than likely a given, since almost 60 percent of the shares are held by Alibaba and its supporters, such as Victor Koo, a Youku founder, who will also receive an undisclosed package for staying on as chairman.John Foley is Reuters Breakingviews editor for Europe, the Middle East and Africa. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »