By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMARCH 31, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  The Nasdaq OMX Group has long courted technology companies as they seek to go public.But its latest initiative is aimed at helping entrepreneurs well before they even consider taking their businesses to the stock markets.In the South Financial District here — close to a growing number of start-ups — Nasdaq is in the midst of building what it calls its Entrepreneurial Center, a 13,000-square-foot space aimed at teaching future generations of Mark Zuckerbergs how to create and run successful businesses.It is in some ways Nasdaq’s own spin on “incubators” that help hatch and nurture nascent start-ups. But according to Bruce E. Aust, the Nasdaq vice chairman who is spearheading the center, it is also a natural extension of the stock exchange’s longstanding interest in fostering a growing start-up community.Advertisement“This is really an area we have expertise in,” Mr. Aust said in an interview. “We felt we could really create a great center to teach entrepreneurship.”AdvertisementStill, the Entrepreneurial Center is also another weapon in Nasdaq’s arsenal as it continues to battle its archrival, the New York Stock Exchange, for the hearts — and listings — of companies headed toward new lives as public companies.The stakes for both exchanges are high. According to the research firm CB Insights, about 588 privately backed companies have valuations of more than $100 million, meaning that they are potential candidates for going public sometime in the next several years.Among that group are highly visible, multibillion-dollar darlings — so-called unicorns — like Uber, the ride-hailing service; Spotify, the music-streaming service; and Dropbox, the online file-sharing giant, all of which could generate significant investor interest if and when they begin trading on a stock market.Nasdaq has long held an advantage in courting tech initial public offerings, dating back to the tech boom of the 1990s. It still maintains a lead, with 118 offerings in the sector since 2010 compared with the Big Board’s 109, according to data from Renaissance Capital. In virtually every year, Nasdaq’s lead in tech offerings has been by fewer than five deals.(Over all, the N.Y.S.E. has had 485 offerings during that time, compared with the Nasdaq’s 451.)But the N.Y.S.E. has won sizable mandates in recent years as it has heavily courted tech companies around the world. That campaign has won some notable trophies, including Twitter in 2013 and the Alibaba Group of China, whose public debut last year was the biggest on record, hitting $231 billion on its first day of trading.Last year, the two exchanges were neck and neck, by Nasdaq’s reckoning, with Nasdaq having 29 offerings compared with the Big Board’s 28.And the N.Y.S.E. has expanded its own network in Silicon Valley and established entrepreneurship initiatives like Big StartUp, which connects young businesses with established companies.AdvertisementMr. Aust professed little worry about the competition, noting that a number of prominent start-ups like Etsy, the online retailer of handmade goods, are slated to begin trading on the Nasdaq soon. So far this year, the two are tied in terms of tech offerings.But the Entrepreneurial Center is also an outgrowth of the 21-year-old nonprofit Nasdaq Educational Foundation. In recent years, Mr. Aust said, he and Nasdaq’s chief executive, Robert Greifeld, began discussing ways to offer more courses and resources to prospective new customers. Though the center will be open to entrepreneurs from all industries, its location will probably draw plenty of people from the tech world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Aust and Mr. Greifeld also discussed further drawing upon the foundation’s relationships with schools like Stanford Law School and the Anderson School of Management at the University of California, Los Angeles.“We see it as a kind of gathering place where you can come if you want to learn more about entrepreneurship,” Mr. Aust said. “It’s a way to gather those ideas in one spot.”By December, Mr. Aust — who formerly led Nasdaq’s global listing service — moved back to the Bay Area, where he had previously lived for 12 years, to be president of the Entrepreneurial Center. The executive director of the site is Nicola Corzine, who joined Nasdaq in January from Band of Angels, a collection of early-stage investors.When the center is finished, probably this fall, entrepreneurs will walk into a sprawling space that is part school, part hangout and part broadcast studio. Visitors will be able to attend educational forums and classes to learn the basics of running a business, from writing a business plan to raising the initial funds to get a company off the ground.Visitors can unveil new products, hold news conferences and conduct video interviews from the building.Budding chief executives can also stop by a coffee shop — described in promotional materials as a place for “exchanging best practices and ideas” — and a museum about entrepreneurship.And, of course, companies can ring the Nasdaq’s opening and closing bell from the center, rather than have to trek to the exchange’s Times Square studio. (Previously, ringing the bell outside of New York City was a rare occurrence, conferred only to the likes of Facebook, which kicked off its first day of trading from its campus in Menlo Park.)Over all, Mr. Aust said, fostering the latest generation of businesses is simply part of Nasdaq’s mission.Advertisement“Nasdaq does think at its core it wouldn’t be around if it weren’t for the great entrepreneurs who created the companies that listed on our market,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page F8 of the New York edition with the headline: Nasdaq’s Nursery for New Ventures.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.