AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressA jury in Georgia has awarded $150 million to the family of a 4-year-old boy killed when a Jeep Grand Cherokee exploded into flames after being rear-ended three years ago. The jurors in Decatur County ruled Thursday that Chrysler acted with reckless disregard for human life in selling the family of Remington Walden a 1999 Jeep with a gas tank mounted behind the rear axle.The boy, nicknamed Remi, of Bainbridge, Ga., was killed when the Jeep driven by his aunt was hit from behind by a pickup in March 2012. The fuel tank leaked, engulfing the Jeep in flames and killing him.The verdict comes nearly two years after Chrysler compromised with a federal safety agency and agreed to a scaled-down recall of some older-model Jeeps with the rear-mounted tanks. The tanks have little structure to protect them if struck from behind, making them susceptible to punctures and fires.Federal documents show that at least 75 people have died in post-crash fires because of the rear-mounted fuel tanks.After a seven-day trial, the jury ruled that Chrysler was 99 percent at fault for the crash and the pickup driver 1 percent at fault. Jurors also said that Chrysler failed to warn the family of the hazards of driving the Jeep. They ruled that the Waldens should get $30 million for Remi’s pain and suffering and $120 million for the full value of his life, according to a verdict form.Mike Palese, a spokesman for Chrysler’s parent company, FCA US, said it would appeal the verdict. Chrysler, he said, was prevented from presenting data submitted to federal safety regulators showing that the vehicles did not pose an unreasonable safety risk. “The vehicles are not defective,” he said.Carl Tobias, a professor at the University of Richmond law school, said it would be difficult for Chrysler to overturn a jury verdict, but an appeals court might reduce the amount of damages. He questioned Chrysler’s decision to take the case to trial because of the horrific nature of the crash.Mr. Tobias said the Walden verdict was likely to lead others to sue the company, or could speed along cases that are already in the system.Chrysler has long said that the Jeeps were no more dangerous than comparable S.U.V.s built at the time. It used that argument to convince the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in 2013 to allow Chrysler to recall just 1.56 million Jeeps after the agency initially recommended that 2.7 million be repaired. Under the recall, Chrysler agreed to install trailer hitches in the rear as an extra layer of protection.Safety advocates have called the size of the recall and the fix inadequate.Advertisement