AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks Barnes and Michael CieplyLOS ANGELES — United Talent Agency poked a bear earlier this week, stealing movie star clients like Will Ferrell and Chris Pratt from the powerful Creative Artists Agency. On Thursday afternoon the bear struck back.Escalating an insider spat into a full-scale fight, Creative Artists filed suit in Los Angeles County Superior Court on Thursday against United Talent, a smaller rival, for recruiting 10 of its agents in what it called a “lawless, midnight raid.”The surprise defection, one of the largest in Hollywood history, robbed Creative Artists of a lucrative comedy operation and, perhaps just as bad, made it look weak.The suit accuses United Talent and two defectors of organizing an “illegal and unethical conspiracy” that started in January and resulted in 10 agents leaving. Named in the suit as ringleaders are Gregory Cavic and Gregory McKnight, who left Creative Artists on Tuesday and later that day joined United Talent as partners. Creative Artists stopped short of suing the seven other defectors, but named several in the body of the complaint as having breached contracts.Creative Artists said in the suit that Mr. Cavic and Mr. McKnight not only caused the group to “brazenly and abruptly” breach their employment contracts but that they “delayed meetings and deals with existing and potential C.A.A. clients” so they could “divert as much of C.A.A.’s business to U.T.A. as possible.”Along with damages to be determined at the trial, the suit seeks a temporary restraining order prohibiting the departed agents from providing services to any clients they had while working at Creative Artists.A spokesman for United Talent declined to comment. Mr. Cavic and Mr. McKnight also declined to comment.The rapid legal response may have been aimed at complicating the decision of any Creative Artists client who may be tempted to leave with the agents. Mr. Ferrell and Mr. Pratt, the fast-rising star of films like “Guardians of the Galaxy” and the forthcoming “Jurassic World,” have both already left for United Talent. Other A-listers, including Melissa McCarthy, have indicated interest in following but have not yet signed contracts.The departures from Creative Artists shifts the agency landscape but does not reorder it. Creative Artists, which has expanded into areas like sports, will continue to dominate the entertainment business with William Morris Endeavor, a powerhouse that became Hollywood’s biggest agency in 2013, when it swallowed the sports and media talent agency IMG for $2.3 billion.United Talent will remain in third place, albeit with a vastly improved position in the comedy realm in particular. United Talent, which has about 200 agents, has worked in recent years to cast itself as an artist-friendly operation that remains laser-focused on movies and television — volatile businesses that its rivals have tried to diversify from, with sports, for example.The exodus of agents from Creative Artists was seen as pointing toward a change in internal culture at the agency, which sold a 35 percent stake to TPG Capital in 2010. TPG increased its position last year and now owns the majority of Creative Artists. That Creative Artists could even suffer such a blow was instantly read by its critics as proof that some of its senior agents had lost focus.Creative Artists loyalists, however, have ardently argued that nothing has changed at the agency — that it remains as effective and focused as ever.While relations among agencies are never easy, the raid awakened memories of talent wars that were more common in decades past. One particularly disruptive defection occurred in 1995, when a handful of agents left International Creative Management to found an agency of their own. The new agency quickly grew and eventually merged with William Morris.In 1975, Creative Artists was created by defectors from the William Morris Agency. Their newly created firm eventually became majority-owned by Michael Ovitz, who was widely hailed as the most powerful figure in Hollywood before leaving the agency to a next generation of managers in the 1990s.If public intrigue over the machinations of agents has diminished since Mr. Ovitz’s heyday, the current shake-up nonetheless shook Hollywood, where a semi-subterranean network of agents and managers conspires daily to keep clients working — or not.Advertisement