AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiThe president of Saks Fifth Avenue, Marigay McKee, stepped down Thursday after 15 months at the department store chain’s helm. She was replaced by Marc Metrick, an executive at Saks’s parent company, Hudson’s Bay.Ms. McKee joined Saks in 2014 after revitalizing the luxury London retailer Harrods. She pushed to modernize Saks, which had struggled with underperforming stores after overexpanding in the last decade. She said she would spend $1.25 billion over two years to refurbish stores and try to attract younger customers by adding more contemporary fashions and international labels.But “the fit wasn’t perfect,” Richard Baker, executive chairman of Hudson’s Bay, said in an interview. “Our strategy hasn’t changed at all. Marigay did a lot of good work and we made a lot of good progress,” he said. “It’s just at this point, in order to move forward, both Marigay and I thought it was time for a change.”Mr. Metrick, 41, spent 15 years at Saks in merchandising and strategy positions before joining Hudson’s Bay in 2012 as its marketing chief. Since 2013, he had been its chief administrative officer.In an interview, Mr. Metrick said his priorities were bolstering relations with Saks’s vendors and rallying store staff. “Change can be disruptive, and what I bring is a sense of continuity, and a deep understanding of how the company works,” he said.Ms. McKee could not be reached for comment. She had been scheduled to give a talk titled “What It Means to Be President of Saks Fifth Avenue” at New York University next weekHudson’s Bay, which runs a namesake chain in Canada as well as Lord & Taylor stores, acquired Saks in 2013 for $2.4 billion. In the third quarter last year, the group said its overall retail sales almost doubled from a year earlier to $1.9 billion thanks to its acquisition of Saks.But same-store sales at Saks rose just 1 percent from the same period last year, while sales at the rest of Hudson’s Bay’s retailers grew 1.7 percent.Advertisement