By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONAPRIL 2, 2015
At a news conference this week, Jesús G. Garcia, who is trying to unseat Rahm Emanuel as mayor of Chicago, accused the incumbent of allowing the city’s rich to “pay to play.”Then Mr. Garcia got personal. Standing in front of the offices of the $26 billion investment firm Citadel, the challenger accused the firm’s billionaire owner, Kenneth C. Griffin, of benefiting from a relationship with the mayor.Mr. Emanuel’s single biggest donor, Mr. Griffin, 46, has given more than $1 million to political organizations that support the mayor. The bulk of that money — $950,000 — was donated in recent weeks after Mr. Emanuel failed to win majority support for a second term at the end of February.Backing Mr. Emanuel, a former Democratic congressman and President Obama’s first White House chief of staff, may seem an unusual choice for Mr. Griffin. A self-made billionaire who started trading convertible bonds from his dormitory room at Harvard, Mr. Griffin does not like big government. He thinks taxes are too high and corporate regulation is too burdensome.AdvertisementWhile he has rarely commented on his political donations, in 2012 Mr. Griffin said he considered himself a “Reagan Republican” and that he thought the rich have “insufficient influence” on the political process.AdvertisementHis own influence has been felt in Illinois. “We need changes in Springfield,” he told an audience of hedge fund managers in Manhattan last year. That change, he said, could be brought about by Bruce Rauner, the Republican candidate in 2014 for governor of Illinois. Mr. Griffin spent more than $13 million supporting Mr. Rauner’s successful campaign.
            Since 2010, Kenneth Griffin, chief executive of the investment company Citadel, has given almost $1.3 million to Rahm Emanuel’s campaigns, the bulk of it this year.        Kenneth Griffin’s donationsto organizations supportingRahm Emanuel’scampaigns*’10$100,000’11none’12none’13$5,300’14$150,000’15$1.025 millionAPRIL 2, 2015
Opponents of Mr. Emanuel point to these donations as an example of how Wall Street reaches into its deep pockets to ensure it has a say in policies. And as the mayor heads into a runoff election on Tuesday, the first since the city began nonpartisan elections, his top donors have come to underscore a reputation for being, in the words of one critic, “Mayor One Percent.”Mr. Griffin certainly epitomizes that 1 percent. He is worth $6.5 billion, Forbes magazine estimates. A generous donor to the arts, Mr. Griffin was recently featured in the local press for a $10 million gift to the Museum of Contemporary Art. He spends millions on art for himself, too. In February, he bought a 10-foot-tall Gerhard Richter painting for $46.4 million at a Sotheby’s auction.Last year, Mr. Griffin gave $150 million to Harvard College for its financial aid program. That is the largest single amount donated to the university.His real estate purchases make the news as well. The Chicago Tribune recently reported that Mr. Griffin spent $30 million on two apartments in the Waldorf Astoria Chicago last year.He has also become a regular feature in the gossip columns as an acrimonious battle over billions of dollars has played out between him and his wife, Anne Dias Griffin, from whom he filed for divorce last summer.Mr. Griffin began trading in 1987, his sophomore year, with $265,000 from family and friends. When he set up Citadel in 1990, he was making exotic and complicated trades like Japanese equity warrants and placing bets on mergers and acquisitions.AdvertisementCitadel has grown from a small hedge fund into an investment firm giant, managing some $26 billion and employing 1,400 worldwide, 740 of them in Chicago.The current financial and political titans of Chicago have known each other since Mr. Emanuel was at the investment bank Wasserstein Perella, where he worked for three years after leaving the Clinton White House. The two do not always see eye to eye, however. While supporting the mayor, Mr. Griffin warned in 2013 that the country was at “the knife’s edge of a government that is too big.”And when Mr. Emanuel shut down 50 public schools in Chicago, polarizing some voters who said the move unfairly targeted low-income communities, Mr. Griffin argued that the mayor should have gone further. “The number should’ve been 125,” he said.But when it comes to taxes, Mr. Emanuel and Mr. Griffin share similar views. In a recent television advertisement paid for by Chicago Forward, one of the political organizations that Mr. Griffin has given money to, a retired Chicago police sergeant criticizes Mr. Garcia, known as “Chuy,” for being too quick to raise taxes. “When I see Chuy Garcia, I say, hold on to your wallets, this guy wants more taxes,” the advertisement said. “We just can’t afford that.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a statement, Mr. Griffin said: “Many of us at Citadel are actively involved in supporting candidates, nonprofits and civic groups that make our city and state a better place to live. More jobs. Less crime. Better schools. That’s what we all want for our community and our families.”At Citadel’s Chicago headquarters, Mr. Griffin has compelled those who work for him to be engaged in the community. The firm holds regular town hall meetings, where politicians, economists and the occasional chef (Grant Achatz) are invited to give talks with employees. When he was a presidential candidate in 2007, President Barack Obama attended one such town hall meeting.Mr. Emanuel spoke at another town hall meeting in September 2013.Citadel employees have followed Mr. Griffin in making significant political donations to the mayor’s campaign. Since 2010, employees have given $173,000 to Chicago for Rahm Emanuel, a political organization.Some employees have established closer ties with Mr. Emanuel: Daniel Widawsky, a former tax lawyer at Citadel, was appointed Chicago’s comptroller in 2013 by Mr. Emanuel.Mr. Griffin has also galvanized leaders of Chicago’s business community to get involved in politics. At a 2013 dinner held by Chicago’s Economic Club, he called upon the audience to pick up their pens and phones and reach out to local and state officials.Advertisement“You see, we have a powerful voice, a voice that can play an important role in fixing our schools, in protecting and providing for our retirees, and in creating good jobs, a voice that can’t wait until the next election cycle, a voice that must be heard now,” Mr. Griffin said.In Chicago, where the rough and tumble of Democratic ward politics is woven into the city’s DNA, Mr. Emanuel’s positioning as a middle-of-the-road Democrat contrasts with more left-leaning mayoral candidates like Mr. Garcia.Many in the business community have praised Mr. Emanuel and say he is a networker whose connections in Washington have helped bring funds to Chicago when money is tight. The mayor has received plaudits for improving the public transport system, increasing the minimum wage and encouraging companies to stay in Chicago.Supporters of Mr. Garcia argue that the views on small government and less taxes espoused by Mr. Griffin go too far.“It’s a Darwinian approach, and it’s limited the scope of government,” said David S. Schaffer, the largest individual donor to Mr. Garcia’s campaign and a longtime adviser to Mr. Garcia. “It’s a return to the days of the robber barons,” he added.On Tuesday, as Mr. Garcia spoke to a crowd of political supporters and reporters, Potbelly sandwiches were distributed. When asked, the servers said the sandwiches were “compliments of Ken Griffin.”A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Chicago’s Odd Couple.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.