
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

APRIL 2, 2015
Delaware is going to war over shareholder litigation, but will shareholders or corporations emerge victorious?The war is being fought over recent amendments proposed to corporate law in Delaware, where most United States public companies are incorporated.These amendments would do three things: weaken appraisal rights, designate Delaware as the sole forum for litigation and ban so-called fee-shifting to the losing parties in cases. The outcome has the potential to transform the landscape of shareholder litigation.The first amendment concerns appraisal rights, or dissenters’ rights, which allow shareholders of an acquired company to go to court to seek more cash if they think the takeover price was too low. A judge determines the fair value of their shares.AdvertisementUntil recently, appraisal rights were little used in Delaware because, unlike in class-action litigation, shareholders must pay their own legal fees. Litigating appraisal cases can be expensive and take years. The results are also uncertain because a court may award less than the amount offered in the takeover.AdvertisementIn recent years, though, hedge funds, including the Merion Capital Group, have specialized in exercising appraisal rights. The hedge funds have had mixed success, losing a big case recently involving Ancestry.com, but they have scared the Delaware corporate bar.Appraisal rights were originally aimed at protecting shareholders from underpriced bids, but Delaware is having second thoughts now that people are actually exercising them. The section of the Delaware State bar that makes recommendations to the Legislature over the scope of the state’s corporate law has made two proposals.The first would change the rate of interest paid to shareholders until their appraisal case is decided. Shareholders now accrue 5.75 percent in annual interest on the deal price while waiting the years it takes to decide an appraisal case. But the corporate bar feels that the rate is too high and limits the downside for hedge funds, encouraging them to exercise appraisal rights. After all, even if the court decides that the amount paid in the merger was fair and the hedge fund receives nothing extra, it still receives the interest.The amendment ends this game of “heads I win big, tails I win a little.” It permits companies to pay the amount of the merger price they do not dispute and then pay interest only on the amount of any difference if the court determines a higher value. Because companies will presumably contend that the company’s fair value is near the offer price — though probably below it for bargaining purposes — this would sharply curtail any interest payments.The second proposal would eliminate small shareholder claims. It would ban appraisal rights if the aggregate amount of claims asserted were less than 1 percent of the outstanding shares or $1 million in total. This amendment is aimed at small investors, mostly individuals who have traditionally brought these claims. It would eliminate these claims and make it particularly hard to exercise appraisal rights in bigger companies.This proposal is a bit disconcerting. If a company is not paying fair value, why should a claim be prohibited simply because it is small? While preventing frivolous claims is admirable, is such a blunt remedy necessary?The second important amendment would permit forum selection bylaws, but with a twist. Forum selection bylaws were a response to the rise of multijurisdictional litigation. In 2012, 92 percent of mergers were litigated, and more than 50 percent were litigated in more than one place. Plaintiffs’ attorneys filed suits in multiple states to play judges against one another and pursue litigation in a place that was more likely to be favorable to their clients.AdvertisementIn response, companies began to adopt forum selection bylaws that designated only one forum for litigation, almost always Delaware. For the most part, these bylaws, which could be easily adopted without shareholder approval, have been upheld when considered by state courts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Delaware’s Legislature is proposing, out of an abundance of caution, to add a statutory authorization of these bylaws. But the proposed law does not allow a company incorporated in Delaware to designate another state as an exclusive forum. For example, a company based in California but incorporated in Delaware could not select California for litigation.From the point of view of Delaware’s lawmakers, this discrimination is justified because it is their law and they see their courts as being in the best position to make decisions. But they do come off looking greedy. Delaware might indeed be the best place for this litigation, but why not let companies decide what’s best?Furthermore, the change appears unnecessary. According to a letter by Prof. Joe Grundfest of Stanford Law School to the Delaware bar, 1,029 companies have adopted a forum selection provision. Every single Delaware company, 830 in all, designate Delaware as an exclusive forum.The final and most controversial amendment would ban fee-shifting bylaws, which require the loser in fiduciary duty litigation to pay the fees and expenses of both sides. Such bylaws have the potential to bring shareholder class-action litigation to a screeching halt. Plaintiffs’ attorneys will be deterred from bringing cases by the prospect of having to pay millions of dollars in fees if they lose.The issue of fee-shifting bylaws arose last year out of the decision in ATP Tour v. Deutscher Tennis Bund,  which upheld such a bylaw by a private company. Corporate lawyers quickly seized on the decision and argued that this decision also permitted public companies to adopt similar bylaws. The plaintiffs’ bar became apoplectic and tried to push through a quick statute outlawing these provisions.At the time I wrote that the plaintiffs’ lawyers would be successful and that fee-shifting bylaws in public companies would have a short life. I was wrong. The quick introduction of a proposed ban in the Delaware Legislature prompted a protest led by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which opposed the ban and argued for a more deliberative process. After the chamber’s complaints, the proposed ban was withdrawn.A handful of small companies have since adopted fee-shifting bylaws, as have a couple of big companies in connection with their initial public offerings. The most notable of these was Alibaba, which provides its publicly traded United States securities through an entity in the Cayman Islands. In all, Institutional Shareholder Services reports that 52 companies have adopted these bylaws.The proposed ban is back, setting up a battle royal between corporate lawyers and the plaintiffs’ bar, not to mention debate in the legal community. John C. Coffee Jr., a professor and expert in securities law at Columbia Law School, has argued forcefully against these provisions and in particular contends that the proposed amendment is ill-drafted. Theodore N. Mirvis and William Savitt of Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz recently released a white paper arguing that the courts should decide, which they say would most likely mean a compromise in which some but not all of these provisions would be allowed.AdvertisementIt’s all a bit curious because losers already pay in the United States if their suits are frivolous. Because courts can already award attorneys’ fees, fee-shifting bylaws run the risk of deterring valid claims.While the Delaware Legislature and the corporate bar are dealing with these issues as three different problems, they are, in fact, related. Each is aimed at altering the ability of shareholders to bring suit. Perhaps a better approach would be a thoughtful discourse on how all of these proposals work or don’t work together and whether they would curtail shareholders’ rights too much.Moreover, there seems to be a bit of highhandedness by both sides. The capable Delaware courts appeared in control of the situation and were shaping the law to address these issues. They permitted forum selection bylaws while not making Delaware the exclusive forum; seemed to be limiting appraisal rights exercises by awarding lower amounts; and in conferences and outside the court, indicated a deliberative approach to the fee-shifting issue. Just last week, a Delaware court struck down a fee-shifting bylaw on the grounds that it purported to apply to former stockholders who no longer held shares when the bylaw was adopted.Instead of rushing to correct perceived flaws, it might benefit everyone to take a step back, let this unfold a bit more in the courts and then take a broader look at the entirety of Delaware law and how these provisions interact with it. But in the fog of war, sometimes waiting seems to be the worst option.An earlier version of this column misstated the reason a Delaware court struck down a fee-shifting bylaw. It was on the grounds that the bylaw purported to apply to former stockholders who no longer held shares when it was adopted, not on the grounds that it was adopted in anticipation of litigation.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @StevenDavidoff on Twitter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »