By ALEXANDRA ALTERAPRIL 2, 2015
Winter is coming, slowly.The best-selling author George R.R. Martin just released an excerpt from his novel in progress, “The Winds of Winter,” the latest book in his epic fantasy series “A Song of Ice and Fire.”Mr. Martin’s fans have been agitating for the next volume in the series, which was turned into the hit HBO show “Game of Thrones,’’ since the fifth book came out in 2011. Some have harangued him for taking time off from the books to write episodes of the show, while others have urged him to appoint a literary successor in case he doesn’t live long enough to finish the story. Mr. Martin did not write for the show’s fifth season, and has said that he won’t be writing episodes for season six to focus on finishing the novel.The story takes place in a vaguely medieval fantasy world where different political factions are vying for power, with the help of dragons, black magic and armies of freed slaves.The new excerpt, posted Thursday on Mr. Martin’s website, arrived just ahead of the April 12 premiere of the fifth season. The excerpt unfolds from the perspective of Sansa Stark, who comes from one of the country’s political dynasties and fled the dangers of the capital with her Machiavellian rescuer, Littlefinger.Mr. Martin published the first volume in 1996, and has said he plans to write at least two more books. With the publicity boost from the HBO series, sales of the books have exploded, topping more than 60 million copies worldwide.Mr. Martin’s publisher said no publication date had been set yet for “Winds of Winter,” (and the cover design floating around the web is not the real book jacket). That hasn’t stopped some people from stirring up trouble on Twitter. On April 1, someone with a spoof account under the name George RR Martin posted, “The Winds of Winter is finally finished #GoTAprilFools.”A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Martin Releases Excerpt From ‘Winds of Winter’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.