By JAD MOUAWADOCT. 16, 2015
United Airlines said that its new chief executive, Oscar Munoz, had been hospitalized.United, which is based in Chicago, said in a short statement on Friday that it was “continuing to operate normally.” It did not elaborate on Mr. Munoz’s condition or provide more details. “Our thoughts and prayers are with his family and we are respecting their privacy,” the airline said. He was hospitalized Thursday.Mr. Munoz, who is 56, was named to the post last month after the surprise dismissal of United’s previous chief executive, Jeff Smisek, during a corruption investigation.In his first month on the job, Mr. Munoz traveled extensively around United’s hubs to speak with employees and pledge a change in direction for the airline.Since merging with Continental Airlines five years ago, United has suffered from poor on-time performance and bad employee relations, which led to frustrated passengers.AdvertisementMr. Munoz’s arrival was greeted by United’s unions, which welcomed a change from Mr. Smisek’s leadership and hoped that a new executive could help improve relations. Analysts said the company had started expedited contract talks with pilots.Advertisement“There’s no doubt that Mr. Munoz’s challenges have been extraordinary,” said Vicki Bryan, an analyst at Gimme Credit. “He has taken on one of the largest airlines in the world in seemingly total disarray with critical failures to address in network operations, customer service and labor relations — the list goes on.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Before joining United, Mr. Munoz had no operational experience running an airline. He was formerly a high-ranking railroad executive who was expected to be the next chief at CSX Corporation.He has gained insights into the airline business after joining the board of Continental Airlines in 2004 and of United when the two companies merged.In an interview this month, he provided a blunt assessment of the level of discontent he had seen at United within his first few weeks on the job, and he emphasized that the way to improve customer service was to fix employee relations first.“What resonates, and what I feel most of all, is just a complete disengagement of folks,” Mr. Munoz said then. “Maybe that’s overly dramatic. It’s not complete disengagement. It’s definitely disenchantment.”United shares fell after the news on Friday and closed down $1.79, or 3 percent, at $55.97 a share.The company is scheduled to report its third-quarter earnings on Thursday. Analysts expect the company to report record quarterly pretax profits after it recently increased its outlook.A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: New Chief of United Airlines Hospitalized; Cause Is Not Disclosed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.