AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — So much of the money pouring into venture capital nowadays has come from investors hoping to get a piece of the next Uber or Dropbox.But one investment firm has found supporters by looking for start-ups with a decidedly more scientific bent.Lux Capital plans to announce on Thursday that it has closed its latest investment fund at $350 million, more than its initial target of $245 million. The new fund, which was nearly doubly oversubscribed, will bring the firm’s assets under management to $700 million.The new fund will help the 15-year-old Lux continue its strategy of finding start-ups further away from the allure of smartphone apps and consumer services and in something decidedly less sexy: those rooted in hard sciences like materials and health care.“When you think about the next generation of industrial titans, it’s not going to be app developers,” Josh Wolfe, a Lux co-founder and managing partner, said. Referring to his firm’s investments, he added, “In many ways, they’re challenging the laws of physics.”Among the start-ups that Lux has invested in are Kymeta, which produces ultrathin satellite antennas and which has also drawn Bill Gates as a backer; Shapeways, a 3D printing company; and Kurion, a specialist in cleaning up nuclear waste at sites like Fukushima in Japan.Other current areas of interest, according to Mr. Wolfe, include robots used for surgery that are controlled by video game devices and advanced but cheap satellite cameras.Finding attractive investments in these fields is often difficult, said Peter Hébert, a co-founder and managing partner, in part because there are far fewer choices than there are in other fields, like e-commerce. Many traditional venture capitalists, the two executives contend, are momentum investors who are chasing trends.“Because it’s hard, there are fewer entrepreneurs willing to go into these areas,” Mr. Hébert said. “Then there are fewer investors willing to take on some of these challenges.”Though Mr. Wolfe declined to discuss Lux’s performance, he said that several of the firm’s portfolio companies have seen their valuation rise to between 50 times and 100 times their original level.That may not quite yield the kind of home runs that a lucky bet on, say, Facebook or WhatsApp could yield. But Mr. Wolfe said that his firm was happy to back more unusual companies that are developing durable businesses.“We have an enormous sense of pride in the more eclectic, bold entrepreneurs that we’re backing,” he said.Advertisement