AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsRudolph Perz, an advertising executive who pondered a soulless, squishy, cylindrical mixture of flour and water on his kitchen table 50 years ago and conjured up the genial Pillsbury Doughboy, died on Thursday in a suburban Chicago hospital. He was 89.The cause was cardiac arrest, his daughter Martha Nora said. The pudgy Pillsbury mascot, known as Poppin’ Fresh, became instantly recognized as the symbol of the company’s line of refrigerated biscuit, roll and cookie dough that popped out of a cardboard tube. He made his debut in a 1965 commercial for crescent rolls. Within three years the figure, sporting a kerchief and toque and always tickled by a signature tummy poke, claimed an 87 percent brand recognition among American consumers. That was enough to immortalize it in the pantheon of other anthropomorphic hucksters, including the Jolly Green Giant, Tony the Tiger and Morris the Cat. Since then, the Doughboy has rescued cooks both fledgling and overwhelmed, spawned dolls and play sets, and joined the cast of giant balloons in the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade.In 1987, Adweek magazine declared him “America’s most loved character.” Mr. Perz, who lived in Glenview, Ill., was the creative director of the Leo Burnett agency in Chicago when he imagined a blue-eyed Poppin’ Fresh springing from a tube of dough, like a fast-forward version of evolution from primordial ingredients.To distinguish him from a plumper incarnation of Casper the Friendly Ghost in cartoon illustrations, the Doughboy became a three-dimensional clay figure designed by Milt Schaffer, an animator. “We made two Doughboys,” Mr. Perz said in an interview with a colleague at Leo Burnett in 1972. “One was a rubber Doughboy with an armature inside, and you could move his arms a little bit at a time. And the other was a hard Doughboy.” The hard version had many heads carved with different expressions, “and you shifted the head or you shifted the body,” Mr. Perz said. The tummy poke, he said, was shot using a frame-by-frame stop-motion technique. “Then when you ran them together it looked very pliable.” General Mills, Pillsbury’s parent, said the first Doughboy television commercial required five bodies and 15 heads and cost $16,000 to make. Thirty seconds of Poppin’ Fresh on camera required 720 photographs.The Doughboy’s voice — “Hi! I’m Poppin’ Fresh, the Pillsbury Doughboy,” he announced, giggling “Hee-Hee” (later “Hoo-Hoo”) when poked in his soft belly — was originally supplied by Paul Frees. A busy voice actor, he also voiced the Disney duck Professor Ludwig Von Drake and Admiral Yamamoto in the 1976 movie “Midway.” Rudolph Robert Perz was born in Chicago on Dec. 6, 1925, to immigrants from what became Yugoslavia. His father, also named Rudolph, was a carpenter. His mother was the former Lucy Opperman. He graduated from the University of Illinois in Chicago. His wife, the former Lois Wagberg, died in 1971. In addition to Martha, he is survived by another daughter, Laura Matlin, and six grandchildren. Mr. Perz worked for J. Walter Thompson in Chicago on the 7-Up and Aunt Jemima accounts and joined Leo Burnett as a copy supervisor in the television and film department in 1959. Burnett won the refrigerated foods account in March 1965, and Mr. Perz handled Pillsbury products until the early 1970s. He left the agency in 1980 to work for the Minneapolis-based firm Campbell Mithun (now just Mithun). Poppin’ Fresh has appeared in more than 600 commercials; in the most recent, he wears jeans (presumably relaxed fit). He has guest-starred in advertisements for MasterCard and Geico. Mr. Perz’s work will be featured in “A Salute to Advertising’s Greatest Icons,” an exhibition opening in May at the Chicago Museum of Broadcast Communications, along with StarKist’s Charlie the Tuna, the Keebler Elves and more.“Perz was a creative icon who created another icon,” said Bruce DuMont, the museum’s president. Advertisement