By RACHEL ABRAMSAPRIL 3, 2015
A federal appeals court has temporarily halted new safety rules for high-power magnets, dealing a setback to federal regulators who have spent years fighting to get such products off the market. The ruling was a reprieve for the last manufacturer.The ruling will prevent the Consumer Product Safety Commission from enforcing new regulations for the magnets, made popular by the now-defunct Buckyballs. Regulatory efforts were initiated after a child died from swallowing the toys.Shihan Qu, the founder of Zen Magnets, took the commission to court to fight the ban. The judges’ order, issued on Wednesday, did not specify a reason for granting the stay.Mr. Qu circulated an email on Friday announcing the ruling. “In effect, short term, it doesn’t change that much for us,” Mr. Qu said. “But long term, it says a lot.”AdvertisementFighting high-power magnets has been the safety agency’s most aggressive campaign in years. The toys, which contain magnets that are stronger than normal, were typically sold in sets. Consumers could stick them together to build various shapes, and the products were largely marketed as adult desktop toys.AdvertisementBut the Consumer Product Safety Commission became alarmed at reports that children were swallowing the magnets, which could attach to each other through the intestines and cause internal injuries. Such injuries sent 2,900 children and teenagers to the hospital from 2009 to 2013, the commission said, citing data from the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System, the agency’s network of self-reporting products. At least one child died.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The agency pushed manufacturers to issue voluntary recalls, but the manufacturers pushed back, until fighting the commission became too expensive. Maxfield & Oberton, the maker of Buckyballs, refused for years to issue a recall before finally capitulating. Eventually, all of the magnet makers stopped production except for Mr. Qu, who still sells some magnets online. In a separate lawsuit, the agency is still trying to force Mr. Qu to issue a recall.Manufacturers of the magnets argued that many products could be dangerous if used incorrectly. The rights of small-business owners, Mr. Qu and others argued, should be balanced with serious safety concerns.The agency subsequently imposed new standards for high-power magnets, requiring them to be either less powerful or too large for a child to swallow. The agency will not be able to enforce those rules until the Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit issues a final ruling. The agency has until April 14 to respond.In a statement, the agency’s chairman, Elliot F. Kaye, said, “We remain committed to our thoughtful and well-reasoned regulation.” He said he hoped the court would uphold “the commission’s proper exercise of authority and will quickly agree that the safety of children comes first.”A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Court Grants a Temporary Reprieve for High-Power Magnet Safety Regulations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.