By ANITA RAGHAVANAPRIL 3, 2015
Donald Meltzer, who ran Credit Suisse’s global mergers group during the heady deal-making era at the turn of the millennium, is returning to Wall Street after a hiatus pursuing Jewish studies.Rabobank, which started 115 years ago as an agricultural cooperative bank in the Netherlands, is expected to announce next week that it has hired Mr. Meltzer as vice chairman and head of North American mergers and acquisitions.The move will be a sharp change of pace for Mr. Meltzer, who is 57. In late 2010, Mr. Meltzer left Cowen & Company, a boutique investment bank he joined as head of investment banking after more than two decades at Credit Suisse and a stint as the investment banking chief at Dresdner Kleinwort. He recalls telling Cowen’s chief executive that he wanted to “pursue a different path in life” and that he was leaving to pursue a master’s degree in law and Jewish civilization at New York University.When the program he was interested in was dropped because of an insufficient number of qualified candidates, a law professor suggested that Mr. Meltzer come to the university and write a paper focusing on the relevance of Jewish thought or law to a larger societal issue. In early 2011, Mr. Meltzer became a scholar at N.Y.U.’s Tikvah Center for Law and Jewish Civilization.Advertisement“The world interpreted that I was going to be a rabbi,” Mr. Meltzer said in a phone interview this week. Instead, he embarked on a mission to “research the broadly perceived immorality of the professional financial community and the possible application of the rabbinic tradition to institutional and individual behavior in that workplace,” according to a note about his research at nyutikvah.org.AdvertisementWhat he found in his research is not exactly flattering to Wall Street.“In the Jewish moral code, there is a sense of limit, there is a certain amount of gain and a certain amount of profit that is appropriate, but there comes a point where what is good for the community as a whole is the overarching principle,” Mr. Meltzer said. “What I found is on Wall Street, there is no limit on what the appropriate profit is. The objective is: The more profit, the better.”Given his findings, why did Mr. Meltzer choose to return to Wall Street? “I am not embarrassed to say it would be useful to have an income because it enables a lot of my philanthropic work,” he said.In 1996, Mr. Meltzer and his wife suffered a profound loss when their son, who had Down syndrome, died. Soon after, the Meltzers adopted a child and moved to Europe for a time. “I knew I needed to work to survive,” Mr. Meltzer said. “But working to work was not good enough for me. I had to have meaning in life. The inquiry, the Jewish studies are all about having meaning in life.”Mr. Meltzer appeared on a panel at his 35th Harvard College reunion, where he spoke about how to move forward after a life crisis like the loss of a child. One of the ways the Meltzers regrouped was by finding avenues to give back.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Over the years, he and his wife have supported the Camphill Foundation,0 which works to enhance the life of people with disabilities, donating both money and time. Mr. Meltzer was president of Camphill more than a decade ago, and his wife, Shelley Burtt, is its executive director.At Rabobank, Mr. Meltzer believes he has found a culture that fits with the individual he is today. “It became very clear that who I am and what my values are could be expressed at Rabobank,” he said. “It is not a publicly traded company. It is a Dutch cooperative bank. It has near-term performance needs but the ability to think long term.”Mr. Meltzer’s return to investment banking comes at an opportune time. After slumping in the wake of the financial crisis, deal-making has been steadily picking up. In the first quarter, worldwide mergers and acquisitions jumped 25 percent, to $854.2 billion, the strongest three-month period since 2007, according to Thomson Reuters.Mr. Meltzer built his reputation as a mergers and acquisitions banker in the health care sector, advising giants like Novartis and representing Schering in its defense of an unsolicited takeover bid from Merck, which resulted in the sale of Schering to Bayer for nearly $20 billion.AdvertisementBut at Rabobank, he will concentrate on food and agriculture, which has traditionally been a focus for the Dutch bank and an area where there has been vibrant deal-making activity recently. Last week, for instance, 3G Capital announced it would merge H.J. Heinz with Kraft Foods.Mr. Meltzer will have his work cut out for him. Rabobank ranks 66th in global M.& A. activity this year, with $2.3 billion in deals to its credit, according to Thomson Reuters, but that is up from 198 in 2014. By comparison, Credit Suisse, where Mr. Meltzer spent most of his career, stands at No. 10, with $72.7 billion in deals it has arranged.Despite his time away from Wall Street, Mr. Meltzer has not lost his fighting spirit.“I am a Type-A, competitive-enough guy to want to improve a franchise which has great client relationships in the food and agricultural space,” he said.Anita Raghavan is the author of “The Billionaire’s Apprentice: The Rise of the Indian-American Elite and the Fall of the Galleon Hedge Fund.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.