By MATTHEW GOLDSTEIN and BEN PROTESSAPRIL 3, 2015
The legacy of Preet Bharara’s crackdown on insider trading — his prosecutors won more than 80 convictions as they swept through Wall Street — might now hinge on the most unpredictable of allies: Congress.On Friday, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit denied Mr. Bharara’s request to reconsider a ruling in December that sharply narrowed the definition of insider trading. That ruling, issued by a three-judge panel of the court, tossed out the convictions of two hedge fund traders and threatened to dissolve other signature convictions and pleas secured by the office of Mr. Bharara, the United States attorney for Manhattan.The latest denial from the appeals court now leaves Mr. Bharara with few legal options. With the approval of the United States solicitor general, Mr. Bharara could seek to appeal the ruling to the Supreme Court, but legal analysts have described his chances there as a long shot.Given the paucity of legal avenues in this landmark case, the answer for future investigations might lie instead with Congress, which could clarify just what constitutes insider trading. Already, in the wake of the December ruling, lawmakers have introduced at least three bills that would establish clearer ground rules, potentially empowering prosecutors and stemming the fallout from the ruling.AdvertisementNo federal law defines insider trading, a vacuum that has given federal judges and regulators unusual sway in shaping the boundaries of what it means to trade on confidential tips. In the absence of a federal law, the definition of insider trading has emerged from a patchwork of legal opinions and regulations.Advertisement“This decision today reaffirms the need for Congress to act, and I’m pleased that there is bipartisan interest in improving the fairness of our securities markets and cracking down on harmful insider trading,” Senator Jack Reed, Democrat of Rhode Island, who introduced one of the bills, said in a statement on Friday.To be sure, most of Mr. Bharara’s cases will still stand. And his crackdown on insider trading will continue to be a centerpiece of his career.Yet the order on Friday eliminated two of his paths for appeal. For one, the appeals court denied the legal equivalent of a do-over in a process known as en banc. The process would require every judge on the appeals court to hear the case.The three-judge panel that ruled in December, overturning the convictions of Anthony Chiasson and Todd Newman, also refused to conduct a new hearing on the matter, surprising some legal experts.The three-judge panel, in dismissing the insider trading charges, ruled that Mr. Chiasson and Mr. Newman needed to know that insiders at technology companies were improperly leaking confidential information to hedge funds in exchange for some “personal benefit.”In the case, the tips started with insiders at Dell and Nvidia and bounced among a number of hedge funds before reaching Mr. Newman and Mr. Chiasson. Those extra layers, the panel concluded, meant that the traders would not have known of any such benefit.The panel then went a step further, challenging the very notion of what constitutes a benefit. It disagreed with prosecutors, who argued that the benefit could be something as intangible as friendship, ruling that the government had to show that a person passing on an insider tip expected to receive something “of some consequence” in return.AdvertisementThe appeals court was not clear on what constitutes “some consequence,” and it is this aspect of the ruling that has disturbed prosecutors in Mr. Bharara’s office the most. Prosecutors fear that the ruling will open the door to allowing textbook leaks across the corporate world. Take, for example, the classic example of an executive whispering to a friend on the golf course about a coming acquisition.In asking the appeals court to reconsider the ruling, Mr. Bharara’s office had said the panel’s “erroneous definition of the personal benefit requirement will dramatically limit the government’s ability to prosecute some of the most common culpable and market-threatening forms of insider trading.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At a minimum, Mr. Bharara had hoped the three-judge panel would clarify that portion of the ruling. But now that it is clear the court will not do that, some argue Congress should step in to remedy the matter if it wants to deter traders from finding creative ways to profit from inside information.Justice Antonin Scalia of the Supreme Court has suggested that Congress should take up this issue.And Ira Lee Sorkin, a longtime white-collar defense lawyer who may be best known for representing Bernard Madoff, said the appeals court decision might increase the pressure on Congress to clarify insider trading. Mr. Sorkin said it appeared the courts were increasingly dissatisfied with having to interpret what constitutes insider trading in the absence of a federal law and the Securities and Exchange Commission’s efforts to expand the definition over the years.“The courts are fed up with expansion,” Mr. Sorkin said. “That is not to criticize Bharara — he is simply doing what he thought the courts permitted him to do — but the Second Circuit said, ‘No.’ ”If Congress were to act, the outcome would not affect those convictions now imperiled by the appeals court ruling. But it would potentially set a standard for future prosecutions.In Mr. Reed’s bill, he sought to draw a “simple, bright line rule” that would eliminate the need for a personal benefit. That is, according to the bill, if someone trades on material information that he has reason to know is confidential, then that constitutes unlawful insider trading.Then again, given the gridlock on most issues in Washington, the idea of passing any insider trading law in Congress might be wishful thinking.A spokesman for Mr. Bharara declined to comment on a possible Supreme Court appeal. The Justice Department in Washington is reviewing its options, according to a spokeswoman.AdvertisementFor now, barring such an appeal, it appears Mr. Chiasson and Mr. Newman are in the clear.“Today’s decision, without dissent from any member of the Second Circuit, emphatically reaffirms that Todd Newman committed no crime,” Stephen Fishbein and John Nathanson, Mr. Newman’s lawyers, said in a statement. “It is now time for the government to move on and allow an innocent man to continue with his life.”Gregory Morvillo — who represented Mr. Chiasson along with Alexandra A. E. Shapiro, and Mark F. Pomerantz, a lawyer at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison — said, “This victory is proof that the justice system worked how it is supposed to, with thoughtful judicial oversight when there are glaring errors at the trial court level.”The ruling, left undisturbed, could also set the stage for another appellate court to overturn the insider trading conviction of Michael Steinberg, a longtime confidant and trader for Steven A. Cohen, the billionaire investor. Mr. Steinberg was convicted of trading on much of the same sources of information as Mr. Chiasson and Mr. Newman.It is likely that other traders who pleaded guilty and agreed to cooperate with Mr. Bharara’s investigation may also seek to overturn their pleas. Separately, a number of defendants in insider trading cases around the country have tried to argue that the ruling in the case involving Mr. Chiasson and Mr. Newman should void their cases as well.It was an unusual coincidence that the decision landed on Good Friday. It was two years ago on Good Friday that agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation arrested Mr. Steinberg at his Park Avenue apartment in Manhattan, the beginning of a long legal journey.“Today’s decision reaffirms that Michael Steinberg did not commit a crime and never should have been prosecuted,” said Mr. Steinberg’s lawyer, Barry Berke. “The decision requires his conviction to be thrown out as well.”Peter J. Henning contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Court Rejects Request to Reconsider Insider Trading Ruling.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.