By DAVID JOLLYAPRIL 1, 2015
Klaus E. Tschira, whose pioneering role in the business software revolution made him one of Germany’s richest men, died on Tuesday in Heidelberg. He was 74.His death was confirmed by Renate Ries, a spokeswoman for Klaus Tschira Stiftung, a foundation established by Mr. Tschira to support his philanthropic ventures. She did not specify the cause.In 1966, as a freshly minted physics graduate of the University of Karlsruhe, Mr. Tschira joined IBM, which at the time dominated the computer world with its big mainframes. For the next six years he was a systems analyst, taking part in a project in the new field of enterprise software — creating programs for computerizing businesses’ day-to-day operations to raise efficiency and cut costs. But IBM lost interest in the project in 1972.“We wanted to develop the software within IBM,” Hasso Plattner, one of Mr. Tschira’s colleagues at the time, said in an interview. “But the conditions weren’t right. Management probably didn’t see the potential.”AdvertisementSo Mr. Tschira, Mr. Plattner and three other colleagues — Dietmar Hopp, Hans-Werner Hector and Claus Wellenreuther — left IBM to develop the software on their own. They formed a company called SAP, short for Systems, Applications and Products in Data Processing.AdvertisementCorporate computing systems in those days employed so-called batch processing, requiring custom-made software and punch-card storage. Data was entered by a keyboard and processed later, often overnight, and it could take days to obtain useful output. The SAP team, betting on the novel idea of “real time” business computing, went to work on developing software that would give companies immediate access to their output.“We had no computer of our own, so we had to work on customers’ computers, usually at night,” Mr. Plattner said. “That was stressful.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.SAP’s first product, accounting software known as RF, ultimately gained it more than 100 big corporate customers, but the programs were still largely customized for each company. In 1979 SAP introduced R2, an off-the-shelf software package to integrate all of a company’s business operations, and sales took off. R2 also got the company noticed in the United States.The breakthrough came in the early 1990s with R3, which put management tools on the desktops of even small companies. SAP is now a world leader in business software, with companies like Oracle and Microsoft. In 2014 it posted revenue of 17.6 billion euros, or about $18.9 billion.Though it was “a team effort,” Mr. Plattner said, Mr. Tschira played a major role in developing all three of those products and led the development of software used by human resources departments to manage hiring, payroll processing and employee records.When SAP went public in 1988, Mr. Tschira became exceedingly wealthy. Forbes last year estimated his family’s net worth at $8.9 billion.Klaus Erwin Tschira was born on Dec. 7, 1940, in Freiburg, Germany. His father was a businessman, his mother a nurse. He is survived by his wife, Gerda, and two sons.Mr. Tschira stepped down from his operational role at SAP in 1998, but he remained on the board until 2007. In recent years he focused on his charitable activities, including financing research and education.A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2015, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Klaus Tschira, 74, Business Software Pioneer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.