By REUTERSOCT. 16, 2015
General Electric reported a better-than-expected third-quarter profit on Friday, helped by cost cuts and higher sales from its jet engine business, which offset struggles in its oil and gas segment.The conglomerate, which is pulling back from financial services, also said industrial revenue grew 4 percent, excluding the impact of foreign currency swings and acquisitions.The company maintained its profit forecast for its core industrials segment of $1.13 to $1.20 a share for the full year.G.E.’s orders dropped 26 percent, including a big decline in oil-related orders, but an Edward Jones analyst, Jeff Windau, said the company “had some big orders last year, so the comparison was pretty tough.”AdvertisementShares, up about 10 percent since the activist investor Nelson Peltz revealed a $2.5 billion stake in the company this month, rose 95 cents, to $28.98, on Friday. It was the biggest percentage gainer on the Dow Jones industrial average.On another positive note for shareholders, G.E. said it expected to retire as much as 7 percent of its outstanding floated shares by mid-November, as it completes the spinoff of its former retail finance business, Synchrony Financial. The Federal Reserve this week said Synchrony could function alone.AdvertisementThe Synchrony split is part of G.E.’s big retreat from financial services, which began in earnest in April when it said it would divest itself of some $200 billion worth of its GE Capital financing assets to focus on industrial manufacturing.Including the Synchrony split, G.E. said it expected to return about $30 billion in cash to shareholders this year through GE Capital divestitures.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For the quarter, net earnings fell 29 percent from a year earlier to $2.51 billion, or 25 cents a share. Excluding items, earnings of 29 cents a share exceeded the average estimate of analysts by 3 cents, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.Revenue slipped 1.3 percent to $31.68 billion. Revenue in its oil and gas segment dropped 16 percent because of weakness in crude prices.Aviation revenue increased 5 percent, while revenue in its power and water division, its biggest segment, grew 1 percent.The chief, Jeffrey R. Immelt, expressed confidence that the $3.3 billion sale of G.E.’s appliances unit to Electrolux of Sweden would close this quarter, despite a challenge from United States regulators.A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: G.E. Profit Tops Forecasts, Despite a Slip in Revenue.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.