By DANIEL E. SLOTNIKMARCH 31, 2015
Janet L. Norwood, who ran the Bureau of Labor Statistics throughout the 1980s and maintained objectivity when politicians wanted her to interpret jobs data in a way that furthered their parties’ agendas, died on March 27 in Austin, Tex. She was 91.The cause was Alzheimer’s disease, her son Stephen said.The Bureau of Labor Statistics, which is part of the Labor Department, is the federal agency charged with measuring and disseminating information on the state of America’s economy, including the unemployment rate and the Consumer Price Index.Dr. Norwood ascended through the bureau and was appointed commissioner by President Jimmy Carter in 1979. She was the first woman to hold the position, which she retained until 1991. .“Objective, methodical, unflappable under sometimes hostile congressional questioning, Norwood measures our prosperity and tells the man on the street whether the next line he stands in is likely to be at the bank-teller window or the unemployment office,” a 1983 profile in The Washington Post Magazine said.AdvertisementAs commissioner, Dr. Norwood explained the bureau’s findings in a report to Congress every month, striving to present her data in a nonpartisan fashion.“I find it a stimulating challenge,” Dr. Norwood said in an article in The New York Times in 1982. “There are always a variety of innovative senators and representatives who raise questions that I have to be very careful to answer in a completely objective framework.”Dr. Norwood also asserted the bureau’s independence from the rest of the Labor Department, pressing for autonomy on personnel issues and on the scientific contents of the bureau’s news releases. She arranged for the bureau to take over the National Longitudinal Survey when the Employment and Training Administration planned to discontinue it, updated the bureau’s data-gathering process and helped develop the Employment Cost Index, a quarterly measure of the changes in labor costs for businesses in the United States.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Simply put, all U.S. policy makers, businesses and families can make better decisions every day because of Janet Norwood’s work at B.L.S.,” Erica L. Groshen, the bureau’s current commissioner, wrote in a statement.Janet Sonya Lippe was born on Dec. 11, 1923, in Newark and grew up in Irvington, N.J. She received a bachelor’s degree in government from the New Jersey College for Women (now Douglass College, part of Rutgers University) in 1945. She received her master’s degree in 1946 and her doctorate in 1949 from the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University.She married Bernard Norwood in 1943. He survives her, as do her son Stephen; another son, Peter; and three grandchildren.Dr. Norwood taught economics at Wellesley College while her husband completed his doctorate, then left the work force when he got a job with the foreign service in Belgium. She did not start working for the Bureau of Labor Statistics until her 40s.AdvertisementAfter retiring, Dr. Norwood joined the Urban Institute, where she published papers and testified before Congress on political issues. She was also the president of the American Statistical Association. The School of Public Health at the University of Alabama at Birmingham named an annual award for outstanding achievement by a woman in statistical sciences after her.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2015, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Janet Norwood, 91, Chief of Labor Statistics Bureau.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.