By STEVE FRIESSAPRIL 5, 2015
A hotly awaited report that was expected to provide guidance for shareholders and institutional investors as to whom to support in Elaine P. Wynn’s battle to stay on the Wynn Resorts board instead suggested all board nominees be rejected and denounced the company’s “manifest failures of governance.”Institutional Shareholder Services said late Sunday in the 31-page assessment that it was unconvinced by either the arguments of Ms. Wynn, a co-founder and ex-wife of the chief executive Stephen A. Wynn, or the company. Instead, it attacked the casino conglomerate’s compensation structure, questioned Mr. Wynn’s “excessive aircraft use” and expressed frustration at board secrecy.“There appears to be no daylight between Elaine Wynn and the rest of the board on tolerating weak governance practices, poor pay practices, or an overall corporate governance profile that ranks among the worst, not the best, of U.S. companies,” the report said.In urging shareholders to withhold votes from the two renominated incumbent board members, J. Edward Virtue and John J. Hagenbuch, and reject Ms. Wynn, the report said they can “send a strong signal to the remaining directors about the board’s continuing acceptance of poor pay practices, as outlined extensively in our analysis of the executive compensation plan.”AdvertisementThe board’s governance committee in March renominated Mr. Virtue and Mr. Hagenbuch and eliminated Ms. Wynn’s seat, prompting her to mount a proxy effort to retain a seat. The company said Ms. Wynn, who is suing Mr. Wynn to be released from a shareholder agreement that forces them to vote in tandem but limits her ability to sell stock, had ceased to act in the company’s best interest by filing the lawsuit. That agreement, which has been in place for the two since their 2010 divorce gave Ms. Wynn half of Mr. Wynn’s share of the company, exists to prevent either of them from selling enough to cost Mr. Wynn his controlling interest. The two have 19.3 percent of the company’s shares; T. Rowe Price has 16.8 percent.AdvertisementInstitutional Shareholder Services’ assessors were galled by that situation but blamed the board for “the inordinately weak succession planning process” that has both left Mr. Wynn’s grip on the company so precarious yet put forth no clear notion of how the 73-year-old corporate namesake would someday be replaced.It was thought that Ms. Wynn’s fate would be sealed by the report because most major institutional investors would follow its advice. T. Rowe Price and seven other firms hold a combined 37.7 percent of Wynn, and both sides have been meeting to woo them. Yet this middle ground provides no such guidance.“There is nothing to indicate that, as a director, [Ms. Wynn] acted any more accountably to shareholders than any other director with regard to its numerous governance challenges,” the report stated. It was equally underwhelmed by Ms. Wynn’s assertions that she must remain for the sake of diversity — without her it is comprised entirely of white men — by noting that she “has not, apparently, done anything to drive additional diversity” during her 13 years as a director.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The report “should be extremely embarrassing to the company because I.S.S. is saying the best thing shareholders can do to protect their interests right now is send a message of a lack of confidence to the company,” said longtime shareholder advocate Nell Minow, vice chair of ValueEdge Advisors. “They’re saying, ‘All you can do is embarrass them, and that’s what we’re telling you to do.’ ”The company, however, showed no indication it is embarrassed. In a news release late Sunday, it said only that it is “pleased” that the report had recommended Ms. Wynn’s rejection. After prodding, Wynn Resorts spokesman Michael Weaver said via email that the company had “recently implemented a new, performance-based executive compensation program, restructured executive benefits and committed to increasing diversity on the board.”For her part, Ms. Wynn said in a statement she agrees that “the stockholders of Wynn Resorts deserve better than the choices presented to them by the company this proxy season” and that voting for her is “the only way” to achieve change.Institutional Shareholder Services’ assessments are routine but rarely noticed when there is no proxy battle. This one, too, might have gone unnoticed were it not for the peculiar spectacle sparked by the board’s efforts to remove Ms. Wynn, and her decision to fight back.“This is completely unusual,” Ms. Minow said. “How many other times in history has there been an ex-spouse on the board of the company she founded in litigation with the head of the company? This case is really one in a million.”The shareholders’ choice will be revealed at the company’s annual meeting on April 24 in Las Vegas.A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Report Denounces the Board at Wynn and Rejects Nominees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.