AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week.The Federal Reserve said after its March meeting that it was ready to raise interest rates as soon as June, if economic growth met its expectations. But the post-meeting statement did not explain exactly what the Fed wanted to see. The minutes of the March meeting, which the Fed will release on Wednesday, may provide some additional details about what the Fed wants, and how soon it is likely to act. —Binyamin AppelbaumGreece faces a critical week as the cash-short government must make a sizable debt repayment to one of its international creditors on Thursday, while it continues tough talks on the economic reforms necessary to unlock further crucial rescue loans. The Greek government has said it will make the 458 million euro payment to the International Monetary Fund on time despite dwindling cash supplies. But talks between the Greek government and the country’s international creditors on a list of reforms proposed by Athens have been progressing slowly. A final deal is regarded as unlikely this week and, with money running out, fears have resurfaced that Greece will default on its debt and possibly leave the eurozone. Amid the uncertainty, the Greek prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, is to meet with Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin, in Moscow on Wednesday on the first day of a two-day visit. Although the trip is billed as routine and aimed at improving ties between the two countries, there is speculation that Greece may seek an economic boost from Russia, despite Russia’s own financial woes. Although Mr. Tsipras last week condemned the European Union sanctions against Russia as “a road to nowhere,” his government supported them in a vote in January. —Niki KitsantonisOn Tuesday, the nine board members of Japan’s central bank, the Bank of Japan, begin a two-day meeting to weigh monetary policy amid signs that Japan’s economic recovery may be sputtering. Last week, the nation’s index of manufacturing activity slipped to 50.3, just above the 50 threshold that separates expansion from contraction. The central bank began a policy of aggressive monetary easing two years ago to stimulate the economy. The stock market is up, but household spending remains weak. Further loosening of the money supply will be on this week’s agenda. —Steve LohrIndia’s central bank is to hold its next bimonthly monetary policy review on Tuesday. Governor Raghuram Rajan has already cut interest rates twice so far this year, on Jan. 15 and March 4, as India’s economic growth has slumped. He acted both times between policy reviews, despite saying that his broader preference is to act at the regularly scheduled meetings. At the last policy review, on Feb. 3, he also reduced the reserves that Indian commercial banks must hold, freeing them to lend more. —Keith Bradsher When Samsung Electronics, the Korean technology giant, provides earnings guidance for its first quarter Tuesday, analysts and investors will look for signs that its smartphone business is stabilizing. Samsung is still the largest smartphone maker, but its market share and profits have been falling. It cannot match Apple’s appeal at the high end of the market, and in the middle tier and below it faces intensifying competition from Xiaomi of China and others. Still, Samsung’s display and chip businesses are strong. —Steve LohrAdvertisement