AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The six-month rate was 0.09 percent, and the four-week rate was 0.04 percent.The following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Board of Education, $259 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYHarford County, Md., $74.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Knoxville, Tenn., $137.2 million of wastewater system revenue bonds. Competitive.Lawrence, Kan., $90.7 million of water and sewer system revenue bonds. Competitive.Virginia Beach, Va., $109.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYHoward County, Md., $198.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.North Carolina, $225 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYBurnsville-Eagan-Savage, Minn., Independent School District, $65 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Hampton, Va., $56.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Kansas City, Mo., $59.8 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAbilene, Tex., $75 million of general obligation limited tax certificates of obligation. Samco Capital Markets. University of Akron, Ohio, $99.4 million of general receipts bonds. PNC Capital Markets. California Housing Finance Agency, $174.2 million of taxable debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities. California Municipal Finance Authority, $93.2 million of water system debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.California Public Works Board, $244 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs. Chaffey Joint Union High School District, Calif., $150 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Desert Community College District, Calif., $50 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray. Glynn-Brunswick Memorial Hospital Authority, Ga., $83 million of debt securities. Raymond James.Hillsborough County, Fla., $67 million of communications services tax revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Jackson, Tenn., $194 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs. Decatur Township Multischool Building Corporation, Ind., $74.8 million of mortgage multipurpose bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets. Missouri Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $124.2 million of health facilities revenue bonds. Jefferies.New York Dormitory Authority, $125 million of revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs. New York Dormitory Authority, $956 million of New York University revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.North Texas Tollway Authority, $871.3 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Onondaga County, N.Y., Resource Recovery Agency, $53 million of revenue bonds. TD Securities. Commonwealth Financing Authority, Pa., $196.3 million of revenue bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Philadelphia Redevelopment Authority, $113 million of city service agreement revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs. Reedy Creek, Fla., Improvement District, $50 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.San Ramon Valley, Calif., Unified School District, $125 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Fremont Union High School District, Calif., $100 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley. Tampa, Fla., $80 million of revenue refinancing bonds. SunTrust Robinson Humphrey Capital Market.Lone Star College, Tex., $230.3 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Advertisement