AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberAs many magazines are slimming down, one that caters to high-end travelers is gaining weight.Starting with its September issue, the luxury travel magazine Condé Nast Traveler will be bigger and heavier. The pages will be two inches bigger when the magazine is opened, with thicker pages and heavier covers.“It’s going to feel like the luxury product that it is,” said Bill Wackermann, the magazine’s publisher. “What do you get in first class? You get more space.”Condé Nast Traveler’s move is a significant investment in print as many publications are shifting their focus to digital. The idea is to give the magazine’s affluent consumers a more substantial product — something they would want to display on their coffee table.“The luxury consumer loves their print,” Mr. Wackermann said. “There’s something tactile about it, and there’s something that feels great stocking it in your bookshelves and holding onto it.”And while bigger pages will showcase the magazine’s photography — already a big draw for readers — they will also offer advertisers more space to show off their products.“Luxury brands always love to see themselves as big as possible,” said Melissa Pordy, group director for media at Tiffany & Company North America, which places ads in several high-end magazines, including Condé Nast Traveler.At a time when many magazines are struggling to attract advertisers at all, Condé Nast Traveler does not seem to be having much trouble. It has lured some of the most coveted luxury and fashion brands in the industry, including Porsche, Maserati, Bulgari and Bottega Veneta.Much of the magazine’s ability to attract top advertisers and retain readers is the work of Pilar Guzmán, who was named the editor in chief in 2013. Under her leadership, the magazine took a more holistic view of travel that included fashion, food and design. The revamp was part of an effort to make the magazine relevant in the age of Instagram and Yelp, where everyone can be a travel photographer and writer.Ms. Guzmán’s vision for the magazine appears to be working. The number of ad pages in the magazine increased 5.8 percent in 2014, to 935 pages, from 884 pages in 2013, driven in large part by an increase in fashion and luxury ads. Circulation decreased only slightly last year, to 813,505 from 821,957 in 2013, according to the Alliance for Audited Media.Travel magazines in general have largely avoided the pressures, including a drop-off in the number and quality of ads, that have plagued the rest of the print industry in recent years. One reason is that ad buyers are still willing to pay top dollar to get their brands in front of the travel magazines’ target readers — consumers with cash to spare.“These are the folks with money,” said Steven Cohn, the editor in chief of Media Industry Newsletter, which covers magazines. Advertisers, he added, “want the high end because they’re spenders.”Condé Nast Traveler plans to announce the changes to its print format in a short online video on Monday that riffs on the question, “What does two inches mean?” Iris Apfel, the bespectacled fashion icon, will make an appearance.Advertisement