
Another View By                     
SUJA A. THOMAS and


MARK CUBAN

OCT. 16, 2015
Who should decide a defendant’s fate — a jury of everyday people or a judge employed by the Securities and Exchange Commission?This is one of the questions that federal courts are considering in several cases brought by plaintiffs. They are challenging the agency’s authority to both accuse them of securities law violations and decide whether they are liable, subjecting them to the possibility of paying high civil penalties to the government.After losing several cases before juries, the S.E.C. went to a place where it generally cannot lose: itself. When it accuses a person of a securities violation, the S.E.C. has often brought the case in an administrative hearing where one of its own judges decides the case, not a jury. Rarely does the agency lose such cases before its judges, and when it has lost, the loss is not well-received. At least one judge has reported being criticized for finding too often in favor of defendants. That same judge ultimately resigned.In one case, Charles Hill, a self-employed real estate developer, was accused by the S.E.C. of buying stock on the basis of inside information about a merger. This year, the S.E.C. brought the case before a judge in the agency, pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Act, instead of a federal court where a jury could hear the case. Among other things, if the case continues to go forward before the agency, its judge could order Mr. Hill to pay significant civil penalties to the government.AdvertisementMr. Hill and others like him have challenged the government’s authority.Many of the challenges, such as one brought by the private equity financier Lynn Tilton, focus on matters that do not go to the heart of the issue. The real issue is an individual’s right to a jury trial. When the jury trial right was established in the late 18th century, if a civil penalty was sought, a jury decided that case. The division of authority among governmental bodies was clear. Juries decided money issues and judges decided other questions such as whether to order a person to stop some action. Even as new causes of action were created, juries continued to decide issues involving money, including civil penalties.AdvertisementSo why does the government think agency judges should decide these cases instead of juries? The government has emphasized that, under Supreme Court authority, Congress can move matters involving “public rights” to administrative agency judges. The government argues that the cases at hand involve such public rights.Because of the impact of the 2008 financial crisis on the public, the government asserts that the securities issues in these cases are the exact public rights questions that S.E.C. judges should decide.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Despite the persistence of this public rights doctrine, there is no constitutional authority for it. First, Article I does not give Congress any authority to determine who decides civil cases. Second, the Seventh Amendment itself tells us who should decide these cases. Under it, juries decide money issues and federal judges decide other matters.Some argue that administrative law judges are sufficiently independent. The high victory rates of the S.E.C. in comparison to cases before juries, as well as the reported criticism of a recalcitrant judge, do not support such independence.Moreover, changes recently proposed by the S.E.C. — such as more time for defendants to prepare for the hearing and permitting defendants to take depositions before the hearing — do not change the fact that the agency remains the accuser and the decision-maker.While it is understandable that the government wants its cases decided by its judges because it will win, the Constitution granted people protections from the government. Specifically, the jury provided such protection. Under the Seventh Amendment, if the government sued a person, a jury was to decide if he was liable and required to pay money to the government.The federal courts should recognize the constitutional authority granted to juries to decide civil cases as well as the related limitations on the legislature and the executive to determine who decides. Importantly, a defendant accused of wrongdoing by the government and facing significant monetary penalties should have the option of a jury deciding his case.Suja A. Thomas is a professor at the University of Illinois College of Law and author of “The Missing American Jury: Restoring Its Fundamental Constitutional Role” (to be published by Cambridge University Press). Mark Cuban is the owner of the Dallas Mavericks, Landmark Theatres and Magnolia Pictures, and is chairman of AXS TV. He won his Securities and Exchange Commission case before a jury two years ago.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »