By PAUL MOZURAPRIL 6, 2015
HONG KONG —  After a tough 2014 for Samsung Electronics, the beleaguered South Korean manufacturer said it expected earnings in the first quarter of 2015 to beat analyst forecasts, in the first sign of a possible turnaround for the company.In a news release, Samsung said its operating profit was likely to have fallen about 30 percent in the first three months of the year compared with the same period in 2014.Despite the drop, Samsung exceeded analyst expectations by posting an operating profit of about 5.9 trillion won, or $5.4 billion, in the quarter, down from 8.5 trillion won a year earlier. Sales totaled about 47 trillion won, down roughly 12 percent from 53.7 trillion won a year earlier. The figures are preliminary; Samsung will post final earnings later this month.Samsung’s forecast signals the sixth consecutive quarter of decline in operating profit, and highlights how competitive pressure from Chinese rivals at the low end of the market and Apple’s iPhone at the high end has been squeezing Samsung.AdvertisementStill, there are signs the world’s top smartphone brand is on the mend.Underscoring the recovery are two trends: better-than-expected early sales for the company’s new high-end Galaxy S6 phone, and new demand for its microchips.AdvertisementAnalysts say the S6, which features a screen that curves over the side of the phone, provides much-needed stylistic freshness.“I think the reason Samsung struggled last year is they just looked boring,” said Peter Yu, an analyst with BNP Paribas. He pointed out that the Galaxy model from 2014 had little to set it off from the 2013 version.“Everyone caught up,” he said. “When it came to Android phones everything now just looks the same. If you cover up the brand, you couldn’t tell the difference between the Chinese smartphones and the Samsung smartphones.”The fact that the S6 now stands out from the crowd is helping the company improve sales at the top end, where it makes the bulk of its profits. But Mr. Yu said Samsung’s new strategy with its lower- and mid-tier smartphones could also help the company this year.Where before Samsung offered a large variety of lower-end smartphones, it now offers a single series — an attempt, according to Mr. Yu, to take advantage of economies of scale and increase margins for the phones.He noted that Nokia used to make 20 percent profit margins by selling a 40-euro phone. “I think Samsung is trying to emulate that.”On the semiconductor front, Samsung will be helped both by smartphone companies buying more and more memory chips to put in their phones and by the resurgence of the company’s microprocessor business.AdvertisementIn particular, Lee Seung-woo, an analyst with IBK Securities, said Samsung’s supplying Apple with the A9 chip for the next iPhone would be a big boon to profits in the second half of the year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In spite of the rosier outlook, analysts said Samsung’s television business could struggle, and the company still faces huge challenges competing with Apple. Ben Thompson, an independent technology analyst at Stratechery.com, said the success of the S6 phone was by no means guaranteed.Samsung is “testing the thesis that phone quality matters,” he wrote in an email. “My thesis is that it’s the software that gives Apple its lock on the high end (plus brand), so I’m skeptical.”Fourth-quarter market share statistics also show how much Samsung’s status as the global smartphone champion has eroded.In a report on sales for the quarter that ended Dec. 31, the research group IDC noted that Apple’s total unit sales in the quarter nearly tied Samsung’s, despite the fact that Samsung sold 33 million more handsets in the same quarter a year earlier.“What remains to be seen is how the vendors beyond Samsung and Apple will assert themselves,” Ramon T. Llamas, an analyst with IDC, wrote in the report.”With Lenovo acquiring Motorola, and Xiaomi having greater aspirations beyond China, the competitive pressure will come more from below and less from above,” he wrote. “This will make the smartphone race continuously competitive as 2015 shapes up.”If Apple has nearly tied Samsung in device sales, the Chinese upstarts that have been competing with Samsung in the lower-end segment still lag far behind.In the fourth quarter Samsung’s global market share was 20 percent, compared with a roughly 4 percent to 7 percent global market share for each of its major Chinese rivals Lenovo, Huawei and Xiaomi.A version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Samsung’s Profit Falls Again, but Better Days Are Seen.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.