AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaThe University of Virginia fraternity at the center of a retracted article by Rolling Stone magazine that detailed a purported gang rape by its members said on Monday that it planned “to pursue all available legal action against the magazine.” The fraternity, Phi Kappa Psi, issued a statement after the release of a damning report that the magazine commissioned from the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, which described how Rolling Stone’s journalistic process failed at every step before the article’s publication last November. Despite the public criticism of the article, and its retraction, legal experts said the path to a successful defamation lawsuit by the fraternity was not straightforward. The report, which was released Sunday night, “demonstrates the reckless nature in which Rolling Stone researched and failed to verify facts in its article that erroneously accused Phi Kappa Psi of crimes its members did not commit,” Stephen Scipione, the president of the Virginia chapter, said in the statement. The fraternity has retained a lawyer, but has not yet taken any formal action, a spokesman said. The fraternity would have to allow a public examination of its social activities, said Charles D. Tobin, who heads the national media practice for the law firm Holland & Knight, which might include potentially embarrassing details from parties it has held. It would also be required to show that the claims made in the article were “of and concerning it” as an entity. And if the fraternity was deemed legally to be a public entity instead of a private one, as legal experts said was likely, Mr. Tobin said it would have to “establish actual malice — not that Rolling Stone committed bad journalism but that it knowingly committed a falsehood.” Mr. Tobin said, “It would be colossally difficult for them to make a successful claim.” Rolling Stone declined to comment on any potential legal action against the magazine. After the report and article’s retraction, Rolling Stone was criticized by the University of Virginia and by the governor and the attorney general of the state. On social media, some railed against the decision to allow the article’s author, Sabrina Rubin Erdely; its editor, Sean Woods; and Rolling Stone’s managing editor, Will Dana, to keep their jobs. (Ms. Erdely is working on another article for the magazine, according to a person with knowledge of the assignment, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.) Others questioned statements that Jann Wenner, the magazine’s publisher and one of its co-founders, made to The New York Times that the failings of the article represented an isolated incident, and that part of the fault lay with its source, a woman identified only as Jackie. On Monday, at a news conference to discuss the report, two of its authors, Steve Coll, the Columbia journalism school’s dean, and Sheila Coronel, the dean of academic affairs, noted that Rolling Stone had itself commissioned the report, in part as an attempt to allow others to learn from its mistakes. But they also rejected the notion that Jackie was to blame for the article’s issues. The magazine’s reporting was at fault, they said, and they stood by their recommendations for more robust newsroom practices. “This failure was not the subject’s or the source’s fault,” Mr. Coll said. “It was the product of failed methodology.” Ms. Erdely broke down when describing to them the moment she realized that Jackie might not be reliable, they said. They declined to comment on whether any of those involved with the article should have lost their jobs. “We pointed out systemic and institutional problems,” Ms. Coronel said. “We leave it up to Rolling Stone to decide how best to deal with these problems.” The article, titled “A Rape on Campus,” was based on Jackie’s account of being raped by seven men at a fraternity event, and the resistance she met when trying to get justice for herself. It initially stoked a national debate on sexual assaults on campus, but was quickly called into question by The Washington Post and the fraternity itself. Last month, the police in Charlottesville, Va., said they had “exhausted all investigative leads” and found “no substantive basis” to support the article’s description of the assault. The Columbia report, written by Ms. Coronel and Mr. Coll, with Derek Kravitz, a postgraduate research scholar, criticized the process behind the article. The magazine did not engage in “basic, even routine journalistic practice,” it said, specifying that it had not corroborated Jackie’s account with the friends quoted in the article using pseudonyms; had not adequately sought to identify the man who Jackie said led those who raped her, also identified by a pseudonym; and had not given the fraternity adequate information to respond before publication. At the news conference, Mr. Coll said that he and Ms. Coronel were concerned that the failings of the article, and the fallout from it, including their report, might discourage others from reporting on the vital issue of campus sexual assault. “It would be a really unfortunate outcome if journalists backed away from doing this kind of reporting as a result of this highly visible failure,” he said. “Because this is important work, and it’s hard work.” Advertisement