AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael Cieply and Emily SteelThe Weinstein Company is on the verge of selling its growing television unit to Britain’s ITV Studios for as much as $950 million, following a monthslong search for a buyer, people briefed on the possible sale said.Harvey Weinstein and his brother, Bob, the Weinstein Company’s co-chairmen, would continue to oversee the operation, according to the people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. If completed, the deal would deliver cash to Weinstein in stages, starting with initial payments of more than $300 million.Representatives for both the Weinstein Company and ITV declined to comment. Word of the possible sale comes as Harvey Weinstein prepares for the April 15 Broadway opening of the musical “Finding Neverland” and contends with an investigation into claims that he inappropriately touched a woman at his Manhattan office after meeting her during a social event at Radio City Music Hall. Mr. Weinstein, through a spokesman, has denied wrongdoing in connection with the claim. While a police investigation has taxed his time and attention during the last week, it has not impeded the possible television sale, a person briefed on the bargaining said.The Weinstein Company — best known for Oscar-winning movies like “The Artist” and “The King’s Speech” — announced a plan last summer to spin off the television unit to ready it for a whole or partial sale that would help increase the company’s range and financial strength.In November, both the Allen & Company investment banking firm and the Creative Artists Agency became advisers in a search that had looked to the digitally minded giants Yahoo, Amazon or Google. Weinstein ultimately attracted several potential bidders, but is now close to a deal with ITV, a British network that had earlier paid about $360 million for Leftfield Entertainment Group, known for “Pawn Stars” and other shows.Weinstein’s television group recently made the “Marco Polo” adventure series for global distribution by Netflix, which has renewed it for a second season. It also had a string of reality-show hits, including “Project Runway” and its spinoffs. ITV is a television group that produces programs for its commercial channels as well as other outlets, both in Britain and around the world. Its studio group ranks as the largest production group in Britain. In the United States, ITV’s programs including the reality series “Cake Boss,” “Duck Dynasty” and “Hell’s Kitchen.”Advertisement