By NOAM SCHEIBERAPRIL 6, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The Chicago Cubs opened the 2015 season Sunday night with a 3-0 loss against the St. Louis Cardinals, and one glaring absence: Kris Bryant, the team’s budding superstar. The Cubs sent Bryant down to the minor leagues last week, setting off a 21st-century-style labor dispute.To the Major League Baseball Players Association, the move looked to be less about baseball aptitude than money and control: Bryant, 23, who plays third base, had been having a preposterously good spring training, hitting nine home runs and notching a .425 batting average. But if he remained in Triple-A for at least 12 days, it would push back by one year the date on which he would qualify for free agency, allowing the Cubs to buy his services at a potentially steep discount for an extra season.On one level, it is hard to feel sympathy for a baseball prodigy who could well be making $25 million a year in the near future, whether that day arrives in 2021 or 2022. But the dispute over Kris Bryant highlights something that runs deeper across a number of industries: the degree of solidarity between the stars and everyone else may be the key to the future of labor relations.The players’ union complained that Bryant could have been one of the game’s greatest players and the Cubs “still would have made the decision they made.”AdvertisementTo which management’s de facto representatives — that is, the league — responded by wondering why a union that ostensibly exists to protect its members should get so exercised about a player who does not even belong to it yet.Advertisement“We do not believe that it is appropriate for the players’ association to make the determination that Kris Bryant should be on the Cubs’ 25-man roster while another player, who, unlike Bryant, is a member of its bargaining unit, should be cut or sent to the minor leagues,” Major League Baseball said in a statement.To labor experts, the league’s position seemed aimed at pitting baseball’s superstars against the less prominent players who claw their way onto the end of a bench. “It sounds an awful lot like an employer looking to drive a wedge between different constituencies in the work force,” said Daniel A. Gilbert, an assistant professor of labor at the University of Illinois, whose book, “Expanding the Strike Zone,” includes the history of the baseball union.It’s a tactic that management has historically deployed across much of the labor force. Robert Muehlenkamp, who was once executive vice president of 1199, the hospital and health care employees’ union, posited an analogy to the service sector, where the same union may represent highly skilled workers like nurses along with housekeepers and food service workers.Mr. Muehlenkamp said management would tell low-skilled workers they should oppose nurses’ efforts to organize because, in his paraphrasing: “It’s a zero-sum game. The pot is only so big.”If, on the other hand, the nurses were already in the union, management would whisper that nurses were subsidizing the health care benefits of their lower-paid colleagues and encourage them to form a separate union. “They’d say, ‘Break away from them and we’ll give you’ ” a self-insured plan with the same coverage, Mr. Muehlenkamp said. “And then maybe they throw in a bonus to go with it.”Baseball players have generally been immune from such tactics. According to Professor Gilbert, solidarity between the star players and the lesser ones has been critical to their bargaining successes since the mid-1960s, when the players brought on Marvin Miller, a former United Steelworkers economist, to run their union.Most famously, in the run-up to the Major League Baseball strike of 1981, the club owners were determined to scale back the free agency rights the players had won five years earlier. The owners proposed requiring any team that acquired a free agent to compensate the player’s former team with a member of its roster.That approach would have sharply reduced teams’ incentives to sign free agents, except in the case of the most-sought-after players. But the stars held the line, effectively preserving free agency for their less-skilled colleagues.Advertisement“From the standpoint of labor, it was the most principled strike I’ve ever been associated with,” Mr. Miller later wrote. “Many of the players struck not for a better deal for themselves but for a better deal for their colleagues.”But while baseball players may appear to be in a unique situation, their experience turns out to be highly relevant elsewhere in the economy. In recent decades, a growing number of fields have begun to mimic the “winner-take-all” dynamic of professional sports or the movie business, thanks to the global scale at which many businesses operate, the proliferation of information technology — which allows elite performers to reach much bigger audiences than ever before — and the breakdown of traditional norms of pay equity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There are now superstar doctors and academics, who command enormous attention and earn outsize incomes relative to the average worker in their field. A tiny number of YouTube personalities have become highly compensated, as have a handful of self-published authors via Amazon. And only a few merchants have been able to build million-dollar businesses on the backs of eBay and Etsy.Yet it is not uncommon for the stars of these industries to have common interests with the masses who toil away for far less income. Robert Bruno, a professor of labor relations at the University of Illinois, pointed out that academics of all profiles are increasingly worried about university administrators and state legislators having access to their emails. And doctors in hospitals and clinics have one of the fastest rates of unionization among professionals, Mr. Bruno said, because of the increased stress of dealing with insurance companies.Or consider Holly Ward, a self-published romance writer who, as H.M. Ward, had sold more than six million books on Amazon when a change in the company’s pricing policy cut her revenue by an estimated 75 percent. Legions of far less successful Amazon authors shared in her outrage.In this relatively new world, the stars face a choice: They can cut their own deals and leave their less-heralded colleagues to fend for themselves. Or they can insist on a higher floor and more protections for everyone.Baseball demonstrates the advantages of the latter approach. The legacy of the stars’ hard-line posture in 1981 is that average players make far more money today than they would have under a more restrictive free-agency arrangement. “They basically forced the teams to pay more across the board,” Professor Gilbert said. The stars have also been critical to raising the league’s minimum salary over the years.For their part, stars benefit from a union that aggressively polices personnel decisions affecting them — like the financial calculations that may have led to Kris Bryant’s minor-league demotion.AdvertisementIn fact, there are few issues that better unite baseball’s stars and bench surfers than the ease with which teams can deny a player credit for what is essentially a year of service by briefly shipping him to the minors.“Every player is impacted by this, particularly lesser players,” said Scott Boras, Bryant’s agent. “It’s usually the 24th, 25th men where they still do it, so they can use them at the minimum salary for four years, rather than three.”Of course, as Mr. Boras said, baseball players have another reason to feel as though their fates are linked to one another’s: “Every player in the big leagues who is there wants to be on a team that wins. They want a ring, a championship, that’s their goal in life.”If workers in other industries want steady improvements in their standard of living, they may need to create that same sense of shared purpose.A version of this news analysis appears in print on April 7, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Player’s Demotion, the Baseball Union and a Lesson for Labor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.