AdvertisementSupported byItinerariesBy Amy ZipkinDaniel Zumbrunnen needed space for training 70 employees at NBCUniversal in 2013. “I was looking for flexibility,” he said, “a large room to hold all the participants, but also rooms for smaller sessions.”Mr. Zumbrunnen, director of talent development at the company, ruled out hotels because he said they required him to book sleeping rooms to guarantee meeting space; up to 80 percent of the attendees were commuters. And he was put off by steep prices for soft drinks, up to $7 each.The search led him to an office building several blocks from the company’s headquarters at Rockefeller Center. It was one of four sites in Manhattan run by Convene, a stand-alone conference space that opened in 2009.Conference centers like Convene’s provide space for smaller meetings of up to 400 people, access to technology and catering for an all-inclusive price, at rates they say are more competitive than those of nearby hotels.The stand-alone centers began to win business after the recession, when “there was a predisposition to be in a place you wouldn’t be criticized for,” said Steven Carvell, associate dean for academic affairs at the Cornell University School of Hotel Administration.But as companies continue to embrace a new frugality, even with the economy in recovery, nonresidential urban conference centers in office buildings are gaining visibility.Their ranks include Convene in New York and suburban Washington and the Summit Executive Center and the recently opened Summit West in Chicago. The Hub has three locations in Philadelphia, and Metro Meeting Centers serves Boston. TKP, a Japanese company with locations in Shanghai and Hong Kong, opened a Manhattan site in 2013. And in England, Etc Venues has 14 locations in London and one in Birmingham.“You avoid the feeling of insignificance you feel at a hotel,” said Christopher J. Kelly, co-founder and president of Convene.Their rise has been steady in recent years. “The nonresidential facilities are the fastest-growing category of our membership,” said Mark Cooper, chief executive of the International Association of Conference Centers, a trade group.Fourteen new members have joined the association in the last two years, Mr. Cooper said, adding that the average meeting size is generally smaller than 100 people. The association’s research shows that just over a third of the meetings are training courses and just under a third are management meetings.Christine Plitt is the director of event logistics at Pragmatic Marketing in Scottsdale, Ariz., a company that trains product managers in the technology industry. She organizes and runs about 100 sessions a year. While some sessions are scheduled at hotels, she said she preferred the ambience of conference centers.“There’ll be a giant chandelier in the middle of the room, and the décor isn’t necessarily conducive for the meeting space,” she said of hotels. And, she said, about a quarter of attendees have dietary restrictions or food preferences, like the paleo diet, that hotel banquet menus do not always accommodate. “Banquet menus are not as readily on-trend,” she said.The cost of the stand-alone centers varies by location. Metro Meeting Centers in Boston charges $135 per person per day. Convene charges from $99 to $229 a day depending on a group’s technology and food and beverage requirements.Cost aside, Ms. Plitt said booking a stand-alone center required caution. Although the centers may offer sleeping options in partnership with local hotels, bad weather can force delays and cancellations.At Metro Meeting Centers, groups were forced to rearrange their schedules because of Boston’s snowy winter. “We’ve allowed them to change start and end times and to completely reschedule their meetings,” David Smith, a co-founder and partner, wrote in an email. He said clients dictated hours of operation except when the public transportation system was closed and employees were unable to commute to work.Still, Mr. Carvell said, the bar for a successful meeting tends to be lower at the dedicated spaces. Attendees want the air-conditioning, the lights and the audiovisual systems to work. “A great job means nothing goes wrong,” he said.The real question, Mr. Carvell said, was, “How are hotels going to respond?”A few hotel chains are taking a page from the same playbook. Technology enables companies like LiquidSpace of Palo Alto, Calif.; Davinci Meetingrooms of Salt Lake City; and Regus, which advertises 3,000 locations in 900 cities and 120 countries, to offer smaller unused meeting rooms on short notice.Workspace on Demand by Marriott is a collaboration between Marriott and LiquidSpace. Its app allows guests to book meeting rooms and lobby areas in Marriott properties. Selected vacant meeting rooms at some Hiltons in smaller cities like Madison, Wis., and Hartford are also on the platform. “It shows real-time availability,” said Mark Gilbreath, chief executive of LiquidSpace.Separately, more than 1,800 Hilton hotels, including Hilton, Embassy Suites and Hampton Inn locations, participate in Meetings Simplified, a program in which meetings with 25 or fewer attendees can request pricing online. Packages include meals, snacks and equipment.Marc A. Hoffman, chief operating officer of Sunstone Hotel Investors, which owns several participating Hilton hotels, said the idea made sense, “because group business is driven by small groups.” At the Hilton San Diego Bayfront, for example, groups of 10 to 50 make up 60 percent of the meeting business.The charge for a 20-person meeting at that hotel, booked in advance for this May, would be $225 a person. The same meeting not booked through Meetings Simplified would cost $19 more a person.Mr. Hoffman said demand had been brisk. The hotel recently reconfigured space to add a dozen more meeting rooms.In New York, Mr. Zumbrunnen of NBCUniversal estimates he has held about 25 days of events at Convene locations, but the steady relationship may be tapering off. Construction at NBCUniversal’s corporate headquarters is expected to be finished this year.“This will certainly make many of the things we’ve done at Convene come back to our own dedicated space,” Mr. Zumbrunnen wrote in an email, adding, “I’m confident there will still be times and opportunities that we’ll leverage Convene and other similar facilities.”Advertisement