AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedAfter shelving plans to go public last year amid uproar over Michael Lewis’s book about high-frequency trading, one of the biggest firms in that field is restarting its initial public offering.Virtu Financial disclosed on Monday that it hopes to raise as much as $313.5 million in its initial stock sale by selling shares at $17 to $19 each. At the midpoint of that range, the company would be valued at about $2.5 billion.In restarting its I.P.O. process, Virtu is betting that the furor over high-frequency trading — in which computer programs buy and sell shares in milliseconds — has died down. The firm had been deep in the process of going public when Mr. Lewis’s “Flash Boys,” a literary broadside against an industry that it depicted as having rigged the stock markets, emerged with much fanfare.Virtu, founded by the longtime trader Vincent Viola, has become one of the most prominent figures in that world. The company has been so successful, according to its prospectus, that it lost money for only one day in 1,485 trading days, chalking up its record to its “risk management strategy and technology.”By the time “Flash Boys” was published last year, several government regulators had begun looking into high-frequency trading firms like Virtu, including New York’s attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman. At the heart of those inquiries is whether those companies have an unfair advantage over other traders.Defenders of the industry argue that they improve the liquidity of public stock markets through their rapid-fire trading, making it easier for both big and small investors to buy and sell stocks.Over all, Virtu earned $190 million last year, up 4 percent compared with results in the previous year and more than double what it earned in 2012. Its total revenue last year was $723 million, up 8 percent from the year before.By comparison, KCG Holdings, the publicly held trading firm once known as Knight Capital, reported $61 million in profit and $1.2 billion in revenue last year.Among other disclosures in Virtu’s prospectus, the company said that it would have four classes of common stock, with two of them — Class B and Class D — having 10 votes per share compared with one for the other two classes. That means that even after the stock sale, Mr. Viola’s family will maintain control of the firm, with more than 93 percent of the overall voting power available. At the midpoint of the offering, the Violas’ stake would be worth about $1.4 billion.Virtu plans to begin trading later this month on the Nasdaq stock market under the ticker symbol VIRT.Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase and Sandler O’Neill & Partners are leading the underwriting of the offering.Advertisement