AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — Processing companies’ payrolls may not seem like the hottest business opportunity around. But ZenPayroll, a start-up just over two years old, has drawn a number of big backers to do just that.The company plans to announce on Monday that it has raised $60 million from a group led by Google Capital, an investment arm of the technology giant.Others in the latest round include Emergence Capital Partners, Ribbit Capital and existing investors like General Catalyst Partners, Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers and Google Ventures.The round, which valued ZenPayroll at $500 million excluding the new investment, is only the third that the start-up has raised since officially opening its doors in late 2012. And according to its chief executive, Joshua Reeves, the money will help expand the staff and national reach of the company as it tries to upend people’s conception of payroll.“Payroll today is thought of as a hassle,” Mr. Reeves said in an interview at the company’s offices here. “It’s our belief that payroll should be more than an employee ID number and a transaction.”Unlike the plain-looking documentation that accompany the traditional payroll forms that many companies use, ZenPayroll’s emails to employees present a host of information, including not only pay but also data ranging from work anniversaries to birthdays. Employees can also easily choose to donate part of their paychecks to charities, with their employers matching with just two clicks.With the investment, ZenPayroll will become one of the relative handful of start-ups backed by Google Capital. Others that the investment operation has backed include Lending Club, the huge online loan marketplace; SurveyMonkey, the online survey provider; and Credit Karma, a credit score service.Unlike the more established Google Ventures, Google Capital invests in older companies with more established businesses, providing the kind of so-called “growth capital” that is increasingly pouring into Silicon Valley darlings like Uber.“ZenPayroll has changed payroll from an impersonal transaction into a meaningful connection between employers and employees, and we’re delighted to join in their mission to free people to do their best work,” Laela Sturdy, a partner at Google Capital, said in a statement. “They’re growing at an incredible rate and we’re excited to see how they’ll continue to help small businesses around the country.”The most important of ZenPayroll’s offerings — born from the experiences of Mr. Reeves and other founders at previous start-ups — are ease of use and a level of trust between the company and customers, Mr. Reeves said.Founded in 2012 and initially focusing on California-based companies, ZenPayroll now operates in 47 states and Washington. Within a week or two, according to Mr. Reeves, it will service customers in all 50 states.None of the founders came in with in-depth knowledge of payroll rules and compliance. They focused on other issues like ease of use and customer service. (That said, ZenPayroll employs a sizable contingent of compliance-minded workers.)It is a business purpose that has resonated with prominent chief executives who have invested in the company, including Drew Houston of Dropbox and Jeremy Stoppelman of Yelp.Mr. Reeves said that his team first met with Google Capital several years ago. But with fund-raising not a primary area of focus — by the time ZenPayroll raised its $60 million, it still had about $17 million left in its bank account — his start-up was willing to bide its time and raise money only when there was a clear strategic reason to do so.“The biggest area I’m focused on is scaling,” he said. “Google Capital is experienced in that.”Though ZenPayroll loses money now, Mr. Reeves argues that the company could turn a profit if it decides to shift its focus from spending on growth. And it has already turned down several opportunities to sell itself, Mr. Reeves said, because it believes in the promise of a multibillion-dollar market.“We’re absolutely on a path to be an independent public company for several decades,” he said.Advertisement