By BEN SISARIOAPRIL 7, 2015
The story behind the hit podcast “Serial” is not over. The podcast focused on the 1999 death of Hae Min Lee, a Maryland teenager, and the subsequent conviction of her former boyfriend, Adnan Syed, who is serving a life sentence for murder. It became the fastest podcast to reach five million downloads, according to Apple. Starting Monday a group of lawyers and advocates connected to Mr. Syed will debut another podcast, “Undisclosed: The State v. Adnan Syed,” which will “examine and explore the case in greater detail, from an investigatory perspective instead of a narrative one,” according to a statement. “Undisclosed” is being presented by Rabia Chaudry, a lawyer who has been a longtime advocate of Mr. Syed — as “Serial” fans know, she was the one who suggested that Sarah Koenig, the host of “Serial” and a longtime producer for “This American Life,” look into the case — along with two other lawyers, Susan Simpson and Colin Miller. None of them represent Mr. Syed but each has been investigating the case, Ms. Chaudry said in an interview Tuesday. New episodes of “Undisclosed” are to be released every two weeks. The podcast is sponsored by the Adnan Syed Legal Trust, which, according to a page on the crowdfunding site LaunchGood, is dedicated to Mr. Syed’s defense and has raised $93,000. In November the producers of “Serial” said that a second season was coming. In February a Maryland court agreed to hear an appeal from Mr. Syed, who has said that he is not guilty of Ms. Lee’s murder and that he received ineffective legal counsel at trial.Because of an editing error, a report in the “Arts, Briefly” column on Wednesday about the new podcast “Undisclosed: The State v. Adnan Syed,” which examines the case that was the subject of the hit podcast “Serial,” referred incorrectly to the suggestion to Sarah Koenig, the host of “Serial,” that she look into the Syed case. It was made by Rabia Chaudry, a lawyer who is presenting the new podcast — not by Ms. Chaudry and two other lawyers, Susan Simpson and Colin Miller.A version of this brief appears in print on April 8, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Another ‘Serial’ Chapter, From Group of Lawyers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.