
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

APRIL 7, 2015
Do venture capitalists and other highly sophisticated and compensated investors, like those controlling large private equity and hedge funds, have any moral or ethical responsibility for the investments they make?Should the smart-money crowd be held accountable for the harm caused to people who use the products and services created with the money that springs from their coffers?Or is the bottom line the only thing that matters when it comes to investing?These questions come to mind when considering the turmoil caused on college campuses nationwide by Yik Yak, the anonymous messaging service founded in 2013 by Tyler Droll and Brooks Buffington soon after they graduated from Furman University in Greenville, S.C. Not surprisingly, the immense popularity of Yik Yak has attracted the attention of venture capitalists looking for the next Facebook.Within months of starting its service — with a loan from Mr. Droll’s parents — Yik Yak began collecting venture capital money. The first round of financing was a modest $1.5 million from a group of small venture capitalists in and around the company’s Atlanta headquarters. Two months later, Yik Yak raised an additional $10 million from many of the original investors, as well as a V.C. heavyweight, Tim Draper, the founder of Draper Fisher Jurvetson. Then, last November, Yik Yak hit the jackpot when Sequoia Capital, the granddaddy of all Silicon Valley venture capitalists, led a $62 million round of equity financing that valued the company at $200 million to $300 million.AdvertisementYik Yak allows localized groups of people to post instant messages anonymously for other people in the same area to see, on whatever subjects they want. Yik Yak knows the identities of its users and has constructed its privacy policies to make it nearly impossible for it to share names without a subpoena or court order. The reach of the service is limited to a 1.5-mile radius from a local service node, making Yik Yak well suited to college campuses. Think of it as Twitter without user profiles, either fictitious or genuine.AdvertisementYik Yak allows for real-time social and political commentary about events that are happening — and that seem so excruciatingly important at any given moment — on campuses across the country, but it also permits an unleashing of the basest human instincts that result, too often, in forms of cyberbullying.“Think of it as a virtual community bulletin board — or maybe a virtual bathroom wall at the student union,” Jonathan Mahler wrote in The New York Times last month. “It has become the go-to social feed for college students across the country to commiserate about finals, to find a party or to crack a joke about a rival school. Much of the chatter is harmless. Some of it is not.”And that in a nutshell is the problem. According to Mr. Mahler, Yik Yak “has been used to issue threats of mass violence on more than a dozen college campuses, including the University of North Carolina, Michigan State University and Penn State. Racist, homophobic and misogynist ‘yaks’ have generated controversy at many more, among them Clemson, Emory, Colgate and the University of Texas. At Kenyon College, a ‘yakker’ proposed a gang rape at the school’s women’s center.”More than 78,000 people have signed an online petition urging that Yik Yak be shut down. Just as we do not allow someone to yell “Fire!” in a crowded theater, shouldn’t there be limits to hateful, anonymous speech that can unfairly tarnish a life forever or cut one short? And shouldn’t the Sequoia Capitals and Tim Drapers of the world bear some responsibility for financing businesses where such behavior is not only permitted but also actively encouraged through the cover of anonymity?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To try to get some answers, I reached out to Jim Goetz, the Sequoia Capital partner responsible for the firm’s investment in Yik Yak and a new member of the company’s board. Mr. Goetz may be one of the most successful venture capitalists of all time; he is the man behind Sequoia’s extraordinarily successful investments in YouTube, Instagram, PayPal and WhatsApp. When Facebook bought WhatsApp in 2014 for about $20 billion in Facebook stock, Sequoia made more than 50 times its $60 million investment. Needless to say, Mr. Goetz is a busy man and much in demand.My written questions to him ranged from why Sequoia decided to make the investment to how he feels about the controversy Yik Yak has generated to ones about whether venture capitalists have any moral or ethical responsibility for the investments they make? This latter question is one that Paul Tudor Jones, the billionaire hedge fund manager and founder of the Robin Hood Foundation, tackled in a highly regarded TED Talk last month.After voicing his concern about the growing gap between rich and poor in this country, Mr. Jones said he was creating Just Capital, a nonprofit organization dedicated to trying to make sure investors and companies do the right things, not just the expedient and profitable ones. “When we begin to put justness on par with profits, we get the most valuable thing in the world. We get back our humanity,” he said.I was hoping to have a conversation about all this with Mr. Goetz. Does he agree with Mr. Jones, for instance? But he demurred.Advertisement“This is not a list that we can address with a quick weekend call,” he wrote me. Alas, he did not offer another time for a call during business hours. Instead, Mr. Goetz answered, by email, two of my questions.As to why Sequoia made its investment, Mr. Goetz wrote, “Yik Yak has tapped our desire to connect authentically with those around us. Its hyper-local forums provide a sense of community and a place to be our genuine selves, and that’s really resonated with millions of people, myself included.”As for the controversy that Yik Yak has generated on the matter of cyberbullying, Mr. Goetz wrote, “I know Yik Yak takes cyberbullying very seriously and has made a number of meaningful changes to address it, such as proactively geo-fencing middle and high school campuses so the app simply can’t be used there. Cyberbullying is a broad and thorny challenge faced by all social media networks and there’s clearly more work to be done, but Yik Yak is definitely moving in the right direction.”Beyond that, Mr. Goetz directed me to Hilary McQuaide, Yik Yak’s new director of communications. As one would expect, her answers were filled with the usual corporate pablum. Was there anything else she could help me with, Ms. McQuaide wondered? Why yes, I answered: I would still like to hear from Mr. Goetz on the question of what responsibility venture capitalists bear, if any, for financing companies that encourage anonymous cyberbullying? I am still waiting.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »