AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningJudge Jed S. Rakoff of Federal District Court in Manhattan has been a bit of a thorn in the side of the Securities and Exchange Commission, once describing a settlement with Bank of America over faulty disclosure in the Merrill Lynch acquisition “half-baked justice.”But his decision on Monday to allow the S.E.C. to pursue insider trading charges in light of the recent appeals court opinion in United States v. Newman gives the agency some indication that cases will not be hamstrung by the decision’s tighter requirements for proving a violation.The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed the convictions of two hedge fund traders who received information passed along through multiple layers, known as remote tippees. The appeals court concluded that the government failed to prove the traders knew that the original source of the information received a benefit for passing it along.In reaching its decision, the appeals court narrowed the definition of an improper benefit. It required that it be based on something more than a casual friendship, so there must be proof of a “meaningfully close personal relationship” involving an exchange that was “consequential” and “valuable.” The appeals court last week rejected the Justice Department’s request to reconsider that language, so prosecutors and the S.E.C. now have to live with that requirement unless a Supreme Court review is sought.Even before the Second Circuit decided not to reconsider the case, the Newman opinion influenced the prosecution of five men who traded on information about the acquisition of SPSS Inc. by IBM. The source of the information was a lawyer who was working at a firm that was advising IBM on the deal. He told a close friend, Trent Martin, about the transaction with the expectation he would keep it confidential. But Mr. Martin told his roommate, Thomas Conradt, who worked for a brokerage firm. The information eventually made its way to Daryl M. Payton and Benjamin Durant III, who worked with Mr. Conradt.Mr. Durant intended to take the case to trial, while the other defendants pleaded guilty and cooperated with the government. But after the Newman opinion came out, the district court allowed the cooperating defendants to withdraw their guilty pleas because there was no proof that Mr. Conradt provided a benefit to Mr. Martin. In February, the Justice Department dismissed the charges against all the defendants.The S.E.C. had filed parallel civil insider trading charges against them, and the case was assigned to Judge Rakoff. Although the other defendants reached settlements in 2014 by forfeiting their gains from the trading in SPSS shares, Mr. Durant and Mr. Payton did not resolve the case. After the Newman decision, they asked for dismissal of the civil case, arguing that the S.E.C.’s complaint did not meet the heightened benefit requirement. In response, the S.E.C. added details to its complaint to try to show that Mr. Conradt provided consequential benefits to Mr. Martin and that Mr. Payton and Mr. Durant were aware of them.Judge Rakoff is the first judge to explore the parameters of the Newman opinion, and he did not read it as creating a high threshold in a civil case. He contrasted the requirements for a criminal prosecution, in which the government must prove the defendant acted “willfully,” with a civil proceeding, in which the S.E.C. needs to show only that the defendant was reckless. That more-forgiving intent standard lets the S.E.C. make its case by showing the defendant disregarded warning signs about the source of the information rather than proving actual knowledge.Among the benefits Judge Rakoff found sufficient was the “close, mutually dependent financial relationship” between Mr. Martin and Mr. Conradt, and the fact that Mr. Conradt helped Mr. Martin, an Australian citizen, deal with a criminal matter that might have affected his ability to remain in the country. This was enough to pass the relationship and benefit tests regarding the source and the recipient of the information that the Newman opinion now requires.That evidence alone would not be enough, however, because the S.E.C. must also show that Mr. Payton and Mr. Durant knew, or were reckless in not learning, about the benefits. Judge Rakoff pointed to the S.E.C.’s contention that the defendants were aware that the source of Mr. Conradt’s information was Mr. Martin and had asked whether he could provide more information about the deal. Further confirmation of their knowledge came from conduct after the trading, when “the defendants took multiple steps to conceal their own trading” from the brokerage firm where they worked.The case was before the court on a motion to dismiss the complaint, which means all of the S.E.C.’s allegations must be treated as true in deciding whether to allow it to move forward. That is a low standard because it gives the S.E.C. the benefit of the doubt on its claims. Whether the agency can convince a jury remains to be seen.Judge Rakoff did not interpret “consequential” as setting a particularly high bar for showing a benefit and found that value can be established by something indirect, like assistance in a criminal case. Under this approach, the Newman opinion should not present much of a hurdle for the S.E.C. if it can demonstrate evidence of a benefit that appears to be of some reasonable value and a relationship that goes beyond a work friendship or being golf buddies.The effect on criminal prosecutions is harder to assess. Proving intent in a criminal insider trading case requires showing willfulness, which means the defendant knew the conduct was wrongful. That is more difficult than showing recklessness in a civil case, so the allegations in the S.E.C.’s complaint might not be enough to prove a crime beyond a reasonable doubt.Yet Judge Rakoff’s analysis provides at least some guidance on how to assess the new landscape under the Newman opinion. Courts tend to apply securities law decisions interchangeably in criminal and civil cases, so the Justice Department can cite his opinion as a favorable precedent in other cases involving tippees.As I noted in an earlier column, the government is likely to take a wait-and-see approach to the Newman opinion. Judge Rakoff’s decision signals to the S.E.C. and federal prosecutors that the law of insider trading may not have changed all that much.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2nd edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningAdvertisement