AdvertisementSupported byBy Landon Thomas Jr.CHICAGO — It has been a tough week for Direxion, a sponsor of exchange-traded funds that make highly leveraged bets on various markets going up and down.Over the last few days, with global stock exchanges seesawing sharply between positive and negative territory, two of Direxion’s funds — both of which use leverage three times the size of their assets to spur returns — have lost over $1 billion.But at an industry conference here, Michael R. Eschmann, a sales executive for Direxion who was in town to promote his funds to investors, maintained that even during these volatile times there is demand for his turbocharged funds.“We are not encouraging this type of risk,” said Mr. Eschmann, whose fund company oversees $8.5 billion in assets. “But there is a market for it. A lot of our clients like leverage — and they want as much of it as they can get.”At a time when prominent investors like Carl C. Icahn are raising concerns about exchange-traded funds investing in risky high-yielding bonds, Direxion funds that offer investors triple-leverage returns by going long or short on biotechnology stocks, the Chinese stock market or gold miners — to name just a few — are the risk frontier for E.T.F.sThe firms that sponsor these types of superleveraged funds together account for about $35 billion in exchange-traded investments, a small percentage of the surging E.T.F. market, which now surpasses $2 trillion. That is more money than is managed by hedge funds.Nevertheless, their growth highlights just how far ambitious E.T.F. providers will go to satisfy investor appetites.E.T.F.s trade on an exchange, like securities, and track a range of stock and bond indexes, as well as other assets like currencies and commodities. Investors have flocked to these funds, attracted by their liquidity and transparency.The mood was cocky this week at the gathering, the Morningstar E.T.F. Conference, which drew industry giants such as BlackRock and Vanguard (which together oversee over $1 trillion in E.T.F. assets) as well as minnows managing a just a few million dollars.Markets may be volatile and investors may be pulling money out of funds, but for the long term, there appears to be no stopping the E.T.F. revolution.“I think we are in the very early stages here,” said Joseph H. Davis, the head of Vanguard’s investment strategy group. “We are seeing a global adoption of E.T.F.s.”At their sales stations, fresh-faced young men and smiling women pitched their products to browsing investment advisers. “Targeting Yield?” asked one advertising slogan. “Go Beyond the Conventional,” urged another.And if the success of E.T.F.s is to be judged by the quantity — if not quality — of its swag, then the good times are indeed rolling. Company tables overflowed with iPhone chargers, souped-up golf balls and all manner of branded pens.In explaining why his company has focused on triple-leveraged funds, Mr. Eschmann says that when Direxion (the letter x is a financial symbol for leverage) broke into the market seven years ago, ProShares, the market leader then and now, had already established its reputation with double-leveraged funds.To differentiate, Direxion upped the ante and started the first triple-leveraged fund.Mr. Eschmann cautions that the funds are not for the average investor (there are many such warnings in the funds’ investment literature) and he says that active day traders and hedge funds are his main clients these days.Nevertheless, some participants view these funds and their appetite for risk as giving the sector a bad name. BlackRock’s chief executive, Laurence D. Fink, for example, has said that leveraged E.T.F.s could “blow up the industry” some day.That day has not yet come, as Mr. Eschmann takes pains to point out.“I think he was talking his own book,” Mr. Eschmann said of the BlackRock leader’s warning. “He was over the top in terms of risks — there has to be some buyer beware here.”Advertisement