By JOHN KOBLINAPRIL 7, 2015
For the first time in five and a half years, ABC’s “World News Tonight” defeated the “NBC Nightly News” in total viewers last week. ABC’s evening newscast averaged 7.99 million viewers a night compared with NBC’s 7.91 million for the week beginning March 30, according to Nielsen.The “NBC Nightly News” has been in a period of tremendous unrest after the suspension of Brian Williams two months ago for embellishing an anecdote about a helicopter trip in Iraq. ABC has been steadily catching up to NBC in the evening news hour and closed the gap to as few as 11,000 viewers three weeks ago, before “Nightly News,” which Lester Holt now anchors, briefly expanded the lead.Throughout the year, ABC’s newscast, anchored by David Muir since September, has been making strides in the demographic key to advertisers. For the week of March 30 to April 3, ABC defeated NBC in the 25-to-54 demographic and in viewers ages 18 to 49. With the total viewer win, it’s the first time ABC has won in all three demographics since February 2008.This victory for “World News Tonight” makes up for a premature celebration last year. Because of a wide-ranging Nielsen reporting error, ABC was crowned winner of the evening news hour for the week of Sept. 29. Days later, the television research company corrected itself and NBC was once again on top.AdvertisementLast month, it was revealed that NBC had begun broadcasting reruns of “Nightly News” in several markets in a graveyard shift after 2 a.m. The additional viewers, however few there may have been, for those broadcasts were rolled into the weekly total viewer ratings. According to a report by The Wall Street Journal, complaints from frustrated advertisers led to last week’s being the first time since early February (when NBC began running the re-aired broadcasts) that those overnight ratings were not included in the total viewership numbers.“The Nightly News” joins other marquee NBC News shows like “Today” and “Meet the Press” that have lost their once-dominant edge in recent years. And the latest evening news ratings comes on just the second day on the job for Andrew Lack, the chairman of NBC News.AdvertisementStill, NBC expressed support for Mr. Holt in a statement, saying he “has led ‘NBC Nightly News’ to great success over the past two months, and we continue to be pleased with his strong performance during this time.”A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: ABC Edges NBC in News Ratings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.