AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesThe enterprise software company Informatica announced on Tuesday that it had agreed to be taken private in a $5.3 billion deal — the largest buyout so far this year.Permira, a private equity firm based in London, and the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board will pay $48.75 in cash for each share of Informatica. Shares of Informatica rose 4.3 percent in trading on Tuesday, to $47.79. Like many technology companies, Informatica is scrambling to adapt to a rapidly changing industry. The company has been focused on moving to subscription-based models and cloud services, and the buyers said the company would continue these initiatives under the new ownership.The deal tops the year’s previous biggest buyout, the $4 billion acquisition of Life Time Fitness announced last month by Leonard Green & Partners and TPG Capital.The Informatica buyout is another big move for the Canadian pension fund, which has emerged as one of the most active private investors in recent years, with investments in Neiman Marcus, Univision and other big companies.The deal comes months after Elliott Management, an activist hedge fund, acquired a stake in Informatica. On Tuesday, the hedge fund applauded the deal.Sohaib Abbasi, the Informatica chairman and chief executive, “has built a great company with a market-leading product portfolio, and today he and his board have delivered truly outstanding value to shareholders,” Jesse Cohn, the hedge fund’s head of equity activism in the United States, said in a statement. “Congratulations to Permira and C.P.P.I.B., who we believe will be excellent partners for Informatica’s next phase of growth.”Mr. Abbasi said: “While delivering immediate compelling value to our shareholders, we remain committed to the long-term success of our customers, partners, and employees. Permira and C.P.P.I.B. share both our vision for Informatica to power the data-ready enterprise and our conviction in sustained long-term growth.”The Informatica board has approved the deal and is recommending shareholders vote for it. The deal is expected to close later this year.Brian Ruder, a Permira partner, said, “We are very excited about the company’s ongoing transition to cloud and subscription-based services, as well as its continued pursuit of four separate billion-dollar market opportunities in cloud integration, master data management, data integration for next-generation analytics, and data security.”Permira has experience with technology companies, having made investments in companies including Ancestry.com and LegalZoom.com.Qatalyst Partners advised Informatica, and Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati provided legal advice. Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Goldman Sachs, Macquarie Capital and Union Square Advisors advised Permira and the Canadian pension fund, and Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson provided legal advice to the buyers.Advertisement