By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDAPRIL 8, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO — The messaging app Kik Interactive said on Wednesday that it was exploring its strategic options, including a potential sale of itself, as messaging apps continue to grow in popularity.In a statement, the company said that it had hired Qatalyst Partners, the boutique investment bank founded by Frank Quattrone, to help examine its options. The hiring came after several approaches from suitors, which it did not name.“We’ve been getting a lot of approaches for acquisitions and saying no for quite a while,” Ted Livingston, Kik’s founder and chief executive, said in the statement. “However, we kept on getting approached and finally decided we should at least consider all the options. So now we’re talking to pretty much every company to see what a partnership might look like.”But Mr. Livingston suggested that the process could lead to additional investors and not necessarily a buyer of the company. “To be clear, we are absolutely committed to staying independent,” he added.AdvertisementThus far, the company — which is aimed at North American youth — has raised nearly $66 million, most recently last November.AdvertisementThe hiring of Qatalyst comes amid a flurry of interest in messaging apps around the world. Once seen as simple if boring ways for users to text one another, such services have exploded in popularity and complexity. The model for many of these services has been WeChat, the hugely popular Chinese app that lets users buy goods, book car rides and play games, as well as message others.Mr. Livingston has been a particularly vocal fan of WeChat, saying that messaging apps in the West could achieve similar levels of complexity and popularity. Kik has started by buying a start-up that allows users to illustrate their dispatches with GIFs, the quirky animated images.Snapchat, the popular start-up that was initially built on disappearing photos, has added a number of new features, including allowing media outlets to publish original content on its service.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even Facebook has made its Messenger app, which has more than 500 million monthly users, a new focal point for its business, adding a payments feature and opening the service up to outside developers.“We view this as being a race to be the WeChat of the West,” Mr. Livingston told DealBook last year. “For us, it’s a once-in-humanity great opportunity.”That promise has helped bolster the stratospheric value of messaging apps. Snapchat is aiming for a valuation of up to $19 billion in its latest round of financing. Though Kik does not disclose its user numbers, it has said that more than 700 million “snaps,” or disappearing messages, are sent each day.Last month, it fetched a $200 million investment from the Alibaba Group, the Chinese e-commerce titan.Facebook paid $22 billion for WhatsApp, the world’s most popular messaging service, with more than 700 million users.Kik, which is based in Waterloo, Ontario, has about 200 million users.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.