By JOHN KOBLINAPRIL 8, 2015
Bob Schieffer, a television anchor who has worked at CBS for nearly half a century and interviewed every sitting president since Richard Nixon, announced Wednesday night that he was retiring this summer.Mr. Schieffer, 78, made the announcement while giving an address at Texas Christian University, his alma mater.He joined the network in 1969, and has been the host of the Sunday morning program “Face The Nation” since 1991. He departs on a high note: The show was the top-rated Sunday morning public affairs program for total viewers for the first three months of 2015.“That broadcast is in its 60th year and has never been better or more powerful, ranking consistently No. 1 this season,” David Rhodes, president of CBS News, said in an email to staff members. “He’s been an inspiration and a mentor to so many colleagues — and frankly, to me.”AdvertisementMr. Schieffer has been a constant across different eras at CBS: from Walter Cronkite and Don Hewitt to Katie Couric and Scott Pelley. He was the anchor of the Saturday edition of “The CBS Evening News” for 23 years. When Dan Rather left the evening newscast in 2005 after a controversial “60 Minutes II” report, it was Mr. Schieffer who was called upon to steady the ship and host the newscast for over a year before Ms. Couric took over. Mr. Pelley took over the show in 2011.AdvertisementMr. Schieffer has won numerous broadcast journalism awards, including eight Emmys, and was named a living legend by the Library of Congress in 2008. Before CBS, he was a reporter at The Fort-Worth Star-Telegram.“Because this is where my professional career began, this is where I wanted all of you to be the first to know: This summer I am going to retire,” he said at a symposium at T.C.U.’s Schieffer College of Communication, which was named for him in 2005.He added: “I’m one of the luckiest people in the world because as a little boy, as a young reporter, I always wanted to be a journalist, and I got to do that. And not many people get to do that, and I couldn’t have asked for a better life or something that was more fun and more fulfilling.”A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Veteran CBS Anchor Bob Schieffer Says He’ll Retire in Summer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.