AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — British regulators said on Friday that Kweku M. Adoboli, a former UBS trader found guilty nearly three years ago of fraud related to a $2.3 billion trading loss at the bank, had been barred from the financial industry.Mr. Adoboli, 35, was convicted in November 2012 of two charges that he abused his position as a trader at UBS from 2008 to 2011. He was sentenced to seven years in prison.Released from prison this year, he is fighting efforts by the British government to deport him. Mr. Adoboli was born in Ghana, but he left the West African nation as a child and has lived in Britain for most of his life.On Friday, the Financial Conduct Authority said Mr. Adoboli had been barred from “performing any function in relation to any regulated financial activity.”“Mr. Adoboli is not a fit and proper person to perform any functions, as his conduct demonstrates a serious lack of honesty, integrity and reputation,” the regulator said in a final notice in his case on Friday.“In reaching its decision, the F.C.A. has considered all the relevant circumstances and the severity of the risk posed by Mr. Adoboli to consumers and financial institutions, and to confidence in the market generally,” the regulator added in a news release.Mr. Adoboli could not be located for comment on Friday.He joined UBS as a trainee shortly after graduating from the University of Nottingham in England in 2003 and rose through the ranks at the Swiss bank.Prosecutors accused Mr. Adoboli of falsifying some trades and of setting up separate accounts to hide profits and losses from his unauthorized trades.The trades initially earned money for the bank and its clients, but losses began to pile up in 2011, when Mr. Adoboli made a wrong bet on the direction of the financial markets, prosecutors said. UBS ultimately reported a $2.3 billion loss related to the trading.At trial, his lawyer argued that Mr. Adoboli was a scapegoat for a multibillion-dollar loss at UBS and that the bank was aware of and condoned his trading activities as long as they were profitable.In 2012, UBS paid a fine of 29.7 million pounds, or about $46 million, for failures in its systems and controls that allowed the unauthorized trading.In 2014, John Christopher Hughes, a former senior trader at UBS, was barred from the financial industry for failing to report an account used with Mr. Adoboli’s trading scheme to manipulate the daily profits and losses on the bank’s global synthetic equities desk, according to the Financial Conduct Authority.Mr. Adoboli was junior to Mr. Hughes on the desk, the regulator said. Mr. Hughes was fired by UBS in 2012, according to the Financial Conduct Authority.Advertisement