By REUTERSAPRIL 8, 2015
Alcoa earned a profit in the first quarter after posting a loss a year earlier, reflecting its continuing shift from traditional smelting and refining to value-added businesses like automotive and aerospace, the company said on Wednesday. It also reaffirmed its 2015 forecasts for its major markets.Also on Wednesday, Alcoa said it expected the world aluminum market to have a surplus of 326,000 metric tons in 2015.The company’s earnings, excluding restructuring costs, beat market expectations, but its revenue lagged analysts’ estimates, sending Alcoa shares down more than 3 percent in after-hours trading.Alcoa’s chief executive, Klaus Kleinfeld, said in a telephone interview that all of Alcoa’s growth over the previous year came from its new businesses, as it had shut down or reduced a large portion of its essential aluminum smelting and refining business.Advertisement“This shows that our strong operational transformation is fully on track,” Mr. Kleinfeld said, adding, “we have more work to do.”AdvertisementThe company has been moving away from its traditional, more costly smelting operations in pursuit of more value-added products for the automotive and aerospace industries. Last month, the company announced a strategic review of 14 percent of its global smelting capacity and 16 percent of its global refining capacity.Last week, Alcoa said it was curtailing the remaining smelting capacity at a plant in Brazil as part of that process.The company has made several acquisitions recently to increase its focus on aerospace products. In March, Alcoa announced it had agreed to buy RTI International Metals, a titanium supplier whose customers include Boeing, for $1.3 billion.The surplus forecast differed sharply from Alcoa’s January estimate of a 38,000-metric-ton deficit for 2015, largely driven by an increase in its estimate for output in China, a top producer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“China continues to add capacity,” said William Oplinger, the company’s chief financial officer. “Smelters have been reluctant to curtail as prices have recovered.”Demand for aluminum remained strong, he said, noting that global inventories continue to fall and are at 66 days of consumption, just above their 30-year average of 61 days.“The industry needs metal to operate,” Mr. Oplinger said. “So as metal comes out of inventory it is being absorbed through higher demand.”Alcoa said it expected growth in global aerospace sales to reach 9 to 10 percent in 2015 and worldwide automotive production to rise 2 to 4 percent.AdvertisementThe company posted first-quarter net income of $195 million, or 14 cents a share, in contrast to a loss of $178 million, or 16 cents a share, a year earlier.Excluding restructuring costs, Alcoa earned $363 million, or 28 cents a share. Wall Street analysts had expected 26 cents, according to Reuters.Alcoa reported revenue of $5.82 billion, up nearly 7 percent from $5.45 billion a year earlier, but short of the $5.94 billion expected by analysts.In after-hours trading, Alcoa shares were down more than 3 percent at $13.21.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Alcoa Posts Profit on Shift in Operations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.