
Breakingviews By                     
FIONA MAHARG-BRAVO

APRIL 8, 2015
Royal Dutch Shell sat out previous waves of energy consolidation. Now Shell, a British-Dutch company, has struck the first megadeal of the latest oil rout. Paying $70 billion for the smaller, gas-focused rival BG looks like a smart and opportunistic way to increase growth.Shell acknowledges eyeing BG for years. The deal looks well timed: A series of profit warnings and management changes made BG vulnerable, with its new chief executive, Helge Lund, taking over only in February.At first glance, though, this looks like a better value for BG shareholders. A fat 50 percent premium equates to a total markup of nearly $23 billion. That outstrips planned annual savings of $2.5 billion: Taxed at BG’s 37 percent rate and capitalized at 10 times, these would have a net present value of closer to $16 billion.However, there may be plenty of extra savings that Shell has not quantified. And BG’s depressed share price might overstate the real premium. The stock has plunged 28 percent in the last nine months.AdvertisementMoreover, the strategic argument is compelling. BG will bolster Shell in two complementary areas, Brazilian deepwater assets and liquid natural gas. Shell, which has a lackluster reserve-replacement ratio compared with its peers, will see production lifted 20 percent.As ever with megadeals, much depends on execution and containing costs. Given BG’s recent troubles, this may not be straightforward, although the company’s capital commitments are declining as it completes large projects.AdvertisementThere is also built-in optimism behind Shell’s move. BG will add to cash from operations in 2016 and will be strongly accretive to earnings per share from 2018, Shell says. But it is assuming that by then Brent crude oil will have recovered to $90 a barrel, some 50 percent higher than today’s price. If it does not, Shell will need to find a sharper ax.Fiona Maharg-Bravo is Reuters Breakingviews Madrid correspondent. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »