AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — The Federal Reserve is looking increasingly unlikely to start raising its benchmark interest rate in June.A number of Fed officials expressed doubts about beginning in June during the March meeting of the Fed’s policy-making committee; according to an account the central bank published on Wednesday. And those doubts have since been reinforced by a disappointing estimate of March job growth, and by the continued sluggishness of inflation.“Data has very much surprised to the downside,” William C. Dudley, the influential president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, told Reuters on Wednesday. “It’d be reasonable to think that the timing of the Fed’s first rate hike might be a little further off in time.”The Fed has held short-term interest rates near zero since December 2008 as part of its campaign to stimulate economic growth, which has included the accumulation of more than $4 trillion in Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities.That campaign is drawing to a close. The Fed said after the March policy meeting that economic conditions were strong enough that it would consider raising rates as early as the committee’s June meeting.The current flatness of the curve shows investors expect mediocre growth.But according to the minutes of the March meeting, released after a standard three-week delay, only a minority of Fed officials said that it was likely that the economy would be strong enough for the Fed to start raising rates that soon.“Several participants judged that the economic data and outlook were likely to warrant beginning normalization at the June meeting,” the minutes said. “However, others anticipated that the effects of energy price declines and the dollar’s appreciation would continue to weigh on inflation in the near term, suggesting that conditions likely would not be appropriate to begin raising rates until later in the year.”This debate among Fed officials about the proper calibration of its stimulus campaign is playing out in a narrow range. Most officials agree the Fed should start raising rates this year because the health of the labor market has improved considerably. Most also agree that the economic impact of starting to raise rates in June is likely to be roughly the same as starting in July or September.Jeffrey M. Lacker, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Va., said last month there was a “strong case” for raising rates at the Fed’s June meeting. He said he expected the recent run of lackluster economic data to be transitory.Dennis P. Lockhart, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, also said he expected growth to rebound, but he was among a majority of Fed officials, led by the chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, that saw no harm in waiting to be certain.“I would probably be biased toward the July or September dates as opposed to June,” Mr. Lockhart, a bellwether moderate, told Bloomberg on Monday. “We will have more data, and we will give the economy a little more time to prove out the thesis that I laid out, that the first quarter was anomalous again, just like a year ago.”Only a few Fed officials stand outside this consensus, arguing that the Fed should not increase rates until wages and prices start to rise more quickly. Narayana Kocherlakota, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, said on Tuesday that the Fed should be “extraordinarily patient” in choosing its moment because many people are still struggling to find work while inflation remains well below the 2 percent annual pace that the Fed regards as best for the economy.“I continue to believe that it would be a mistake to raise the target range for the fed funds rate in 2015,” Mr. Kocherlakota told an audience in Bismarck, N.D., on Tuesday.This view is more popular outside the Fed, according to a recent survey of economists by the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The largest number said the Fed should wait to raise rates until price increases are stronger.But Ms. Yellen and other officials say they do not plan to wait. Changes in monetary policy influence economic conditions only gradually, and so they contend the Fed must take account of the water already in the hose in deciding when to shut the spigot.Even those who favor waiting a little longer do not necessarily rule out a June rate increase. Mr. Dudley, in his comments on Wednesday, noted that economic growth this year had fallen short of the Fed’s predictions and that “the bar is probably a little bit higher” for a June increase. But he said it remained a possibility.“I could imagine circumstances where a June rate hike is still in play,” he said, if the jobs report on April, to be released in early May, is very strong, or if growth “looks like it is bouncing quite sharply.”Advertisement