By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDAPRIL 8, 2015
Bank of America has shifted the leadership of its global investment bank, naming Karim Assef and Diego De Giorgi as its co-heads, according to an internal memorandum sent on Wednesday.Mr. Assef, who is based in New York, and Mr. De Giorgi, based in London, will continue to report to Christian Meissner, the firm’s head of global corporate and investment banking, the memo said.Previously, Mr. Assef was the global head of investment banking coverage, while Mr. De Giorgi was co-head of the global corporate and investment bank for Europe, the Middle East and Africa.“Karim and Diego possess the right mix of leadership and client relationship and banking skills required to provide market leading advice and transaction execution to our clients,” Mr. Meissner wrote in the memo, which was reviewed by DealBook.Separately, the regional heads of Bank of America’s mergers business — which had a very good day on Wednesday, thanks to the firm’s role advising Royal Dutch Shell in its acquisition of the BG Group — will report to Mr. Assef and Mr. De Giorgi, as well as Steven Baronoff, the chairman of global M.&A. and their respective regional heads.A spokesman for Bank of America confirmed the contents of the memo.Here’s the full memo from Mr. Meissner:To continue to strengthen our ability to serve our most important clients, I am pleased to announce that Karim Assef and Diego De Giorgi have been appointed co-heads of Global Investment Banking, continuing to report to me. In this capacity, Karim and Diego will partner closely with me on the execution of our global strategy to propel the growth and quality of our Investment Banking business by deepening client relationships, enhancing coverage efforts and strengthening collaboration and partnerships across the firm. Karim and Diego will remain based in New York and London, respectively, but will be actively involved in each region.Karim and Diego possess the right mix of leadership and client relationship and banking skills required to provide market leading advice and transaction execution to our clients. Since 2013, Karim has served as global head of Investment Banking Coverage and has played a pivotal role in helping the firm intensify its focus and coordination in assisting clients to achieve their objectives. Diego has served as co-head of Europe, Middle East and Africa GCIB along with Bob Elfring since 2013 and, under their direction, have helped us significantly increase our market share and position the firm as a leader across multiple products and asset classes. Bob will continue to lead this critical market going forward as sole head of EMEA GCIB. He will continue to report to me and Alex Wilmot-Sitwell, president of EMEA.As M&A continues to be at the heart of building strategic relationships with clients, the global M&A group will be part of Global Investment Banking. Steve Baronoff, chairman of global M&A, will continue to report to me, and the regional heads of our M&A businesses will have dual reporting lines to Steve, Karim and Diego, as well as their respective regional heads.Please join me in congratulating Karim, Diego and Bob on their expanded roles and in wishing them and Steve continued success.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Shift at Bank of America.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.