AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesAs the pharmaceutical industry continues to consolidate, even companies once considered stable stalwarts are scrambling to strike deals.Mylan, one of the big makers of generic drugs, made public on Wednesday an unsolicited offer to acquire Perrigo for about $29 billion in a deal that would extensively expand its range of product offerings.Perrigo, which makes many of the store-brand over-the-counter drugs sold at pharmacies, “has one of best business models in health care” and generates a high cash flow, David Steinberg, an analyst at Jefferies, wrote in a note.If the deal is completed, it will be the latest mega-merger in an industry that has been undergoing a furious round of consolidation, with health care deals this year already at record levels even before this offer was made.The proposal also illustrates the lingering effects of last year’s flurry of so-called inversions, in which American companies move abroad to reduce their tax bills. Mylan and Perrigo were once American companies but recently reincorporated in Europe.Under the offer, announced on Wednesday, Mylan would pay $205 a share in cash and stock for Perrigo, a 25 percent premium over Perrigo’s stock price last Friday. Mylan did not specify what the split of cash and stock would be.Perrigo shares jumped above $211 after the announcement but closed on Wednesday at $195 a share.A combined company would have big businesses in specialty pharmaceuticals, generic drugs, over-the-counter medications and nutritional products, and more than $15 billion in annual sales.Mylan’s executive chairman, Robert J. Coury, wrote in a letter to Perrigo’s chief executive, Joseph C. Papa, that the two companies had met several times and discussed a merger. But Mylan’s public announcement of its unsolicited offer suggested that the two companies could not immediately come to terms.According to a person with knowledge of the matter who was not authorized to speak publicly, Mylan approached Perrigo on Monday about striking a deal but was compelled to make its offer public before Perrigo, which is incorporated in Ireland, could respond because of strict Irish takeover laws.“This proposal is the culmination of a number of prior discussions between Mylan and Perrigo about the compelling strategic and financial logic of this combination,” Mr. Coury said in a statement. “This combination would result in meaningful immediate and long-term value creation, and our proposal is designed to deliver that value to shareholders and other stakeholders of both companies. We have great respect for Perrigo’s board and management team and what they have built.”Perrigo acknowledged it had received the offer and said it would respond after its board had met. But it is unlikely that the company will simply accept Mylan’s offer of $205 a share. Instead, it may deem the offer to be too low in the hope of attracting a higher bid. Or it could enter into friendly negotiations with Perrigo, and perhaps other potential buyers.Manufacturers of generic drugs, like Mylan, have increasingly sought to diversify their portfolios as revenues for their product lines have slowed in recent years, said Michael Faerm, an analyst for Wells Fargo. Fewer brand-name drugs have been losing patent protection, and competition from new players — especially manufacturers in India — has grown more intense.“So the garden-variety generics in many cases — that opportunity is not what it once was,” Mr. Faerm said in an interview. “In order to keep growing, they need to look elsewhere.”Some companies, like Teva Pharmaceutical and Actavis, have sought to expand into brand-name drugs, while others, including Mylan, have focused on harder-to-make generic drugs like respiratory products and extended-release medications. That is one reason Perrigo, with its portfolio of dermatologic creams and over-the-counter drugs, looks attractive to Mylan, he said.“This could be a strong deal” for Mylan, Mr. Faerm wrote in a note. “It would bring together highly complementary strengths at the two companies.”If it goes through, it will be the first big deal since Mylan reincorporated in the Netherlands, in one of last year’s more notable inversions.To make the move abroad, Mylan hunted for a suitable inversion target. After being rejected by the Swedish drug maker Meda, it agreed to  acquire Abbott Laboratories’ European generic drug business for $5.3 billion. The move was controversial because it showed how easy it was for American companies to move abroad and also because Mylan’s chief executive, Heather Bresch, is the daughter of Joe Manchin III, a Democratic senator from West Virginia.Late last year, the Obama administration cracked down on inversions, introducing new rules that deprived companies of some of the main tax benefits of the strategy.Perrigo moved abroad through an inversion in 2013. Previously based in Allegan, Mich., Perrigo paid $6.7 billion for Elan, an Irish drug company, and reincorporated in Dublin. The move was expected to allow Perrigo to save an estimated $150 million a year in taxes.In his letter to Perrigo, Mr. Coury proposed that he would continue as chairman of the combined company and that Ms. Bresch would serve as chief executive. He offered Mr. Papa a seat on the board.Goldman Sachs is advising Mylan, and Morgan Stanley is advising Perrigo. “This is the right time for our two companies to move forward together, and Mylan and our board are firmly committed to making this combination a reality,” Mr. Coury said.This move could set in motion other potential deals. Mylan itself could be in play. According to several analysts, this deal could be interpreted as a defensive move against Teva, another big generic-drug maker, which has reportedly been interested in acquiring Mylan.And another company might make a rival offer for Perrigo.“Additional bidders could come forward,” Annabel Samimy, an analyst at Stifel, wrote in a note. “With heated M.&A. discussion amongst biotech/pharma, particularly those slow to the game, we reasonably believe other players (with flexibility to submit a competitive bid) will come to the table.”Katie Thomas contributed reporting.Advertisement