By JENNY ANDERSONAPRIL 8, 2015
It has been an age-old question: Are quotas the best way of getting more women on boards and keeping them there?Other factors may be more effective at diversifying boards, according to recent research commissioned by BNY Mellon, the wealth and asset management firm, and conducted by Sucheta Nadkarni, a professor at Cambridge University.The research found that a nation’s female economic power — as defined by expected number of years of schooling for girls and the percentage of women in the work force — and a corporate governance code — a written policy at a company that mentions gender diversity – were more influential in getting women onto boards and ensuring that they stayed on.Australia, Norway and Denmark registered the highest levels of female economic power. The United States ranked sixth and Britain was in ninth place.AdvertisementAlthough quotas worked in placing women on boards, they did not necessarily succeed at encouraging women to remain in the posts, the research showed.Advertisement“For me the striking and most encouraging finding is that empowering women and girls outside the boardroom is key to getting them into the boardroom — and staying there,” said Helena Morrissey, chief executive of Newton Investment Management, which is owned by BNY Mellon.Ms. Morrissey has actively worked to promote the issue: She is the founder of the 30% Club, which aims to increase female representation on boards of British companies. “It is not about a few token women on boards,” she said. “If done through real change, it can impact all.”Some European countries have required quotas to ensure that corporations add female board members. But the Cambridge study found that it was not this system — or political influence of women in governments — that mattered most.Academic research into what policies influence board representation has disproportionately centered on boards in the United States. The latest report focuses globally and asks what factors contribute to both more percentages of women on boards as well as longevity, or how long they stay on boards. The report was presented Wednesday at a conference sponsored by BNY Mellon called Womenomics.The report studied data collected from a sample of 1,002 companies from the Forbes Global 2000 list in 2013. It included businesses from 41 countries on six continents. The research looked at statistics from 2004 to 2013 — what it called the equivalent of more than 10,000 firm-years of data.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Getting women on the board is different from keeping them there,” Professor Nadkarni said in an interview before the conference.She added that although the conclusions were fairly intuitive, they had not been reached through academically recognized research across countries before.“The issue of female representation on boards has been the focus of corporations and legislatures,” Professor Nadkarni said. “We wanted to look at societal factors.”AdvertisementCertain policies have been helpful in aiding the efforts to increase the number of women on boards. Those include more substantial maternity leave (the longer the leave, the higher the percentage of women on boards and the longer they stayed on boards). Political power also had an impact: The more women in politics, the greater the number and the longer they stayed in corporate boards.But the most effective policies seem to be the economic power of women and the governance policies of any given corporation. Unlike legislation requiring quotas, these factors are nonbinding on businesses.As a side note, gender egalitarianism — the degree to which a country emphasizes gender equality — helps in increasing the percentage of women on boards, but this factor did not seem to influence how long they remained in those posts. In more assertive cultures like Greece and the United States, fewer women were named to boards, but they stayed there longer.The research, to some extent, raised other issues. What keeps women on boards? Does longevity translate to effectiveness, and what is effectiveness?“This opens a lot of questions,” said Professor Nadkarni.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.