AdvertisementSupported byBy Stanley Reed and Michael J. de la MercedLONDON — Energy companies have spent months in a state of strategic paralysis, wary of making big moves with oil prices plunging.Now, the mind-set is shifting, as the industry giants look to capitalize on the weakness.On Wednesday, Royal Dutch Shell agreed to buy the BG Group for $70 billion. It is the first major deal for an oil and gas producer since prices started falling last summer.The acquisition could provide a template in the current environment, with deep-pocketed players taking advantage of their competitors’ problems to bolster their own position.In buying BG, Shell is concentrating on the fast-growing business of producing and selling liquefied natural gas. It will also become a major player in Brazil’s offshore oil fields, where Shell’s exposure has been small.Shell is taking advantage of the financial struggles of BG. Before the deal was announced, BG had watched its shares fall more than 30 percent since May.Liquefied natural gas “is a very very important component of this,” Ben van Beurden, Shell’s chief executive, told reporters on Wednesday. “It is really the strength of both companies.”Deal makers have predicted that the plunge in oil prices could spark interest among would-be acquirers eager for bargains. Other potential buyers, like private equity firms, have amassed billions of dollars to hunt for new trophies.Many of these bankers and lawyers, though, have cautioned that would-be sellers may find other ways to raise money, rather that risk auctions at fire-sale prices. For example, Whiting Petroleum, a midsize oil and gas company, chose to raise $2 billion in debt and sell 35 million shares after failing to draw an attractive takeover offer.But the attractions of energy mergers — including the benefits of greater scale and the ability to move into productive fields of oil and gas — may ultimately compel many players to the negotiating table.Shell, in large part, is betting on a changing international energy market.As global energy needs have soared, companies are looking to liquefied natural gas, or L.N.G., to meet the demands. The process involves supercooling natural gas into a liquid that can be transported around the world on ships. By doing so, natural gas has become a global commodity, with companies bringing supplies from remote locations in Africa to energy-hungry markets like China and India.L.N.G. is often used to meet peak energy demand in Persian Gulf countries like Dubai and Kuwait to power air-conditioning in the summer. Britain uses it to meet peak demand during the winter heating season.L.N.G. also has the potential to reduce the leverage that pipeline gas suppliers have over their customers. Lithuania, for instance, has built an L.N.G. facility to ease its dependence on Russian gas. Poland is working on a similar plant.With the technology taking hold, global L.N.G. surged rapidly in the early 1990s. But demand leveled off in recent years, tempered by weak economic growth, high prices and a lack of new supplies. Many forecasters expect the business to bounce back, growing in the high single-digits over the next decade.“The long-term expectation is for a resumption of rapid growth because of fundamentals and in response to current low prices,” said Christopher Goncalves, head of the energy practice at the Berkeley Research Group, a consulting firm based in Washington.More than any of its rivals, Shell has staked its future on natural gas, L.N.G. in particular. Over the last decade, Shell has invested $56 billion in the cooling plants, terminals and other facilities required to produce L.N.G. and other gas-derived fuels.When Repsol ran into trouble in Argentina, Shell swooped in to purchase the company’s well-regarded L.N.G. business for $5.4 billion. Shell is also developing a large floating L.N.G. installation, called Prelude, to process the output of a gas field off Australia.With the purchase of BG, Shell is building on that base, adding to existing projects in places like Trinidad and Australia. The deal will enhance the portfolio as well, with BG’s gas discoveries off Tanzania in East Africa, a future growth area where Shell has been unable to establish a foothold.Both companies are positioned to benefit from the shale gas boom in the United States. BG has a contract to buy L.N.G. from a facility called Sabine Pass on the Gulf of Mexico, owned by Cheniere Energy. Shell has an interest in a facility planned for an island off Georgia.The greater scale and additional sources of supply should provide an advantage for Shell. The company, already considered a sophisticated L.N.G. trader, would be able to further define its shipping routes and send cargoes to destinations offering the highest price, wherever they are.So far, the big push into L.N.G. has proved a blessing for Shell, particularly at a tough time for its oil business as well as its refining units. Last year, the company reported $11.3 billion in earnings from L.N.G. and related businesses, about 75 percent of its overall income. By adding BG, Shell expects to increase its L.N.G. capacity by 73 percent in the next three years.BG, by comparison, has been going through a rocky period since the sudden departure of its chief executive, Chris Finlayson, last year. The company has been particularly hurt in recent months by its operations in Egypt. To satisfy growing demand stoked by cheap subsidized energy prices, the country’s government, also facing social unrest, diverted the company’s production for domestic purposes. As a result, BG couldn’t get sufficient gas supplies to meet its L.N.G. export commitments.Since the departure of Mr. Finlayson, Andrew Gould, BG’s chairman, has largely been steering the company. Helge Lund, a former chief executive of Norway’s Statoil, took the helm of BG about two months ago.Mr. Gould, a former chief executive of the energy technology company Schlumberger, took the lead, negotiating the deal directly with Shell’s chief, Mr. van Beurden. Mr. van Beurden said at a news conference on Wednesday that after Shell decided to move ahead with the deal, he called Mr. Gould and the two met on March 15 in London, where “we had a very good discussion.”Mr. Gould told reporters that he and Mr. Lund had looked forward to turning around BG. But when the board and Mr. Lund looked at the Shell offer, they found it too compelling to pass up.Investors, though, have viewed the deal skeptically, at least initially. Shell’s stock price was off more than 5 percent on Wednesday. The main knock is the 50 percent premium that Shell is paying over BG’s Tuesday closing price, although the stock is well off its high.A more fundamental concern may be that L.N.G. prices are under pressure from a variety of factors, including oversupply in the market and weaker-than-expected growth in demand from countries like China. Asian spot prices, for instance, have fallen by nearly 50 percent from their 2014 highs.Most L.N.G. is sold under long-term contracts, whose terms are usually not disclosed. But because they are linked to oil, usually with a several-month time lag, they are also coming down. That will put pressure on Shell’s profits, particularly on L.N.G. from the high-cost Australian projects to which both Shell and BG have substantial exposure.“We believe that Shell will have to work very hard to convince shareholders that the strategic benefits outweigh the premium offered,” Iain Reid, an analyst at BMO Capital Markets, a Canadian bank, wrote in a note to clients on Wednesday.Stanley Reed reported from London and Michael J. de la Merced from San Francisco.videoAdvertisement