By STEPHANIE STROMAPRIL 9, 2015
A virulent, deadly flu virus has hit the nation’s turkey flock, forcing culling and quarantines that are disrupting trade with various countries.In the last several weeks, turkey producers in Minnesota, the largest turkey-producing state (46 million annually), have had to euthanize some 525,000 birds, and farms there and in other states affected by the virus are under quarantine in an effort to prevent it from spreading.Experts are all but certain that the virus is being spread by the feathers, feet and feces of wild waterfowl like Canada geese that cruise three of the nation’s four flyways, the paths that migratory birds follow as they seek the perfect climate.The virus most likely infiltrated the United States from Canada, where outbreaks occurred in December in British Columbia. The first cases of what is called “highly pathogenic avian influenza” were identified in the United States a month later, in wild birds and backyard flocks in Washington State, Oregon and Idaho.AdvertisementNow, it has spread to Arkansas, California, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri and South Dakota.“As birds migrate north in the summer months and south in the winter, they mix with one another and pick up the virus and spread it when they begin migrating again,” said Dr. John Clifford, chief veterinary officer at the federal Agriculture Department.AdvertisementThe outbreaks have prompted many foreign countries, including China, Japan and South Africa, to ban or curb their imports of American poultry products.So far, the impact of the virus, often referred to as avian flu, on the nation’s flocks has been small. Turkey farmers produce 240 million to 270 million birds a year, according to the National Turkey Federation. No one has collected data on the number of birds culled because of the virus, but a back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that it is nearing one million.“We’ve had isolated cases at this point,” said Steve Olson, executive director of the Minnesota Turkey Growers Association. “The good thing is that there are multiple barns on these farms, and we’re not seeing it spread from barn to barn or farm to farm.”According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, humans are at minimal risk for contracting this virus, though workers at poultry facilities are being monitored for infection.The virus has primarily infected flocks of so-called large toms, turkeys that are mainly used in ground meat products and animal feeds, said Joel Brandenberger, president of the National Turkey Federation. “At this point, we don’t think this will have an impact on Thanksgiving,” he added.The virus has arrived just as pig herds are beginning to recover from an outbreak of porcine epidemic diarrhea virus, which killed over eight million pigs in more than 30 states after it took hold in 2013.In its “highly pathogenic” form, avian influenza is deadly to commercial turkey flocks. “One of our contractor’s barns had 2,000 turkeys in it, and within 48 hours, only 20 were alive,” said Michael Martin, a spokesman for Cargill, a large commodity food dealer.AdvertisementThat farm is in Missouri, where the Agriculture Department has confirmed outbreaks in two commercial turkey flocks. Mr. Martin said no other facility raising poultry for Cargill, which contracts with farmers for some of the meat it sells, has been infected.
            Counties with confirmed cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza since December.          OkanoganClallamPopeBentonLac qui ParleStearnsJudith BasinWash.Kingsburyminn.Ore.BeadleMont.CanyonMeekers.d.idahoKandiyohiDeschutesNoblesDouglasMoniteauStanislausLeavenworthkan.Mo.KingsCalif.BooneJasperark.APRIL 10, 2015
Farmers must destroy entire flocks to prevent the virus from spreading. The U.S.D.A. has a program that compensates them for the birds they have to destroy, which acts as an incentive to report suspected cases quickly, but not for birds that have already died from the virus.In British Columbia this year, some 245,600 turkeys and chickens have died or been destroyed, and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency confirmed this week that birds in Southern Ontario were also infected.Canada’s outbreak led American poultry producers to beef up biosecurity measures and quickly establish quarantine areas upon signs of the virus.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Olson said farmers in Minnesota were doubling down on efforts to prevent contaminants in their barns, like requiring workers to leave their boots outside before entering barns rather than having them walk through disinfectant foot baths. They then put on boots inside the barn that have never been outside.Producers are hosing down the wheels and wheel beds of trucks that make feed and other deliveries or transport birds, and their drivers are asked to remain in the vehicles to minimize the risk of cross-contamination.But all those precautions cannot keep rodents and other creatures that come into contact with feces and feathers left behind by wild birds out of the barns.The Agriculture Department is hosting a “chicken chat” next week to discuss what measures poultry producers should take to prevent infection.Tom Super, a spokesman for the National Chicken Council, said commercial chicken producers, many of whom also market turkey, were also taking precautions, even though few chickens have caught the virus so far. (The virus does not appear to be as deadly in chickens as it is in turkeys, according to the U.S.D.A.)AdvertisementSome of those chickens were what the industry calls “backyard birds,” or those grown by individuals. The commercial poultry industry has long warned that the proliferation of homegrown chickens, turkeys and ducks would increase the risk of a virulent disease taking hold.For instance, the only confirmed case of the virus in Kansas, which isn’t a large poultry-producing state, was among a backyard flock of chickens and ducks, according to Beth Gaines, a spokeswoman for the state’s agriculture department.The H5N2 strain of the virus has caused most of the crisis.But when avian influenza showed up in California, infiltrating a Foster Farms turkey ranch in Stanislaus County in January, the U.S.D.A. identified it as the H5N8 variety, which is probably the strain of the virus being transported by migrating birds.That strain also was found the next month in barns of a commercial producer of broiler chickens and ducks a little further south in Kings County.A third infection in the state, however, at a commercial turkey producer in Merced County, was caused by a low pathogenic version of the H7N3 strain. That strain, in a much more virulent form, was responsible for an outbreak in Mexico in 2012 that forced the culling of millions of birds.The U.S.D.A. says that the deadly H5 part of the virus is mingling with North American strains, according to the department, creating new, “mixed race” viruses.Dr. Clifford said that made it more likely that birds carrying the virus would end up traveling the Atlantic flyway, along which it has not yet appeared. That could endanger flocks in North Carolina, the state producing the second-most turkeys (though measured by value, it ranks first). “Next fall and winter, when the birds start moving down, if the virus remains as virulent, then we’ll potentially see it in all four flyways,” Dr. Clifford said.A map on April 10 with an article about a virulent form of avian influenza affecting turkey flocks reversed the locations of Deschutes and Douglas Counties in Oregon, where the flu has struck. Douglas abuts the coastline and Deschutes is inland. A corrected map can be found at nytimes.com/businessday.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Brought by Wild Neighbors, a Deadly Flu Attacks Turkey Flocks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.