AdvertisementSupported byCommon SenseBy James B. StewartIn what should be a ringing alarm for nonprofit boards across the country long accustomed to minimal scrutiny or accountability, Attorney General Eric T. Schneiderman of New York has signaled that the laissez-faire approach to nonprofit governance is over.Mr. Schneiderman’s office has sent letters to the board members of Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, the prestigious college founded in Manhattan in 1859 by the philanthropist Peter Cooper on the premise that it be “open and free to all.” Last year, after the school said it faced financial ruin otherwise, it began charging tuition.The investigation, reported earlier  by The Wall Street Journal, is focusing on the board’s management of its endowment; its handling of its major asset, the Chrysler Building; its dealings with Tishman Speyer Properties, which manages the skyscraper; and how it obtained a $175 million loan from MetLife using the building as collateral, according to people involved. (All are issues I highlighted when I examined the Cooper Union endowment almost two years ago.)Apart from the impact on Cooper Union itself, what’s striking about Mr. Schneiderman’s investigation is that his office is intervening before its financial problems ruin the school. Cooper Union’s endowment stood at $735 million at the end of its most recent fiscal year and, despite its financial woes, it is in no imminent danger of failing.“It’s easy to forget, but New York’s charities, collectively, are a big and important part of our state’s economy, and I consider it my responsibility to promote and protect the nonprofit sector,” Mr. Schneiderman told me this week. “In part, we do that by aggressively investigating and prosecuting fraud. But we work just as hard to prevent mismanagement before it starts and, whenever possible, get troubled charities back on track.”The Cooper Union investigation fits into the New York attorney general’s office’s broader strategy to get ahead of potential crises by “stress testing” nonprofits that show signs of potential trouble, such as large operating deficits and excessive spending rates on endowments, said James Sheehan, the chief of the office’s charities bureau. “Once an organization is in trouble, donors don’t want to give money and people don’t want to join the board,” he said. “We want people to anticipate these issues before they become disasters.”Such disasters have befallen the New York City Opera and Long Island College Hospital, two major New York institutions that collapsed in financial disarray in recent years, and the Crystal Cathedral in California, which filed for bankruptcy protection in 2010 after accusations that its board had imprudently borrowed against the endowment.Whatever the outcome at Cooper Union, Mr. Schneiderman deserves credit for putting nonprofit boards on notice that they’ll be held accountable, said Jack B. Siegel, author of a widely used guide for nonprofit directors, whose subtitle is “Avoiding Trouble While Doing Good.” “More states should emulate New York,” Mr. Siegel said.This is no small matter, given that nonprofits accounted for 9.2 percent of all wages and salaries in the United States and 5.3 percent of gross domestic product in 2010, according to the National Center for Charitable Statistics. Given the many illustrious universities, hospitals, museums, orchestras, theaters and other arts organizations, nonprofits play an outsize role in the nation’s culture. But they have traditionally received little scrutiny until a scandal erupts or they’re on the brink of collapse.State attorneys general oversee nonprofits both because they’re generally exempt from state taxes and because they represent the interests of donors who may lack the means to enforce the terms of their gifts or, once they’re dead, the capacity. (Since such institutions are also exempt from federal taxes, the Internal Revenue Service is charged with ensuring that organizations adhere to their tax-exempt purposes.)Mr. Siegel said New York’s charities division “is really active, does a lot of investigations and really does go after people.” For most state attorneys general, he said, “their main focus in life isn’t charities and nonprofits.”In large degree, this is a simple matter of capacity. The New York attorney general alone oversees about 80,000 nonprofits, ranging from world-renowned institutions like the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Metropolitan Opera to little-known historic house museums. Given limited resources, “we have no choice but to go after the most egregious examples,” Mr. Sheehan said. He cited the example from last year of William Rapfogel, a close friend of the now-disgraced assembly leader Sheldon Silver, who was executive director of the Metropolitan Council on Jewish Poverty. He was sentenced to a prison term after pleading guilty to plundering the charity of more than $9 million.But most cases of nonprofit mismanagement involve breaches of fiduciary duty, not criminal behavior, often rooted in a sincere if ultimately misguided effort to help. Board members are typically “people who are generous donors who support the mission of the institution,” Mr. Sheehan said. “There’s a culture of politeness and respect, and they support the chief executive. Most chief executives don’t want board members to ask tough questions. This is especially true when you have a charismatic leader.”Cooper Union’s board took a series of financial steps that, with benefit of hindsight, seem misguided. The school borrowed $175 million for 30 years at a rate of 5.75 percent and then spent most of the proceeds on a lavish new building while continuing to run operating deficits. It also agreed to a prohibitively expensive prepayment penalty, making it financially impossible to extricate itself from the terms of the loan, according to people with knowledge of the agreement who spoke on the condition of anonymity. One of the issues in the current investigation is whether Cooper Union disclosed this potential penalty when it sought court approval for the loan.In the meantime, Cooper Union is stuck with what may well be the least diversified endowment of any university in the country. The Chrysler asset is valued at $612 million in the most recent audited financial statement and accounts for 83 percent of the $735 million endowment. Much of the remainder is invested in hedge funds, private equity partnerships and other so-called alternative investments, in part to try to reduce the risk associated with an endowment so concentrated in a single New York office building.But such investments are typically burdened with high fees, and their returns in recent years have been disappointing. Cooper Union’s endowment increased 6.1 percent for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2014, and a meager 1.65 percent if the Chrysler Building is excluded. By comparison, the average endowment return for colleges and universities for the same period was 15.5 percent, according to the National Association of College and University Business Officers-Commonfund Study of Endowments.Justin Harmon, a spokesman for Cooper Union, said the board’s investment committee had a new head who was taking a “fresh look” at its asset allocation strategy. School officials have “engaged in regular briefings with the attorney general’s office since realizing that the Cooper Union’s financial circumstances would likely require us to change its financial mode,” Mr. Harmon said. “We are cooperating fully and providing as much information and perspective as we can.”Under New York’s nonprofit statute, the attorney general can seek sweeping remedies, including putting an institution into receivership, ousting managers and board members or even forcing dissolution of the institution. But no one wants to see such an outcome at Cooper Union, which remains a crown jewel in American higher education. Accountability for any past misdeeds is important, especially if the continuing dissension and distrust among trustees, administration, faculty, alumni and students is ever to heal.But that’s not going to restore Peter Cooper’s dream of free tuition. For that, the school needs a sound financial plan that will regain the confidence of donors, faculty and prospective students. By intervening now, the attorney general might well be able to achieve that.Advertisement