AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersSAN FRANCISCO — California’s chief utility regulator on Thursday ordered Pacific Gas and Electric, the state’s largest power utility, to pay $1.6 billion in fines and other penalties stemming from a deadly natural gas pipeline rupture and fire near San Francisco in 2010.The sum is the largest penalty ever imposed by the five-member California Public Utilities Commission, the agency said, dwarfing a $38 million fine against the same company for a natural gas explosion in Rancho Cordova in 2008.The commission’s president, Michael Picker, said the order also ranked as “one of the biggest utility sanctions in U.S. history.”The chairman and chief executive of P.G.&E., Anthony F. Earley Jr., said the company was still reviewing the ruling but did not expect to appeal it.The penalties cover nearly 3,800 violations of state and federal laws and regulations that two administrative law judges for the commission found in connection with the utility’s pipeline network, including the 2010 explosion.The enforcement action includes an $850 million shareholder penalty that would pay for gas transmission pipeline safety infrastructure; a $300 million fine; a $400 million billing credit to be spread across P.G.&E.’s gas customers; and $50 million in other remedies to enhance pipeline safety.As approved by the commission, the penalties must be borne entirely by P.G.&E.’s shareholders and may not be passed on to the utility’s customers.When added to disallowances already adopted in a previous decision by the commission, the penalties and remedies would exceed $2.2 billion.The pipeline explosion on Sept. 9, 2010, in San Bruno, a city just south of San Francisco, destroyed an entire neighborhood, killing eight people and injuring 58 others. The National Transportation Safety Board later blamed the utility for a lax approach to pipeline safety and faulted state regulators for weak oversight.In a statement announcing the penalty, Mr. Picker addressed his agency’s share of responsibility in the tragedy.“P.G.&E. failed to uphold the public’s trust. The C.P.U.C. failed to keep vigilant. Lives were lost. Numerous people were injured. Homes were destroyed,” he said. “We must do everything we can to ensure that nothing like this happens again.”In his statement, Mr. Earley said his utility was “deeply sorry for this tragic event, and we have dedicated ourselves to re-earning the trust of our customers and the communities we serve.” Advertisement