AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedAs the boutique investment bank Perella Weinberg Partners aims to expand, it has poached one of the top telecommunications bankers around — one who helped put together one of last year’s biggest deals.The firm has hired George H. Young III from Lazard to serve as a partner, it said in an internal memorandum.The hiring is one of the most prominent by Perella Weinberg in recent years, as the nearly nine-year-old firm continues to grow amid stiff competition in the world of deal-making. It’s the highest profile recruitment since the firm took on Robert K. Steel, a former Goldman Sachs banker and Treasury Department official, as its chief executive last year.In poaching Mr. Young, who goes by Woody, Perella Weinberg is gaining a prominent specialist in telecommuncations and media deals. He was the lead banker for AT&T in its $49 billion takeover of DirecTV last year, one of the biggest transactions in a year full of mega-deals.He has been one of the telecom giant’s closest advisers, having worked on most of the mergers that helped create the modern-day AT&T. He also advised on Sprint’s combination with Nextel and U.S. West’s union with Qwest Communications, as well as on media transactions like Dex Media’s sale to R. H. Donnelley.“Widely considered one of the most successful telecom bankers on Wall Street, Woody has advised on many of the industry’s largest transactions,” Peter A. Weinberg, a Perella Weinberg co-founder and the head of the firm’s advisory business, wrote in the memo, which was reviewed by DealBook.Lazard declined to comment.Before joining Lazard — where he was a co-head of telecom, media and technology banking and a vice chairman of investment banking in the United States — Mr. Young served as the global head of tech, media and telecom at Merrill Lynch. And before that, he spent 14 years at Lehman Brothers, where he eventually became the head of that firm’s global communications group.Mr. Young also served in the Treasury Department, as a special assistant to the deputy secretary focusing on international affairs, from 1991 to 1992.But Mr. Young also has a long history with many of the executives at Perella Weinberg, including its namesake founders. He worked under Joseph R. Perella in the mergers group at First Boston, and had known Mr. Weinberg for years.He also became friends with Paulo C. Pereira, a partner at Perella Weinberg who had previously been a rival at Morgan Stanley based in Europe.At Perella Weinberg, Mr. Young will essentially be tasked with building the firm’s American telecom and media practice, people briefed on his hiring said. The appointment reflects in large part the investment bank’s expectation that much more consolidation is set to ripple through the sector, both in North America and in Europe.Mr. Young, who will be based in New York, is expected to start on Jan. 4, 2016.The rest of Lazard’s telecom, media and technology group is expected to stay at the firm, including Paul Haigney, the other co-head of the group.Meanwhile, Perella Weinberg is expected to continue hiring more bankers, these people previously said. Among those hirings will likely be a new team devoted to corporate restructurings, after the firm fired several of its top bankers for what it argued were breaches of their employment agreements.A spokeswoman for Perella Weinberg declined to comment.Advertisement