AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberPereira & O’Dell, an advertising agency known for the long-form digital video campaigns it has created for clients like Skype, is breaking away from its holding company, a move that goes against an industry trend toward consolidation.The agency, based in San Francisco, is set to buy back about 70 percent of itself from the Brazilian advertising holding company Grupo ABC, which provided financial backing when Pereira & O’Dell formed in 2008. The agency, which did not say how much it would pay to regain its independence, expects to complete the deal this month.With the buyback, Pereira & O’Dell will go it alone in an industry dominated by enormous ad-holding companies like Omnicom, Publicis and WPP. Those companies have repeatedly scooped up smaller agencies, becoming behemoths that rule much of the advertising and marketing world.Pereira & O’Dell, which celebrated its seventh anniversary on Thursday, said its revenue increased 47 percent last year, to $31.6 million, from $21.5 million in 2013. But while the agency will give up resources without Grupo ABC, it will gain autonomy.“It’s a feeling of empowerment that we now can create our own destiny,” said Andrew O’Dell, a founding partner. “It allows us to take the company in directions we maybe couldn’t have before.”Mr. O’Dell and P. J. Pereira held senior positions at the agency AKQA before leaving to start Pereira & O’Dell in 2008, as the country braced for recession. With support from Grupo ABC, the agency expanded from San Francisco to New York, Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo, Brazil, and now has about 200 employees.The agency has gained recognition in particular for its long-form, digital content. For instance, the agency created a campaign for Skype that showed examples of how people use the service. One five-minute video, called “Pet Detective,” is about a man in Russia who finds lost pets by communicating with their owners through Skype.For another client, Intel, the agency created a series in 2012 called “The Beauty Inside,” about a man who wakes up as a different person every day, which won a Daytime Emmy Award. More recently, the agency made a series for Intel and Dell, “What Lives Inside,” which is streaming on Hulu and was directed by Robert Stromberg, who has won two Academy Awards for art direction.“The more control consumers have over what they’re watching and consuming and sharing, the more the stories matter,” Mr. Pereira said.Pereira & O’Dell has also created campaigns for Lego, 1-800 Contacts and the University of Phoenix. It recently signed the Mexican fast-casual food chain Qdoba, Hyatt Regency and Coca-Cola, for which it is introducing a campaign in Latin America.The agency’s focus underscores the shifting dynamics in the ad industry. Agencies no longer simply create commercials or advertisements that run alongside original content. Instead, more agencies are looking to make appealing content that stands alone as entertainment. And many clients are seeking agencies that will help them tell relevant, fresh stories.“The first thing I look for is an agency that’s fearless,” said Angie Hill, the general manager of Skype audience marketing at Microsoft. “I need an agency that has a creative team that’s willing to push the boundaries.”With its new independence, Pereira & O’Dell is hoping to become more nimble in an industry undergoing so much change. It is also already looking to grow.“We’re going to expand into areas or countries or new offerings as we are ready for it and as we see the opportunity,” Mr. O’Dell said. “We do want to continue to grow the business at a rate that feels comfortable for us.”Advertisement