AdvertisementSupported byBy David JollyPARIS — You would never know from his demeanor that Yanis Varoufakis, the celebrity Greek finance minister, was carrying the weight of a nation on his shoulders. In fact, you could be forgiven for thinking that it was his country’s uncompromising creditors who were on the defensive.On Thursday, at a conference of economic luminaries, Mr. Varoufakis was working hard to divert the discussion from Greece’s shrinking financial freedom and fears that it might default. (He had a bit of wind at his back with news that Greece on this same day had just met its deadline for repaying a €460 million, or $491 million, loan installment to the International Monetary Fund.)Rather than concede any Greek missteps, Mr. Varoufakis wanted to assess the flaws of the eurozone that he said had been revealed by the 2008 global meltdown and its aftermath.“There is no doubt that if we had a federal republic, if we had a United States of Europe, we would not be here discussing the Greek crisis, the eurozone crisis, banking union or anything of the sort,” he said in an onstage conversation with the Nobel laureate Joseph E. Stiglitz, at a conference of the Institute for New Economic Thinking. “Unfortunately,” he added, “the way we designed the eurozone, it was crying out for a crisis.”Mr. Varoufakis, as is now well known, became finance minister in January as part of the Syriza-led leftist government of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, which came to power promising voters to renegotiate the €240 billion international bailout, whose terms Athens blames for sending the economy into a tailspin and leaving more than 50 percent of Greek youth jobless.When Mr. Stiglitz asked him how Greece’s creditors could have repeatedly overestimated the country’s ability to grow under the terms of the bailout, Mr. Varoufakis replied, “I think it’s the politics of denial.”Even making Thursday’s payment to the I.M.F. required scraping together money from the government’s dwindling resources. It staved off a default for now, but did nothing to solve the bigger problem: that the government is running out of cash to meet obligations like paying pensions and the wages of public employees. To obtain another tranche of desperately needed bailout funds, Greece still has to persuade its highly skeptical creditors — which also include the European Central Bank and the European Commission — that Athens has a credible economic overhaul plan.And even Mr. Varoufakis’s visit to Washington last weekend, where he had promised the repayment to the I.M.F. chief, Christine Lagarde, was not without turmoil. The Greek representative to the I.M.F., Thanos Catsambas, an appointee of a previous Athens government, did not take part in the weekend meeting and subsequently tendered his resignation, according to Greek news media.Mr. Varoufakis, 54, comes across as a sort of debonair Mr. Spock, a financial Vulcan of the eurozone. Dressed in a dark jacket with his trademark casual, open-collared shirt, he speaks clearly about the currency bloc’s awkward truths, avoiding the jargon and evasiveness that normally characterizes the region’s dreary politics.Appearing on a separate panel with Mr. Varoufakis on Thursday, the Irish central bank chief, Patrick Honohan, referred to the “glass being half full” after Ireland’s bailout and tentative recovery.“I don’t like the metaphor,” Mr. Varoufakis said. “In the case of my country, the glass is broken.”He said he it was difficult trying to make people understand that part of the currency union’s problem was the imbalances between countries like Germany, which runs a persistent current-account surplus, and those like Greece, whose very different mix of exports — Germans make machines, Greeks grow olives — still has not recovered despite a 40 percent drop in real wages since the onset of the crisis.Regardless of how low wages in Greece fall, Mr. Varoufakis said, alluding to the belt-tightening pressures from its creditors, Greek cars “are not going to be competitive with Mercedes-Benz and Toyota, simply because we don’t make cars.”He also pleaded for time to develop a deep economic restructuring plan that could be embraced by the Greek people.After five years of austerity imposed by creditors, “the word ‘reform’ resonates in Greece like the word ‘democracy’ in Iraq,” he said. “It’s a dirty word.” If the Greek public doesn’t “own” the overhaul plan, he said, “they will not cooperate, they will see it as a forced occupation.”Mr. Varoufakis repeated his assertion that Greece should not have joined the euro union in the first place. But he said the media seemed to have misunderstood his position on the merits of staying in, now that Greece is part of the union.“I don’t believe anyone should have become a member of this eurozone, the way it’s designed,” Mr. Varoufakis said. “But, it’s one thing to say we should never have joined and another to say we should leave it.”Niki Kitsantonis contributed reporting from Athens.Advertisement