AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesGeneral Electric is poised to sell its enormous real estate portfolio in a sale that could fetch about $30 billion, according to people with knowledge of the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity.The move would be the biggest move yet for G.E.’s chief executive, Jeffrey R. Immelt, as he tries to refocus the company on its core industrial businesses and reduce its exposure to financial services.Two financial institutions — Blackstone and Wells Fargo — are preparing to buy most of the portfolio, which includes office and apartment buildings as well as substantial loans, these people said. A deal could be announced as early as Friday.Many details of the transaction were not immediately clear, including the price, which assets were being bought by Blackstone and Wells Fargo, and whether any other buyers were acquiring substantial assets from G.E.But the move is part of a broader shift underway at G.E. as the company distances itself from its riskier finance operations, allowing it to focus on its better-known businesses of building turbines, engines and industrial and medical equipment.G.E. has already been pruning its real estate portfolio. In the last full quarter, the company sold 350 properties worth about $2.1 billion.In January, G.E. said its real estate assets were valued at $34 billion, down 11 percent from a year earlier. About $9 billion of that was equity in various companies, nearly a third less than a year earlier. The portfolio generated net income of $299 million, up 134 percent for the year.Blackstone, for its part, is doubling down on real estate. It recently raised a $14.5 billion real estate fund and in late 2013, took the big hotel chain Hilton Worldwide public after buying it in 2007 and turning it around.One of the assets Wells Fargo is most likely to acquire is G.E.’s commercial real estate loans. Wells is already the largest commercial real estate lender in the United States, providing financing for everything from office buildings to home builders.In recent years, Wells Fargo has expanded its commercial real estate reach overseas, part of a broad effort to broaden the bank’s focus, which is overwhelmingly centered on the United States.In 2013, Wells Fargo acquired $6.05 billion in commercial real estate across Britain, with a particular concentration in London. Wells executives have noted that Europe and Canada are two particular growth areas for the bank’s real estate business.G.E. has been taking other steps to reduce its exposure to financing operations. Last month, GE Capital sold its consumer lending business in Australia and New Zealand for about $6.3 billion.In July, it spun off its retail finance business, called Synchrony, through an initial public offering. Also last year, it sold its Scandinavian consumer finance operations to Banco Santander.It also sold its small-appliances unit to Electrolux for $3.3 billion last year, shedding a division that was too small to make a meaningful contribution to the sprawling company’s revenue.At the same time, it is expanding its industrial and technology operations. Last year, it won a contentious auction process for the energy assets of Alstom, the French industrial company. And it has been expanding into big data, hoping to become a big player in the so-called Internet of Things.These efforts have resulted in a moderately better financial performance. In the last full quarter, revenue rose 4 percent, to $42 billion, as Mr. Immelt pursued what he has called a big “pivot” for one of the country’s last true conglomerates.The Wall Street Journal earlier reported that a deal with G.E. was near.G.E., Blackstone and Wells Fargo all declined to comment.Michael Corkery and Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting.Advertisement