AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressStocks edged higher Thursday, led by gains for energy companies as the price of oil stabilized after a big drop the day before.Oil rose as negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program hit a snag. That could delay the arrival of more Iranian oil on the international market.Investors were also assessing some mixed news on company earnings.The drugstore chain Walgreens climbed after reporting earnings that surpassed the expectations of Wall Street analysts. The company also said it would expand a cost-cutting program. Alcoa and Bed, Bath & Beyond dropped after delivering earnings reports that disappointed investors.For the first time in years, the outlook for earnings could prove to be more of a hindrance than a help to stock investors in coming weeks.Companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index are expected to report that average earnings per share shrank by 3.1 percent in the first quarter, according to S&P Capital IQ. If that forecast proves accurate, it will be the first time since 2009 that earnings have contracted.“If the U.S. market is going to advance this year, it’s going to need to advance mostly on the back of earnings,” said Russ Koesterich, chief investment strategist at BlackRock. “The guidance going forward is going to be critical for the market.”The S.&P. 500 rose 9.28 points, or 0.5 percent, to 2,091.18. The Dow Jones industrial average rose 56.22 points, or 0.3 percent, to 17,958.73. The Nasdaq gained 23.75 points, or 0.5 percent, to 4,974.57.Position of the Dow Jones industrial average at 1-minute intervals yesterday.After six years of gains, U.S. stocks have made only modest advances this year. A big slump in oil prices since June last year have hit profits at energy companies and a surge in the U.S. dollar is hurting multi-national corporations that have a lot of sales overseas. Investors are also unsettled by the prospect of the Federal Reserve’s first interest rate increase after more than six years of near-zero rates.But while U.S. stocks have struggled to gain traction, markets in Europe have surged — even as the outlook for economic growth remains fragile and the region grapples to find a definitive way to deal with the ongoing Greek debt crisis.On Thursday, the Stoxx Europe 600, an index that tracks large and medium-sized companies in Europe, closed at a nominal high of 409.15, surpassing the previous high close of 405.50 set in March 2000 during the technology boom. Stocks in the region are getting a boost from a combination of European Central Bank stimulus, a weaker euro and low oil prices.The European index is up almost 20 percent this year. By contrast, the S.&P. 500 index is up 1.6 percent.Economic growth in Europe is projected to reach just 1.4 percent this year, compared with 3.1 percent in the U.S., according to the most recent forecasts from the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Economic Development.Still, stocks in Europe are jumping after the European Central Bank announced an expanded 1.1 trillion euro ($1.2 billion) bond-buying program in January to boost the region’s economy. The euro region, a net oil importer, is also benefiting from falling energy costs and a weakening euro.“There are some nice tailwinds to Europe,” said W. Janet Dougherty, a global investment specialist in Chicago for JPMorgan Private Bank.Bond yields in Europe are at historically low levels. The yield on the 10-year benchmark German government bond, which started the year at 0.55 percent, has fallen to just 0.16 percent.The combination of falling bond yields and the comparatively weak outlook for the region’s economy has also had the side effect of weakening the euro against the dollar. That gives a lift to the region’s exporters, making goods produced in Europe cheaper to overseas buyers. It should also draw tourists to the region.The euro has fallen 12 percent against the dollar since the start of the year. The euro is currently trading at $1.06 and many analysts expect it to fall to parity with the U.S. currency this year.Back in the U.S., Walgreens was one of the day’s biggest gainers in the market.The company’s stock jumped $4.94, or 5.6 percent, to $92.62 after it earnings surpassed analysts’ expectations. The drugstore chain said it will shutter about 200 U.S. stores as part of an expanded cost reduction push.Alcoa was among the losers. The company posted a first-quarter profit that beat Wall Street expectations, but its revenue fell short.Alcoa is striving to transform itself from an aluminum maker into a supplier for the auto and aerospace industries, making it less sensitive to swings in commodity prices. Analysts were disappointed by the outlook for the company’s rolled metal products, which include sheets used for drinks and food cans. Alcoa’s stock dropped 46 cents, or 3.4 percent, to $13.21.Bed Bath & Beyond also slumped after reporting earnings. The results for the housewares retailer fell short of the expectations of Wall Street analysts. Its earnings outlook was also less than forecast. Seth Basham, a Wedbush analyst, described the outlook as “somber” and said the company’s profitability was being threatened more and more by online competition.The stock dropped $4.22, or 5.4 percent, to $73.46.In energy trading, benchmark U.S. crude rose 37 cents to close at $50.79 a barrel in New York. Brent crude, a benchmark for international oils used by many U.S. refineries, rose $1.02 to close at $56.57 in London.U.S. government bond prices fell. The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note edged up to 1.96 percent.Gold fell $9.50 to $1,193.60 an ounce, silver fell 28 cents to $16.18 an ounce and copper edged down less than a penny to $2.73 a pound.In other energy trading on the NYMEX, wholesale gasoline rose 2 cents to close at $1.759 a gallon; heating oil fell 2.9 cents to close at $1.727 a gallon; and natural gas fell 9.1 cents to close at $2.528 per 1,000 cubic feet, the lowest since June of 2012.Advertisement