By BROOKS BARNESAPRIL 9, 2015
BURBANK, Calif. —  Warner Bros. and Lego are deploying Batman, Marty McFly, the Wicked Witch of the West and other movie characters in search of profits in the booming area of entertainment known as “toys to life.”Warner, which has three Lego movies in the works, on Thursday unveiled a gaming and toy initiative called Lego Dimensions. Lego will sell collectible movie-character mini-figures, which Dimensions players, using a Lego sensor base, can bring to life in a Warner-published video game. The companies plan to release Dimensions worldwide starting on Sept. 27.David Haddad, general manager of Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment, called Dimensions “a very ambitious project with enormous expansion opportunity.” To add heft, Warner has recruited character reinforcements from competing studios. Universal has licensed “Back to the Future” characters, for instance. Characters owned by 20th Century Fox are also expected to join Dimensions as it rolls out.Highlighting Mr. Haddad’s bullishness, Dimensions starter kits will cost about $100, or roughly 30 percent more than a competing product from Disney.AdvertisementBy some measures, Warner and Lego are late to this party. Activision Blizzard created the toys-to-life market in 2011 with its wildly popular Skylanders, which is now on a fourth incarnation and has generated $3 billion in sales. Disney arrived in 2013 with Infinity, which, analysts estimate, has sales nearing $1 billion, enough to turn around an entire Disney division. Infinity players mash together characters from Pixar, Disney and Marvel movies. A “Star Wars” version of Infinity is expected next.AdvertisementLate last year, Nintendo arrived with its own figurine-based game called Amiibo. As a category, toys-to-life sales in the United States totaled $671.3 million last year, a 64 percent increase from 2012, according to the NPD Group, a market research firm.But Dimensions signals the first time that a toy giant has arrived on this scene, said Michael Pachter, an analyst at Wedbush Securities. “There is still plenty of room for Warner and Lego,” he said. “This category is just getting started. You’ve got to imagine all the big toy franchises — Hot Wheels, Barbie, G.I. Joe, Transformers — looking very closely at this same opportunity.”Dimensions reflects two strategies at Warner. In October, Kevin Tsujihara, who took over as the studio’s chief executive in 2013, emphasized Lego as one of a handful of movie franchises receiving a cross-company push. “The Lego Movie,” released last year, took in $468.8 million worldwide. “Ninjago,” another Lego film, is scheduled to arrive next year, with two more brick-building movies in the pipeline.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Tsujihara, who previously oversaw Warner’s home entertainment division, including video games, has also promised “meaningful growth” from consumer products. “Disney’s success with Marvel and other franchises shows us what’s possible,” Mr. Tsujihara said at a recent investor presentation.Movie studios have struggled to gain a foothold in gaming, but Warner’s track record has been better than most. Warner Interactive, home to games like Batman: Arkham City and the Mortal Kombat series, is expected to generate $1.5 billion in gaming sales this year. Warner also has a popular line of traditional Lego games.Work on Dimensions started more than two years ago, according to Jeff Junge, a senior vice president at Warner who oversees all things Lego at the studio. “This is not a copycat of something else,” he said. “It’s important to Lego that Dimensions is bigger and better and richer and deeper.”What justifies the price? “The amount of playability, and the embedded brick-building,” Mr. Haddad said. “In that sense, it’s not very comparable to what else is out there.”Warner declined to say how much it spent to develop Dimensions.Along with the sensor pad, each starter kit will come with a Lego Batmobile and three Lego mini-figures: Batman, Wyldstyle from “The Lego Movie,” and Gandalf from “The Lord of the Rings” and “Hobbit” films. The kits will also include Lego bricks to build an elaborate “gateway” on top of the sensor pad, but players must accomplish tasks in the video game to unlock the building instructions.Add-on characters, vehicles and tools will be sold separately at prices ranging from about $15 to $30. Dimensions, intended for family play but aimed at boys ages 7 to 10, is available for various Xbox, PlayStation and Wii devices.Advertisement“A lot of details are still to come,” said Jon Burton, founder and creative director of Warner’s TT Games, which developed Dimensions. “We’re having to unveil it in stages, so we don’t just flood people and overwhelm them.”A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Warner Bros. and Lego Enter Market of Toys Brought to Life.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.