
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

APRIL 10, 2015
Jeffrey R. Immelt, the chief executive of General Electric, has plotted an escape for GE Capital from onerous regulation. He is offloading most of the conglomerate’s finance unit, which should allow it to ditch the tag imposed by watchdogs of being a systemically important financial institution, or SIFI. Big United States banks might fancy similar liberty, but they are more tightly hemmed in.GE Capital plans to shed about three-quarters of the $360 billion in assets it had on its balance sheet at the end of 2014. That will leave the unit with no deposits, little or no securitization inventory, a far smaller international business and hugely reduced debt needs, including for the commercial paper that caused so much angst during the 2008 financial crisis.Becoming far smaller, less reliant on short-term funding and less interconnected to the financial system domestically and internationally should mean that Washington is virtually certain to remove the company’s SIFI (pronouncded SIH-fee) designation, which comes with onerous additional regulation.The likes of JPMorgan Chase, Citigroup and Bank of America all chafe to some extent against the extra burden, although it comes with an arguably beneficial aura of size and safety. But they lack some of G.E.’s options. For starters, they don’t have a collection of nonfinancial businesses delivering higher returns to fall back on. G.E.’s industrial units provide that.AdvertisementA breakup is still possible for any of these banks. Analysts at Goldman Sachs suggested this year, for example, that chopping up JPMorgan might add value, though executives, led by its chief Jamie Dimon, argued that the costs and lost business would outweigh the benefits.Even if it happened, the biggest banks’ main business units might still merit SIFI designation independently. JPMorgan’s investment bank, for example, has $860 billion of assets. That’s in the same ballpark as Goldman Sachs, and similarly interconnected. JPMorgan’s retail bank holds some $455 billion on its balance sheet, making it huge in its own right.AdvertisementTo shed the SIFI burden, big American lenders would have to aim much closer to, say, $44 billion Jefferies. As radical as G.E.’s shift might be, shrinking a megabank that much would be far more so. G.E.’s path is a tough one to follow.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »