AdvertisementSupported byBy David Gelles and Michael J. de la MercedGeneral Electric is returning to its industrial origins. And some $36 billion of its cash is coming home as well.The conglomerate’s so-called repatriation of its foreign earnings, which will mean taking a $6 billion tax hit, is notable in an era when corporate America has bellowed loudly for an overhaul of the tax code. It’s especially notable when the one doing the repatriating is G.E., which has been criticized for its strategies to lower its tax bill.Among American multinational conglomerates, the company has drawn fire over its aggressive lobbying for tax breaks and a series of maneuvers that allow it to keep much of its earnings in other countries.Robert Willens, an independent corporate tax adviser, said he had spoken with several G.E. investors on Friday who, like him, were surprised that the company would pay such a large tax bill.“Given G.E.’s history of tax minimization, they too are skeptical that the company will actually be repatriating foreign earnings and incurring the U.S. taxes that such a repatriation would engender,” Mr. Willens said.But General Electric said that was exactly what it intended to do. The company expects to pay about $6 billion to the Internal Revenue Service in order to repatriate about $36 billion in foreign earnings from the sale of GE Capital.Paying the bill and then using the cash as part of the huge payout to shareholders — G.E. estimates that its actions can return $90 billion to investors, including through a $50 billion stock buyback — was worth the tax bill and not worth hoping for a change in the law.“We decided not to wait for tax reform,” Keith S. Sherin, the chairman and chief executive of GE Capital, said in an interview on Thursday.For G.E., it is simply the cost of exiting a complex and highly regulated business that has weighed on its earnings for years.Other American companies like eBay have brought home overseas cash, but General Electric is the largest and most prominent one so far.Still, given the uniqueness of General Electric’s situation, it appears unlikely that its move will now inspire other companies to repatriate billions of their own cash from overseas.“G.E.’s repatriation decision seems to be in conjunction with the major restructuring they are going through,” said J. Richard Harvey Jr., a professor at the Villanova School of Law. “Thus, I do not believe G.E.’s actions will encourage other companies to follow suit.”Behind the fight is the United States tax code, which levies taxes on money that American companies earn overseas and bring home at the standard rate of 35 percent. That stands apart from many other countries, which do not tax money earned abroad, leading many corporate chieftains to deride the situation as “double taxation.”Some companies have urged the federal government to enact a tax holiday, a temporary break that would allow them to repatriate the cash tax-free, as Congress did in 2004. (The Democratic staff of the Senate’s Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations found in 2011 that the move did little to advance its stated purpose of increasing hiring and research spending.)Bringing back the overseas cash, according to people briefed on G.E.’s plans who spoke on the condition of anonymity, was a decision born of the company’s decision to sell off most of GE Capital. Much of the money held overseas was part of GE Capital as part of a vast international lending business.Laws passed over the last two decades have enabled companies to defer paying taxes on those earnings, to the consternation of lawmakers and corporate critics.In the course of examining GE Capital’s assets, G.E.’s management and advisers ultimately decided that the cost of bringing back those overseas earnings was less than expected. At $6 billion, the tax bill proved to be “multiples” less than analysts had estimated, said one of the people briefed on the plans, who also spoke on the condition of anonymity.Moreover, selling off GE Capital meant that the overseas cash served a less important world.G.E.’s decision to pay a large tax bill, however, is less about an altruistic impulse to replenish the government’s coffers than it is a part of a broader financial strategy.“For public traded companies, this is all about managing expectations and managing earnings,” said Stephen E. Shay, a professor at Harvard Law School. “They care about the stock price. If you manage the earnings and get people to give you a better price earnings multiple, that’s much more important than cash tax savings.”What is more, a one-time tax charge might ultimately be less important for the company’s finances than the reformed balance sheet it will have after a series of complex deals to offload its finance operations“It’s a combination of taxes and how it runs through the financial statements that really make these issues important,” Mr. Shay said.And more than anything, the decision to pay the tax bill now is a signal that G.E. is not holding its breath for a change in corporate tax laws.“This reflects both their existential despair over seeing tax reform any time soon, and the increasing implausibility of their claims that in fact their offshore earnings will in fact ever be put to work in new foreign investments,” said Edward D. Kleinbard, a professor of law at the University of Southern California.Advertisement