
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
OCT. 17, 2015
How much do private equity investors pay to the firms overseeing their portfolios?You might think such a question would be a no-brainer. But in the supersecret world of private equity, it is anything but. That’s why John Chiang, the treasurer of California, recently called for legislation requiring full transparency in the reporting of fees charged by private equity firms.In an Oct. 12 letter to the California Public Employees’ Retirement System and California State Teachers’ Retirement System, Mr. Chiang urged both organizations to help him devise legislation to solve the problem of investors who “pay excessive fees to private equity firms and do not have sufficient visibility into the nature and amount of those fees.”You might think this issue has little to do with the rest of us. But tens of millions of people have entrusted their retirement to pension funds and other big firms with substantial stakes in private equity investments.Opacity is a byproduct of the secrecy permeating the $3.9 trillion private equity industry. Giants like Blackstone, TPG and the Carlyle Group have said that disclosing their agreements with investors would reveal trade secrets. Pension funds investing in these deals also refuse to disclose relevant documents, saying private equity firms would bar them from future deals if they did so.AdvertisementMore common knowledge is the “two and 20” that private equity firms typically earn: a 2 percent management fee, based on assets, and 20 percent of any profits generated by the private equity fund.AdvertisementBut private equity firms overseeing the companies they have bought on behalf of their investors impose a number of other charges. These include fees for transactions and legal advice, for monitoring a company’s progress while it is in a portfolio, and even for the payment of legal settlements involving private equity executives.Any fees paid by portfolio companies are essentially fees paid by private equity investors. But complexities in these deals’ fee structures help hide the full costs.The Securities and Exchange Commission has taken up the problem of hidden fees in private equity. On Oct. 7, it settled a case with Blackstone, contending that the firm had not told investors about certain monitoring fees it had been receiving or about discounts on legal fees that the firm received but that investors did not. Without admitting or denying the allegations, Blackstone paid $39 million to settle the matter.Some private equity firms acknowledge that their fee disclosures are incomplete. A recent regulatory filing by the industry giant Silver Lake Partners states that fees paid to “engage and retain senior advisers, advisers, consultants, and other similar professionals who are not employees or affiliates” will often not be disclosed to investors.A Silver Lake spokeswoman declined to comment.In other instances, costs are hard to spot because they are simply deducted from the proceeds of the sale of a portfolio company. If a cost isn’t clearly identified, then an investor is less likely to question it.Consider a recent independent auditor’s report from a 2006 fund operated by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company, or K.K.R. The confidential report, provided to investors, detailed the fund’s 2014 year-end results; it contained a schedule of investments, management fees and a lengthy discussion of how the firm values the portfolio companies in the fund.But only those readers who delved deep into the document’s footnotes learned that they were being charged $38.6 million to cover a legal settlement in a 2007 collusion case filed by shareholders of public companies taken private by Bain Capital, Blackstone, K.K.R. and a host of other big private equity firms.AdvertisementAs is typical among private equity deals, K.K.R.’s 2006 fund agreement required its investors to cover the costs of such legal settlements. K.K.R. settled the collusion matter in 2014.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rather than show the $38.6 million charge to investors as an expense in the financial statements, K.K.R. noted it on Page 35 of the 37-page report. The obligation would be paid to K.K.R. out of “realization proceeds allocable to the fund” upon the sale of fund investments, it said. The charge had been deducted from the portfolio companies’ values as presented to investors, the report said.Three weeks later, the firm sent investors a “transparency report” that did include, in a table, the amount they were being charged for the settlement. That report gave the amount as a line item and referred investors back to an August 2014 document for further information about the lawsuit.Kristi Huller, a K.K.R. spokeswoman, said in a statement that the firm could have called for capital from fund investors to cover the expense, but reimbursing K.K.R. for the cost through proceeds from portfolio sales was “more advantageous” to fund investors than “having to ‘come out of pocket’ for their share of the settlement.”Because the K.K.R. report is confidential, few beneficiaries of pensions invested in the 2006 fund knew that they were paying toward $38.6 million in settlement costs. These beneficiaries include schoolteachers in California, Kentucky, Louisiana and Texas, and public employees in Idaho, Illinois and Iowa.Comparing a fund’s investor materials with related regulatory filings can also raise questions about private equity firms’ fee reporting.Materials sent this year to investors in the K.K.R. 2006 fund contained a Dec. 31, 2014, table listing transaction and monitoring fees paid to K.K.R. by 14 portfolio companies. A portion of these fees, totaling $7.2 million, offset or reduced K.K.R.’s management fees.But some of the figures in the table are far lower than the fee amounts reported in regulatory filings issued by the same portfolio companies. An example is Samson Resources, a troubled oil and gas company. The K.K.R. 2006 fund report showed Samson paid transaction and monitoring fees of almost $1.1 million for the quarter that ended on Dec. 31, 2014. But public filings state that Samson is contracted to pay K.K.R. at least $2.8 million each quarter.Ms. Huller said that the 2006 fund document reflected only the expenses that were allocated to investors in that particular fund and that the additional money paid by Samson was allocated to investors in other K.K.R. vehicles. She added that K.K.R. provided extensive details to investors, demonstrating its commitment to transparency.AdvertisementBut K.K.R.’s investment advisory filings state that only some vehicles may receive offsets against the management fees. The 2006 fund table did not tell investors the exact amounts charged to different vehicles that receive fee offsets.This is just the kind of confusion the California treasurer probably wants to clear up. And one expert in the area thinks other states will follow.“In any other investment context, it would be uncontroversial that investment managers should disclose all the fees they extract from the corpus of their clients’ assets,” said Michael Flaherman, a former Calpers board member who researches private equity practices as a visiting scholar at the University of California, Berkeley. “Now that the public has woken up to the fact that this is occurring, I suspect we are going to see a lot more proposals like the California treasurer’s.”Pension beneficiaries and other private equity investors can only hope.The Fair Game Column on Oct. 18, about opacity in private equity disclosures, misstated Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company’s disclosures to investors regarding monitoring and transaction fees received and allocated to various K.K.R. investment vehicles. While the firm did not tell investors the exact amounts allocated to different vehicles that receive fee offsets, it did disclose the full amount of fees it was entitled to receive. The column, using incomplete information supplied by a K.K.R. spokeswoman, also described incorrectly K.K.R.’s disclosures regarding the amount paid to settle a class-action lawsuit. The exact amount was included in an expenses table that was part of a report sent to investors after the firm distributed a 2014 auditor’s report; it was not disclosed only in the notes to that report.A version of this article appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Challenging Fees Tucked in Footnotes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »