AdvertisementSupported byLettersTo the Editor:In Tyler Cowen’s column, “It’s Not the Inequality, It’s the Immobility” (Economic View, April 5), he asserts that, “Since 1973, for workers as a whole, wages have stagnated largely because of a severe productivity slowdown.”Having worked from 1969 until 2001 with exposure to a variety of jobs, I have seen nothing but huge rises in productivity throughout American industry. Widespread uses of computing, analyses, work planning and scheduling, quality improvements, etc., have been successfully integrated into American business, with large productivity improvements and the deletion of whole departments because of work consolidation.Whatever costs have devalued these productivity gains (for example, a terribly inefficient and ineffective legal system, the most costly medical system of any developed nation and a financial system that has run amok), we shouldn’t impugn American workers for the ineptitude of our leaders.Charles FinchHuntington Beach, Calif., April 5To the Editor:Tyler Cowen writes, “Wages have stagnated largely because of a severe productivity slowdown.”The facts simply do not support this statement. In “Who Stole the American Dream?” Hedrick Smith notes that productivity from 1945 to 1973 rose 96 percent and worker pay was up 94 percent. Not bad. But from 1973 to 2011, productivity was up 80 percent but worker pay rose only 10 percent.Workers have been battered by globalization and technology. State and federal government have enacted anti-worker legislation. Unions are weaker than they have been in 70 years. Corporations have the power, supported by international trends and government, to make workers take what they are given. The American social contract is no longer.Let’s not blame worker pay stagnation on lack of productivity. It’s much more deliberate and sinister than that.Fred RotondaroWashington, April 6The writer is chairman of the board of trustees for Catholics in Alliance for the Common Good.To the Editor:Prof. Tyler Cowen incorrectly dismisses inequality. When a C.E.O. is overcompensated for improving the company’s bottom line by suppressing head count and wages of lower-level workers, society loses. Customers don’t have enough workers to serve them. The quality of service is depressed by demoralized workers who can’t earn a living. Taxpayers must provide services to the workers when their wages are not sufficient for basic expenses. The company loses real, long-term value because the quality of its products and services is lowered; shareholders lose because of lost company value and stock dilution to overcompensate the executives. Overcompensating executives supposedly gets and retains the best people. When something goes wrong, however, these “best people” claim ignorance.We should lower compensation levels, get rid of the dead-weight executives who are just looking for the big payouts and open up the positions to a more diverse group. That would help fix immobility and inequality.Ronald ThomasNew York, April 6To the Editor:One of the greatest tools to provide mobility is affordable education. Higher education has become unaffordable for a significant segment of the population.Furthermore, income inequality is not based on productivity or value. Wall Street executives, C.E.O.s of health insurance companies and Big Pharma, football and basketball coaches of many major universities, and many others are grossly overcompensated while teachers, construction workers and many blue-collar workers are inadequately compensated.Income inequality is a major issue, and minimizing it only makes the solutions more difficult.Jerry FrankelPlano, Tex., April 5Letters for Sunday Business may be sent to sunbiz@nytimes.com. Advertisement