
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
APRIL 11, 2015
This interview with Andy Bryant, the chairman of the technology giant Intel, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Tell me about your early years.A. We lived in a small house in the Midwest. My dad was killed in the Berlin Crisis — he was a navigator on a bomber. There was no life insurance. My mom had to raise three boys. We grew up as latchkey kids. We never felt poor, but we always worked hard. I had paper routes, and in high school I actually had a night job in a factory.What kind of factory?It was a plastics molding factory. The thing I remember most is making fly swatters. This big press would make them and then it would open and the fly swatters would pop out, and you had to reach in, grab them and get your hand out before it slammed back again to make the next ones.And where did you go to college?University of Missouri for undergraduate. When I got out of school, it was 1972, and not particularly the best economic time. I got a job selling tools to stores. As an introvert, I would never have picked being a salesman as a career. I was pretty good at it, but I didn’t like it. Then I went to the University of Kansas to get an M.B.A.AdvertisementAnd your career plan then?I didn’t have a massive plan for my life. I was just going to get a good job and do meaningful work. When I was younger, I would have said maybe I’m going to coach sports in high school or teach, because I always did have a desire to teach. In my wildest dreams during grad school, I wanted to work for the Ford Motor Company. I love cars. But I didn’t think that would happen.Then, lo and behold, Ford came and interviewed at Kansas that year. It was the first time they’d been there. I was probably the fifth person the guy from Ford interviewed. I walked in and he said, “Will you move to Detroit?” I said, “Of course. Why else would I be here?” And he said, “You’re the only one who’s answered ‘yes’ to that question.” I got the job offer, and so I went to Ford. I joined Intel after five years in Detroit.What are some leadership lessons you’ve learned?The first key lesson was to be open and honest with your people. I’d seen many times that wasn’t the case. At a lot of companies, people are told, in effect, “Here’s the company line, and you have to support the company line.” And there were times I thought the company made the wrong decision. You can’t undermine the decision, but I developed an approach with my employees if they thought my way was right, but it was not what the company had decided.If they asked me about it, I’d say: “I want to give you two answers. I would have gone a different way, and here’s why. On the other hand, I want you to understand why the C.E.O. or whoever made this decision. I don’t know if I’m right and they’re wrong. What I know, though, is that they were empowered to make the decision. It’s a decision that can be defended, and our job now is to optimize that decision.” People always knew that they were going to hear what I really think. It created a good following.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I also believe that you have to help people develop. In typical annual reviews, you say, “Here’s how you did, and do these four things next year.” Mine never did. I would say: “I’m going to talk about how to develop you. And so to help you develop, I have to first know what you want to do with your career. If you tell me, ‘I want to leave Intel at some point and be a C.F.O. at a small company,’ I’ll help you figure that out. We’ll talk about the skills you don’t have and how you can gain them. We can also talk about the skills I need you to develop while you’re still here, to do better work for us.”So you start with what the person’s looking for and add to it what you need, and then you get better work from the person. The point is to actually help people achieve their goals, and at the same time improve their ability to do their job. It should be about developing people, rather than listing tasks for them accomplish in the coming year.AdvertisementHow do you hire? I’m very good at assessing talent from an M.B.A. school. I was always on our interview teams. I would ask, “Which classes were your best classes?” I knew enough about all the different subjects to find out if they learned something or if they just showed up and got a good grade.Hiring from another company is much harder because of the cultural differences. But I’ll look at your record of success and try to get a sense of whether you’ll fit in our culture, and I’ll try to make sure you understand what our culture is.I want to make sure you really want to be here. The bottom line is that if you don’t want to be here, you won’t be successful. It comes down to intellect, a track record of success and a desire to be at Intel. If I can find people who have those criteria, I can generally make it work.What career advice do you give people?People inside Intel often come to me for advice, and they might say, “I’ve got these two job offers inside the company. I don’t know which one to take.” I’ll say, “Which do you want to do?” They’ll say, “I want to do this one, but the other one is the next step up.”And I’ll say: “The thing I learned is that if you’re not doing the job you want to do, it will reflect on your performance. You’re better off to take a job you’re excited about than to do the one you think somebody wants you to do.” People are successful when they’re intellectually and emotionally engaged as opposed to when they’re checking the box.You can follow Adam Bryant on Twitter at @nytcorneroffice.This interview has been edited and condensed.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Don’t Just Check Off Career Boxes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »