AdvertisementSupported byBy Diana B. HenriquesOf all the regulatory concerns about the fund industry, the most persistent worries are perhaps those focused on money market mutual funds, which now hold more than $2.6 trillion in assets.That may be because there has already been a money-market fund crisis.In 2008, the share price of one fund fell below a dollar, “breaking the buck,” in Wall Street jargon. That set off a panic among some institutional investors and required the government to create a temporary insurance program.The memory of that episode still haunts regulators. Most of the official focus is on prime money funds, which take on slightly more risk to provide slightly higher returns. “Prime money market funds with a fixed net asset value remain vulnerable to investor runs if there is a fall in the market value of their assets,” the Federal Reserve said in its monetary report in February.But many of the people who manage these funds say they are puzzled by the continuing regulatory concern.For one thing, they say, the kinds of securities held by money market funds — high-quality, low-risk, short-term notes — would be considered a haven for investors during a crisis, providing enough demand to support liquid trading.Moreover, money market funds now operate under more stringent postcrisis regulatory rules: Money funds must take less credit risk and maintain more substantial cash cushions to cover redemptions than they did before the crisis.New regulations that go into effect next year will impose even more safety rules on money funds, which will be divided into institutional and retail categories. The institutional funds, which currently report net asset values of a dollar a share, will be required to start reporting daily changes in those values, while retail money funds will continue to report a dollar a share.“What I wonder is, why do regulators have so little confidence in the changes they have put in place to address these liquidity issues in money funds?” said Joseph K. Lynagh, who heads the cash management team at T. Rowe Price and manages more than $8 billion in money fund assets. “Everything I see suggests the industry is more robust than it’s ever been.”That may well be. But investors may still want to remember that while the precrisis money fund risks may have declined, regulatory worries have not. DIANA B. HENRIQUESAdvertisement