AdvertisementSupported byBy Carla FriedIn a world teeming with new varieties of mutual funds and exchange traded funds, the old-school balanced fund might seem like a Model T in a Tesla world.But classic balanced funds, which typically hold 60 percent or so in large-capitalization United States stocks and 40 percent in high-grade domestic bonds, don’t seem to be suffering from obsolescence.The five-year average annualized return for moderate allocation funds — Morningstar’s nomenclature for funds that take a balanced approach of owning stocks and bonds — is a none-too-shabby 8.9 percent.The granddaddy of balanced funds, the $90 billion Vanguard Wellington mutual fund, delivered a near 11 percent annualized gain over that stretch. Now in its ninth decade of operation, Vanguard Wellington offers a rare real-world, long-term track record through numerous bull and bear markets for both stocks and bonds, not some hypothetical back-tested result. A $10,000 investment at the fund’s start in 1929 has grown at an annualized pace of 8.3 percent and is now worth nearly $9 million.If the $10,000 had merely grown at the rate of inflation, it would be worth about $138,000 today. Wellington’s vanilla performance has been impressive.“Complexity does not necessarily outperform,” said Fran Kinniry, a principal in Vanguard’s investment strategy group.Research from Mr. Kinniry’s group shows that in the five years through 2013 the average annualized gain of hundreds of United States university and college investment endowment portfolios trailed a 60/40 balanced approach by about two percentage points, and over 10 years the 7.4 percent annualized gain for the balanced approach outpaced the gains of 90 percent of endowments. The model used by Vanguard divided the stock portion among domestic stocks (42 percentage points) and international equities (18 percent points).At the heart of their strategy, balanced funds give a slight overweight to stocks for their growth potential, which they couple with the ballast of bonds. That makes them a “classic hedge that will keep you out of a lot of trouble,” said John S. Osterweis, founder and chief investment officer of Osterweis Capital Management.That’s not faint praise. The ability to avoid bone-crushing losses in down markets is at least as important to long-term success as solid gains in rising ones. And that’s a central function of a balanced approach.MFS Investment recently examined the performance of a 60/40 portfolio during rolling 12-month periods from January 1976 through December 2013. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index represented the stocks in the portfolio and the Barclays U.S. Aggregate Bond Index stood in for bonds. There was just one 12-month stretch in which the balanced portfolio lost more than 25 percent and 16 periods when rolling 12-month losses were at least 10 percent.If you instead owned only stocks, you would have had to stomach 10 periods of losses of at least 25 percent and 46 stretches when the loss was at least 10 percent. For the 37-year period, the 60/40 approach delivered about 90 percent of the return of an all-equity portfolio with one-third less volatility.David W. Connelly, director of global product at MFS and author of the study, notes that the less bumpy ride of a balanced portfolio can help loss-phobic investors stay the course. The automatic rebalancing of the portfolio also helps.“You’re not letting your winners run too long, and you’re buying lower when markets are down,” Mr. Connelly said. The upshot can be some virtuous inertia, as balanced fund investors seem less inclined to chase performance. Mr. Connelly found that in rolling 12-month periods for the five years through 2013, balanced fund investors had the lowest redemption rates among five broad types of funds, which also included domestic stock, foreign stock, municipal and taxable bond funds.WHILE balanced funds are certainly a viable option, there are trade-offs. Depending on your age, investment goal and appetite for risk, a static stock target of 60 percent may not be your personal Goldilocks portfolio.You’re also likely to have a somewhat xenophobic portfolio, as classic balanced funds tend to traffic mostly in domestic stocks. The Vanguard Balanced Index fund is 100 percent domestic. Vanguard Wellington has 8 percent of its assets invested in foreign stocks. The $82 billion American Balanced fund and the $12 billion Dodge & Cox Balanced fund currently have 7 percent invested abroad. One outlier: The $4.2 billion T. Rowe Price Balanced fund recently had more than 20 percent of assets invested abroad.Moreover, owning bonds and stocks in separate funds or E.T.F.s (or individual issues for that matter) makes it easier to harvest tax losses, said Gary Schatsky, a financial adviser in Manhattan. It’s also easier to calibrate the risk of shifting interest rates. “I can choose a short-term bond fund for a client, but with a balanced fund, chances are I am going to get a bond portfolio with a longer duration,” he said. The longer a fund’s duration, the bigger its price declines when interest rates rise. The current average duration for moderate allocation funds in Morningstar’s database is near five years.The bond side of the balanced fund may be a headwind for returns over the next decade. That’s because the current yield for high-grade bonds foretells future returns. With the 10-year Treasury note currently yielding about 2 percent, it is mathematically impossible for high-grade bonds to deliver the same returns as in decades past, when yields were at least twice as high.But that doesn’t change bonds’ classic airbag role during market crashes. In the 2007-8 bear market that sent the S.&P. 500 down more than 55 percent, the average balanced fund lost just 40 percent, because high-grade bonds rose in value during the stock drop. Those were big losses but not nearly as big as in most pure stock funds.“To argue that balanced funds can’t work is to argue that diversification doesn’t work,” said Ben Carlson, an institutional money manager, who writes extensively on the value of diversification at his blog, A Wealth of Common Sense.Still, some strategists say it’s wise to lower expectations. Based on current market valuations, Research Affiliates, a money manager in Newport Beach, Calif., forecasts a 1 percent inflation-adjusted return over the next 10 years for a domestic 60/40 portfolio.The economics team at Vanguard isn’t as dour, noting that a global balanced fund could generate inflation-adjusted returns in the range of 3 percent to 5 percent over the next decade. (Vanguard assumes that of the stock portion, 18 percentage points are in foreign stocks, and of the bond portion eight percentage points are in foreign bonds.) That’s just for the next decade. As Wellington’s long track record attests, for those who avoided moving their investment through feast and famine, keeping it simple has had a payoff.“Old-fashioned tends to be seen as a bad thing, but a balanced approach is a classic solution that continues to work,” Mr. Osterweis said.Advertisement