AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim GrayStock markets in big emerging-market countries like China, Brazil and Russia have been sagging. But the returns have been splendid for their oft-overshadowed smaller siblings — frontier markets like Kazakhstan, Kenya and Kuwait.Mutual funds that invest in the frontiers have surged, according to Morningstar, returning an annualized average of 5.9 percent over the three years through March. By contrast, emerging-market funds have lost an annualized average of 0.3 percent in the same period.Frontier markets, as the name implies, are at the outer edge of publicly traded investments. They are among the least developed stock markets, though not necessarily in countries with the least developed economies. “People make the mistake of thinking of the frontiers as the poorest countries, but the definition is really about capital-market access,” said Oliver D. M. Bell, manager of the T. Rowe Price Africa & Middle East fund.Some of the countries in MSCI’s Frontier Markets Indexes do have low per capita incomes, including Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Vietnam. But the group also includes Argentina, a middle-income country that has imposed controls on foreign investment, and Kuwait, whose per capita gross domestic product nearly equals that of the United States but whose stock market is still developing.However you define frontier markets, American investors and investment companies have been flocking to them. New investor cash is rushing in — the amount invested in frontier mutual funds and exchange-traded funds nearly doubled over 2013 and 2014, according to EPFR Global in Cambridge, Mass. And more frontier mutual funds and E.T.F.s have been introduced. Out of 15 frontier offerings assessed in a recent Morningstar report, 10 began in 2012 or later.“Fund companies are always looking for the next thing to promote,” said Patricia Oey, a senior analyst at Morningstar and the author of the report.Yet frontier mutual funds and E.T.F.s may not have a place in everyone’s portfolio. “It can be hard to know what you’re getting with a frontier fund, so it can be hard to know how it should perform and what role it will play in your portfolio,” said Todd L. Rosenbluth, director of E.T.F. and mutual fund research at S&P Capital IQ.Short performance records mean that investors will not be able to see, for example, how a fund held up during a bear market like that of the 2008-9 financial crisis, he said. What’s more, frontier mutual funds and E.T.F.s are as varied as the countries they invest in. Some buy only in the frontier markets, while others also hunt in smaller emerging markets like Peru and the Philippines, he said. Some also layer on companies that are listed in the developed world but operate mostly in frontier countries.Even index-tracking E.T.F.s can vary surprisingly, Mr. Rosenbluth said. Witness the iShares MSCI Frontier 100 E.T.F. versus the Guggenheim Frontier Markets E.T.F. The top three country stakes in the iShares E.T.F. are stocks in Kuwait, Argentina and Nigeria, while the top three in the Guggenheim offering are Chile, Argentina and Colombia, with Chile accounting for a hefty 41 percent of the assets. (MSCI, the index provider for iShares, classifies Chile and Colombia as emerging markets, not frontier markets.)“I can’t come up with two things with the same name that could be any more different than these two E.T.F.s,” Mr. Rosenbluth said.Many frontier countries have been enjoying something of a peace dividend, said Mr. Bell at T. Rowe Price. A generation ago, quite a few were seized by some sort of conflict: civil war in Sri Lanka, border battles between Pakistan and India, the bloody breakup of the former Yugoslavia. “About 50 countries in the ’90s had conflicts,” he said. “Today, there are about 10. When there’s not conflict, investment and economic growth can happen.”PART of the appeal of frontier markets is diversification. The countries tend to be insulated from the ups and downs of the developed world and even from one another, said Pradipta Chakrabortty, manager of the Harding Loevner Frontier Emerging Markets Portfolio. “Take two countries in the same region — Nigeria and Kenya,” he said. “Nigeria sold off last year, but Kenya was up about 30 percent. This is different from developed markets. They pretty much move in the same direction.”Professional investors often track whether groups of stocks rise and fall in tandem — whether their returns are correlated. They aim to combine groups that zig and zag independently, thus damping the volatility of a portfolio’s average return. Frontier markets are not closely correlated with the others, and that can be an advantage: A study published in 2013 in The Journal of Portfolio Management found that adding a frontier E.T.F. to a portfolio diversified across developed and emerging markets achieved that.“If you look at the individual countries, frontier markets are risky,” said Kuntara Pukthuanthong, one of the study’s authors and a finance professor at the University of Missouri. “But when you build a diversified portfolio, because the market integration of frontiers with the other markets is lower, the risk of the whole portfolio is lower.”Another element of the frontier markets’ appeal is their economic potential. “The growth in the future should be in these markets,” said Laura E. Geritz, manager of the Wasatch Frontier Emerging Small Countries fund. “A lot of that stems from demographics — the populations are young — and cheap labor costs. To me, an ideal frontier market is a low-G.D.P.-per-capita country like those in Africa and less-developed Asia, as well as Ecuador and Cuba.”Yet there is no guarantee that economic growth will translate into investment wealth. Vanguard’s studies have found little correlation between growth and stock-market returns, said Christopher B. Philips, who leads the client service team for the institutional investment group at Vanguard.“There should be a long-term link, but in the shorter term, the relationships are zero,” he said. “In China, for example, we found that despite its strong growth, it has had a zero percent total return of its equity markets since inception.”Mr. Philips did not know why the hoped-for relationship had not arisen. He speculated there might be a disconnect between stocks and the broader economies. “The securities you can invest in differ from the drivers of the economy,” he said. In Nigeria, for example, oil propels much of the growth, but state-run companies and foreign multinationals control much of the production.Even with the increased attention and investment, frontier markets continue to present unique risks, especially of political upheaval. Nigeria, for example, has faced an insurgency in its northern reaches, led by the militant group Boko Haram, while Argentina has feuded with United States courts and creditors over its default on sovereign debt. “Every frontier market has its idiosyncratic risks — politics, reliance on a single commodity, or currencies,” said Jay A. Jacobs, a research analyst with Global X Management Company, sponsor of the Global X Next Emerging and Frontier E.T.F.Even basic data on companies in some of these markets can be difficult to find. Taizo Ishida, lead manager of the Matthews Emerging Asia fund, recalls being surprised at the scarcity of information when he first visited Bangladesh four years ago, but he says the situation has improved. “Now I can see information on the companies,” he said. “That gives me more confidence.” Partly as a result, Bangladesh represents the fund’s biggest country stake — 13.9 percent on Dec. 31.Adam J. Kutas, manager of Fidelity Investments’ Latin America fund and its Emerging Europe, Middle East and Africa fund, said he saw the frontier markets as analogous to small-capitalization stocks in the developed world — riskier than large caps and midcaps but worth including in a diversified basket of investments.“Frontiers shouldn’t be your core investment,” he said. “But they can give you higher return potential and reduce the volatility in a portfolio.”Advertisement