By PAUL J. LIMAPRIL 11, 2015
The key to success for many stock funds this year has been simple: Buy health care.While the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index ended the first quarter up just 0.6 percent, shares of health care companies gained 7 percent, continuing a trend that has been quietly unfolding for years.As a result, some of the best-performing stock funds lately have been those with larger-than-average stakes in pharmaceuticals, biotech, managed care and other medical-related industries that collectively make up around 15 percent of the broad market.“Health care is probably the area I’ve added the most in since I took over this portfolio a year ago,” says Joseph B. Fath, manager of the T. Rowe Price Growth Stock fund, which has one-fifth of its assets in the sector. The fund soared 6 percent in the first quarter, beating 93 percent of other large growth funds, according to Morningstar.Portfolios that focus exclusively on health care stocks — especially biotech companies — posted even better returns. The First Trust NYSE Arca Biotech exchange-traded fund is already up 16 percent since the start of January and 54 percent over the last 12 months.Advertisement“In the last four years, the health care sector has been in one of the great stealth sector bull markets I’ve ever seen,” said Doug Ramsey, chief investment officer for the Leuthold Group, an investment management firm based in Minneapolis.AdvertisementSince March 2011, health care stocks have generated total returns of nearly 150 percent, doubling the gains of the broad market. At the same time, biotech shares have more than quadrupled in value. To some, this rally is beginning to resemble the run that technology stocks enjoyed in the late 1990s, though this sector has received far less attention.What accounts for health care’s resurgence? Money managers cite several developments in recent years.For starters, the wave of patent expirations that plagued big pharmaceutical companies in the 2000s appears to have subsided, allowing the industry’s earnings to stabilize. “Once pharma started to get healthy, it became easy for portfolio managers to look at biotech,” said Alex Winogradoff, head of health care equities research at TIAA-CREF.BIOTECH has always had a reputation for being high risk. “These companies always seemed to be raising money but never seemed to generate cash flow,” Mr. Winogradoff said.But that perception is beginning to change, as several big companies, including Amgen, Biogen and Gilead Sciences, “are generating enormous amounts of cash flow” and profits, he added.Two of the biggest-selling drugs last year belonged to biotech companies. Humira, which is AbbVie’s autoimmune treatment, generated $12.5 billion in sales in 2014 while Gilead’s relatively new hepatitis C treatment, Sovaldi, brought in $10.3 billion.Gilead is now among the top holdings of Thornburg Value, which recently held 21 percent of its assets in the health care sector.AdvertisementConnor Browne, co-manager of the Thornburg Value fund, noted that it invested in three types of companies: basic value plays, emerging franchises and consistent earners. He said the fund originally invested in Gilead as an emerging franchise, but the stock had since been reclassified as a consistent earner.Over the last five years, the company’s earnings have grown nearly 40 percent annually. As a result, even though the stock has gained 34 percent a year since 2010, Gilead shares trade at a modest price-to-earnings ratio of less than 10 because of those faster-growing profits.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Of course, the same can’t be said for the entire health care sector.Robert S. Burnstine, co-manager of the Aston/Fairpointe Focused Equity fund, said, “Three years ago, health care was a great place to be.”Back then, he said, 27 percent of his portfolio was held in the sector, and those health care stocks traded at an average P/E ratio of about 13, based on forecast forward 12-month earnings.But “health care prices generally aren’t cheap anymore,” Mr. Burnstine noted.Today he keeps only about 15 percent of his fund’s assets in health stocks, and the shares he owns have a projected P/E of about 18.This reflects a similar trend in the broader health care universe. Medical stocks in the S.&P. 500 currently trade at an average P/E of 18.8, according to Bloomberg, versus 17.7 for the broad market.Mr. Browne agrees that “on an absolute basis, we’re getting up there in terms of valuation levels.” However, relative to other non-economically sensitive areas of the market, “valuations look cheaper while growth opportunities look better,” he said.Shares of consumer staples companies — makers of basic household goods like toothpaste and soap — trade at an average P/E ratio of 20. Yet consumer sector earnings are expected to grow 7 percent annually over the next three to five years, versus nearly 10 percent for health care.Michael S. Tung, co-manager of the Turner Medical Sciences Long/Short fund, said “there’s still value to be found in health care.” He points to areas such as the specialty pharmaceutical business, where mergers and acquisitions are heating up.AdvertisementHe cautions, though, that valuations are significantly higher among small biotechnology stocks. “Some of the valuations are absolutely obscene,” he said. “Some of these companies are being priced as if every drug is going to get approved.”Still, many investors think health care’s run can keep going, at least in the short term.The low-interest-rate environment continues to drive an M.&A. boom in this sector, driven by aggressive cost-cutters like Valeant Pharmaceuticals International.The Canadian pharmaceutical giant recently won a bidding war against Endo International to buy Salix Pharmaceuticals, which specializes in drugs for gastrointestinal disorders, for nearly $11 billion in cash. This comes on the heels of a failed bid late last year for the Botox maker Allergan, which was snagged by a rival, Actavis.Until acquisitions and earnings growth subside — or until another sector of the economy excites Wall Street enough to start absorbing all the new money heading into health care — this rally is likely to keep going, Mr. Winogradoff of TIAA-CREF said.“Fundamentally,” he said, “we are probably in the sixth inning of a nine-inning game.”A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page BU15 of the New York edition with the headline: This Quarter’s Elixir: Health Care.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.