AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim GrayThe bull market rumbled past its sixth birthday in March. Despite that marathon climb, fund managers are still finding underappreciated stocks. The stewards of three of the top-performing funds of the first quarter grabbed gains in the health care sector and Japan.Thomas R. Vandeventer, portfolio manager of the Tocqueville Opportunity fund, calls health care “the engine behind the portfolio for the last couple of years.” Investments in the sector accounted for about a third of his fund’s assets at the end of 2014 — more than double the share of its average peer, according to Morningstar.Why make that big bet? Mr. Vandeventer said he believed that genetic science was continuing to increase the ability of companies to create drugs that can zero in on particular cancers. He called that development “one of the great revolutions we’ll see in our lifetimes.”Mr. Vandeventer started to manage the fund in 2010, and one of the first health care stocks he bought was Pharmacyclics, the maker of a drug for a cancer called chronic lymphocytic leukemia. “When we looked at the drug, it checked a lot of boxes for us,” he said. “It’s taken orally and once a day, and it has better side effects” than competing treatments.In March, Pharmacyclics received a takeover offer from AbbVie at $261 a share. Mr. Vandeventer said he had begun buying when the stock was trading at about $25. “That was a home run for the fund,” he said.Mr. Vandeventer is unusual among active managers in that his fund holds a high number of stocks — 238, compared with 148 for the average actively managed fund tracked by Morningstar. He does that for diversification: Holding more stocks means more protection from losses for his shareholders, he said. And while he may seem to be trudging along with an overstuffed pack, his holdings pale next to the number of companies in his benchmark index, the Russell 2500 Growth Index.Following so many stocks can be challenging. He has developed a quantitative screen he runs regularly against the thousands of mid- and small-capitalization stocks that he might buy. If the screen highly ranks a company that the fund does not own, Mr. Vandeventer starts digging to see what he might have missed.The fund, which has an expense ratio of 1.3 percent, returned 11.3 percent in the first quarter, compared with 0.95 percent for the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index. It returned an annualized average of 18 percent over the five years ending March 31.HEALTH CARE bets have lately helped the BlackRock Mid-Cap Growth Equity fund, too. Like Mr. Vandeventer, its managers have overweighted the sector. Health care accounted for nearly a fifth of the fund’s assets at the end of February, and its top holding was a health care stock, United Therapeutics.Based on its price/earnings ratio, United Therapeutics looks cheap considering the growth rate of its earnings, said Lawrence G. Kemp, one of the fund’s co-managers. United Therapeutics, known for its treatment for pulmonary arterial hypertension, was recently trading at a P/E of 28.2, compared with an industry average of 47.4, according to Morningstar.Mr. Kemp and his co-managers have made an even bigger bet on consumer discretionary companies, which represented nearly 40 percent of assets at the end of February. Among their favorites is Netflix. The company leads its industry in technology and content spending, creating a high barrier for competitors, said a fund co-manager, Philip H. Ruvinsky. Netflix has built a dominant market position in the United States, and Mr. Ruvinsky said he expected the same abroad.Another entertainment holding is the Madison Square Garden Company, which owns sports teams, including the New York Knicks and Liberty basketball teams; cable channels; and other venues besides its arena. Mr. Ruvinsky said the market mistakenly valued the company based on current earnings, failing to account fully for the value of its “trophy assets.” The Knicks, for example, are most likely worth billions, given that the Los Angeles Clippers sold last year for $2 billion, he said.In March, the company, which has a market capitalization of $6.4 billion, announced plans to separate its media and its sports and entertainment businesses into two companies. “When the separation becomes effective, we believe MSG TV networks will trade on its earnings potential, and the sports and entertainment businesses will trade on the value of the assets,” Mr. Ruvinsky said.The BlackRock managers separate their holdings into three baskets: superior, durable and periodic growers. Netflix goes in the superior basket, and Madison Square Garden into the durable one, Mr. Ruvinsky said.The fund returned 11.4 percent in the first quarter, and its A shares carry a net expense ratio of 1.39 percent. It returned an annualized average of 14.9 percent over the last five years.AS in health care, big changes are happening in corporate Japan. But the impetus there is not new technology, said Archibald Ciganer, portfolio manager of the T. Rowe Price Japan fund. It is a new approach to corporate governance paired with an improving economy, he said.“For the past couple of decades, Japanese companies haven’t been run in an aggressive manner,” Mr. Ciganer said. “Either they weren’t run for shareholders or deflation was pressuring them so much that they couldn’t be aggressive.”Mr. Ciganer said two developments changed the way Japanese companies operate: growth in the share of Japanese stocks owned by foreigners and a government, led by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, committed to vanquishing deflation and reinvigorating the economy. “This could be a once-in-a-generation turning point,” he said.Foreign investors like T. Rowe Price demand more transparency and responsiveness than Japanese companies typically provided, Mr. Ciganer said. When outsiders represented a smaller share of the market, those demands could be ignored. Now Japanese companies are hewing more to United States and European norms of governance, he said.Consider Japan Tobacco, one of the fund’s top 10 holdings. “It was one of the first companies to be in this new wave of Western-style corporate governance,” he said. “They stepped up the dividend payout, and they started buying back stock.”Even holdouts have begun to change, like Fanuc, a maker of industrial robots. “Before, they wouldn’t even meet investors — they wouldn’t have results meetings or calls,” Mr. Ciganer said. Lately, the company has said it will establish an investor relations department and start returning more cash to shareholders, he said.Mr. Ciganer took over the fund at the end of 2013. He had worked as analyst on it for the previous seven years, and he does not predict major changes in its investment style under his management. “We have a responsibility to our clients to not do anything revolutionary,” he said.He has been selling off holdings to shrink the number of stocks; the fund held 75 at the end of last year. He said he believed that a more concentrated portfolio contributes to active management, adding that when managers do not concentrate, their funds can end up looking too much like their benchmark indexes. “If you’re going to be a closet indexer,” he said, “people might as well buy an E.T.F.”The fund, with an expense ratio of 1.05 percent, returned 13 percent in the first quarter. It returned an annualized average of 7.9 percent over the last five years.Advertisement