AdvertisementSupported byBy Conrad De AenlleWhen you buy foreign stocks, you get stakes in foreign companies and also the currencies they do business in. If you have been invested abroad over the last year or so, there is a good chance that you have been happy with the first part. But the currency exposure? Probably not.The dollar rose 9 percent against a standard basket of currencies in the four quarters through March, leaving it close to a 12-year high and curtailing or even eliminating the gains on foreign stocks when expressed in dollars.You can limit susceptibility to currency fluctuations by choosing certain managers or types of funds, but you may not want to. Because big moves tend to be reversed over time, investment advisers say the best way to handle currencies in a long-term portfolio is to all but ignore them.“If you’re buying a fund for the long haul, currency should sort itself out back to neutral because currencies ebb and flow,” said Todd Rosenbluth, director of fund research at S&P Capital IQ. “You should be cognizant of currency movements, but I don’t think they should be a major factor when choosing an international fund.”But the rally in the dollar has persuaded many investors to buy hedged E.T.F.s — exchange-traded funds that use derivative instruments to nullify the impact of currency movements. Assets in these funds, which are offered by WisdomTree Investments, BlackRock’s iShares and Deutsche Bank’s X-Trackers, more than tripled in the 12 months through March, to $47 billion, according to Morningstar, mainly through new investment. Assets in all international stock E.T.F.s rose 26 percent during that span.“There have been heavy flows into those products, and they have significantly outperformed their actively managed peers because most funds that invest abroad don’t hedge their currency exposure,” said Patricia Oey, an analyst at Morningstar who specializes in E.T.F.s.The iShares Currency Hedged MSCI Japan E.T.F., for example, rose 16.4 percent in the four quarters through March, compared with 12 percent for Japan mutual funds and 10.6 percent for the unhedged iShares Japan E.T.F. The outperformance was sizable for hedged Europe E.T.F.s, too.Over longer periods, hedged and unhedged E.T.F.s have performed roughly the same, Ms. Oey said, but the hedging process adds to a fund’s costs, putting a drag on returns for buy-and-hold investors, so she considers hedged E.T.F.s better as trading vehicles. Even then, they may not be suitable for many investors.“They’re good for a short-term trade, but it’s probably more trouble than it’s worth,” she said. “You could have a lot of taxable capital gains, and there are commissions, and you might get it wrong” and buy at a bad time.Daniel Gamba, head of Americas institutional business for iShares, the BlackRock E.T.F. subsidiary, which has five hedged products, agreed in a blog post on BlackRock’s website that they “may not be necessary for your broad, long-term building block positions.” They could make sense, however, he said, “if you take a more active view or hold more precise international exposures.”Jeremy Schwartz, director of research at WisdomTree, thinks that hedged E.T.F.s make useful long-term holdings. He called the widespread belief that they do not “the biggest misconception there is when people address this topic.”“There’s no model that says currencies produce an expected positive return,” he said, looking at the long-term impact, or lack of it, from a different angle. “So what is the point of taking currency risk?”The point to Ms. Oey is that some markets, including ones like Japan for which hedged E.T.F.s have been popular, feature an inverse correlation between stocks and currency values. By eliminating currency risk, investors may be increasing risk over all, she said, although she noted that the inverse relationship between currencies and stocks does not apply to all markets.With global stocks performing well and the dollar strong, owners of hedged E.T.F.s are having their cake and eating it, too. But what happens when feast gives way to famine and the dollar starts giving up its gains? That’s when manager discretion can come in handy.“The good thing about actively managed mutual funds is that they can always take a hedge off, but a hedged product is always hedged,” Mr. Rosenbluth said. Referring to the dollar’s strength, he added, “I don’t have the expertise to tell you when that stops, but at some point international currencies should do well.”But most fund managers readily concede that they do not have the expertise, either, so they do not make currency calls or hedge their exposure. They would rather look for solid companies to invest in based on the usual criteria — growth prospects, valuation, financial and managerial strength — and consider the currency backdrop only to the extent that it influences those factors.“As a general rule we do not hedge,” said Jamie Doyle, co-manager of the Causeway International Value fund. One reason, he said, is that “it’s often difficult to know what the underlying hedge should be.”It would be easy enough to figure out with one of his holdings, KDDI, a Japanese mobile phone service provider whose sales are almost entirely in yen, he noted, but another one, Toyota, has costs and sales all over the world. Toyota itself hedges, Mr. Doyle added, and is long the dollar, so anyone who hedged a position in Toyota could be more exposed to the dollar than an investor who owned the same stake in an American company.Bryan Lloyd, co-manager of the Harding Loevner International Equity fund, doesn’t hedge, either. Even so, he makes it a point to ensure that companies he is contemplating buying have a rough balance between the currencies of their sales and costs.“We spend a fair amount of time analyzing what exposures businesses might have,” Mr. Lloyd said. “If we find a material mismatch that may affect a company’s financial strength, we won’t own it.” He is especially wary of banks for which the currencies of its loans and deposits are out of whack.Nick Kaiser, manager of the Sextant International Fund, finds that currency effects balance out in other ways. With the euro depressed, the yachts and motorboats that the French company Beneteau makes are more affordable for Americans. But Beneteau’s vessels are just as expensive for anyone paying in euros, he pointed out, and with the euro cheap because Europe’s economy is struggling, seafarers there are less likely to be in the market for one.SOME portfolio managers do hedge. Evermore Global Advisors uses derivatives called forward contracts to eliminate exposure, much as hedged E.T.F.s do. David Marcus, Evermore’s chief executive, acknowledged Mr. Doyle’s concern, that the hedging activity of some companies in a portfolio, combined with the manager’s, could create too much dollar exposure from an individual holding. But any imbalance across a portfolio is unlikely, Mr. Marcus said.“If you do not hedge, then you are implicitly making a currency call,” he said. “We want to rise or fall based on our ability to find compelling investments,” not because of foreign-exchange movements, he said.That is the logic underpinning hedged E.T.F.s, although they do not use active stock picking to fill their portfolios. Ms. Oey still contends that it is more sensible for someone with a long horizon to invest abroad through more conventional vehicles.“For long-term investors,” she said, “it’s probably better just to go with a good mutual fund with a good manager or with a cheap, broadly diversified E.T.F.”Advertisement