By ANNA BERNASEKAPRIL 11, 2015
As the price of crude oil fluctuates, why some countries are faring much better than others.A 50 percent drop in the price of crude oil in a matter of months is a highly unusual occurrence. But that’s what happened from the beginning of July 2014 to the end of this March. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index rose 5 percent in that period, but individual parts of the market reacted in very different ways.Energy stocks, battered by worries about weaker earnings, followed the price of oil downward: Since last July, the S.&P. 500 energy index has lost 22 percent.Then there are the big winners: consumer discretionary stocks. When oil prices drop, gasoline prices do too, and many consumers have more money to spend. Investors have bid up stocks of companies like Nike and Walt Disney on the assumption that people will be funneling more cash into such nonessential products and services as apparel and entertainment. And so, since July 1, 2014, the S.&P. 500 consumer discretionary index has increased 12 percent.Among exchange-traded funds, or E.T.F.s, the trend has been similar. For instance, the largest oil futures fund, the United States Oil Fund, or USO, has dropped 57 percent since July, while the Consumer Discretionary Select Sector SPDR Fund, or XLY, has posted a 12 percent gain.AdvertisementLately, some investors have been buying oil E.T.F.s in anticipation of an oil price recovery. In the six months through March, USO had a net inflow of almost $2.9 billion compared with an outflow of $216 million during the same period a year earlier. “When E.T.F. investors see falling oil prices, their response is to buy oil and bet that the average consumer is heading to Disneyland for a vacation,” said Matt Hougan, president of the analytical website ETF.com.Those expectations could be thwarted by consumer behavior, however. Retail spending figures suggest that consumers may not be spending very much of their oil windfall after all.AdvertisementIf that continues, consumer discretionary stocks could fall out of favor. And at some point, the oil market is likely to trend upward. But betting on the timing of all of this is risky behavior indeed.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page BU15 of the New York edition with the headline: Consumers Thrive as Oil Shares Dive.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.