AdvertisementSupported byOff the ShelfBy Paul B. BrownSocially responsible investing in its basic form doesn’t go far enough for some people. After all, countless mutual funds already avoid shares of companies that produce addictive or dangerous products — like tobacco, alcohol or firearms.But suppose you want to go beyond investing in things that do no harm and prefer owning shares in companies that have a chance to make a significant difference in the world.Such an approach is beginning to be known as “impact investing.” The idea is “that capital can be deployed to make a good or provide a service that offers positive social impact, while generating some level of financial return.” That definition comes from the authors Keith A. Allman and Ximena Escobar de Nogales in their book “Impact Investment” (Wiley Finance).Mr. Allman, who works for Deutsche Bank, and Ms. de Nogales, the head of impact management for Bamboo Finance, a private equity firm that invests in developing markets, have created a how-to handbook for people interested in investing this way.Parts of the book won’t appeal to many general readers. The authors apparently decided to write it for people who will need to justify these kinds of investments to their boards’ finance committees or for wealthy individuals considering buying a stake in these companies before they go public.But those of us who are simply interested in potentially buying public shares of such firms can skip the discussion of things like term sheets, payout mechanisms and anti-dilution protections. We can concentrate on the authors’ solid discussion of how to assess the potential impact of companies and the pros and cons of investing in them.The authors advise starting with a look at the company’s mission. It’s important to understand what the firm is trying to achieve. You then can examine its short- and intermediate-term goals for getting there: How is the organization investing — in terms of human resources, material and capital — to reach its goals?From there you study the company’s “outputs and outcomes.” That requires a little explanation. “Outputs” refers to the direct results of the company’s activities. For a health care company in the developing world, it would be the number of patients treated, for example. “Outcomes” is the authors’ shorthand for the difference that the company makes in someone’s life. In the case of the health care company, it could be a drop in the mortality rate.All investments come with risk, but impact investing comes with more than most. The authors point out that in addition to worrying that your investment may fall in value, you need to be concerned that the “the social mission can impede financial viability. Many social entrepreneurs create business plans that can be viewed as weaker from a business functionality point of view because the social mission is too aggressive.”They add that because the geographic focus is frequently outside the developed world, “impact investments often have heightened risks” which range from political instability to foreign exchange exposure.Finding investments that can make a difference and make you money without an unreasonable amount of risk is difficult.THOMAS J. ANDERSON, a financial adviser, has set an equally daunting challenge for himself in “The Value of Debt in Retirement” (Wiley).He talks about debt for older people but not in the way you might expect. He says many retirees need more of it.“My goal is to reframe the conversation around debt in general and highlight its potential benefits as well as the potential risk of being debt-free.” (The italics are Mr. Anderson’s.)While being rid of all debt — especially mortgage debt — is often a goal people set when they do retirement planning, Mr. Anderson argues that the idea may make their financial lives harder than they have to be.He writes that paying off your mortgage — especially if you do so in one lump sum as you enter retirement — reduces your liquidity and therefore your financial flexibility. In addition, you lose the potential tax break that mortgage interest provides.He goes on to argue that there may be situations in which you may choose to take on what he calls “enriching debt,” by which he means borrowings “you could pay off tomorrow, but choose not to. You have the money in the bank, but are making a proactive, strategic choice to have the debt.”Suppose you are in the 25 percent tax bracket, he says, and own your home outright. You might choose to take out a mortgage at say 4 percent. Its after-tax cost is 3 percent. If you can invest in a portfolio that generates more than a 3 percent after-tax return, you are ahead of the game.Similarly, if you have stocks with a brokerage firm, you could borrow against your portfolio — pledging those stocks as collateral — and use that loan to pay off other, more expensive, debt. If your brokerage loan costs you 6 percent and you use it to pay off credit card debt of 18 percent, you have cut your interest rate by two-thirds.He does not flash warning signs as often as I would have liked, but Mr. Anderson does point out that taking on debt is always risky. Your circumstances may change — your health may decline precipitously in retirement, let’s say — making it difficult to repay your mortgage, or the value of the collateral you pledge falls and the brokerage firm requires you to put up more. If you are unable to do so, they could sell your securities at a loss to pay back the loan.Like “Impact Investing,” the ideas here are intriguing, but potentially dangerous. They are worth thinking about, very carefully, before you try to put them into practice.Advertisement