By ALEXANDRA ALTERAPRIL 10, 2015
John Green still vividly recalls the opening line of a stinging critique that his editor, Julie Strauss-Gabel, delivered after reading an early draft of his novel “The Fault in Our Stars.”“The first sentence was, ‘I really enjoyed reading the first draft of this promising and ambitious novel,’ and the rest was 20 pages of her tearing it apart,” Mr. Green said. “Her editorial letters are famous for their ability to make you cry and feel anxious. They’re very long, very detailed and very intimidating.”One of her more memorable barbs described an overwrought climactic scene as reading “like bad John Green fan fiction,” Mr. Green recalled. He changed the ending.Mr. Green didn’t suffer an ego bashing in vain, at least. In its revised and polished final form, “The Fault in Our Stars,” a novel about two teenagers with cancer who fall in love, became a monster hit.AdvertisementThree years later, it’s still on the best-seller list, with more than 18.5 million copies in print worldwide. It was adapted into a feature film, and unleashed a wave of realistic, contemporary teenage novels, changing the plot paradigms of popular young adult fiction after more than a decade of books about wizards, vampires and werewolves.AdvertisementIn the cosseted world of children’s book publishing, getting an editorial letter from Ms. Strauss-Gabel, the publisher of Dutton Children’s Books, is the literary equivalent of winning a golden ticket to Willy Wonka’s chocolate factory. It virtually guarantees critical or commercial success, and often brings both.She doesn’t hand out many of them. “I am naturally exceedingly picky,” she said. “If I’m not in love with someone’s writing at the sentence level, then I’m not going to sign up the book.”Her knack for spotting and developing talent is apparent on this week’s New York Times young adult best-seller list, where novels that she edited hold five of the top 10 spots. She has edited 22 New York Times best sellers.With her stable of blockbuster writers, Ms. Strauss-Gabel has become one of the most influential players driving and shaping a surge in young adult fiction, a shift that is not only transforming the publishing industry but changing American reading habits.Over the last decade or so, as publishers have been battered by sagging print sales, shrinking retail space and e-book pricing wars, children’s books have become one of the industry’s last bastions of sustained growth. Eight of the top 10 best-selling print books were children’s and young adult titles, with Bill O’Reilly and Gillian Flynn standing out as the anomalous authors of adult books. In 2014, revenue from young adult and children’s books rose by 21 percent over the previous year, while adult fiction and nonfiction fell by 1.4 percent, according to the Association of American Publishers.Ms. Strauss-Gabel’s unconventional taste and eye for idiosyncratic literary voices have helped her identify and build up some of young adult fiction’s biggest breakout stars.In addition to Mr. Green’s books, which have more than 30 million copies in print worldwide, she’s shepherded best sellers like Ally Condie’s “Matched” series, which has 3.3 million copies in print in North America. She has shaped the careers of emerging stars like Nina LaCour, Stephanie Perkins and Andrew Smith, whose surreal novel, “Grasshopper Jungle,” won comparisons to Kurt Vonnegut.AdvertisementSome prominent adult authors have gravitated toward her, too, including John Grisham and Meg Wolitzer, who have each published multiple novels with Dutton.“When Julie buys a book, she’s not buying the book, she’s buying an author for their career,” said Don Weisberg, the president of Penguin Young Readers, which operates 10 children’s imprints, including Dutton.Mr. Green has worked with Ms. Strauss-Gabel for nearly 12 years. His first two books sold modestly, until “The Fault in Our Stars” lifted those early books onto best-seller lists.“In a publishing world that maybe doesn’t have as many long-term relationships as it used to, she invested a lot of time in me before I ever earned a profit,” Mr. Green said. “I’ve never written a book without Julie. I wouldn’t know how to do it.”Mr. Green’s rapid ascent in many ways reflects the growing dominance of young adult literature in contemporary pop culture. Last year, “The Fault in Our Stars” was inescapable, as bookstores created entire John Green sections near their cash registers, the movie’s soundtrack invaded the airwaves and people flocked to the film, which grossed $125 million in the United States. The novel, with its hardcover, paperback and movie tie-in editions, held three of the top 10 spots for the best-selling print books of 2014, according to Publishers Weekly.In its latest financial earnings report, Penguin Random House, which operates nearly 250 imprints globally, cited “The Fault in Our Stars” as the company’s biggest hit last year, and said that “major best sellers, especially in the field of children’s books” had helped produce a 25 percent increase in revenue in 2014.This year, in anticipation of the forthcoming film adaptation of Mr. Green’s 2008 novel, “Paper Towns,” Dutton is printing 1.5 million copies of a movie tie-in edition. To put that figure in perspective, the year’s most highly anticipated new adult fiction title, Harper Lee’s second novel, “Go Set a Watchman,” will have a print run of two million copies.Teenage-oriented publishing took off in the 1960s and 1970s with best-selling books by Judy Blume, S. E. Hinton and Lois Duncan. The children’s category began to grow and evolve rapidly in the late 1990s. The breakout success of J. K. Rowling’s Harry Potter books, which attracted hordes of adult readers and now have sold more than 450 million copies worldwide, paved the way for other crossover hits. They arrived one after another — “Twilight,” “The Mortal Instruments,” “The Hunger Games,” “Divergent” — and started a stream of blockbuster Hollywood franchises, which in turn brought older readers to the books.AdvertisementThe lines dividing adult and children’s literature have grown increasingly blurry, as young adult authors experiment with dark, challenging and sophisticated story lines and narrative structures. Adults aged 18 to 44 made up 65 percent of young adult book buyers in 2014, according to a recent Nielsen Books & Consumer survey, and men accounted for 44 percent of young adult book buyers in 2014, up from 31 percent in 2012. And 65 percent of adults buying young adult books reported that they were purchasing the books for themselves rather than for children.As the appeal of young adult literature expands beyond its intended demographic, blistering debates have broken out on the web over whether it’s appropriate for adults to read children’s books. Some see the rapid rise of young adult fiction sales as a potential threat to American literary culture. Not only are a lot of grown-ups reading children’s books, it seems they’re reading them instead of adult books.“This has been a huge change in the dynamics of the book market,” said Carl Kulo, Nielsen’s director of book analytics. “We’ve seen declines in adult fiction at the same time we’ve seen rises in the volume of juvenile fiction.”Not surprisingly, a growing number of best-selling adult authors are angling to capture a slice of that booming commerce. The list of big-name authors who are extending their brands into children’s literature is long and growing longer: James Patterson, Harlan Coben, Jodi Picoult, Sophie Kinsella, Carl Hiaasen, David Baldacci and Mr. Grisham, to name a few.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Books about adolescence have a kind of urgency,” said Ms. Wolitzer, who published “Belzhar,” a young adult novel, with Dutton last year and has signed to write two more books for Ms. Strauss-Gabel. “The young adult fiction that’s being written now is so wild and different and interesting, you can’t generalize about it.”Ms. Strauss-Gabel, 42, remembers the precise moment she realized children’s books could be just as sophisticated and challenging as adult literature. She was in eighth grade, already reading grown-up books, when her earth science teacher gave the class a trivia challenge for extra credit. The question — where is the East Pole? — stumped her. She learned it was in “Winnie the Pooh,” and read the classic for the first time. “It was an utter revelation to me,” she said. “I fell in love with the book. It’s an extraordinary work of literature.” In what she calls “utterly crazy serendipity,” 25 years later, she became the publisher of Dutton, which publishes “Winnie the Pooh” in the United States.Ms. Strauss-Gabel grew up in White Plains, where her father worked as a forensic photographer and her mother taught home economics. She majored in English at Amherst College, where she met her husband, David Matthew Feldman, a puppeteer who writes and performs for children’s TV shows. They now live in Bedford Hills, N.Y., in a cheerful, chaotic house with their daughter, 5, and son, 9.Even in college, when most English majors tackle Proust and Tolstoy, Ms. Strauss-Gabel was obsessed with children’s books. She took a course in children’s literature and a seminar on the Brothers Grimm, and wrote her senior thesis on fairy tale tropes in young adult literature. After getting a master’s degree in education from Harvard, where she took classes in comparative literature and folklore, she got her first job in publishing at Hyperion Books for Children.She became publisher of Dutton in 2011, and right away, it was clear this was going to be a different sort of imprint. She whittled down the list from about 50 titles a year for children of all ages, to about 10 books, with a focus on high-quality young adult fiction.Advertisement“There was nobody doing just what I do now 20 years ago,” she said. “It would have been unheard-of for a children’s publisher not to do picture books.”In person, Ms. Strauss-Gabel is not nearly as terrifying or intimidating as her legendary editorial letters. She has a collection of Winnie the Pooh paraphernalia in her office, including stuffed animals and old picture books. She speaks softly and has an infectious enthusiasm. She takes an almost maternal pride in her authors’ success and views her literary brood as an extended family. She and Mr. Green speak a few times a week, or daily if he’s working intensely on something, he said. “At the end of the day, I’ll read her what I wrote that day,” he said.Like exasperated children, her writers occasionally commiserate about her exacting standards. A few years ago at a dinner in Los Angeles in honor of the grande dame of young adult fiction, Ms. Blume, several of Ms. Strauss-Gabel’s authors sat together, and the conversation inevitably turned to her editing style.“It turned into a therapy session about Julie and her editorial letters,” said the novelist Adam Gidwitz, one of the authors there, who summarized her editorial letters this way: “She goes through the book and tells me everything that’s terrible about it in very insightful ways.”As publisher, Ms. Strauss-Gabel oversees every stage of a book’s life cycle, from shaping the manuscripts with intense editing to weighing in on cover designs and marketing tag lines (she was very particular about the precise shade of blue and the wispy, handwritten lettering on “The Fault in Our Stars”). She has just one other editor on staff, and often works on five manuscripts at a time.“When I work with Julie, I know it’s going to be a big book,” said Jodi Reamer, a literary agent at Writers House who represents Mr. Green and Ms. Condie. “She can really build an author’s brand. She brings a level of editing to it that most others don’t.”But the field has become much more competitive lately. Close to 12,900 young adult books were published last year, up from nearly 6,000 in 2004, according to Bowker, which tracks the publishing industry. Hardly a week passes without some new young adult franchise being branded as the next “Harry Potter” or “Hunger Games.” With each breakout hit, a wave of imitations follows.“You go through vampires, you go through dystopian, you go through contemporary, you go through fantasy,” Ms. Strauss-Gabel said. “The last thing you want is an author saying, ‘That’s what’s selling right now, so that’s what I’m going to write.’ That’s the point at which a trend gets icky.”AdvertisementFor such a small list — this year, Dutton will publish a mere eight titles — Ms. Strauss-Gabel’s books are strikingly diverse, covering science fiction and dystopian worlds, psychological suspense and works of social realism. She favors realistic, contemporary fiction, though lately she has been acquiring more memoirs and nonfiction.“We’re in an era where the definition of a young adult book is completely up for grabs, and people are willing to reinvent it,” she said. “There’s no one saying, ‘You can’t do this in a book for children.’ ”Sometimes she’ll see potential in a manuscript that no one else will touch. Several years ago, the literary agent Sarah Burnes sent her a chapter of Mr. Gidwitz’s debut book. It had obvious problems.“It was an illustrated children’s book, in which the children are decapitated by their parents,” said Mr. Gidwitz, who was working as a substitute teacher in Brooklyn at the time.But Ms. Burnes knew that Ms. Strauss-Gabel was a fan of dark fairy tales, and thought she might appreciate the book’s weirdness. When the three of them met, Ms. Strauss-Gabel said there was no market for the book but suggested that Mr. Gidwitz rewrite the story as a novel for older children. She offered to read it and give him notes, with no promise of publishing it. A year and three excruciating drafts later, she bought the book.The novel, “A Tale Dark & Grimm,” turned into a best-selling trilogy that has more than 500,000 copies in print. It was listed as one of the best children’s books of 2010 by Publishers Weekly and School Library Journal.Mr. Gidwitz still remembers the pep talk Ms. Strauss-Gabel gave him before the book was published. She wasn’t just hoping for a best seller; she aimed to make the book a children’s classic. “She said, ‘Our goal is for this book to never go out of print,’ ” he said. “She has insanely high standards.”Mr. Gidwitz added that as much as he dreaded receiving one of Ms. Strauss-Gabel’s editorial letters, he has come to depend on them.“Whenever I get a letter from her, I go through this mourning process,” he said. “The first day, I rage all day. The second day, the tears set in, and I say she’s right, and I’m a terrible writer. The third day I say I’m not a terrible writer, but I can’t write this book. The fourth day, I get to work.”A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Barbed Pen of Best Sellers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.