AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — Martin Winterkorn will resign as chief executive of the company that holds a majority of Volkswagen shares, the holding company said on Saturday, ending his formal influence over the carmaker he ran for eight years until an emissions cheating scandal led him to resign last month.Even after quitting as chief executive of the carmaker on Sept. 23, Mr. Winterkorn continued to hold the title of chief executive of Porsche Automobil Holding SE, which owns more than half of Volkswagen’s voting shares.As head of the holding company, Mr. Winterkorn may have continued to exert influence behind the scenes at Volkswagen as it tried to cope with the consequences of the scandal. Under pressure from German regulators, Volkswagen said this week that it would recall 8.5 million diesel cars in Europe equipped with software that is intended to cheat on emissions tests.Mr. Winterkorn, 68, has denied knowing about the illegal software, but many critics have said his autocratic management style and his determination to make Volkswagen the world’s largest automaker may have contributed to the crisis. His resignation will take effect at the end of October, Porsche SE said. The company did not explain why Mr. Winterkorn had not stepped down sooner.Porsche SE holds shares in Volkswagen owned by descendants of Ferdinand Porsche, who designed the Volkswagen Beetle. Hans Dieter Pötsch will replace Mr. Winterkorn as chief executive of the holding company, Porsche SE said. Last month, Matthias Müller, who ran the Volkswagen division that makes Porsche sports cars, replaced Mr. Winterkorn as chief of Volkswagen.Mr. Pötsch, 64, is chairman of the supervisory board of Volkswagen and the carmaker’s former chief financial officer. He is regarded as being close to the Porsche family shareholders and, like them, is Austrian.A steep decline in the price of Volkswagen shares since the emissions cheating was revealed has reduced the value of the Porsche family shares by billions of euros. Nevertheless, Wolfgang Porsche, chairman of the supervisory board of the holding company, praised Mr. Winterkorn, saying his work had been “highly professional.”There are tentative signs that the damage to Volkswagen’s reputation has begun to hurt sales, possibly leading to job cuts.The company said on Friday that sales of Volkswagen brand cars fell 4 percent worldwide in September from a year earlier. The decline was primarily because of a collapse of sales in Brazil and Russia, which was probably not related to the scandal.Still, sales of Volkswagens in Europe and the United States rose at a slower rate in September than the overall automobile market. Even before the scandal, Volkswagen had been losing market share in Europe, where it is the largest carmaker by far.To cut costs, the company is considering reducing the number of temporary workers it employs, Reuters reported on Saturday, quoting a Volkswagen labor representative.Advertisement