By THE NEW YORK TIMESAPRIL 12, 2015
Here are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week.On Tuesday, the Commerce Department will release data on retail sales in March. Economists are looking for a rebound in store sales after a weak performance in recent months, despite sharply lower gasoline prices that have left more cash in consumers’ pockets. The consensus on Wall Street is for a 1 percent gain, driven by strong auto sales and higher discretionary spending. Even with the exclusion of volatile car and gasoline purchases, core retail sales are thought to have increased by 0.4 percent. If the numbers come in below those somewhat optimistic forecasts, it will only add to the mystery of what consumers are doing with their savings on energy. Savings rates have been rising, which provides one answer, but if weak retail sales growth persists, it will sap overall economic gains in the first half of 2015. —Nelson D. Schwartz JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo will be the first big banks to report their first-quarter earnings, on Tuesday morning before the market opens. On the consumer side, the continued sluggishness in mortgage lending is expected to serve as a drag on results. But JPMorgan is expected to have benefited from a pickup in trading activity during the first few months of the year. That should also help Bank of America, which reports its financial results on Wednesday, and Citigroup and Goldman Sachs, which are set to report on Thursday. All of the banks with big trading operations have been struggling over the last few years as low interest rates and new regulations discouraged trading activity. —Nathaniel PopperChina’s economy is expected to show further signs of weakening when the country reports first-quarter gross domestic product figures on Wednesday. Economists are forecasting that growth slipped to 7.1 percent in the January-to-March period, the slowest quarterly expansion since 2009. The country’s economy has been steadily cooling. G.D.P. growth was 7.4 percent in the first quarter of last year and 7.3 percent in the final quarter of 2014. —Neil GoughMario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank, is expected to argue at a news conference in Frankfurt on Wednesday that a new bond-buying program has been helping to revive the eurozone economy. At the news conference after a regular meeting of the central bank’s governing council, Mr. Draghi is also likely to discuss how policy makers will deal with the increasingly dire financial situation in Greece. —Jack EwingOn Friday, the Labor Department will report on the Consumer Price Index in March. Economists are looking for a 0.3 percent rise in the overall index, with a 0.2 percent rise in the core index, excluding more volatile food and energy prices. Later on Friday morning, the University of Michigan will release its initial reading of consumer sentiment in April.  —Nelson D. SchwartzA version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: JPMorgan and Wells Fargo Earnings; March Retail Sales.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.