AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.10 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.02 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $300 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Florida State Board of Education, $258.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYBoulder Valley, Colo., School District, $250 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Hamilton County, Tenn., $65 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Houston Higher Education Finance Corporation, $77.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, $87.1 million of debt securities. Competitive.Sumner County, Tenn., $69.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYAlpine, Utah, School District, $61.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Kansas Development Finance Authority, $61.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Virginia, $280.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYMultnomah County, Ore., School District, $243.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New York City Transitional Finance Authority, $200 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAlabama Public School and College Authority, $131.1 million of advance refinancing and new money bonds. Raymond James. Arizona Board of Regents, $53 million of Northern Arizona University System revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Bucks County, Pa., $57.6 million of water and sewer revenue bonds. Boenning & Scattergood. Buffalo and Erie County, N.Y., Industrial Land Development Corporation, $95.7 million of debt securities. Jefferies.Buncombe County, N.C., $127.5 million of limited obligation bonds. Robert W. Baird.Seneca Valley School District, Pa., $57.9 million of debt securities. Janney Montgomery Scott. San Dieguito Union High School District, Calif., $114.7 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Golden Empire Schools Financing Authority, Calif., $153 million of floating rate notes. Wells Fargo Securities.Cleveland, $128.5 million of water revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Forsyth County, Ga., $145 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Fort Bend County, Tex., $143 million of road and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. Halifax Hospital Medical Center, Fla., $113.5 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities. Huntsville, Ala., $62 million of general obligation warrants. Raymond James. Long Beach, Calif., $65.2 million of harbor revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Memphis, $132.3 million of general obligation bonds. Raymond James. Michigan Finance Authority, $214.2 million of hospital revenue and refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Michigan Finance Authority, $225 million of school loan revolving fund revenue bonds. Bank of America. Western Michigan University, $109 million of general revenue and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. Missouri Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $150 million of debt securities. RBC Capital MarketsMonongalia County, W.Va., Building Commission, $50 million of refinancing and improvement revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Moreno Valley, Calif., Unified School District, $100 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Western Nassau County Water Authority, N.Y., $73 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America. Nebraska Investment Finance Authority, $65 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities. New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $160 million of Princeton University revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.New York City Transitional Finance Authority, $650 million of future tax secured bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, $775 million of debt securities. Bank of America.Oakland Alameda County Coliseum Authority, Calif., $79.7 million of lease revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Oregon Facilities Authority, $92 million of University of Portland revenue bonds. Bank of America. Oregon, $92.1 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Santa Paula, Calif., Utility Authority, $66.6 million of wastewater revenue bonds. FirstSouthwest.Keller Independent School District, Tex., $106.1 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Texas Public Finance Authority, $82.2 million of debt securities. Ramirez. Texas, $130.6 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Baylor Scott & White Holdings, Tex., $550 million of taxable bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. University of Pennsylvania Health System, $367 million of hospital revenue bonds. Bank of America.University of South Florida, $75.6 million of refinancing certificates of participation. Wells Fargo Securities. Upper Santa Clara Valley Joint Powers Authority, Calif., $64 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets. MultiCare Health System, Wash., $360 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities. West Travis County, Tex., Public Utility Agency, $55.1 million of revenue bonds. Bosc. Advertisement