AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberWhen James Oseland was editor in chief of Saveur, the food magazine, he had dinner one night with Maria Rodale, the chief executive of the publisher Rodale. There, at ABC Kitchen near Union Square, they ran into Alice Waters, the acclaimed chef and champion of sustainable food.“We took it as a pretty amazing sign,” Mr. Oseland said last week at Rodale’s office in Midtown Manhattan. Ms. Rodale recalled Mr. Oseland saying it was “just like being blessed by the pope.”On Tuesday, more than a year after that meeting and nearly eight months after Mr. Oseland surprised the food world by announcing that he was leaving Saveur for Rodale, he and the publisher are introducing a magazine called Organic Life. The magazine is a rebranding of Rodale’s Organic Gardening and will focus more on the organic lifestyle — food, well-being and home — and less on soil and plants.“Things have really made this pretty seismic shift in the past five to 10 years especially, and yet there was no one, consistent, all-encompassing media brand that answered the need for this very, very hungry readership,” Mr. Oseland said. “Organic Gardening was a wonderful brand, and our goal is to capitalize on that and make it even richer.”Mr. Oseland, also a judge on “Top Chef Masters” on Bravo, worked at Rodale in the early 2000s as managing editor of Organic Style, now defunct. He had served as top editor at Saveur since 2006.The revamped Organic Life has higher-quality paper stock, with brighter photographs, than its predecessor. The first issue features articles on yoga, walking and “holistic air travel,” along with organic gardening. The magazine, which will be published every two months, has also recruited a “brain trust” of advisers that includes the chefs Mario Batali and Tom Colicchio and the former congressman Dennis Kucinich.“This is about reaching new readers, definitely reaching new advertisers,” said Scott D. Schulman, who became president of Rodale in the fall of 2013.The best-known brand that advertised in Organic Gardening was arguably Subaru, which markets vehicles for outdoor enthusiasts. Organic Life, on the other hand, has ads from Whole Foods and Chipotle.Like Rodale, which publishes a number of health and wellness magazines including Runner’s World and Prevention, companies are increasingly rebranding their titles to draw more readers and advertisers. Just last week, Travel & Leisure, a Time Inc. publication, introduced a redesigned magazine that covers fashion and other aspects of the travel experience. The men’s magazine Maxim, known for its often crude humor and photographs of scantily clad women, is taking a more sophisticated tack under its new editor, Kate Lanphear.Rodale, a private publisher, does not release revenue figures. But Ms. Rodale, whose grandfather, J. I. Rodale, founded Organic Gardening in 1942, says the company is in the black. And while the circulation of most Rodale magazines, including Men’s Health and Bicycling, have decreased slightly, Organic Gardening is faring better. Its circulation rose 6.8 percent last year, to 320,085 from 299,744 in 2013, according to the Alliance for Audited Media.Rodale itself is undergoing a broader transformation. It recently introduced an e-commerce site, Rodale’s; an online learning site called Rodale U; a site on clean eating; and Zelle, a women’s running site. There are also plans to introduce a video network.“We are profitable and we’re healthy,” Ms. Rodale said, “and we’ve been at the forefront of making the changes that need to happen for us to stay that way.”Advertisement