AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinJohn Dickerson will be the new host of the CBS Sunday morning program “Face the Nation” after Bob Schieffer retires this summer. Mr. Schieffer announced the news on Sunday morning on his show.Mr. Dickerson, 46, has been working at CBS News for six years and became its political director in 2011. Mr. Schieffer, the host of “Face the Nation” for 24 years, announced his retirement in an emotional address at Texas Christian University, his alma mater, on Wednesday night.The “Face the Nation” handoff was quick and peaceful, especially compared with the transition last summer at the NBC News show “Meet the Press.” Last August, Chuck Todd took over “Meet the Press” after several tortured weeks of rumors and speculation that he would replace David Gregory, who left before giving a farewell on TV.David Rhodes, the president of CBS News, said he had been talking with Mr. Schieffer for some time about his retirement. By the time the longtime CBS anchor was prepared to make his remarks at Texas Christian, “we got to a good place with John,” Mr. Rhodes said.“One thing I’m really proud of as an organization is we got to the announcement of Bob’s retirement and John’s appointment without a whole lot of public Sturm und Drang,” he said in an interview on Sunday.Mr. Dickerson has been a guest host on “Face the Nation” and appeared on the program 83 times, but is still a relative newcomer to television. He has never been the host of a television program and has a background in print journalism. He’s the chief political correspondent at Slate, and previously worked at Time magazine.Mr. Rhodes said it was Mr. Dickerson’s reporting background that made him appealing for the program.“That’s our basic brand,” Mr. Rhodes said. “The on-air presentation is informed by the reporting we do, and we want all these broadcasts to reinforce that.”On the program, Mr. Dickerson told Mr. Schieffer, “It’s not just your example as an anchor but as a daily reporter that I have to follow.”Mr. Dickerson will have a big platform: “Face the Nation” was the No. 1 Sunday morning public affairs program for the first quarter of 2015. His family has also had a long tradition with CBS. His mother, Nancy Dickerson, was the first female correspondent for the CBS News Washington bureau.“This just underlines what I’ve been saying for years,” Mr. Schieffer, 78, said on his program on Sunday. “I find myself these days working with the children of my friends.”Advertisement