By RAPHAEL MINDERAPRIL 10, 2015
ANDORRA —  In the clubby world of banking here in this tiny Pyrenees principality, where money comes and goes under only the partial purview of European regulators, there had long been whispers: Was there something fishy about one of Andorra’s five privately held banks, Banca Privada d’Andorra?Andorran judiciary officials had also raised questions. Whether for lack of expertise or energy, their investigations went nowhere.It took the long arm of American law to finally crack down. Criminal investigators for the Treasury Department last month published a report accusing B.P.A., as the bank is known, of laundering hundreds of millions of dollars on behalf of some of the world’s most powerful criminal gangs.Andorran authorities are now taking action against B.P.A., including the arrest of Joan Pau Miquel Prats, the bank’s chief executive.Advertisement“Building up a legal case over money laundering has its difficulties,” Gilbert Saboya Sunyé, Andorra’s foreign minister, said in an interview. “You have to understand that such investigations are often very dependent on information that the investigating country doesn’t have.”While some Andorran banking executives are adopting an “I told you so” attitude, local depositors whose B.P.A. accounts are now semifrozen are exasperated with the seemingly free rein given to the bank’s management and two brothers, Higini and Ramon Cierco, who were chairmen of the bank and whose family controlled it.“I just can’t believe we couldn’t stop earlier a bank from handling so much crime money,” said Carmen Panadero, who described herself as a housewife.200 MilesGERMANYParisSWITZ.FRANCEITALYANDORRAMediterraneanSeaSPAINAPRIL 12, 2015
With the five banks and their combined assets of about 16 billion euros, or $17 billion, being so integral to the economy of Andorra, which has only 80,000 residents, it might not be surprising that the government gained little traction in past efforts to investigate B.P.A.In late 2012, for instance, an Andorran court froze about €200 million held with B.P.A. by Venezuelan clients tied to the government of Hugo Chávez. Last year, however, an Andorran judge unblocked the Venezuelan accounts because there was no conclusive evidence of the alleged money laundering that had prompted the action.AdvertisementThe B.P.A. scandal is the latest evidence that under the Obama administration, “the U.S. has increasingly taken it upon itself to go after white-collar crime, even where the actors are all overseas,” said Patrick O’Donnell, a partner at Harris, Wiltshire & Grannis, a Washington law firm. “I think it also reflects a U.S. government perspective that overseas regulators aren’t doing quite enough.”Whether any B.P.A. bank officials go to trial, the severity of the American claims has forced Andorra’s government to take measures to ring-fence B.P.A. from the rest of the financial sector.After setting up an emergency credit line of up to €100 million for B.P.A.’s corporate clients, the Andorran authorities are now hoping to sell B.P.A.’s legitimate assets — split from whatever illicit money it is accused of handling for corrupt Venezuelan government officials, Russian and Chinese criminal rings, and the Mexican Sinaloa drug cartel.A spokesman for the Treasury Department’s crime-fighting unit could not discuss the next steps. American officials, however, visited Andorra shortly after publishing their concerns.For more than a year before the American report, Spain had been investigating Banco Madrid, the Spanish subsidiary of B.P.A.The Spanish inquiry by Sepblac, the agency that fights money laundering, stemmed from earlier arrests of two men in separate cases. One is Gao Ping, a Chinese businessman, who is now in a Spanish prison awaiting trial in a case of fraudulent trade shipments between Spain and China. The other is Andrey Petrov, a Russian accused of bribing Spanish officials on behalf of Russian criminal gangs in connection with property transactions.A spokeswoman for Spain’s Economy Ministry said that the day before the United States report was published, Sepblac had informed Banco Madrid of the results of its investigation. Sepblac’s findings, however, have not been made public.In the wake of the Treasury Department accusations, Banco Madrid declared bankruptcy last month.Andorra, wedged between France and Spain, is not a member of the 28-nation European Union, but it falls under the supervision of some European regulators. Andorran officials stressed that Andorra had passed four reviews conducted in recent years by Moneyval, the anti-money-laundering committee of the Council of Europe.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Like other Andorran banks, B.P.A. had weathered the euro debt crisis, emerging from it with a €20.5 million profit in 2013. Its 2011 takeover of Banco Madrid also made B.P.A. the first Andorran bank to get a Spanish banking license.Advertisement“The crisis of 2008 was a sort of blessing for Andorra,” said Oriol Ribas, vice chairman of one of the country’s other financial institutions, Andbank. “Many overseas clients came to us because they were disgusted with what their banks had sold them.”But in the case of B.P.A., United States authorities say, some clients came to the bank for its willingness to look the other way.Some rival bankers suggested that B.P.A.’s aggressive pursuit of clients had, in fact, long raised concerns within a close-knit financial community, in which a small number of extended families dominate the banking industry. B.P.A. was evidently considered something of a black sheep.It is “a bank that has long been seen here as having lower moral values,” Mr. Ribas said. “Certainly none of the other banks was looking to merge with them.”Xavier Cornella Castel, the chairman of Andorra’s banking association, said that “it’s clear that this bank had a level of risk tolerance higher than the rest of the sector.”B.P.A.’s controlling family, the Ciercos, also owns gas stations, hotels and other real estate inside and outside Andorra. Ramon Cierco is a director of F.C. Barcelona, the soccer club.The brothers have been ousted, alongside the other members of B.P.A.’s board, by the Andorran government. But they have not been charged, and the American report did not name any B.P.A. executives as part of its claims of criminal wrongdoing.In a statement, lawyers for the Ciercos said the brothers had ordered an internal investigation of the Treasury accusations and were cooperating with the American, Andorran and Spanish authorities.AdvertisementThe Ciercos, their lawyers said, “are confident that the record will show that they discharged their duties as directors with diligence and integrity.”Andorran officials say that B.P.A. was an isolated case of flawed corporate governance that should not unfairly tarnish the principality’s whole banking sector.“When there is a problem with a bank in a country that only has five, it creates more noise,” said Mr. Saboya, the foreign minister.Still, the B.P.A. scandal is a particular blow to Andorra because it has hit the reputation of a country that was not removed until 2009 from a list of “uncooperative tax havens” drawn up by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.Andorra’s government recently hired consultants from PricewaterhouseCoopers to comb through B.P.A.’s balance sheet. But Andorra’s plan to then sell at least part of B.P.A. could still be derailed by the United States Justice Department and a possible American fine, especially since B.P.A. is accused of processing hundreds of millions of dollars through four correspondent banks in the United States. Washington could also seek extraditions.In recent years, the United States levied significant fines on Swiss banks for helping clients evade American taxes. American officials also reached an $8.9 billion settlement last year with BNP Paribas, France’s biggest bank, over its violation of sanctions against Iran, Cuba and Sudan. In 2012, the international bank HSBC paid $1.9 billion to settle a United States money-laundering case involving Mexican drug trafficking.This time the United States is targeting a bank with only €3.3 billion of assets.But Mr. O’Donnell, the Washington lawyer, said, “I would be very surprised if the Department of Justice went away anytime soon.”A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Andorra Cracks Down on Bank After U.S. Accusations of Money Laundering .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.