By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDAPRIL 14, 2015
The former governor of Massachusetts, Deval Patrick, has joined the private equity firm Bain Capital as a partner to focus on socially oriented investments, a person briefed on the matter said on Monday.Mr. Patrick, a Democrat and close ally of President Obama, left office in January. At Bain, he is expected to concentrate on raising money for a new fund that will focus as much on positive social impact as it will on investment performance.Bain Capital, which is based in Boston, is one of the biggest and best-known private equity firms, with roughly $65 billion in assets under management.Yet Mr. Patrick will be joining a firm that became a lightning rod during the past two presidential elections: One of its founders was Mitt Romney, a predecessor of Mr. Patrick in Massachusetts, whose stint in private equity drew scrutiny and criticism from political opponents during his run for the presidency.AdvertisementOne of Bain Capital’s current leaders is Stephen Pagliuca, a longtime Democratic donor who ran unsuccessfully for a United States senate seat in Massachusetts in 2009.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Of course, the move by Mr. Patrick to Bain Capital isn’t the first by a public official to private equity. In 2013, Timothy F. Geithner, the former Treasury secretary, joined the investment firm Warburg Pincus as president.A former corporate lawyer, Mr. Patrick has said that he planned to re-enter the private sector once his term ended.AdvertisementA spokesman for Bain Capital declined to comment on the hiring of the former governor.A version of this article appears in print on April 14, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Governor Will Lead New Fund at Bain Capital.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.