

      By NEIL GOUGH

OCT. 19, 2015

Mixed policy signals from China – on the stock market, currency and financial reform – have unnerved global investors and prompted central bankers to shift strategies. Here are five officials who are calling the shots in Beijing. The head of the central bank in China since 2002, Mr. Zhou is the world’s longest serving governor of a major central bank. Fluent in English and an admirer of Western classical music, he has long been a public face of Chinese financial reform to the outside world; that status has helped him stay in office despite having surpassed the retirement age for officials of 65 (he’s now 67). As a princeling, or son of a senior Communist Party figure, his voice also carries added weight within China. Mr. Zhou has been busy pushing for a more freely traded renminbi, which if successful would have huge implications for China and its main trade partners, including the United States. A former banking chief, Mr. Xiao is an outspoken critic of nontraditional finance. He once famously described the rapid growth of China’s loosely regulated shadow finance sector as “fundamentally a Ponzi scheme.” At the central bank, Mr. Xiao and Mr. Zhou both served under Zhu Rongji, the prime minister in the late 1990s and early 2000s who led sweeping overhauls of the country’s banking sector and state-owned companies. Mr. Xiao, who took over the securities agency in 2013, has faced criticism in China for not acting fast enough to curb the speculative excesses that helped drive the run-up in share prices. His agency has since responded with an aggressive crackdown on short sellers. At the same time China’s anti-corruption agency has also taken aim at securities officials.Another protege of the former prime minister, Mr. Lou in 2007 became the first chairman of the newly established China Investment Corporation, the country’s first sovereign wealth fund. With Mr. Lou at the helm, the fund bought stakes in American financial companies like Morgan Stanley and Blackstone. The purchases came under fire in the Chinese press when their value dropped because of the financial crisis. After becoming head of the finance ministry in 2013, he has focused on technical fiscal reforms as well as the high levels of local government debt. Earlier this year, he warned that China faced a 50 percent chance of falling into the middle-income trap – where growth and incomes stagnate – unless it pursues further financial reform. China’s prime minister, also know as the premier, traditionally has been the point person for economic policy. As the head of the state council, Mr. Li oversees the work of the central bank, securities regulator, the finance ministry, as well as dozens of other government agencies. He is also the No. 2 in the seven-member Politburo Standing Committee, the Communist Party’s most powerful decision-making body. Since coming to power in 2002, Mr. Li has focused on cutting administrative red tape, promoting technology and innovation, as well as increasing state investment in infrastructure. Since rising to power three years ago, Xi Jinping, a lifelong politician who was educated as a chemical engineer, has emerged as one of China’s most influential leaders. He has asserted himself as the prime decision maker in economic policy, partly overshadowing the typical role of the premier. Along with introducing sweeping financial reforms in late 2013, Mr. Xi created a new “central leading group on deepening overall reform.” He has rejected recent criticism that the country is backpedaling in its efforts, saying in a speech in September that “the key to China’s development lies in reform.” Advertisement