
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

APRIL 13, 2015
Wall Street will probably have to bid farewell to its fee darling, General Electric. The conglomerate has been the best corporate client for investment bankers over the last 15 years, spending some $5.1 billion for advice and assistance. Shrinking GE Capital will keep M.&A. practitioners busy for a while. Borrowing by that financial operation, however, has been the biggest moneymaker.Selling bonds, for example, accounted for roughly $150 million in fees — or about half the total that G.E., led by Jeffrey R. Immelt, paid to financial middlemen in each of the last three calendar years, according to Thomson Reuters data. Loans take the overall total up to almost 70 percent of fees in one of those periods.GE Capital supplies most of that business. Between 2012 and 2014, the unit accounted for some three-quarters of G.E.’s bond sales. Most of that activity could be at risk even before any more assets are sold. The finance unit announced on Friday that it was paring its commercial paper issuance to just $5 billion this year and that it would not need to raise any long-term debt for the next five years.What’s more, many of the potential buyers for pieces of GE Capital are banks. United States lenders, broadly speaking, have a surfeit of deposits and therefore may not need to finance any G.E. lending businesses in the bond markets. Private equity and other so-called shadow banks would be more in need of wholesale funding. Cheaper deposit funding, however, gives traditional lenders an edge in the bidding.The silver lining for Wall Street is deal-making. First, selling the finance businesses should generate some huge fees for banks. The boutique shop Centerview Partners and the bigger institutions JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America already have the edge, having advised G.E. on the breakup. And the conglomerate’s industrial concerns probably have more deals to do.That could keep the company as a lucrative client for bankers. But its position at the top of the charts, and in the hearts and pockets of advisers — especially bond underwriters — may soon be a casualty of this GE Capital whopper.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »