AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioWith the economics of the music industry getting increased attention in Washington, Representatives Jerrold Nadler and Marsha Blackburn announced Monday that they were introducing a broad new bill that would require radio stations to pay royalties to performing artists and address an array of other topics about the licensing of digital music.Although much of the current discussion about music royalties concerns online services like Pandora and Spotify, the biggest complaint from artists and record companies has long been that AM/FM radio stations in the United States — almost alone in the world — pay royalties only to songwriters and music publishers, not to the performing artists and record companies.The bill, the Fair Play Fair Pay Act, would change federal copyright law to create a “terrestrial performance right for sound recordings,” as it is known in the music world, meaning that radio stations would have to pay performing artists as well as songwriters. (Online services pay both kinds of royalties.) Mr. Nadler, a Democrat of New York, is the ranking member of the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property and the Internet, and Ms. Blackburn, a Republican of Tennessee, is the vice chairwoman of the Energy and Commerce Committee.The bill would also make various changes to the complex procedures for setting royalty rates for satellite and Internet music services. These would include setting a single standard that federal judges would use in setting digital rates; Sirius XM, the satellite radio company, is subject to a different standard than Internet services like Pandora.“The current system is antiquated and broken,” Mr. Nadler said in a statement. “It pits technologies against each other and allows certain services to get away with paying little or nothing to artists.” Mr. Nadler has been a critic of licensing rules and in February gave a speech at a Grammy Awards function calling for changes to copyright law.The bill also proposes royalty payments for recordings made before 1972, which are not covered by federal copyright protection. That exemption has led to a string of lawsuits against Sirius XM and Pandora. But the bill would not extend other privileges of federal copyright to those recordings, like an artist or author’s ability to reclaim transferred works after 35 years.The Fair Play Fair Pay Act is the latest of many attempts by the music industry, going back decades, to change copyright law to require payments from radio. The call has grown more urgent in recent years as musicians and record companies have seen record sales plunge. Another bill, the Performance Rights Act, was introduced in 2009 but later fell apart in negotiations with broadcasters.The National Association of Broadcasters, the lobbying group that represents radio station owners, said in a statement that it would “strongly oppose” the new bill and noted the status of the Local Radio Freedom Act, a nonbinding resolution against “any new performance fee, tax, royalty or other charge relating to the public performance of sound recordings.” The bill has been signed by 147 members of the House of Representatives and 11 senators.Advertisement