AdvertisementSupported byBy David BarbozaSHANGHAI — Just months after resigning, the former head of the embattled Chinese property developer, the Kaisa Group, returned unexpectedly to the helm, raising doubts about whether the company’s rescue by a rival will move forward.The surprise comeback on Monday of the chairman and chief executive, Guo Yingcheng, is the latest twist in the Kaisa story.Once a darling of global investors, Kaisa started to stumble last fall, after the government blocked the sale of some of its properties in Shenzhen, its largest market. The company’s stock sank and its bonds plummeted, as analysts raised concerns about its debt load and finances.Late last year, Mr. Guo departed, citing health reasons, and other top executives left soon after. Then in February, the chairman and his family agreed to sell their entire 49 percent stake in Kaisa to another Chinese property developer, Sunac China.Now, that deal is in question. Analysts said that the management announcement could be a sign that Mr. Guo was seeking to regain control of the company that he co-founded with family members in 1999.“The conditions are unclear,” said Edison Bian, a property analyst at UOB Kay Hian. “For now, we can only conclude that there are more uncertainties. Whether Sunac is out of Kaisa remains unclear.”Kaisa offered no further details on Monday about the change. But Mr. Guo is returning as Kaisa’s prospects show signs of stabilizing.Just days ago, the company said that Shenzhen authorities had lifted some of the sales restrictions. And the company recently agreed to borrow roughly $225 million from Sino-Life Insurance, one of its largest shareholders.On Monday, prices of the company’s bonds, which have continued trading, rose slightly after the announcement.“The return of the chairman is a positive development for the company,” said Franco Leung, a Hong Kong-based analyst at the credit ratings agency Moody’s Investors Service. “He has a good understanding of the company’s strategy and its operations.”Sunac declined on Monday to comment on the return of Mr. Guo. Kaisa declined to comment further.Mr. Guo, 50, has been at the center of the firestorm at Kaisa.After the sales restrictions were imposed last fall, reports surfaced that Kaisa’s property deals were the subject of a corruption investigation. Kaisa’s chairman, the reports indicated, was being questioned in the case.Bloomberg News has reported that Kaisa’s problems were linked to Jiang Zunyu, a high-ranking Communist Party official in Shenzhen who was detained last October on suspicion of corruption. Mr. Jiang was later found to have 42 homes and $32 million in unexplained cash.Kaisa’s situation soon began to deteriorate. From December to March, Mr. Guo and virtually his entire management team resigned with little explanation.In February, the company reported that it had $10.4 billion in debt, far more than it had previously acknowledged in public filings. The company said on March 31 that it would delay the release of its quarterly earnings report. Struggling to meets its obligations, Kaisa is trying to restructure its debt with bondholders, which include big Western investors like BlackRock.Since resigning, Mr. Guo, who goes by the Hong Kong name Kwok Yingshing, has disappeared from public view. Several analysts and lawyers had said that Mr. Guo was living in Hong Kong, which is a separate legal jurisdiction from China, and that he had refused to return to the mainland to face the company’s legal troubles.Analysts say Mr. Guo’s return makes it unclear who is in control of the company: the Guo family, which still holds 49 percent; Sunac, which is vying to acquire that stake; or Sino-Life, the second-largest shareholder.Sino-Life has been playing an increasingly instrumental role. When the crisis began to unfold last year, Sino-Life stepped in and purchased a sizable chunk of shares from the Guo family.The insurer has only further cemented its ties with Mr. Guo in recent months. Earlier this year, Sino-Life and its chairman quietly bought shares that Mr. Guo and Kaisa affiliates owned in National Trust, a Beijing-based company that was once partly controlled by the relatives of the former Prime Minister Wen Jiabao.A spokesman for National Trust denied last month that Mr. Guo and the Kaisa affiliates had held a big stake in the company. But corporate shareholder records show the stakes were acquired in late 2014 and then sold to Sino-Life early this year.With the recent loan from Sino-Life, Kaisa can also move forward with its development plans. The money will help Kaisa pay for a land deal in Shenzhen, an acquisition made jointly with Sino-Life.Analysts say the deals with Sino-Life add to the evidence that Mr. Guo might be moving to regain control of the company and brand he helped create.“The return of Guo Yingcheng suggests the Guo family might not sell stakes to Sunac,” said Zhou Chuanyi, a credit analyst at Lucror Analytics, an independent credit research firm in Singapore.Zhang Ruoyao contributed research.Advertisement