AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningPreet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, has been celebrated for the work of his office in cracking down on insider trading, making the cover of Time magazine as the man “Busting Wall Street.” But an opinion issued by Judge Valerie E. Caproni of Federal District Court in Manhattan on Friday questioned whether Mr. Bharara had gone too far in public statements that castigated Sheldon Silver, the former New York State Assembly speaker, after he was charged with corruption.Judge Caproni’s decision raises a broader issue about how far prosecutors should go in seeking publicity when charges are filed. We have become accustomed to “perp walks” in which white-collar defendants are photographed in handcuffs while being escorted by law enforcement into a courthouse, sending a message to the public that crime does not pay even for the wealthy. But criminal defendants are presumed innocent, and the publicity surrounding a case can condition the public to believe a person is guilty long before there is an actual adjudication of culpability.Mr. Silver asked Judge Caproni to dismiss the charges because the grand jury was prejudiced by Mr. Bharara’s statements about the case. The Justice Department initially filed a criminal complaint on Jan. 21 that included a 35-page statement laying out its case against Mr. Silver, who is accused of abusing his office to obtain nearly $4 million in illicit payments through two law firms. That is an unusual way to start a white-collar crime case because prosecutors typically seek a grand jury indictment, which would not contain the same level of detail as a complaint.But the Justice Department has the discretion to decide how to initiate a case, and the issuance of a complaint still allows for the defendant to be arrested. This was how the insider trading case against Raj Rajaratnam began in 2009, when six defendants were arrested early on a Friday morning. Unlike Mr. Rajaratnam, Mr. Silver was permitted to surrender himself, avoiding the humiliation of a perp walk by being transported in an unmarked car to the federal courthouse for his initial appearance.That courtesy aside, Mr. Bharara issued a statement asserting that the charges showed “the greedy art of secret self-reward was practiced with particular cleverness and cynicism by the Speaker himself.” Taking to social media, the United States attorney’s office posted on Twitter Mr. Bharara’s comments at a news conference, including one that said, “Silver monetized his position as Speaker of the Assembly in two principal ways & misled the public about his outside income.” Adding fuel to the fire, in an interview on MSNBC a few weeks later, Mr. Bharara referred to Mr. Silver as “somebody who has basically sold his office to line his pockets and compromised his integrity and ethics with respect to how to make decisions.”Despite these statements, Judge Caproni rejected the request to dismiss the case because of prosecutorial misconduct. She found insufficient evidence that the grand jury was influenced by the comments when it indicted Mr. Silver on Feb. 19.In reaching that conclusion, the judge also said she was “troubled” by Mr. Bharara’s remarks “that appeared to bundle together unproven allegations regarding the defendant with broader commentary on corruption.” She rejected the Justice Department’s argument that inserting “alleged” or “allegations” before the statements somehow “magically dispelled” their effect. Although the government did not lose the motion, Judge Caproni said that Mr. Bharara’s comments “strayed so close to the edge of the rules governing his own conduct that defendant Sheldon Silver has a nonfrivolous argument that he fell over the edge to the defendant’s prejudice.”So how much can prosecutors say about a case without crossing the line? Rule 3.6 of the New York Rules of Professional Conduct prohibits lawyers from making a statement that “will have a substantial likelihood of materially prejudicing an adjudicative proceeding.” One such statement is “any opinion as to the guilt or innocence of a defendant,” although prosecutors are allowed to discuss “information contained in a public record,” like a criminal complaint. The primary concern is with the potential for commentary to taint the jury pool in a case, although that was not the argument Mr. Silver made because his case is not yet close to being ready for trial.Like all lawyers, prosecutors do not have the same First Amendment rights as other citizens in making comments about a pending or potential prosecution. The Supreme Court pointed out in Gentile v. State Bar of Nevada that “lawyers participating in judicial proceedings may be subjected, consistent with the First Amendment, to speech restrictions that could not be imposed on the press or general public.”As with most such rules, the issue is how much is too much when it comes to public statements about a prosecution. Charges should not be filed in a case unless the prosecutor is convinced there is a good chance of obtaining a conviction, so allegations of criminal conduct reflect the conclusion that the person is in fact guilty of a crime. Although there is a presumption of innocence in the courtroom, in the court of public opinion, people, including lawyers, are allowed to reach their own conclusions about a defendant’s guilt.Prosecutors occupy a special position in the criminal justice system. The commentary to the New York Rules of Professional Conduct states that “a prosecutor has the responsibility of a minister of justice and not simply that of an advocate.” Figuring out what that means is not easy, however, because prosecutors are concerned about both protecting the public and respecting the rights of the accused.Simply announcing charges may not be enough to assure the public that the government is looking out for their interests. One way to deter others from engaging in crime is to send the message that misconduct will be investigated and prosecuted, so there is a role for public announcements that put a prosecution in a broader context.One of the persistent complaints about the Justice Department in the wake of the financial crisis has been the absence of prosecutions of corporate executives. Former Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner talked about the public demand for “Old Testament vengeance” against those considered responsible for the losses suffered in 2008, sometimes almost regardless of whether they committed any criminal act. So there is a need to send a message that the government is responding to the public interest by pursuing a criminal case.When prosecutors publicize their cases, there is a fine line between informing the public and playing into the desire to extract revenge. This is especially the case with white-collar crime prosecutions in which resentment of Wall Street bankers and public officials can be heightened by comments about the misconduct set forth in criminal charges. Pretrial publicity may convict a defendant in the public’s eye long before the case gets to trial.Judge Caproni’s opinion sends a message to the Justice Department that it must be careful about what it says when announcing a case, especially one involving a prominent defendant. Mr. Silver lost his battle, but it sent a message that will be helpful to other defendants by perhaps toning down some of the language used by prosecutors when announcing a case.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2nd edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningAdvertisement