By DAVID JOLLY and JACK EWINGAPRIL 13, 2015
PARIS — Ferdinand K. Piëch, the famously mercurial chairman of Volkswagen, has once again caused a commotion atop the German automaker, suggesting that he wants to oust the chief executive, Martin Winterkorn, who is set to succeed him in two years’ time.Investors on Monday were trying to figure out how much of a threat the leadership clash could pose to Europe’s biggest automaker. In a show that all was normal, Mr. Winterkorn attended a public meeting at an industrial fair with Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India on Monday.The company’s shares, which fell about 2 percent Monday morning after the dispute erupted over the weekend, recovered slightly but were trading down about 1.8 percent in Frankfurt in the afternoon, on a slightly positive day for stocks in Europe.Mr. Piëch, 77, raised the prospect of a power struggle when he was quoted in a Der Spiegel interview published on Friday, saying, “I’m keeping my distance from Winterkorn.”AdvertisementMr. Winterkorn received words of support over the weekend from Wolfgang Porsche, the leader of the other family that shares control of VW, as well as the automaker’s important works council, which holds crucial votes on the board.AdvertisementIf the intrigue were to result in a shake-up, though, there is certainly a precedent: Mr. Winterkorn was once Mr. Piëch’s protégé, promoted from his former role as the head of Audi after the chairman decided to oust Bernd Pischetsrieder in 2006.”It’s disruptive, it’s annoying, it’s the source of a certain amount of tension, but it’s not anything we haven’t seen before,” said Philippe Houchois, head of European auto industry research at UBS in London. “There’s a risk that we’ll get into a phase where all the fighting for position poses a risk at a time when the company needs to be making some tough decisions,” he said.“In theory, good governance would require that the former C.E.O. not become chairman, and that the chairman not choose his successor,” Mr. Houchois continued. “In practice, it doesn’t always work that way,” particularly, as in the present case, when the chairman is a major shareholder.VW, based in Wolfsburg, Germany, posted sales of 202.5 billion euros, or about $214 billion, and net profit of €10.8 billion in 2014. Its unit sales of 10.14 million vehicles put it second globally, behind Toyota Motors’ 10.23 million and ahead of General Motors’ 9.92 million.The company produces vehicles under 12 nameplates, including Audi, Seat, Bentley and Porsche.Mr. Houchois said that it was possible that Volkswagen would overtake Toyota in global sales this year, but that doing so would mainly be a matter of bragging rights. More important, he said, was the need to improve Volkswagen’s overall profit margin, which at 6 percent compares poorly to Toyota’s 10 percent. In particular, company needs to make more money on the VW-branded cars it sells, he said, and must find ways of better integrating its two truck units, Scania and MAN, and push them in North America and Asia.At its core, the company remains a peculiarly German enterprise. The Porsche family, of which Mr. Piëch is a member, holds five of the 20 board seats. Employee representatives control 10 seats, and the state of Lower Saxony and Qatar Holding, which in 2009 stepped in at a moment of need with €7 billion in capital, each hold two seats on the board.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Together, these three main shareholders control more than 90 percent of the voting rights, and each has a blocking minority — a source of potential gridlock when decisions about important matters need to be made quickly.A vote to part ways with Mr. Winterkorn would require a two-thirds majority.Bernd Osterloh, the chairman of the group works council of Volkswagen and a member of the presidium of the Volkswagen supervisory board, on Friday expressed solid support for Mr. Winterkorn, whom he called “the most successful automobile manager on board.”Advertisement“Together with him we have written an unprecedented success story,” Mr. Osterloh said in a statement. “As far as we are concerned, his contract will be extended beyond 2016.”Andreas Lampersbach, a spokesman for Volkswagen, declined to comment and said that Mr. Winterkorn was not currently granting interviews. A spokesman for Lower Saxony, which owns a 20 percent stake in Volkswagen, declined to comment.Mr. Winterkorn may have fallen out of favor in part because of the failure of Volkswagen to expand its market share in the United States. Since 2011, the company has produced a version of its Passat sedan at a plant in Chattanooga, Tenn., in which it invested $1 billion.Mr. Winterkorn “has invested a lot of money and the result was permanent loss of market share,” Ferdinand Dudenhöffer, a professor at the University of Duisburg-Essen, said in an email. Mr. Dudenhöffer said Volkswagen’s market share was a mere 2 percent in the United States, less than Subaru.Like other carmakers including Ford and General Motors, Volkswagen has struggled to make money on midpriced cars in Europe. Most of Volkswagen’s profit comes from its high-end Audi and Porsche brands.As chairman of the Volkswagen supervisory board, Mr. Piëch cannot unilaterally fire Mr. Winterkorn or any other managers.But Mr. Piëch has a reputation as a dominant personality who often gets his way. Mr. Winterkorn could decide to resign rather than face public humiliation by Mr. Piëch, Mr. Dudenhöffer said. Mr. Winterkorn “has earned enough money,” he said. “Why should he put himself through that in the months to come?”David Jolly reported from Paris, and Jack Ewing from Frankfurt.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.