AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — With investing opportunities on its mind, New Enterprise Associates has raised the biggest venture capital fund in the industry — and added a little extra on top.The firm plans to announce on Wednesday that it has closed its 15th investment fund at $2.8 billion, slightly larger than its last several funds. Moreover, it has raised an additional $350 million for what it is calling its NEA 15 Opportunity Fund, a separate pocket of capital intended to funnel more money into select investments.It is a sign of confidence by NEA, one of the biggest venture firms in Silicon Valley, that plenty of investment opportunities remain, despite warnings that the technology world has started to overheat.The new fund was significantly oversubscribed, Peter Barris, the firm’s longtime managing general partner, said in an interview.“We got a lot of, I’ll call it unsolicited interest that we couldn’t accommodate,” he said. “The asset class of venture capital is in a good place right now.”The new fund will provide plenty of firepower for NEA, which over the years has invested in companies ranging from 3Com to Salesforce.com to WebMD.Some competitors have started to sound an alarm about the current environment: Bill Gurley, general partner of the venture-capital firm Benchmark, warned last month that Silicon Valley would soon see the death of some “unicorns,” tech-speak for billion-dollar start-ups. But Mr. Barris professed somewhat less concern.“It appears, and we believe and have great conviction in this, that we have a lot of runway here,” Mr. Barris said. “This is not a moment in time. This is something that has legs on it.”With the new capital, NEA plans to continue its investment strategy, which generally crosses industry lines and spans most of the lifetime of start-ups, from seed rounds to later-stage growth investments. One of the firm’s consistent challenges, he acknowledged, is maintaining what he believes is a healthy mix of early stage, traditional venture capital and late-stage investments.But the presence of the Opportunity Fund in some ways highlights the prominence of these growth investments, including the channeling of enormous sums of cash into multibillion-dollar unicorns like Uber.According to Mr. Barris, the new fund arose from conversations with the firm’s investors, known as limited partners. Many had taken a particular interest in such situations and, subsequently, in an additional investment vehicle that let them invest alongside the firm in those deals.“We thought this was a great way to take advantage of our portfolio, but at that grow-equity round,” he said.But he emphasized that the Opportunity Fund will invest only in start-ups that NEA has committed to its main fund.Separately, the firm will also announce that it has promoted Scott Sandell, the head of its tech practice, to join Mr. Barris as a managing general partner. The promotion is a recognition that Mr. Sandell has proved both an able investor and a capable manager, according to his colleague.“He deserves to be a co-manager with me,” Mr. Barris said. “It’s time.”Advertisement