By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINAPRIL 14, 2015
Prosecutors continue to make unforced errors in the trial of Sergey Aleynikov, the former Goldman Sachs programmer who is being tried for the second time on charges he stole some of the source code to Goldman’s high-frequency trading program.A New York Supreme Court justice ruled on Tuesday that prosecutors for the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus Vance Jr., could not call an expert witness to testify because the prosecution team had told Mr. Aleynikov’s lawyer earlier that it had no plans to call any expert witnesses.“I can’t remember the last time I precluded an expert,” said Justice Daniel P. Conviser said in a ruling from the bench. “I am very disappointed I have to do this thing.”But the judge said he had to take the unusual step of precluding Spencer Lynch, a computer forensics specialist, from testifying because it might prejudice Mr. Aleynikov’s ability to receive a fair trial. The judge, noting that the trial has been underway for several days, said Mr. Aleynikov’s lawyer, Kevin Marino, was not given adequate time to prepare for cross-examination or arrange to have his own expert witness take the stand to rebut Mr. Lynch’s testimony.AdvertisementTwo weeks ago, the same judge rejected a last-minute request by Mr. Vance’s office to delay the start of the trial by several weeks because of scheduling problems with its witnesses. Judge Conviser instead granted a delay of a few days.AdvertisementIn August 2012, Mr. Vance’s office charged Mr. Aleynikov with stealing Goldman source code just a few months after a federal appeals court overturned his conviction in 2010.The second trial of Mr. Aleynikov, a 45-year-old software programmer who was born in Russia, has long raised eyebrows with some criminal defense lawyers given that federal prosecutors misapplied a corporate espionage law in prosecuting him. Mr. Aleynikov spent one year of an eight-year sentence in a federal prison in Fort Dix, N.J., before he was released. Mr. Vance’s office has contended it was appropriate to charge Mr. Aleynikov under state law if the federal law is not applicable.It was not clear how big an effect the judge’s decision to bar Mr. Lynch from testifying will have on the trial. Prosecutors had intended to have Mr. Lynch testify about his analysis of information found by the federal authorities on Mr. Aleynikov’s home computers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a decision last summer, another state judge tossed out much of the evidence in the case, contending that the F.B.I. had violated Mr. Aleynikov’s rights by conducting an illegal search when he was arrested at Newark Liberty International Airport. The ruling, however, let prosecutors introduce computer evidence gathered from Mr. Aleynikov’s home in New Jersey.In a letter submitted to Judge Conviser on Tuesday, Daniel Holmes, the assistant district attorney leading the prosecution, said, “Mr. Lynch is a critical witness to the people because no new examination can be done on the Aleynikov home computers.” Mr. Holmes, in his letter, added that “Mr. Lynch alone can provide testimony about what he observed on these devices.”Judge Conviser said he was sympathetic to the prosecutors’ plight, but he faulted them for bringing the problem upon themselves.“I think this is the people’s responsibility, and I don’t understand why you didn’t just say long ago, ‘I’m presenting Mr. Lynch. He’s an expert witness,’” the judge said.The judge added that if he did not preclude Mr. Lynch from testifying, it could be a “reversible error” if Mr. Aleynikov was convicted.The trial is expected to resume on Wednesday morning with the testimony of one of the F.B.I. agents who arrested Mr. Aleynikov.A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Testimony Denied in Trial of Ex-Goldman Programmer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.