AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesShareholders of two of the nation’s largest health insurers, Aetna and Humana, will vote Monday afternoon on a proposed merger. In July the two announced their plans to merge, with Aetna taking over its smaller rival, which specializes in private Medicare plans, for $37 billion.But consumer advocates have raised concerns about whether the combination will lead to less competition and higher prices. Even if shareholders give a thumbs-up, the Justice Department must still weigh in and decide whether, and under what conditions, to allow the merger to go through. —Reed AbelsonMargrethe Vestager, the antitrust chief for the European Union, could announce decisions this week on whether member states — including Ireland, Luxembourg and the Netherlands — offer tax breaks to multinational companies that amount to illegal state aid. The arrangements, known as tax rulings, have infuriated bigger member countries like France and Germany, which are concerned that they are losing tax revenue as a result of preferential deals offered by smaller states seeking a competitive edge for their economies.If Ms. Vestager does find illegal aid, she could order the Netherlands to recover money from Starbucks, Luxembourg to recover money from Fiat and Amazon, Ireland to recover money from Apple, and Belgium to recover money from dozens of multinationals. Those decisions are unlikely to come at the same time, however, and experts in European competition rulings have said that Ms. Vestager could make a start this week by issuing decisions concerning possible aid to Fiat and Starbucks given by Luxembourg and the Netherlands. —James KanterAnyone who owns stock in technology companies will have a lot of report cards to sift through this week, as a half-dozen major players release their earnings reports. From Microsoft, which reports on Thursday, investors will be looking closely at the performance of its Windows 10 operating system and changes in how the company reports its finances that could provide more clarity on its business.The growth of the cloud computing businesses at both Microsoft and Amazon, which also reports on Thursday, will attract a lot of attention for each of those companies, too. There will be progress reports from Yahoo, on Tuesday, and IBM, on Monday, on their efforts to transform their companies. On Wednesday, eBay reports its results for the first time since it split with its PayPal payments business. And investors will bid adieu to earnings reports from Google on Thursday. Google’s new parent company, Alphabet, will be the one issuing financial results in the future. —Nick WingfieldOn Tuesday, the government will report the latest data on new home construction in September. After a 3 percent decline in single-family housing starts in August, economists expect a 2 percent drop for September. Overall housing starts are expected to rise by 0.4 percent, with multifamily construction compensating for weakness in single-family building. Single-family construction had surged in July, and most economists don’t think the recent weakness signals a fundamental downshift for the housing market. —Nelson D. SchwartzCredit Suisse reports its third-quarter results on Wednesday as earnings season begins for Europe’s largest banks. In addition, the Swiss bank is expected to provide an update to investors on its strategy as its new chief executive, Tidjane Thiam, puts his stamp on the lender.In July, Mr. Thiam, the former chief executive at the British insurer Prudential, said the bank was undertaking an “in-depth strategic review” of its operations and would seek to make its portfolio of businesses “less capital intensive.” In a research note last week, Deutsche Bank said that it expected Credit Suisse to outline plans on Wednesday to raise additional capital and cut its costs further. —Chad BrayThe European Central Bank meets on Thursday in Malta, in one of its twice-yearly sojourns outside Frankfurt to eurozone member countries. Expectations are rising that the central bank may step up its economic stimulus measures because of concern that inflation is too low. But it is unclear whether enough members of the central bank’s Governing Council are ready to support more action. —Jack EwingThe federal auto safety regulator, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, is set to hold a public information meeting on Thursday to update consumers on the safety risks involving faulty Takata airbags, which can violently rupture and shoot out shrapnel in an accident.The safety agency will also outline steps that the government and the auto industry are taking to address those risks, as well as measures that members of the public can take to protect themselves. Since 2004, the defect has been linked to at least eight deaths and over 100 injuries, and 12 automakers have recalled at least 19 million cars to replace the bags. —Hiroko TabuchiAdvertisement