AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonThis Wynn-Wynn situation could be a loss for shareholders if they are not careful.Elaine P. Wynn and her former husband, Stephen A. Wynn, are engaged in a spectacular Las Vegas fight over whether she should remain on the Wynn Resorts board, and at least one proxy advisory service has come out against both sides.The drama could be overshadowing the broader issue for shareholders of companies dominated by an individual. Instead of being distracted by proxy battles, however juicy, and board composition, perhaps shareholders should focus on more important questions, like whether Mr. Wynn is the right person for this company.The phrase that no one really knows what happens in a marriage goes double for the Wynns. They have been married twice, divorced twice, started two multibillion-dollar companies while married and raised two daughters, one of whom was kidnapped and saved by Mr. Wynn in an almost unbelievable case where he paid the ransom with $1.45 million taken from his casino’s money cage.The two were divorced again in 2010 and are battling over the consequences of a billion-dollar settlement that was paid in part in Wynn Resorts stock. As part of the agreement, the couple, who together own 19.3 percent of the company, agreed to vote their shares to elect each other to the Wynn Resorts board. The agreement also restricted both Wynns from selling any shares without the other’s consent.Mr. Wynn most likely wanted the agreement to help him keep control of the company. In his previous venture, Mirage Resorts, he was forced out after shareholders complained about profligate spending, like $200 million on art. The company was sold to Kirk Kerkorian’s MGM Grand for $6.4 billion, and Mr. Wynn was left with only money to console him.When he started his latest company, Mr. Wynn tried to ensure he could avoid a repeat by recruiting Kazuo Okada, the Japanese pachinko tycoon, as a co-investor. Mr. Okada’s stake gave the three control of about 40 percent of the company, and the divorce agreement balanced out Mr. Okada’s stake, keeping control in the Wynn family.But nothing is ever easy in Las Vegas.Wynn Resorts forcibly redeemed Mr. Okada’s shares after accusing him of violating American foreign-corruption laws, which he denies. Mr. Okada is challenging that action in a Las Vegas court, but with those shares out of the picture for now, Mr. Wynn’s control is dependent on Ms. Wynn.Ms. Wynn did not see it that way. In 2012, she sued her former husband in the same Las Vegas court to lift the divorce-settlement restrictions and give her the power to sell her shares at will, arguing that the Okada redemption made the constraints unnecessary.Mr. Wynn, of course, did not want to lose control. The natural solution would have been for Wynn Resorts to buy the shares back, but the company is short on cash while building a new casino in Massachusetts and doesn’t have a spare $1.4 billion.In some places, litigation is a big deal, but in Las Vegas it is merely business. Since Ms. Wynn sued Mr. Wynn they have remained cordial by all reports and they still consult on company matters.But the seeds of discord were sown and the company’s nominating committee refused to nominate Ms. Wynn for re-election to the board, citing the litigation. For added measure, the board also accused Ms. Wynn of “not meaningfully contributing to the board’s discussion and work.”Here’s where things go awry. It appears as if Ms. Wynn was ejected too hastily because the company did not have a replacement candidate and instead chose to shrink the board. Even if the independent directors were having disagreements with Ms. Wynn, it’s curious why they would take such a significant step with what seems to be so little preparation and recognition of the foreseeable consequences, namely that Ms. Wynn would not go away quietly.She hasn’t. Instead, a furious proxy battle has broken out, with both sides arguing noisily over whether Ms. Wynn should remain on the board. It basically boils down to this: From Ms. Wynn’s perspective, she is a big shareholder who can give a critical eye to the business. She is also responsible in part for building two billion-dollar companies and can add value because of it. Ms. Wynn has also argued that there is an “appalling lack of diversity” on the Wynn Resorts board because she is the only woman.From the board’s perspective, Ms. Wynn is suing the chief executive and trying to disrupt things to boot. It has also suggested the possibility of inappropriate business dealings and played down her contributions. The board has also responded that it will add a director with diversity in mind in the near future.(Because the divorce agreement is still in effect, Mr. Wynn is obligated to vote his shares in favor of Ms. Wynn at the annual meeting next week.)In the face of all this, the proxy-advisory firm Institutional Shareholder Services threw up its hands and recommended against all the candidates. I.S.S. also criticized Ms. Wynn, stating that there “appears to be no daylight between Elaine Wynn and the rest of the board on tolerating weak governance practices.” On similar grounds, I.S.S. also recommended that its clients withhold their votes for the other two opposing candidates for “poor pay practices.”Glass Lewis disagreed and sided with Wynn Resorts, citing the fact that “Ms. Wynn’s interests as a significant shareholder and active litigant have increasingly taken priority over her fiduciary duties to all investors.”Both Glass Lewis and I.S.S. are right, really. But one has to wonder whether it even matters.Wynn Resorts is Mr. Wynn. He has a 45-year-history of who he is and how he runs companies. Are people investing in Wynn Resorts because they think Mr. Wynn is going to change? And do they want him to? Additionally, will things really change whether or not Ms. Wynn is on the board, and in their deepest hearts, do the shareholders of Wynn Resorts care whether there is a diverse director or not on its board?These are meaty questions, and I pause here to add another important fact. If Wynn Resorts went public today, this would never become an issue. Most companies can go public with dual-class structures that keep control with a core group. And shareholders don’t seem to care. For the latest example, see Danny Meyer and Shake Shack’s billion-dollar valuation.For some companies, board battles are quite important. For others, where management is the company, as long as it delivers, then director conflict may not be as important. To be sure, it might be worth fighting over Mr. Wynn’s spending on art, or issues about pay, but even if the board were entirely independent or Ms. Wynn suddenly decided to challenge Mr. Wynn’s compensation issues, how would it influence his running of the company? It might even drive him away, something shareholders may regret.Instead of focusing on operations, the Wynn Resorts shareholders seem more concerned with putting together a board that is like porridge — “just right” in terms of composition and independence. That may be important, but it often obscures the operations part. Over the years, Mr. Wynn has delivered, beating the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index since the company’s I.P.O., even with highly volatile operations. He is a legend, albeit a flawed one, as unsatisfying as that is for some shareholders.Ultimately, the choice for the Wynn Resorts shareholders is easy. If they think the company will be better run with Ms. Wynn, then they should support her. Otherwise not. All the rest is a distracting sideshow.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @StevenDavidoff on Twitter. Advertisement