AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Quentin WebbAlcatel-Lucent makes a bold but messy takeover target for Nokia.A potential all-share deal would create a telecommunications equipment giant worth roughly 40 billion euros. Nokia investors seem skeptical. That is understandable: A deal would set off another of the industry’s seemingly endless series of restructurings, while the French connection adds complexity.Swallowing Alcatel would underline Nokia’s transformation from handset giant to network equipment heavyweight. The main draw is Alcatel’s wireless unit, which would take its share in this market to 30 percent from 20 percent. Nokia would become a stronger second player behind Ericsson and win a huge leg up with major American telecommunications operators like AT&T and Verizon. If you want to make money selling wireless equipment, scale helps a lot.Overnight, Nokia would add heft in three other segments: fixed-line access, Internet protocol routing and optics. Analysts at Liberum reckon this breadth could prove useful as mobile and fixed-network technology converges.But for now the lack of overlap means that Nokia has neither synergy potential nor expertise. That is why analysts had seen a purchase of just the wireless unit as simpler and more likely.By early afternoon on Tuesday, Alcatel’s stock was up 14 percent, reflecting the likely premium in an all-stock deal. Nokia’s stock, which fell sharply in earlier trading, recovered somewhat to stand about 3.7 percent lower. Those shifts add roughly €1.5 billion to Alcatel’s market value and take €1 billion off Nokia’s.That still looks harsh on Nokia, when Bernstein analysts reckon the synergies in wireless alone could be worth €1 billion a year. But even with seasoned turnaround specialists in charge, harvesting the benefits of a new combination will take years. Both companies are themselves products of messy mergers and protracted restructuring. History might repeat itself.Moreover, Alcatel remains a work in progress. It has made great strides in cost cuts, divestments and refinancing. But free cash flow was still a negative €420 million last year. What’s more, any deal will also need to assuage Paris’s jitteriness about threats to French jobs and industrial prowess. Connecting all the dots won’t be easy.Quentin Webb is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement