
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

OCT. 1, 2015
It’s the bank merger that has taken longer to consummate than any other in United States history.On Wednesday, the Federal Reserve finally approved the takeover of Hudson City Bancorp by the New York lender M&T Bank, three years, one month and three days after the deal was first announced. Regulators demanded that M&T’s chief executive, Robert G. Wilmers, fix back-office problems first. The delay, though, is a cautionary tale for others.Hudson City shareholders will get around $5.4 billion – up to 40 percent of which M&T agreed to pay in cash. Thanks to the rise in M&T’s stock price, that’s almost half as much again as the deal value in 2012. If anything, though, Hudson City is now worth a lot less than it was. It has been shrinking, and its return on equity has steadily fallen in each of the last three years. This year, its return on equity is unlikely to match even 2014’s dismal 3.3 percent showing.That’s nowhere near the rule-of-thumb cost of capital for banks of 10 percent or so. The current transaction value is roughly equal to its book value, which would imply the bank is covering its cost of capital. Were the deal to fall apart, it’s likely that Hudson City’s stock market value would fall to less than $2 billion.The cash part of M&T’s offer amounts to more than that. Mr. Wilmers may still be able to find some $75 million of cost cuts a year, according to Jefferies analysts. But those are worth perhaps $525 million to shareholders, taxed and capitalized, way less than the more than $3 billion of premium M&T is now implicitly paying. Mr. Wilmers has also said he spent $326 million upgrading systems to appease regulators.It used to be that bank executives could conceal cracks in their businesses by going on merger sprees. That got harder in the run-up to the 2008 financial crisis as shareholders wised up. Since that debacle, regulators have been on the case.That’s what tripped up Mr. Wilmers and M&T. Rivals like BB&T and CIT had shown that mergers are still possible – taking merely months, not years, to complete. But if bank executives have any doubts about their processes and systems, they’d do better to fix them before they go shopping.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »