By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 14, 2015
Citigroup said on Monday that it had shuffled its executive ranks as Manuel Medina-Mora, its co-president and the head of its global consumer bank, prepares to retire.According to a memorandum posted on its website, Citigroup said that Stephen Bird, the chief executive of its Asia-Pacific business, would succeed Mr. Medina-Mora as head of its global consumer bank beginning on June 1. He will transfer to New York as part of a series of management changes.“In various roles in Asia, Stephen has helped establish Citi as a leading bank, significantly increasing net income by focusing on target clients across the region,” Michael L. Corbat, Citigroup’s chief executive, wrote in the memo. “He is exceptionally well-qualified to continue the transformation of our local consumer businesses into one global consumer bank.”Mr. Bird joined Citigroup in 1998 after serving in senior management positions at GE Capital and British Steel. His 17 years at Citigroup have included stints in Latin America and Asia.AdvertisementAs part of the management changes, Francisco Aristeguieta, the chief executive of Latin America, will move to Hong Kong and become head of the Asia-Pacific business.AdvertisementJane Fraser, who leads Citigroup’s retail, commercial banking, and global mortgage businesses in the United States, will become chief executive of Latin America and be based in Miami.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As part of her new responsibilities, she will oversee the bank’s operations in Mexico and Ernesto Torres Cantu, the head of its Mexican businesss, will report to her, according to the memo.After Mr. Medina-Mora’s departure, James A. Forese, the head of Citigroup’s institutional clients group, will serve as sole president at Citigroup. He served as co-president with Mr. Medina-Mora.The retirement of Mr. Medina-Mora was announced in February after what has been a difficult year for the bank’s Mexican operations. Mr. Medina-Mora joined Citigroup in 2011 when it bought the Mexican bank Banamex and has served as chairman of its Mexican operations.Troubles emerged in Citigroup’s operations in Mexico last year when it disclosed that Banamex had been defrauded of about $400 million by an oil services company that had a long history of financial problems.An internal investigation later uncovered other problems at Banamax, including kickbacks involving employees of its private security unit. Banamex USA, a banking unit that operates out of California, is facing an inquiry from federal prosecutors in Massachusetts related to its anti-money-laundering compliance.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.