AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — In its quest to create a platform for networking security, the start-up Illumio has drawn a number of prominent backers.The company said on Tuesday that it had raised $100 million in new financing, its third round in two years. The investment included both BlackRock and Accel Partners as new investors, joining three existing investors, Formation 8, Andreessen Horowitz and General Catalyst.Individual investors in the round included John W. Thompson, the chairman of Microsoft; Marc Benioff, the chief executive of Salesforce.com; and Jerry Yang, a co-founder of Yahoo.The new financing — more than double what Illumio had raised in its previous rounds — brings the company’s fund-raising total to $142.5 million. It’s a fast beginning for the start-up, which focuses on providing a particular kind of security: protection for data centers and cloud services.The company’s approach is what it calls an adaptive security platform, regulating individual workloads or applications rather than relying on a system like a firewall that only serves as a general defense against outside threats.“We wanted to try to build the security platform that solves for the problems of today’s world,” Andrew Rubin, a co-founder and the company’s chief executive, told DealBook in an interview.Alan S. Cohen, Illumio’s chief commercial officer, added that the company’s software also provided clients with a picture of what’s going on within their data center or cloud service, comparing the service to an M.R.I. machine.“It’s not about writing a security policy or enforcing traffic rules,” Mr. Rubin said. “It’s using that M.R.I. machine to draw a picture of your infrastructure. We can build that picture for you and put it up on the screen.”And, the two said, the company’s products require far less setup and monitoring time, running in the background.“One thing we’ve heard consistently from customers is, ‘We want our security software to get out of the way,’” Mr. Rubin said.Also on Tuesday, Illumio is announcing a partnership with F5 Networks, a big networking company.Illumio emerged from stealth mode only last fall, with a number of prominent clients like Morgan Stanley and the talent agency Creative Artists Agency. Since then, its executives said, it has grown in popularity as word has spread about its services.Mr. Rubin said that with the success that the company has seen, it seemed the right time late last year to raise money to embark on a more ambitious growth campaign, even if it didn’t quite need additional money. He declined to offer specific financial performance statistics.With the new money, Illumio plans to spend more on research and development, marketing and raising awareness of its brand — especially at the RSA security conference that begins next week — and expanding its worldwide presence, particularly in Europe and Asia.Advertisement