OCT. 18, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.01 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.08 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.05 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida, $230.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Mount Lebanon School District, Pa., $51.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYCalifornia, $961 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Fort Mill School District, S.C., $77.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementOhio, $300 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYCharleston, S.C., $60.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementNew York City Transitional Finance Authority, $250 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Suffolk County Water Authority, N.Y. $165 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKArizona Health Facilities Authority, $100 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.California Health Facilities Financing Authority, $200 million of refinancing revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.California Statewide Communities Development Authority, $175 million of Enloe Medical Center insured refinancing revenue bonds. Bank of America.Chattanooga, Tenn., Health, Educational and Housing Facility Board, $68.5 million of student housing revenue bonds for University of Tennessee, Chattanooga. Raymond James.Clark County, Nev., $85 million of highway revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Cypress-Fairbanks Independent School District, Tex., $197 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Duke University, N.C., $175 million of taxable bonds. Morgan Stanley.Harris County, Tex., $340 million of refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Maine Housing Authority, $55 million of mortgage purchase bonds. Bank of America.University of Mississippi Educational Building Corporation, $57.5 million of revenue bonds. Raymond James.AdvertisementMissouri Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $65.3 million of St. Anthony’s Medical Center revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Missouri Joint Municipal Electric Utility Commission, $78.4 million of power project revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.New Jersey Turnpike Authority, $750 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.New York City Transitional Finance Authority, $750 million of future tax secured bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.North Carolina Capital Facilities Finance Agency, $370 million of Duke University project revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.North Carolina Housing Finance Agency, $66 million of homeownership revenue bonds. Bank of America.North Slope Borough, Alaska, $96.5 million of general obligation bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets.Riverside County Infrastructure Financing Authority, Calif., $72.8 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.San Diego County, Calif., $57 million of Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute limited revenue debt securities. Bank of America.Sandy Springs Public Facilities Authority, Ga., $155.6 million of revenue bonds. Raymond James.South Carolina Port Authority, $288 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America.Tacoma School District, Wash., $370 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.A version of this article appears in print on October 19, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.