AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedEarly 2015 has been a slow time for companies looking to go public. But a handful of new stock offerings may help jolt that market back to what has been one of the busiest on Wall Street in recent years.Chief among those companies coming to market are Etsy, the online bazaar for handmade jewelry and artisanal knit caps, and Virtu Financial, one of the dominant firms in the world of high-speed computerized trading. The retailer Party City is also set to make its debut.The three could hardly be more different. Yet investors flocked to them, reflecting what analysts and deal makers say is continuing appetite for I.P.O.s despite a noticeable lull at the beginning of the year.Just 38 companies have gone public in the United States in 2015, nearly 60 percent fewer than at the same time last year, according to data from Thomson Reuters. And those initial offerings raised $6.2 billion in proceeds, roughly 68 percent less than the year-ago period.The first three months of the year proved to be the slowest quarter in two years, according to Renaissance Capital, which manages an exchange-traded fund focused on I.P.O.s.Such a drop-off has occurred despite a number of prominent companies making market debuts, including Shake Shack, the online storage provider Box and the Internet registrar giant GoDaddy. And it has occurred despite the presence of factors that help foster a healthy market for debuts. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index has risen 2.3 percent for the year to date, slightly outpacing its performance a year ago.Some analysts say that a factor, at least among start-ups, is that enough money from investors has been available in the private markets that an I.P.O. can be delayed, giving those companies more time to grow.“We’re seeing a robust private financing market,” said Matthew Kennedy, an analyst with Renaissance Capital.Private equity firms, which last year pushed hard to take many of their companies public and begin reaping returns on their investments, also slowed their pace during the quarter.Still, Wall Street predicts that the market for initial offerings will improve over the rest of the year. In large part that is because investors ranging from big mutual funds to hedge funds still have plenty of money ready to spend on promising offerings.Take shares in Aduro Biotech, a small drug company that priced its I.P.O. at $17 a share on Tuesday. As of Wednesday’s market close, that stock has already more than doubled to $42 on its first day of trading. The three big companies that priced their offerings on Wednesday are considerably larger and more prominent. Investors valued Etsy at $1.8 billion, Party City at just under $2 billion and Virtu at $2.6 billion.At those levels, the three will have attained some of the biggest I.P.O. valuations this year, exceeded only by the likes of GoDaddy and Inovalon, a health care data analysis company.All three of the companies making debuts priced their offerings at the top end of the price ranges predicted earlier: Etsy at $16, Virtu at $19, and Party City at $17.Perhaps the most closely watched of the three is Etsy, whose sometimes quirky corporate culture has extended even to its decision to reserve part of its I.P.O. for sellers on its platform. The company has shown strong business performance by a number of measures, with sales rising 56 percent last year, to $195.6 million.Virtu, meanwhile, is trying to go public for a second time in two years. It postponed the stock sale last spring in the face of a furor about high-frequency trading prompted by the publication of the Michael Lewis book “Flash Boys.”A year later, the company is betting that such controversy has largely ebbed. Wall Street has largely been enamored of the trading firm, which contends in its prospectus to have lost money for just one day in 1,485 trading days. Over all, Virtu earned $190 million last year, up 4 percent compared with the previous year and more than double what it earned in 2012. Its total revenue last year was $723 million, up 8 percent from the year before.And Party City, by far the oldest of the three with a nearly 70-year history, is going public after Thomas H. Lee Partners bought control of it three years ago. The store chain, which sells celebratory necessities, including disposable plates and utensils, costumes and decorations, earned $56 million last year on top of $2.3 billion in sales.The three companies — all coincidentally based in New York — are set to begin trading Thursday morning: Virtu on the Nasdaq stock market under the ticker symbol VIRT; Etsy on the Nasdaq under the ticker ETSY; and Party City on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker PRTY.Advertisement