AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelNetflix beat expectations for subscriber growth both in the United States and globally in the first quarter of this year, as the company accelerated its output of original programming and pushed ahead with its aggressive international expansion.The company said Wednesday that it had a total of 59.6 million paid streaming members during the quarter, a net addition of a record 4.9 million. That compares with 46.1 million total paid streaming members during the same period in 2014.Total revenues were $1.6 billion in the first quarter, up 24 percent from the same period last year.The uptick in subscribers fueled a 12 percent increase in Netflix shares in after-hours trading to $534. That put Netflix’s market value at almost $29 billion, within striking distance of CBS Corporation’s $31 billion market value. Netflix missed its profit forecasts for the quarter. Net income was $24 million, or 38 cents a share, a decline from $53 million, or 86 cents a share, during the same period last year. The company had projected that it would have $37 million, or 60 cents a share, in net income for the quarter. Netflix said that currency-related transaction losses and foreign exchange losses hurt its results.The company is investing heavily in its international expansion and has said that it plans to break even globally through 2016 then deliver “material global profits” after that.Netflix’s competitive landscape has changed sharply in the United States in the last several months as a number of technology, media and telecom companies have entered the streaming business. HBO, for instance, recently started a subscription streaming service that does not require a subscription to cable or satellite television. Dish Network started a Sling TV streaming service that offers a number of popular cable networks for $20 a month.While those new entrants ramp up the rivalry for viewers and creative talent, they could also encourage more people to abandon traditional television in favor of streaming. Netflix said that its members streamed 10 billion hours in the first quarter.In a letter to shareholders, Reed Hastings, Netflix’s chief executive, said that Netflix and HBO could coexist because of their different content offerings. He said that the new streaming offerings from an array of outlets are “more competitive to the current pay TV bundle than to Netflix, which is lower cost, has exclusive and original content, and is not focused on live television.”Netflix continues to push ahead on its long-term view that Internet television is replacing linear television, apps are replacing channels and screens are proliferating. “It’s very simple: Netflix doesn’t want to just be HBO, Netflix wants to replace linear television,” said Rich Greenfield, a media analyst with BTIG Research. “The larger they get, the faster they can move.” To be sure, some analysts have raised skepticism about the company’s long-term prospects, worried about its potential for growth in the United States, where the company is profitable, as well as increasing costs tied to paying for content and international expansion.The quarter represented a stronger period for Netflix in the United States, where it has faced slowing growth in recent quarters. Netflix surpassed its expectation for domestic subscribers with 40.3 million paid streaming members in the United States during the first quarter, a net addition of 2.28 million. That compares with a net addition of 2.25 million members in the United States during the same period last year.Netflix attributed that uptick in subscribers to its “ever-improving” lineup of content during the quarter. That includes the new season of its political drama “House of Cards,” as well as the release of the new series “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt,” a comedy from Tina Fey, and the family drama “Bloodline.” The company is putting more emphasis on its exclusive original programming, which it said generated more viewing per dollar than other content. It is planning 320 hours of original programming this year, about three times what it offered in 2014.Netflix also beat its forecasts for global growth in subscribers. The company had 19.3 million international streaming paid members during the quarter, a net addition of 2.6 million.Earlier this year, Netflix said that it would complete its international expansion in the next two years, faster than it had previously anticipated. The company made progress on that goal in the most recent quarter, starting its service in Australia and New Zealand. Advertisement