AdvertisementSupported byBy Hilary StoutJust a few weeks after leading business opposition against a controversial religious freedom law in Indiana, William S. Oesterle is stepping down as the chief executive of Angie’s List, in part to become more “civically involved” in the state’s issues, the Indianapolis-based company announced on Wednesday.Mr. Oesterle, a co-founder of the 20-year-old local services rating business, was one of a number of business executives to speak out against the law signed by Gov. Mike Pence last month, saying that it opened the door to discrimination against gays and would make it harder for companies in the state to attract talent.In protest, Mr. Oesterle halted a $40 million project to expand the Angie’s List headquarters and hinted that the company might move some of its operations out of state.A company spokeswoman declined to elaborate on the circumstances of Mr. Oesterle’s apparently sudden announcement. “Mr. Oesterle has shared his intention to pursue other interests, including becoming more civically involved in the state of Indiana,” the company said in a news release.It is a critical time for Angie’s List, which has operated as a subscription service that offers reviews and ratings of plumbers, painters and myriad other local service providers. Angie’s List once stood virtually alone in the space but now faces rapidly growing competitive pressures from numerous start-ups in the field as well as online behemoths like Google and Amazon, which began a new home services offering last month.The stock has dropped from a high of $28 in July 2013 to $5.95 on Wednesday.Mr. Oesterle, 49, will stay in his job until a successor is found and will keep his seat on the board of directors through the end of his current term.John H. Chuang, the chairman, said in a statement: “On behalf of the entire Angie’s List board, I want to thank Bill for his leadership in helping to create one of the strongest brands in local home services.”Mr. Chuang added that the board was now “focused on identifying a strong leader who has a record of driving positive financial results and who shares our vision of leveraging the unique attributes of the Angie’s List brand.”Mr. Oesterle, a Republican and married father of six, has long had political interests. He was the manager of Mitch Daniels’s successful campaign for governor in 2004.He was not immediately available for comment after the announcement, but in an interview with TheStatehouseFile.com, a local publication, he hinted that he might run for office himself.Contending that Indiana’s reputation “has been badly damaged” by the new religious freedom law, he said he wanted to “begin the long process of repairing that.”“I haven’t figured out how I’m going to do that,” he continued in the StatehouseFile interview. “That could involve helping somebody else run. That could involve working on legislative races. That could involve becoming a candidate myself.”Advertisement