AdvertisementSupported byBy Keith BradsherMany Blackstone executives worked grueling seven-day weeks for a month to put together last Friday’s $23 billion acquisition of mortgages and office buildings from General Electric. But Blackstone’s chief executive says he has been spending twice as much of his time on an entirely different project: the scholarship fund he started at a top Beijing university.Stephen A. Schwarzman, Blackstone’s chairman, chief executive and co-founder, said that he had been immersed in a welter of details for his Schwarzman Scholars program at Tsinghua University, for which applications became available online Wednesday morning. All the while, he was advising his staff members on crucial decisions as they analyzed a complex montage of mortgages and equity stakes in G.E. buildings around the world.“G.E. was easy for me; it was hard for everybody else,” he said. “It was 110 percent of their time for these weeks; for me, it was 5.”By now, real estate transactions were practically second nature to Mr. Schwarzman. He has been making real estate investment decisions practically every week at Blackstone since 1993 and had a process in place at the company to provide him with the information he needed for each of them. He typically starts his day every morning at 6 and finishes at midnight.That allows him ample time, he said, to run Blackstone, the world’s most profitable money management company for the last two years, and also oversee the minutiae of starting a scholarship program 12 time zones away in China.The G.E. real estate deal was complicated by the range of kinds of equity that the company had accumulated in various buildings, which took considerable time for Blackstone staff members to dissect. (One person who was involved in the process had referred to the intensive process as “a Wall Street version of the Bataan Death March.”)But 37 percent of the real estate assets that Blackstone purchased were actually bought by G.E. over the years from Blackstone, which is the largest private sector landlord in the United States; this simplified some aspects of the transaction, Mr. Schwarzman said.Throughout the negotiations on the real estate deal, no one at G.E. told anyone at Blackstone that the transaction was only part of a much broader restructuring of G.E. that would also include the sale of GE Capital, Mr. Schwarzman said.“We had no idea we were part of some bigger thing, like zero,” he said. “Somebody must have known, their board knew, but we didn’t know.”Mr. Schwarzman estimated that he had been spending about 10 percent of his time on the Schwarzman Scholars program, for which he has already raised $333 million, including $100 million of his own money. He plans to announce shortly that he is raising his target for the overall scholarship fund to $400 million, and he believes he can reach that target next year, he said.“We’re not chasing a rainbow; we’re chasing an overhead structure,” he said.The program was a labor of love for Mr. Schwarzman and underscores the tremendous importance of China and its market to Wall Street financiers and corporate leaders.Although the construction of a college at Tsinghua to house scholars and provide meeting rooms for the yearlong graduate program has proceeded on schedule and on budget, other aspects of the program have proved more expensive than expected, Mr. Schwarzman said. Extra costs have involved areas like providing medical insurance for scholars and faculty members, recruiting and retaining visiting professors like Niall Ferguson of Harvard, and setting up internships and mentoring for scholars.Gerard A. Postiglione, the director of Hong Kong University’s Wah Ching Center of Research on Education in China, said that philanthropists setting up large scholarship programs in China face difficult choices to keep their spending focused on academic pursuits.“Foreign donor programs in China come along with many bureaucratic and financial hurdles,” he wrote in an email. “Making sure that the bulk of the donation is focused on the program objectives is always the main challenge.”During a 75-minute interview in a wood-paneled penthouse meeting room overlooking the Upper East Side at Blackstone’s headquarters on Park Avenue, Mr. Schwarzman spoke mainly about the scholars program, while discussing the G.E. deal more briefly. To call an assistant and request a folder on the scholarship program, he pulled out an old Nokia flip phone from the outer right pocket of his dark blue suit coat (he later explained that he had no desire to get a smartphone).His aggressive promotion of Tsinghua University since announcing the scholarship program two years ago appears to have played a role in the greater international visibility lately of Tsinghua; in an annual ranking released last month of the world’s best universities by reputation, Tsinghua jumped to 26th, from 36th a year earlier.The yearlong Schwarzman Scholars master’s degree program has a selection process modeled partly on the Rhodes scholarships at Oxford University. Online applications will be initially screened by the Institute of International Education in New York, and 300 finalists will be brought in for interviews in New York, London, Beijing or Bangkok. Mr. Schwarzman said that he planned to participate in the interviews done in New York and London.Mr. Schwarzman said that the finalist interviews would be scheduled so as not to coincide with the Rhodes Scholar selection interviews. Charles Conn, the chief executive of the Rhodes Trust and warden of Rhodes House at Oxford University, said in a telephone interview, “We work together not only with Steve’s program but also other programs to make sure we don’t put candidates in awkward positions.”The Rhodes scholarships and Schwarzman Scholars programs have similar endowments and fund-raising goals. Which one is ahead in any given week depends mainly on the exchange rate of the pound, which has weakened lately against the dollar. The Rhodes Trust has about 200 million pounds, or $296 million, and has a fund-raising target of £250 million, Mr. Conn said.The Rhodes program announced last month that it was expanding to accept scholars from China.The logistical issues of setting up a program so far away have nonetheless been challenging, Mr. Schwarzman said, adding that his wife keeps asking him: “Why did you pick something half a globe away? Couldn’t you find something in the same time zone?”Advertisement