By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINAPRIL 15, 2015
Another loose end stemming from the collapse of Lehman Brothers was wrapped up on Wednesday as Ernst & Young agreed to pay $10 million to settle a four-year-old lawsuit brought by New York State authorities.The settlement between the big accounting firm and Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York State attorney general, resolves civil allegations that Ernst helped Lehman engineer an accounting fraud that made the Wall Street firm appear less leveraged than it really was in the months before its September 2008 bankruptcy filing.The money being paid by Ernst, which will go to both Lehman investors and the state, is considerably less than the roughly $150 million that state officials had hoped to recoup when the lawsuit was filed by Andrew M. Cuomo just as he was leaving the attorney general’s office to become governor of New York.Mr. Schneiderman, in a statement announcing the settlement, said, “Auditors will be held accountable when they violate the law.”AdvertisementMr. Cuomo filed the lawsuit in December 2010, several months after the court-appointed examiner in the Lehman bankruptcy found that its management used a series of end-of-the quarter transactions called Repo 105 to manipulate the firm’s leverage levels at the end of each quarter. The report by Anton R. Valukas, a former federal prosecutor, presented something of a road map for regulators to pursue lawsuits against Lehman and its auditor over the adjustments that resulted in temporary shifts of tens of billions of debt off the Wall Street firm’s balance sheet at the end of every quarter.AdvertisementBut the Securities and Exchange Commission in 2012 closed its investigation into the collapse of Lehman and the Repo 105 balance sheet maneuvers without filing a lawsuit. And in April 2014, an arbitration panel said it found no basis for a malpractice claim brought by the Lehman bankruptcy estate against Ernst over the firm’s collapse and the Repo 105 transactions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lawsuit brought by New York State authorities stood as one of the last pending legal actions against Ernst arising from the Lehman bankruptcy.“After many years of costly litigation, we are pleased to put this matter behind us, with no findings of wrongdoing by E.Y. or any of its professionals,” a spokesman for Ernst & Young said in an emailed statement.In October 2013, Ernst agreed to pay $99 million to settle an investor class-action suit that claimed the audit firm looked the other way at Lehman’s use of the Repo 105 transactions. About $7 million of the settlement money that Ernst agreed to pay to state authorities will go toward investor restitution as well.In the arbitration, a panel that included three former judges ruled that Lehman’s management, and not Ernst, was most responsible for the controversial accounting maneuver.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Ernst & Young in Settlement Over Lehman Brothers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.