By RAVI SOMAIYAAPRIL 15, 2015
Politico, the political website that started in Washington, is expanding its coverage of states, beginning with New Jersey and Florida.Capital, a New York-based publication owned by the company and focused on state politics and the media, will be renamed Politico. Its senior staff — Josh Benson, Katherine Lehr and Tom McGeveran — will oversee the expansion into the states, Jim VandeHei, a Politico founder, said in a staff memorandum on Wednesday.This year, the memo said, Politico will start a bureau in Trenton, which will offer “a mix of free and paid content for the state written by reporters with expertise and experience.” Shortly after that, the company will hire a team of political and policy writers in Tallahassee, Fla. Additional sites will follow.The aim, Mr. VandeHei said, is to “find a template for saving coverage of state government.”Last November, Republicans posted sweeping gains in state houses across the nation, taking control of 29 legislatures, the most in nearly 100 years. Republican governors are in office in 31 states, the most since 1998. The party hailed the election victories as an endorsement of an agenda that included reducing the power of unions, and fighting President Obama’s health care plan.AdvertisementAnd, as Washington is perceived to have slipped into gridlock, the states have increasingly become the front line for several political and cultural battles, including those over immigration and same-sex marriage. Last month, for example, the national focus turned to Indiana, when state legislators enacted the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, which some suggested permitted discrimination against gays and lesbians.At the same time, the presence of journalists in statehouses has plummeted. Since 2003, the number of newspaper statehouse reporters has fallen about 35 percent, according to figures from the Pew Research Center. About 15 percent of those who remain are students.Advertisement“If you go into some states there is almost nothing, almost nobody paying attention,” Mr. VandeHei said in an interview. Though robust coverage of states is crucial at any time, he said, noting that many have vast economies, it is particularly important “when you fall into these periods where there is a lot of Washington inaction.” The states are now incubators for policies, on topics like energy and transportation, which eventually are folded into national solutions, he said.The Politico model is to get half of the necessary revenue to sustain small newsrooms from higher-priced subscriptions aimed at a smaller group of insiders obsessed with politics and policy, and the other half from advertising and events, Mr. VandeHei said. “No matter where we go, if you’re working in government, you need the same kinds of information,” he said. And there is little competition, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This could step in and fill a void left by daily newspapers,” said James O’Shea, a former editor in chief of The Los Angeles Times who has tracked the issue of local coverage for some time. It could even inspire newspapers to restaff their statehouse operations, he said.In the staff memo, Mr. VandeHei said Politico would also centralize its coverage of the media across New York and Washington, seeking “more stories that pop nationally.”The company announced nearly a dozen hires for its European operation, including Matthew Karnitschnig, chief Europe correspondent for The Wall Street Journal, and Maïa de la Baume, a Paris-based reporter for The New York Times.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Politico to Expand Coverage of States, Starting With New Jersey and Florida.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.