AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — For Menlo Ventures, its latest investment fund means a significant sum of fresh capital to invest in start-ups. It also represents a changing of the guard at one of Silicon Valley’s oldest venture capital firms.Menlo plans to announce on Wednesday that it has closed Menlo Ventures XII at $400 million, capping off nearly a year’s worth of fund-raising. It also gives the venture capital firm more resources to invest after a year-and-a-half in which several prominent investments, like Dropcam and Flurry, were sold.The new fund comes amid signs of both optimism — start-ups are continuing to raise money, sometimes at jaw-dropping valuations — and alarm, as some venture capitalists warn of overheated enthusiasm that portends danger.To Menlo, whose investments have included Uber, Gilead Sciences and Siri, the voice-driven assistant in Apple’s iPhones and iPads, some caution is merited in the current environment. Many investors today are piling into so-called unicorns, the nearly ubiquitous billon-dollar start-ups, pushing valuations to perhaps unsustainable levels.“We do think there’s a downturn coming,” Mark Siegel, a managing director at the firm, told DealBook in an interview. “We’ve gotten very price-sensitive.”Of primary concern are “me-too” companies that are fetching both investor dollars and sky-high valuations that aren’t necessarily merited.Menlo argues that while it was in a few unicorns, like Uber and the eyewear seller Warby Parker, it was committed to getting into hot start-ups early. Moreover, both by design and the limits of having a $400 million fund, the firm can’t and won’t necessarily lead a giant later-stage round.Despite the hints of gloom in Silicon Valley, investors in venture capital funds have still been eager to pour money into the space in hopes of finding the next Facebook or WhatsApp. But according to Mr. Siegel, these “limited partners,” as they are known in the business, have become choosy and begun selecting only a certain few firms.For Menlo, he contended, the draw for limited partners was the firm’s focus on investing early in companies within certain sectors, from Big Data analytics firms to marketplaces like Uber or new e-commerce ventures like Warby Parker.That approach has been largely successful. Menlo Ventures XI, the firm’s last round, has had a net internal rate of return — a common measure of investment performance — of about 81.6 percent as of Sept. 30, according to data from the Washington State Investment Board, an investor in the fund.Over all, the fund will be evenly split between start-ups aiming at servicing corporate clients and those focused on consumer businesses.Yet Menlo Ventures XII isn’t notable only just for being the latest fund for the nearly 40-year-old firm. It was also the first raised by Menlo’s younger partners entirely on their own.Founding partners like H. DuBose Montgomery have slowly been ceding the spotlight to a younger generation over several years. According to Mr. Siegel, that was by design, with Menlo having long embraced an apprenticeship model in which venture capital shops give younger investors time to hone their skills.“We have the older generation, which includes our founders, fading into the sunset,” Mr. Siegel said. Of the smoothness of the transition, he added, “Some firms are managing the process better than others.”Advertisement