AdvertisementSupported byCommon SenseBy James B. StewartPreet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York and one of the most acclaimed prosecutors of his generation, is locked in what seems to be an escalating war of words with the federal judiciary — one that some judges fear could influence important rulings.The tension was on ample display last week in a ruling in the public corruption case against the New York Assemblyman Sheldon Silver. The tone of the opinion left federal prosecutors seething, and the extended criticism of Mr. Bharara stunned even other judges. They fear that the same issues could surface in the related investigation of the leader of the New York State senate, Dean G. Skelos.Mr. Silver’s lawyers moved to dismiss his indictment because Mr. Bharara had orchestrated a “media firestorm” that tainted their client’s right to a fair trial. Such motions are considered long shots, but Judge Valerie Caproni of Federal District Court in Manhattan wrote that Mr. Silver had a legitimate argument that the case should be thrown out because Mr. Bharara, “while castigating politicians in Albany for playing fast and loose with the ethical rules that govern their conduct, strayed so close to the edge of the rules governing his own conduct.”Judge Caproni ultimately sided with the government, so there’s no way of knowing how close she came to tossing the indictment. But the possibility she even seriously considered such a step has set off alarms among some of her fellow judges. Judge Caproni herself acknowledged that dismissing an indictment is a “drastic remedy” that is “rarely used.” She also noted that the motion was not a disciplinary proceeding against Mr. Bharara. That didn’t stop her from spending a good part of the opinion questioning his ethics and chastising him for his public comments about the case.Several judges told me Mr. Bharara still enjoys, as one put it, “a deep reservoir of respect” from the judiciary, and a few conciliatory words would probably go a long way.The United States attorney in Manhattan oversaw a sweeping crackdown on insider trading in the hedge fund industry, but a federal appeals court upended the campaign.“We have the best bench in the country.” Mr. Bharara told me when we discussed the recent tensions. “Does that mean that every member of the bench every day is exquisitely perfect? No. Everyone is a human being. On any given day, our job might be to stand up to a judge, not because it’s disrespectful, but because we have a duty to represent the public interest.”Judge Caproni’s opinion might not have attracted much attention were it an isolated incident. But it follows criticism of Mr. Bharara’s office by the influential United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in the insider trading case against the hedge fund traders Anthony Chiasson and Todd Newman, where the judges’ ire was on display during oral arguments. Cases are supposed to be randomly assigned to judges, but the appellate panel suggested that Mr. Bharara had steered the case to a judge considered sympathetic to the government, a practice known as “judge shopping.” Mr. Bharara emphatically denied that.While related cases are routinely assigned to the same judge, and no one accused Mr. Bharara of explicitly violating the rules, some judges felt that Mr. Bharara had unfairly manipulated the practice to his advantage.“This colored the panel’s whole view of the case,” said one judge. “Over the years, the Second Circuit and Southern District have gone to great lengths to avoid even the appearance of judge shopping. There’s great sensitivity to the issue. This really stuck in people’s craw.”(I interviewed several federal judges this week, all of whom said they couldn’t be identified out of respect for the separation of powers between the judiciary and Mr. Bharara’s office, which is a part of the executive branch. All said they hoped the tension would dissipate.)The Second Circuit panel ruled against Mr. Bharara’s office in the Chiasson and Newman case, issuing an opinion that critics have called a serious setback to efforts to curb insider trading on Wall Street. In a filing, prosecutors called the ruling “dramatically wrong,” further inflaming some judges.But the most damage may have been done last summer. At what has been described as a freewheeling, off-the-record roast for a departing prosecutor, Mr. Bharara referred to Judge Naomi Buchwald, who had just presided over his office’s first loss of a major insider trading case, as “the worst federal judge” he’d ever encountered. Several of Judge Buchwald’s fellow jurists were at the party.Mr. Bharara hasn’t publicly addressed the issue but has told people he was making a stab at humor, part of a longer riff on the admissibility of hearsay evidence. He also said he had expected the remarks to remain private.Whatever Mr. Bharara’s intention at the roast, his comment didn’t prompt any chuckles inside the Daniel Patrick Moynihan United States Court House, where Judge Buchwald has her chambers. Even judges sympathetic to Mr. Bharara have closed ranks, with some calling Mr. Bharara a sore loser.One judge told me this week, “Of all the things attributed to him, that’s the hardest to understand.”Mr. Bharara has tried to make amends. He sent Judge Buchwald a page-and-a-half handwritten note of apology and has sought guidance on how to repair relations from Chief Judge Loretta A. Preska. At the same time, judges I spoke to said they had yet to detect much remorse.“All of these incidents show a certain lack of humility,” a judge said. “A little more deference would seem to be in order.”Other judges said the disagreement wasn’t unusual, especially when a United States attorney has been in office as long as Mr. Bharara (nearly six years). They also make the point that even heated disagreements among judges, prosecutors and defense lawyers are both inevitable and healthy.“We live in an adversary system,” Chief Judge Preska told me this week. “The judge’s role is to say who wins and who loses. There are always going to be disagreements with how we call it.”She said the court had “good relations” with Mr. Bharara and other prosecutors in his office and worked together with them on a variety of issues. (She declined to comment on her private discussions with Mr. Bharara.)“We have the best judges in the country,” said Richard B. Zabel, the deputy United States attorney for the Southern District. “We instruct all our assistant U.S. attorneys to treat the judges with the utmost respect and professionalism, but that doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t express disagreement with the court on an important point of law.”Richard J. Holwell, a former federal judge now in private practice, said, “You make decisions and you move on.” Even a sharp dispute shouldn’t affect “the long-term relationship of his office to the court.”Still, John C. Coffee Jr., a professor at Columbia Law School and an expert on white-collar crime, said that discord between the judiciary and prosecutors could have a subtle effect. “The danger is that the judges get together and talk, and if they decide someone is overreaching, that can color their thinking,” he said.Judges say tensions have been brewing for years, in part because of Mr. Bharara’s high visibility and near-celebrity status. In 2012, a string of prominent insider trading convictions landed him on the cover of Time magazine with the headline “This Man Is Busting Wall St.” The New York Post’s Page Six spotlighted his appearance at this year’s Vanity Fair Oscar party in Los Angeles, featuring him in the same paragraph with Jane Fonda, Angelica Huston and Steve Martin.This grates on a sizable contingent of judges for whom the best prosecutor is a quiet one. Judging from her opinion, Judge Caproni, a former federal prosecutor, may be in this camp. Before joining the bench, she served as general counsel to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, working under Robert Mueller, a famously tight-lipped director of the agency.But others told me this isn’t the issue, and many judges acknowledge that drawing public attention to cases can be an effective law enforcement tool and especially help deter criminal behavior.Some of Mr. Bharara’s predecessors avidly courted publicity. As the United States attorney for the Southern District during the 1980s, Rudolph Giuliani “is in a class of his own” in that regard, one judge said. (And judges repeatedly reprimanded Mr. Giuliani for what they saw as grandstanding.) Over the years, there have also been many intense disputes between prominent prosecutors and judges, not only in New York but across the country.Colleagues say Mr. Bharara is keenly aware of judges’ sensibilities and a longtime student of the federal bench. He spent four and a half years as chief counsel to the Senate Judiciary Committee, where his principal responsibility was vetting judicial nominees and shepherding them through the confirmation process. And many prosecutors in his office clerked for federal judges earlier in their careers and remain close to them.Still, one defender said Mr. Bharara’s “primary responsibility isn’t to keep judges happy.” Nor does humility come easily to him, especially when he’s convinced he’s right and acting in the public interest. In one court submission, defense lawyers referred to Mr. Bharara as a “petulant rooster.”Even Robert Fiske, often held up as the consummate United States attorney during his tenure in the Southern District from 1976-80, had to make amends. In his first case as United States attorney, he clashed with Judge Henry Werker. “After the opinion came down I sent a bouquet of red, white and blue flowers to Judge Werker’s chambers with a note that said, ‘May our future relations be more harmonious,’ Mr. Fiske recounts in his autobiography, “Prosecutor, Defender, Counselor.”After that, Mr. Fiske told me this week, “We got along very well.”Advertisement