By LANDON THOMAS Jr.APRIL 16, 2015
Stephen A. Schwarzman, chief executive of the world’s largest alternative asset manager, said that as his company grows “the cookie jar doesn’t get empty.”Blackstone, fresh off its real estate deal with General Electric, continues to mint money in its two largest areas of focus: private equity and global real estate.In the first quarter, Blackstone’s core profit — fees and its share of investment returns — grew by an impressive 169 percent, to $1.2 billion, the firm announced on Thursday. Over a 12-month period, core profit stands at $3.8 billion.Over all, assets grew by 14 percent, to $310 billion, as yield-starved pension funds and insurance companies continue to funnel money to Blackstone to invest.These types of profits and asset growth are virtually unique on Wall Street today, and they underscore how Blackstone, a firm that Stephen A. Schwarzman founded as a pure private equity firm, has become a broad-based collector of investment assets.Even with last week’s real estate deal with G.E. and Blackstone’s growing influence in this area, the firm’s core private equity business is also thriving.AdvertisementIn the first quarter, private equity profit was up 160 percent, driven by expanding fees and high returns from cashing out investments. Over the last 12 months, core profit for private equity was $2.3 billion, compared with $2.2 billion for real estate, whose core profit doubled.AdvertisementPrivate equity and real estate carried the firm in the first quarter as two other units, hedge funds and credit, did not show growth because of difficult markets.Although first-quarter profit growth was led by private equity, asset growth — a more crucial financial metric — was led by the real estate division, which is overseen by Jonathan D. Gray. Real estate raised $16.4 billion in funds over the quarter, and at $93 billion, it represents the largest segment of Blackstone’s $310 billion asset pile. Private equity is second at $76 billion.Blackstone said it would pay a dividend of 89 cents for the quarter, up from 35 cents a year in the period a year earlier.A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Blackstone Results.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.