By LANDON THOMAS Jr.APRIL 16, 2015
Laurence D. Fink, chief executive of the largest asset manager in the world, said that low interest rates impacted earnings.WASHINGTON —  As regulators in Washington warn of the risks that large asset management companies may pose to the markets, BlackRock, the largest of them all, continues to rake in heavy investment flows.BlackRock said on Thursday that the assets it oversees grew to $4.8 trillion in the first quarter, an 8 percent increase over the period a year ago.Propelled by these robust asset flows, the company earned $822 million, or $4.84 a share, up 9 percent from the quarter a year ago.As has been the case in recent years, the fund giant’s booming exchange traded fund business has driven this growth. E.T.F.s are investment funds that trade like stocks and are linked to a wide variety of stock and bond indexes.Sophisticated investors have come to rely on the funds because they provide liquidity in areas of the market that traditionally have been hard to trade, like emerging markets and leveraged loans. Unlike other fund companies, BlackRock does not have any leveraged loan E.T.F.s.AdvertisementOf the $70 billion in net inflows that BlackRock took in this quarter, $35 billion came from its iShares E.T.F. unit — with $18 billion of that flowing into fast-growing funds like high yield debt and corporate bonds. BlackRock now has close to $1.1 trillion in E.T.F.s under management, by far the most in the industry.AdvertisementAnd that is the rub, in the view of a growing number of academics and watchdogs.On Wednesday, the International Monetary Fund’s financial stability division released a report highlighting how fast funds have grown in areas of the market where it has become harder to buy and sell securities.On the same day, at a conference on financial stability here, Robert E. Rubin, the former Treasury secretary, said that the sharp increase in E.T.F.s in hard to trade areas of the market worried him.In a brief interview on Wednesday, Mr. Rubin said that these funds — which have exploded in size since the financial crisis — had not yet faced a broad and sustained market sell-off so it remained unclear how well they would respond to a wave of investors demanding their money back.The Institute of International Finance, a trade group that represents global banks, also released a letter on Wednesday that warned of the huge buildup of assets in the bond market. The institute’s views on the topic tend to reflect its main constituency, investment banks, which have complained that excessive regulation has hindered their ability to provide liquidity in the market.BlackRock has argued that bond E.T.F.s, and its increasing size, are healthful for the markets in general and that in a low interest rate environment it is to be expected that long-term investors like insurance companies and pension funds invest in higher yielding securities to lock in better returns.Moreover, the industry has said that firms like BlackRock do not invest their own capital in these types of securities — as investment banks did before the crisis — and do not rely on leverage to bolster returns.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We live in a low rate environment in which insurance companies and pension funds have to invest their money,” said Laurence D. Fink, the chief executive of BlackRock, who noted that three-quarters of the firm’s clients were these types of buy-and-hold investors. “We are their agents, and we are investing money for them.”Still, Hyun Song Shin, a top economist at the Bank for International Settlements, a banking and research center for central banks worldwide, argued on Wednesday that this relentless reach for yield by such investors might just as well signal a good old-fashioned investment bubble.“Long-term investors are chasing disappearing yields,” he said at the financial stability conference, highlighting the negligible and in some cases negative yields on long-term German and Swiss bonds. “You are now paying to bear risk so the question is: Is this a sign of exuberance or distress?”A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Rising Assets Push BlackRock’s Profit Up 9%.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.