AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryCitigroup was able to take a rare victory lap on Thursday, reporting first-quarter results that were devoid of the kind of scandal, losses and regulatory missteps that have come to plague the bank.Profit rose 16 percent, to about $4.8 billion, or $1.52 a share, after adjusting for various derivatives and fixed-income holdings. Those results easily beat analysts’ expectations of $1.39 a share. That compared with $4.15 billion, or $1.30 a share, on the same basis in the period a year earlier. Net income was $4.77 billion, or $1.51 a share, compared with $3.94 billion, or $1.23 a share, in the period a year earlier.The increase was driven by lower expenses and strong investment banking revenue. Even mortgage origination, which had been in a slump, perked up in the first three months of the year.Those increases were enough to offset a decline in fixed-income trading revenue as the bank struggled in volatile markets. Investors cheered Citigroup’s results, pushing its shares up by more than 1.5 percent.Investors are eagerly awaiting guidance from management about when higher short-term interest rates will impact the banks’ bottom lines.“We had a strong quarter over all, particularly in executing against our top strategic priorities,” Citigroup’s chief executive, Michael L. Corbat, said in a statement.The first quarter was uneven across Wall Street, with some banks posting improved trading results and others struggling, as low interest rates dragged on their retail deposits and debt holdings.JPMorgan Chase announced strong fixed-income trading results earlier in the week, while Bank of America reported lackluster fixed-income activity, particularly in credit spreads. On Thursday, Citigroup said its fixed-income trading revenue dropped 11 percent in the quarter, while Goldman Sachs netted broad gains in stock, bond, currency and commodity trading.Many questions remain about whether large banks can consistently increase profits in the face of tighter regulation and trading markets that are increasingly at the whim of the interest rate policies of the world’s central banks.Citigroup has faced even more questions than many of its rivals. The bank struggled to pass the Federal Reserve’s stress test last year and grappled with a string of scandals in its Mexico unit.Lately, Citigroup has moved to quiet some of those doubts. Last month, the Fed approved Citigroup’s capital plan, and the bank has shaken up its top management ranks, including in Mexico.Even with Citigroup’s standout quarter, there were signs of the bank’s continued challenges. Adjusted revenue declined 2 percent, to $19.8 billion. If revenue continues to slide this year, that is likely to increase pressure to look for more ways to cut.Analysts have zeroed in on Citigroup’s ability to meet its return targets for the year. At least in the first quarter, which tends to be one of the strongest for banks, Citigroup managed to report a return on assets of 1.05 percent, which is better than the bank’s target of 0.90 percent for the year.Since the financial crisis, Citigroup has been reordering its businesses in a major way. It has been shedding billions of dollars of assets, from its subprime consumer lending arm in the United States to banking branches across the globe. Many of these efforts are now paying off, reflected in lower expenses.There were some bright spots in its consumer banking business in the United States, including an increase in mortgage origination, an improvement that other large banks also reported in the first quarter.In conference calls with analysts this week, many of the bank executives said they were hopeful that the coming home-buying season would improve over last year’s disappointing results. But they cautioned that it was too early to tell if the uptick in mortgage activity would continue through the spring.Advertisement