AdvertisementSupported byBy David JollyPARIS — European automakers last month had their best showing in a year, an industry report showed on Thursday, as the economic recovery and incentive programs lifted sales across the region.Registrations of new passenger cars in the European Union, a proxy for sales, rose 10.6 percent in March from a year earlier, their biggest gain since March 2014, the European Automobile Manufacturers’ Association reported from Brussels. The data include all 28 European Union members except Malta.Sales are improving along with the eurozone economy. Mario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank, said on Wednesday at a news conference in Frankfurt that the eurozone was gradually picking up from the 0.3 percent quarterly growth rate it posted at the end of 2014.Separately, the central bank on Thursday provided further evidence that the eurozone economy was improving, with its survey of professional forecasters showing that they had raised their expectations significantly compared with three months ago.For this year, the 59 economic forecasters raised their estimates for eurozone growth to 1.4 percent, compared with 1.1 percent in the previous quarterly survey. For 2016, they predicted growth of 1.7 percent compared with a previous average forecast of 1.5 percent.The forecasters also predicted that unemployment in the 19 countries in the eurozone would fall to 10.3 percent by 2016, from an estimated 11.3 percent this year, the European Central Bank said.At his news briefing on Wednesday, Mr. Draghi cited lower oil prices and the weaker euro, which helps exporters, as helping to lift private sector demand. He also credited the central bank’s monetary stimulus for having made it easier for households to obtain credit, an important factor in the auto market.Manufacturers’ incentives, including price cuts and rebates, also helped to spur auto sales, though at the cost of reducing profit margins.For the first three months of the year, auto sales in Europe rose 8.6 percent, to 3.5 million vehicles, the manufacturers’ association said. If that pace is maintained through this year, it would put the overall market at 14 million cars sold. While still below the nearly 16 million sold in 2007, the peak, it would represent a significant recovery since sales fell to 11.9 million units in 2013.Hans-Peter Wodniok, an analyst at Fairesearch in Frankfurt, said there were signs that some companies might have “artificially boosted” their sales to maintain their market-share numbers, which manufacturers can do by selling to captive rental fleets or by so-called channel-stuffing, registering cars through dealers before they are sold to consumers.Still, he said, “the recovery is gaining pace.”Mr. Wodniok had forecast that the market would grow about 3 percent this year, but said the strength of the first quarter led him to believe that the growth rate could exceed 5 percent for 2015.That demand, he said, would probably enable carmakers to raise their prices somewhat, raising the companies’ profitability.Volkswagen, the biggest European carmaker and No. 2 worldwide, after Toyota Motors, posted a 10 percent gain. PSA Peugeot Citroën, the second-largest in Europe, had an 8.7 percent gain, and Renault, the third-largest, posted a 10.2 percent gain.Luxury carmakers had a strong month. BMW’s sales rose 10.6 percent, Daimler, maker of Mercedes-Benz cars, reported 18.9 percent growth. Toyota’s Lexus division sold 29.1 percent more cars, albeit from a low base.Among the American firms, Ford Motor’s sales rose 8.7 percent, and the Opel division of General Motors continued to struggle, with sales falling 0.6 percent. Fiat Chrysler posted a 15.5 percent increase, led by a more than tripling of sales of Jeeps.All of the major markets grew, with sales in the two largest on the Continent, Germany and France, up around 9 percent. Sales in Britain expanded 6 percent, Italy rose more than 15 percent, and Spain, where government incentives have been increasing sales for months, rose 41 percent.Advertisement