AdvertisementSupported byIn DebtBy Stephen J. LubbenColt Defense, maker of the famous pistols used by outlaws and actors, has announced that it may undertake one of  the strangest prepackaged bankruptcy cases ever.Actually, it has announced that its first plan is to restructure its outstanding bond debt with an exchange offer. Existing bonds would be exchanged for new bonds with longer maturities and higher interest rates. Bondholders would also enjoy a rather severe haircut – the new bonds would have a face amount that was 70 percent lower. Ouch.But because Colt has also announced that the exchange offer is conditional on receiving nearly full bondholder participation, I’m going to assume that won’t happen and move along to Plan B.Plan B is a “prepack,” or a prepackaged bankruptcy case. An American prepack – the term has a different meaning in Britain – involves solicitation of votes on a bankruptcy plan before the bankruptcy is actually filed. Once the case is filed, the debtor can move quickly to court approval of the plan.An exchange offer must comply with the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, which requires unanimous consent to change the core terms of a bond, but a bankruptcy plan can achieve the same result simply by compliance with the voting rules of the bankruptcy code. Fifty percent of the creditors and two-thirds of the amount owned work here.It is quite common for debtors to follow a two-track approach, presenting an exchange along with a ballot to vote on a prepacked plan.Exchange offers often fail, however, because they are voluntary, and typically a debtor needs at least 85 percent participation to make the exchange worthwhile. It is really hard to get to 85 percent, so Colt is pushing things by aiming for 98 percent.The other odd feature of Colt’s larger plan is that is appears that Colt never negotiated with bondholders. Typically a prepack will be begun with at least the support of some of the largest holders. But indications are that Colt has not talked with them.It is hard to tell who the holders are. Bloomberg identifies about 10 or 11 holders, but they represent only five or six percent of the nearly $250 million outstanding.Nevertheless, starting a prepack or an exchange offer with no input from creditors is a risky move. Perhaps the threat of what might happen if the prepack fails will motivate bondholders to accept the deal, however painful. But if they reject the offer and the prepack, Colt will most likely face a contentious traditional Chapter 11 case.It will be interesting to see how it turns out.Stephen J. Lubben holds the Harvey Washington Wiley Chair in corporate governance and business ethics at Seton Hall Law School and is an expert on bankruptcy.Advertisement