By BEN SISARIOAPRIL 17, 2015
Barely a month after Jay Z took over Tidal, a Swedish streaming music service, the top executive at its parent company has stepped down and about a dozen employees have been laid off.Andy Chen was chief executive of Aspiro, a publicly traded technology company in Sweden that was bought this year by Jay Z. Project Panther, an investment vehicle under Jay Z’s control, made a $56 million bid for Aspiro in January, and then took control of it in March after the bid was accepted by more than 95 percent of the company’s shareholders.According to a statement from Tidal on Friday, the interim chief executive of the service will be Peter Tonstad, a former Aspiro chief. “He has a better understanding of the industry and a clear vision for how the company is looking to change the status quo,” the statement said.In its statement, the company said only that it had eliminated “a handful of positions” as part of an effort to cut redundancies and that it had also hired new staff. A person with knowledge of the changes, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said that of about 100 employees worldwide, about a dozen were laid off.Last month, at a news conference in Manhattan, Jay Z reintroduced Tidal onstage with about 16 other music stars who were identified as the service’s new owners, including Madonna, Kanye West, Beyoncé, Jack White and the French duo Daft Punk. “This is a platform that’s owned by artists,” Jay Z  said at the time.  A majority of the shares in Tidal will be owned by artists, the company said, and Tidal has already presented exclusive content like videos and new singles.Jay Z has portrayed Tidal as a way for artists to have greater control over their work and earn more money from digital music. Yet his involvement of a small number of superstars has been criticized as a way for already-wealthy musicians to increase their share. Speaking at New York University after the service’s introduction, Jay Z defended it. “You pay $9.99 for Spotify, so why not $9.99 for Tidal?” he said. “We’re not asking for anything else; we’re just saying that we’ll spread that money to artists more fairly.”A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Chief Leaves Music Service Taken Over by Jay Z.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.