AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — Consumer prices in the United States increased for a second straight month in March on rising gasoline and housing costs.The Labor Department said on Friday that its Consumer Price Index increased 0.2 percent last month in broad-based price gains after a similar increase in February. In the 12 months through March, the index slipped 0.1 percent after being unchanged in February.The so-called core C.P.I., which strips out food and energy costs, increased 0.2 percent in March after a similar rise in February. In the 12 months through March, the core C.P.I. rose 1.8 percent, the largest increase since October.The economy appears set to rebound from a soft patch in the first quarter. In a separate report, the University of Michigan said its consumer sentiment index jumped to 95.9 this month from a reading of 93 in March.That bodes well for consumer spending and the overall economy, which stumbled at the start of the year under the weight of a harsh winter, a resurgent dollar, weaker global growth and a labor dispute at West Coast ports, which has been settled.The rise in inflation, however, may be limited by the strong dollar, which has gained 13 percent against the currencies of the United States’ main trading partners since last June.Economists estimate the dollar could shave half a percentage point off inflation and economic growth this year. Firming wage growth, however, could mitigate the dollar’s impact on inflation.“But if the core rate is that close to target when it is being constrained by the indirect impact of lower energy prices and the stronger dollar, how high could it get when those transitory effects fade next year?” said Paul Ashworth, chief United States economist at Capital Economics in New York.Last month, gasoline prices rose 3.9 percent, the largest gain since February 2013, after increasing 2.4 percent in February. Food prices slipped 0.2 percent last month, the biggest drop since May 2013.Elsewhere, shelter costs rose 0.3 percent. That, together with higher energy prices, accounted for much of the gain in the index last month.Further gains in the cost of shelter are probable in the months ahead, given rising demand for rental accommodation.There were increases in prices of new motor vehicles, used cars and trucks and medical care services. Prices for apparel items and household furnishings and operations also rose. Airline fares fell 1.7 percent.Advertisement