By DAN BILEFSKY and SILVIA TAULÉSAPRIL 17, 2015
LONDON — The financial affairs of the former International Monetary Fund chief Rodrigo Rato have come under increased scrutiny in Spain after law enforcement officials detained Mr. Rato as part of a tax and money-laundering investigation.Mr. Rato, 66, who was a deputy prime minister and economy minister in the center-right government of former Prime Minister José María Aznar in the late 1990s and early 2000s, was once one of Spain’s most powerful financial figures. He was credited with steering the country to strong growth in the late 1990s, a period known as the “Spanish miracle.” He went on to serve as managing director of the I.M.F. from 2004 to 2007.But his reputation suffered a blow after he became chairman of Bankia, a giant Spanish bank. The lender collapsed under his stewardship in 2012, aggravating Spain’s financial crisis and pushing the country to seek a bailout for its ailing banks.Late Thursday, Mr. Rato was detained by the tax authorities and the police in Madrid as part of an investigation into fraud and money laundering. Prosecutors are trying to determine whether there is sufficient evidence to open a case against Mr. Rato in a 2012 episode in which he took advantage of tax amnesty to repatriate funds held offshore.AdvertisementSpanish television on Friday repeatedly broadcast images of the customs authorities leading Mr. Rato to a car from his home in a wealthy Madrid neighborhood.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.”He was the pride and now he is the shame,” the political analyst Marisa Cruz wrote in the newspaper El Mundo. Others suggested that his detainment marked the end of an era in Spain.AdvertisementAfter he was released early on Friday, Mr. Rato told the newspaper El País that he had confidence in the Spanish justice system. “I am at home with my family and free,” he said.Mr. Rato was a leading light in Spain’s center-right Popular Party, which has been buffeted in recent years by a series of corruption scandals that have undermined confidence in the political establishment and the government of the current prime minister, Mariano Rajoy. Analysts said this latest scandal could further undermine Mr. Rajoy’s government as he seeks re-election this year, and embolden protest groups like the leftist party Podemos.Mr. Rato is already under investigation in a fraud case during his time as chairman of Bankia. In the past, he has denied suggestions that he and fellow Bankia directors ignored or hid loan problems that resulted in the bank’s financial troubles and its eventual seizure by the government.Dan Bilefsky reported from London, and Silvia Taulés from Barcelona, Spain.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.