AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ProtessThe Justice Department often bemoans a lack of transparency from companies facing criminal investigations. Now the Justice Department will be providing some clarity of its own.In a speech on Friday at New York University Law School, the head of the Justice Department’s criminal division outlined plans for prosecutors to better script their approach to penalizing corporate crime, arguing that “an opaque or unreasoned enforcement action carries little deterrent effect.”The effort, building on other recent steps by prosecutors to demystify their corporate cases, addresses complaints from some companies about uneven punishments and uncertain expectations.“In the future, you should expect that our resolutions will include even more detailed explanations of our considerations,” said Leslie R. Caldwell, the head of the criminal division, which oversees some 600 prosecutors and works with United States attorney offices around the country. She added: “This is a priority of mine. While these documents already provide significant insight into our thought processes, they will soon provide an even greater explanation of our analysis and conclusions.”The effort will most likely play out in forthcoming plea deals and deferred-prosecution agreements, which will detail why a company received a certain penalty. And while the Justice Department is skittish about discussing investigations that never materialized into a criminal case, Ms. Caldwell explained that she was “looking for ways to better inform the community about cases in which we decline to prosecute, as there is often as much to learn from a decision not to bring charges.”It is unclear whether such measures will dispel the notion among some companies that the Justice Department picks its punishments out of a hat, handing a deferred-prosecution deal to one bank while demanding a guilty plea from another.But Ms. Caldwell’s speech does signal a broader attempt at clarity for the criminal division, which oversees some of the broadest investigations into Wall Street, including interest rate and foreign currency manipulation by big banks. In September, Marshall L. Miller, the No. 2 official in the Justice Department’s criminal division, detailed in a speech how banks would either earn credit for exposing their employees’ misdeeds or face charges for protecting them.At the center of the plan is explaining what it means to cooperate with prosecutors. For example, when companies conduct an internal investigation, Ms. Caldwell said, it must be an unvarnished recounting of facts for the company to receive cooperation credit.“As we work to be transparent, we expect transparency in return,” Ms. Caldwell said. “Transparency is a two-way street, and we expect companies that are claiming to cooperate to walk the walk.”As for the internal inquiries, they must be “independent, and designed to uncover the facts, not to spread company talking points or whitewash the truth,” she said.Ms. Caldwell also disputed the notion that the Justice Department would effectively rubber stamp the results of a company’s internal investigation.“The criminal division, meanwhile, will conduct its own investigation,” she said. “We will pressure-test a company’s internal investigation with the facts we gather on our own, and we will consider the adequacy of an internal investigation when we evaluate a company’s claim of cooperation.”Some lawmakers and consumer advocates argue that the Justice Department is already too cooperative with corporate wrongdoers. Some companies that settle with the Justice Department display a pattern of recidivism, the critics note, repeatedly racking up new charges.Addressing such criticism, Ms. Caldwell argued in the speech on Friday that corporate plea deals and deferred-prosecution agreements, or D.P.A.s, “have real teeth.”And when a company fails to live up to the agreement, “the criminal division will not hesitate to tear up a D.P.A. or N.P.A. and file criminal charges, where such action is appropriate and proportional to the breach.”Advertisement