By DAVID JOLLYAPRIL 17, 2015
PARIS — The chairman and biggest shareholder of Vivendi, the French company that owns Universal Music, withstood a stockholder rebellion at the company’s annual meeting on Friday, winning a battle in what could be an unusually contentious proxy season for corporate France.The Vivendi chairman, Vincent Bolloré, was able to leverage a controversial French law that went into effect this year. It is aimed at ensuring that long-term shareholders have greater voting rights than investors who hold a company’s stock for shorter periods. The victory for Mr. Bolloré should help his quest to wield even greater control over Vivendi, and to overcome investor dissent.“This isn’t a plan for me,” Mr. Bolloré told shareholders on Friday. “This is a plan for Vivendi.”The law, a subject of debate in investing circles, will be an issue at the annual meetings in coming days of some other big French companies, including the big bank BNP Paribas, the energy giant GDF Suez and the automaker Renault.AdvertisementThe law is meant to continue a longstanding tradition in French corporate governance in which companies can adopt rules allowing registered shareholders who have owned stock for two years or more to have two votes for each of their shares. That compares with the standard one-share, one-vote rights of shorter-term stockholders.AdvertisementSome other countries, including the United States, allow arrangements that can give certain categories of shareholders greater voting rights. The J. M. Smucker Company, a big American food maker that was once a family-owned business, gives 10 extra votes on each share held for more than four years, ensuring that its long-term investors’ voices are heard. And in 2010, the Securities and Exchange Commission adopted a rule giving certain long-term shareholders the right to have their board nominees included in proxy materials.But France stands out. More than half the big companies in the country’s CAC 40 stock index already have a two-for-one voting system in place. On Friday, Vivendi joined their ranks.Afterward, Vivendi’s stock dipped nearly 1 percent in Paris trading.Mr. Bolloré was so concerned about the vote that he nearly tripled his stake in Vivendi this year, raising it in four increments to 14.5 percent from around 5 percent, a holding with a market value approaching 5 billion euros, or $5.4 billion.But he sought to assure shareholders that his interests and theirs were aligned — and that, in the world of media and entertainment, there was nothing unusual about his strong position.To bolster his case, he displayed a chart of other major companies where top executives enjoy outsize influence through various forms of special voting rights. Among them are Google, where Larry Page holds 14 percent of the stock but controls 54 percent of the voting rights; and 21st Century Fox, where Rupert Murdoch controls almost 40 percent of the voting rights but has only a 12 percent family holding.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But many professional investors were not cheering on Friday, having made clear their opposition to the new law that automatically installs the loyalty-share system unless stockholders specifically reject it. The new rules are known as the “Florange law” because the government of President François Hollande adopted the measure last year after battling with the Luxembourg-based steel giant ArcelorMittal over the company’s closing of a mill in Florange, France. The state has long sought to keep French businesses in French hands, and anything that discriminates in favor of long-term shareholders would most likely make unwelcome takeovers more difficult.“It’s a bad idea,” said Denis Branche, a partner at the French asset-management company PhiTrust Active Investors who helped to lead opposition to the so-called passive adoption of the two-for-one voting system at Vivendi.The issue of double voting rights has also hit Renault. Last week, the government shocked the automaker with the announcement that it had raised its stake to almost 20 percent from 15 percent. Renault is one of the big French companies that still uses a one-share, one-vote system. But the government wants the two-for-one system to be put in place at the company, and hopes to make sure nothing prevents that from happening at the shareholders’ meeting on April 30.AdvertisementIn Renault’s case, the management opposes moving to the double-voting system.On Thursday, Carlos Ghosn, the chairman and chief executive of Renault, and his fellow board members held an emergency meeting to discuss the government’s move, which took them by surprise. The issue is a delicate one, because Renault controls its Japanese partner, Nissan Motor, with a 43 percent stake. But Nissan’s 15 percent cross-shareholding in Renault — until recently the same size as the French government’s stake — comes without voting rights.The Renault board released a statement late Thursday urging shareholders to support the one-share, one-vote principle, and saying that the board wanted the French government to bring its holdings back into balance with Nissan’s as soon as possible.In Vivendi’s case, the company is flush with cash after the sale of billions of euros of telecommunications assets it had identified as peripheral to its ambition to be more purely a media content company. That treasure chest has made it subject to demands by some investors that it pass part of the cash to shareholders.On April 8, the company backed down after a monthslong public squabble with an American hedge fund, P. Schoenfeld Asset Management, agreeing to raise its dividend by more than €1 billion. But Vivendi refused another of the hedge fund’s demands — that it sell the Universal Music Group, the world’s largest music company — arguing that the business is essential to its strategy.As evidence that it is serious about a pure-media future for itself, Vivendi said this month that it was in exclusive talks to buy Dailymotion, a video website that it wants to use to increase its reach in music videos.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.