By RAVI SOMAIYAAPRIL 17, 2015
Meredith Kopit Levien, executive vice president for advertising at The New York Times Company, has been promoted to chief revenue officer and will oversee “the generation of all advertising and subscription revenue,” the company’s chief executive, Mark Thompson, said in a memorandum to employees on Friday.Ms. Kopit Levien will work to develop a clear strategy to accelerate consumer revenue growth, Mr. Thompson said, including subscription revenue. In the memorandum, Mr. Thompson cited a recent innovation report, which emphasized the need to break down barriers among departments and disciplines at the company, as a driving factor in the decision. Her promotion is effective immediately, Mr. Thompson said.The Times recently appointed Kinsey Wilson, a former NPR executive who joined the newspaper this year as an editor for strategy and innovation, to lead its companywide digital product and technology operations, reporting to both its business and newsroom leadership.Mr. Thompson called Ms. Kopit Levien’s new position “of a piece” with Mr. Wilson’s dual role, saying that “unifying the responsibilities of advertising and marketing under single leadership will offer us the opportunity to more effectively balance the needs and accelerate the progress of both groups.”AdvertisementMs. Kopit Levien, 44, joined the company in 2013 and has since “transformed our advertising group,” Mr. Thompson said. She was previously chief revenue officer at Forbes Media, and also held various senior and strategic advertising sales positions at The Atlantic Media Company.AdvertisementThe Times, like most publications, has struggled to adapt to changing consumer habits as readers have moved from print to the web and to smartphones and social media. It put up a paywall, charging digital readers to subscribe, in 2011, and by the end of last year it had 910,000 paid digital subscribers.Some industry observers have suggested that the number may be reaching its peak, and that The Times will have to diversify its offerings to generate new reader revenue.Last year, the company’s annual operating profit declined because of investments in digital journalism and severance costs from a round of job reductions. Revenue was flat as growth in circulation as well as digital advertising, credited in part to Ms. Kopit Levien and a move toward native advertising, or ads made to resemble articles, offset declines in its print business.A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Times Company Appoints a Chief Revenue Officer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.