AdvertisementSupported byBy Steve LohrLast week, General Electric declared that it was substantially accelerating its retreat from finance to bet its future on its industrial business.This week, G.E. showed why it was confident in that strategy. At a time when other companies that supply equipment to the oil industry, as G.E. does, are scaling back their sales and profit forecasts in the face of sharply lower oil prices, G.E. is not.G.E. on Friday reported solid profit growth in the first quarter in its industrial business. It acknowledged the challenge to its big oil field equipment business, as oil companies cut exploration and production budgets. But the company not only reiterated its forecast for double-digit earnings growth for the industrial side of the corporation — reaching $1.10 to $1.20 a share — but Jeffrey R. Immelt, G.E.’s chief executive, also said his team was now looking to deliver industrial profits in the “high end of that range.”The G.E. quarterly performance suggests that the company is successfully balancing the weakness in its division that makes heavy equipment for oil exploration and production with strength in other products, like jet engines. The company is also tightly controlling costs across its industrial operations.During a conference call with analysts, Mr. Immelt, in response to a question, said, “We see all the volatility. But we’ve got a pretty good, diversified set of businesses.” G.E.’s products include jet engines, power generators, locomotives and medical-imaging equipment.The year could yet test G.E.’s confidence. But the first-quarter results were an encouraging sign for the company and its back-to-the-future strategy as a global corporation with a broad portfolio of industrial businesses, supported by heavy investment in research and development, and guided by a deep bench of skilled managers.The company’s earnings from its industrial businesses rose 9 percent during the quarter, and 14 percent on a per-share basis. G.E. has an aggressive share buyback program, which reduces the number of shares outstanding.The profit improvement on the industrial side of G.E. was achieved even though its revenue eased by 1 percent. But the slippage into negative territory was the result of a strong dollar, which reduces reported sales because most of G.E.’s business is abroad. Without the currency effect — $950 million — industrial revenue would have increased by 3 percent.G.E. reported a net loss for the quarter of $13.6 billion, reflecting the impact of the company’s announcement a week ago that it was hastening the retreat from its big finance arm, GE Capital. As part of that move, the company said, it would take a $16 billion charge in the quarter.G.E. operating earnings for the company as a whole, excluding the one-time charge, declined 5 percent, to $3.1 billion, or 31 cents a share. That was slightly above the average estimate from Wall Street analysts of 30 cents a share, as compiled by Thomson Reuters.Revenue for the quarter was $29.4 billion, down 12 percent from the year-earlier quarter, largely attributable to the intended shrinking in GE Capital, whose revenue fell 39 percent. Excluding the effect of GE Capital assets sold off during the quarter, companywide revenue slipped 3 percent to $33.1 billion, below the analysts’ consensus of $34.23 billion.Last week, when G.E. disclosed its stepped-up return to its industrial roots, the company’s executives said the industrial businesses were on track to generate double-digit growth in profits.But analysts question how G.E. can deliver sharply rising profits when oil prices have dropped significantly, given its large oil and gas business.“The challenge for the year is getting to that high level of profit on the industrial side with a big drop in the oil and gas business,” said Nicholas Heymann, an analyst at William Blair.G.E.’s first-quarter results provide clues about how it plans to navigate that challenge. Limiting the damage with energetic management is one ingredient. The oil and gas business held up in the quarter better than many analysts expected. Revenue fell 8 percent to $3.96 billion, though operating profits slipped only 3 percent to $432 million and profit margins increased by half a percentage point.Starting last summer, according to Jeffrey S. Bornstein, G.E.’s chief financial officer, the management of the oil and gas unit has been overhauling the cost structure of that business. This year, its expenses are projected to be reduced by $600 million, Mr. Bornstein said, partly by trimming the payroll but also by redesigning how work is done and products are built, reducing materials and labor costs.“There’s a lot of self-help here,” Mr. Bornstein said.A similar approach is being taken, if less urgently, across the company. The operating profit margin on G.E.’s industrial business rose by more than a percentage point, as cost-cutting and productivity programs take hold.On April 10, G.E. announced it was selling off commercial real estate investments valued at $26.5 billion mainly to funds managed by the Blackstone Group, the large private investment firm. And that move, the company said, was one step in a plan to shed $200 million more in assets from GE Capital by 2018, getting rid of not only real estate, but also its consumer finance and most of its commercial lending and leasing assets. What will remain of GE Capital will be its financing of industrial equipment purchases by G.E. customers.G.E. has steadily pared back its big finance unit since the financial crisis hit in 2008, threatening the company’s stability. In good years, GE Capital was a money machine. In 2007, GE Capital contributed 57 percent of corporate operating earnings. By last year, that share was down to 42 percent, with the industrial side accounting for 58 percent.Under its previous plan, GE Capital’s earnings were expected to go down to 25 percent of the corporate total by 2018. Under the accelerated timetable, the finance arm will account for less than 10 percent G.E.’s operating earnings by then.Advertisement