AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Alexa von Tobel, chief executive of LearnVest, the financial planning company, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Were you in leadership roles when you were younger?A. I did some unpredictable things early on. I transferred to a new school between fifth and sixth grade. I was a brand new student, and I ran for class president after a month and won.I had this really great platform where I had everyone stand up. I said, “Everyone on the right side of the room raise your hand and then put it down.” And then, “Everyone on the left side of the room raise your hand and put it down.” And then I said to them, “Are those leadership skills or what?”How have your parents influenced your leadership style?My dad was a doctor. He passed away when I was younger, and my mom is a pediatric nurse practitioner. My mom isn’t going to tell you her opinions unless asked. She’s more of a silent leader, and at 31, I’m starting to really understand the value of not sharing all of my opinions.What are some other leadership lessons you’ve learned?Developing management skills is hard for everybody, and it’s about making mistakes, and trial and error. It’s about trying to figure out who you are as a manager and your own genuine strengths and weaknesses. There are certain things that come naturally — I am a great communicator. On the flip side, I don’t like giving people bad news. I am a positive person who wants to believe in people.One of the biggest insights for me has been that your gut really knows what you have to do and sometimes they’re things that are not easy. You have to listen to that and say, this is a really tough decision. It’s not one I’m excited about, but it’s the right decision, and you have to focus your energy on doing those things.Other insights?The impact of me saying something grew very quickly, as the company went from a team of five people to 20 and then 150. I had to become more thoughtful about my opinions. So one thing I now say probably 100 times a week is, “Here’s my bad idea; make it better.” I don’t have the best idea in the room. Just because I’m the C.E.O. doesn’t mean that I’m the smartest.How do you hire?I will say to people, “Walk me through your résumé, particularly why you changed from one job to the next.” Their thought process tells you a lot about someone. The next thing for me is to ask, “What’s your biggest strength and what’s your biggest weakness?” People will tell you exactly what they’re good at and what they’re bad at. But don’t people try to spin a weakness into a strength, as in, “I work too hard and I’m a perfectionist?”If they don’t give me a real weakness, I’ll tell them about mine. I’m impatient. It’s what makes me the entrepreneur. I’m not willing to wait for the next month. I’m going to find a way to get there faster, but being impatient creates all kinds of other problems.And then I’ll ask them again, “What are you genuinely bad at? What does your spouse or partner or the person you’re dating tell you you’re bad at? Because if they haven’t told you, then you shouldn’t be sitting here because I can’t work with you if you don’t know what you’re bad at.”I don’t think people’s weaknesses are bad at all. We all have them. I have tons, and I’m not going to discredit you for having them, but I think that not being aware of them is dangerous.I learned in business school that you don’t need to limit your weaknesses. You should harness your strengths. If I do that, I’m probably going to go a lot farther in whatever I’m trying to do. That was an “aha” moment for me — that your weaknesses aren’t bad. That’s one reason why I push hard in the interview on strengths and weaknesses. I want you to be able to harness your strengths and, if I can understand them, maybe we can push it further.The last things I ask are, “What gets you out of bed? What gets you excited?” and finally, “Tell me about a time on a Sunday that you were thinking about going back to work and you hated your job. Why? What was it?” We’ve all had Sunday nights when you were stressed and feeling the Sunday blues. That tells me a lot about the type of team member you’re going to be. What career and life advice do you give to college grads?The first is that you have to dream big because no one else can dream for you. Now that I’m becoming a new parent myself, I’m trying to think about what my parents did to help me believe in myself. I don’t think I’m special in any way. I just believe in hard work and I believe in dreaming big. To some degree, you have to believe that you can dream and that you can figure out a way to get there.Sometimes when I’m mentoring people, I’ll say, “What’s your biggest dream?” and it will be something small and I’ll say: “Dream bigger. Just give yourself the ability to say, ‘I want something bigger,’ because who cares if you fail? Truly, who cares? So dream bigger because no one else is going to do it for you.”I also tell them about a filter I use to help me make decisions, which is, “When I’m 90, will I regret this?” When I was in undergrad, they did a study of 90-year-olds in the psychology lab. What they found is that no one ever regretted anything they did. They just regretted the things they didn’t do. That just gave me license to be bold.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about the challenges of leading and managing. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice.This interview has been edited and condensed.Advertisement