

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

APRIL 20, 2015

The paper, based in Charleston, S.C., won for its five-part series, “Till Death Do Us Part,” which explored the epidemic of domestic abuse in South Carolina. A reporter and editor on the team, Glenn Smith, said the paper started working on the series after a report issued by the Violence Policy Center at the end of 2013 named South Carolina the deadliest state in the country for women. “We just thought, man, this is horrible,” Mr. Smith, 50, said of the report. “Why are we so bad compared with everyone else?”Submitted Work:
Till Death Do Us Part (Series Page) The Times staff won for its digital coverage of a landslide in Oso, Wash., which claimed 43 lives and destroyed dozens of homes in the neighborhood of Steelhead Haven. The Pulitzer committee cited not only the paper’s account of the harrowing event, but also its follow-up reporting on whether the disaster — which was set off by the collapse of a hillside above the Stillaguamish River — could have been avoided. Submitted Work:The Oso Landslide (Selection of Articles, Video and More)Finalists: Staff, The Buffalo News; Staff, The Los Angeles TimesMr. Lipton, 49, won for his series of articles about the spread of corporate lobbying to state attorneys general. The Pulitzer committee highlighted the reporting for revealing the slanting of justice “toward the wealthy and connected.”Submitted Work: Courting Favor  (Series Page)Finalists: Duaa Eldeib, David Jackson and Gary Marx, The Chicago Tribune.The Journal was recognized for its “Medicare Unmasked” project, which published secret Medicare data and exposed $60 billion in bogus payments. The series was lauded for uncovering “previously confidential data on the motivations and practices” of health care providers.Submitted Work: Medicare Unmasked: Behind the Numbers (Series Page)Finalists: Duaa Eldeib, David Jackson and Gary Marx, The Chicago Tribune.Mr. Mider, 37, won Bloomberg’s first Pulitzer Prize ever for his series of articles about how United States corporations dodged taxes through practices that included claiming a new address in a foreign country, even if top executives stayed in the United States. The stories showed how regulators helped facilitate the tax avoidance. The Pulitzer board called the series “painstaking, clear and entertaining.” Submitted Work: I Hear America Singing 'Never Pay Taxes': The Inversion OperettaIngersoll Finds Escaping U.S. Tax No Penalty as Contracts FlowTax Maneuver Criticized by Obama Helped U.S. Craft Delphi RescueTax Dodge Used by Bain Shifts U.S. Firms Abroad Without ScrutinyTax Inversions Win When Government Lawyers Join Private FirmsUnpatriotic Loophole' Targeted by Obama Costs $2 BillionTax Break Blarney: U.S. Companies Beat the System With Irish AddressesBloomberg Visual Data: Tracking Tax Runaways  Tax Inversion: How U.S. Companies Buy Tax Breaks Finalists: Joe Amon, John Ingold and Lindsay Pierce of The Denver Post; Joan Biskupic, Janet Roberts and John Shiffman of Reuters.The Pulitzer jury cited Mr. Kuznia, 39, and Ms. Kimitch, 38, both reporters, and Mr. Suraci, 63, the city editor, for an investigation of cronyism and corruption in the academically underperforming Centinela Valley Union High School District. They found that the district paid the superintendent, Jose Fernandez, $660,000 in 2013 and gave him a $910,000 low-interest home loan. Mr. Suraci said he remembered thinking as he worked through the first couple of articles, “This is a darn good story of this tiny inner-city school district and taxpayers being fleeced.”Submitted Work:The Year in the Centinela Valley School District Pay Scandal (2014 Coverage)Finalists: Joe Mahr, Joseph Ryan and Matthew Walberg of The Chicago Tribune; Ziva Branstetter and Cary Aspinwall of The Tulsa World.The prize committee honored articles that revealed a string of security lapses by the Secret Service, which led to the resignation of the agency’s director in October. Two days earlier, Ms. Leonnig had reported that a man who jumped the White House fence had made it much farther into the executive mansion than the agency had acknowledged. Ms. Leonnig, 49, expressed gratitude “to the Secret Service agents who trusted me and risked their jobs to try to fix the Secret Service.”Submitted Work:Finalists: Marisa Taylor, Jonathan Landay and Ali Watkins of McClatchy Newspapers; Walt Bogdanich and Mike McIntire of The New York Times.The Times — led by Pam Belluck, Helene Cooper, Sheri Fink, Adam Nossiter, Norimitsu Onishi, Kevin Sack and Ben C. Solomon — won for its reporting on the Ebola crisis in West Africa, which the committee praised for “engaging the public with the scope and the details of the outbreak while holding authorities accountable.” In addition to eight articles — one of them a 7,600-word report in the paper’s Science Times section — the citation noted two online videos. At a gathering in The Times’s third-floor newsroom on Monday, Joseph Kahn, an assistant editor, remarked on the importance of the multimedia coverage, saying the prize was recognition that “only comes to a modern newsroom and an integrated newsroom.”Submitted Work:Times Coverage of Ebola (Selection of Articles, Video and More)Finalists: Richard Marosi and Don Bartletti, The Los Angeles Times; Ned Parker and a team from Reuters.Ms. Marcum, who covers Central Valley region of California, won for a series of articles chronicling the effects of the drought on farmers, fieldworkers and residents of the state’s parched rural towns. Her subjects included a farmer who gave names to his pistachio trees — and then saw the state cut off the water that irrigated them. “It wasn’t one of those things where we set out to do a series,” Ms. Marcum, 52, said. “We just thought there must be a lot more going on under the surface than was being reported.”Submitted Work:Scenes From California's Dust Bowl (Series Page)Finalists: Sarah Schweitzer, The Boston Globe; Jennifer Gonnerman, The New Yorker.Ms. Falkenberg’s award was the first for The Chronicle. A columnist for the paper’s metro section, she was recognized for her “vividly written, groundbreaking columns about grand jury abuses that led to a wrongful conviction and other egregious problems in the legal and immigration systems.”Ms. Falkenberg, 36, said it was a thrill to write a “set of stories that made a real tangible change in the world, and I can take some credit for that.” But, she added, “I chose to write about grand juries in a year when suddenly the nation cared more about grand juries a little more than they would any other year.”Submitted Columns:Evidence Mounts That Wrong Man On Death Row For Killing HPD OfficerFor Millions Of People Who Have Been Living In Shadows, Future Looks A Bit BrighterIn Harris County, Secrecy That Shrouds Grand Jurors Includes Their NamesCop Was Foreman Of Grand Jury In Cop-KillingAnthony Graves Helps Open A Painful Door To The Past, And Perhaps The TruthMother Of 3 Pressured Into Changing Story, But Jailed AnywayA Disturbing Glimpse Into The Shrouded World Of The Texas Grand Jury SystemWheels Of Justice Grind Slowly On Death RowWe Expect More From Our Heroes Than Being Sued By ThemSenior Tries And Tries To Get ID Card So She Can VoteMs. McNamara, 51, the television critic and a senior culture editor for The Times, won after being a finalist in each of the past two years. “With the unbelievable changes that have been going on in TV for the last five, six, seven years, it’s an extraordinary time to be a television critic,” she said. “Right now, it’s the predominant art form in America, and I feel very blessed that I became a critic right about the time it started getting so good.” Submitted Work:2014 Columns Finalists: Manohla Dargis, The New York Times; Stephanie Zacharek, The Village VoiceMs. Kingsbury was awarded the prize for a series of editorials illuminating “the human costs of income inequality” through the lives of restaurant workers, according to the award citation. Ms. Kingsbury, 36, the paper’s deputy editorial page editor, joined the editorial board in 2013.Submitted Work:‘Service Not Included’ (Series Page)Finalists: Tony Messenger and Kevin Horrigan of The St. Louis Post-Dispatch; Jill Burcum of The Star Tribune, Minneapolis.Mr. Zyglis, 32, was awarded for his cartoons on subjects including data mining, CNN, global warming and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.Submitted Work: 2014 Cartoons Finalists: Kevin Kallaugher of The Baltimore Sun; Dan Perkins, using the pen name Tom Tomorrow,  of Daily Kos.The newspaper’s eight full-time photographers were recognized for their “powerful images” of the events in Ferguson, Mo., after the shooting of Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager, on Aug. 9 by a white police officer, Darren Wilson. From that day until November, when a grand jury decided not to indict Mr. Wilson, the photographers documented the protests even as they faced tear gas and the threat of physical harm. “It’s a tremendous team recognition for the photographers who won the award and for the entire newsroom, which has since August been ensconced in an emotional story,” said Gilbert Bailon, the paper’s editor. Submitted Work:Ferguson ProtestsFinalists: Mauricio Lima, Sergey Ponomarev and Uriel Sinai, The New York Times; Tyler Hicks, Sergey Ponomarev and Wissam Nassar, The New York Times.For four months, Mr. Berehulak, a freelance photographer, followed the Ebola crisis as it swept across West Africa, capturing a region in crisis. His stark images brought awareness to the world of the anguish, resignation and desperation of those touched by the disease.Mr. Berehulak, 39, has won numerous awards for his photography and was a 2011 Pulitzer finalist for his coverage of the floods in Pakistan in 2010. “Covering the spread and devastating impact of the Ebola virus in West Africa is by far the most challenging and important assignment of my career,” he said on Monday.Submitted Entries:A Photographer Documents Ebola’s Deadly Spread Finalists: Bulent Kilic, Agence France-Presse; Bob Owen, Jerry Lara and Lisa Krantz, The San Antonio Express-News.Mr. Doerr’s intricately plotted novel takes place in France and Germany during World War II, and centers on two young characters whose lives converge: a blind girl, Marie-Laure, who flees Paris and joins the resistance movement; and a German orphan, Werner, who attends a Hitler Youth academy. Mr. Doerr spent a decade researching and writing the novel, which was also a finalist for the National Book Award and became a major best-seller, with 1.6 million copies in circulation.“The research was so harrowing,” said Mr. Doerr, 41, who lives in Boise, Idaho. “I thought I would never finish the book, and then I did and now a lot of people are reading it, and it’s so weird.”Finalists: Richard Ford, “Let Me Be Frank With You”; Joyce Carol Oates, “Lovely, Dark, Deep”; Laila Lalami, “The Moor’s Account.”New York Times Review:Light Found in Darkness of Wartime (April 28, 2014)Ms. Kolbert’s book explores the catastrophic effects that climate change and environmental degradation have had on the diversity of life on the planet. The book covers previous periods of mass extinction and examines how humans are driving a current wave of extinctions.“I came to this subject through the scientific literature,” Ms. Kolbert, 53, a staff writer for The New Yorker, said in an interview. “Anyone who comes in contact with it says to themselves, why isn’t this what everyone is thinking about?”Finalists: Anand Gopal, “No Good Men Among the Living: America, the Taliban and the War Through Afghan Eyes”; and Evan Osnos, “Age of Ambition: Chasing Fortune, Truth and Faith in the New China.”New York Times Reviews: Cataclysm Has Arrived: Man’s Inhumanity to Nature (Feb. 2, 2014)Without a Trace (Feb. 10, 2014) Mr. Guirgis’s play, which premiered at the Atlantic Theater Company in New York, is about a retired police officer whose landlords are trying to remove him from a rent-controlled apartment in Manhattan. Mr. Guirgis, 50, often writes with gusto about the disenfranchised; his previous work, which went to Broadway, had an expletive in the title that even made it difficult to advertise. The Pulitzer board praised the new play for employing “dark comedy to confront questions of life and death.”Finalists: Jordan Harrison, “Marjorie Prime”; Suzan-Lori Parks, “Father Comes Home From the Wars (Parts 1, 2, 3).”New York Times Review:Rent-Stabilized, but Otherwise in Flux (July 31, 2014)For this history of the Mandan people of the Dakotas, Ms. Fenn, 55, a professor at the University of Colorado, immersed herself in sources such as centuries-old documents and contemporary Mandan ceremonies.“I try to write in a way that acknowledges the continuum between before 1492 and after,” she said, adding: “I love telling people that I study late medieval and early modern North Dakota. Everyone does a double take.”Finalists: Sven Beckert, “Empire of Cotton: A Global History”; Nick Bunker, “An Empire on the Edge: How Britain Came to Fight America.”For this dual biography, Mr. Kertzer, a professor at Brown University, drew on the newly opened archives of Pius XI as well as records of Mussolini’s Fascist government, which maintained an extensive spy network in the Vatican.Mr. Kertzer, 67, sees the pope as ultimately a tragic figure. “He grew up with a certain kind of medieval church mind-set,” he said. “This just didn’t prepare him for the totalitarian challenge that would take shape on his watch.”Finalists: Thomas Brothers, “Louis Armstrong: Master of Modernism”; Stephen Kotkin, “Stalin: Volume I: Paradoxes of Power, 1878-1928.”Written in a breezy vernacular style with a lively streetwise inflection, the poems in “Digest” take their inspiration from Mr. Pardlo’s neighborhood, the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, or tap into his sense of identity.“I was born in minutes in a roadside kitchen a skillet/whispering my name,” the poem “Written by Myself” begins.The collection’s “clear-voiced poems,” the prize committee wrote, “bring readers the news from 21st-century America, rich with thought, ideas and histories public and private.”Finalists: Alan Shapiro, “Reel to Reel”; Arthur Sze, “Compass Rose.”The Pulitzer committee called “Anthracite Fields” a “powerful oratorio for chorus and sextet evoking Pennsylvania coal-mining life around the turn of the 20th century.”Ms. Wolfe, 56, a co-founder of the contemporary music collective Bang on a Can, said she had been inspired to explore the painful mining history of her native state. “I wanted to honor the people that worked in the mines,” she said, “to really get a sense of what the life was like: lots of integrity, lots being dependent on each other in this very dangerous work. And basically, the work fueled the nation.”Finalists: Lei Liang, “Xiaoxiang”; John Zorn, “The Aristos.”New York Times Review:For Ensembles and Singers, a Night of Backbreaking Labor (June 1, 2014)The Post and Courier won its award for a series on domestic abuse; two of The New York Times’s awards were for its Ebola coverage.AdvertisementThe Post and Courier won its award for a series on domestic abuse; two of The New York Times’s awards were for its Ebola coverage.