AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CieplyLOS ANGELES — In what they hope will be an aggressive attack on the web-based theft of intellectual property, some of Hollywood’s top foreign sales executives are banding together to fight digital movie pirates. Five small film companies — Millennium, Voltage Pictures, Bloom, Sierra/Affinity and FilmNation Entertainment — said they were forming a new antipiracy coalition with the aim of mobilizing small businesses in the television, music, game and software industries against online theft. The alliance is calling itself the Internet Security Task Force. Millennium’s president, Mark Gill, described it as a last-ditch effort by relatively fragile companies with fewer than 50 employees to avoid what they say is the near destruction of their prospective blockbusters, as happened to Millennium and its partners with “The Expendables 3” last year.“Maybe larger businesses can afford to take a hit,” Mr. Gill said in a phone interview last week. “But we don’t have that luxury, we can’t survive.”Precisely what the new task force can do that antipiracy efforts by organizations like the Motion Picture Association of America and CreativeFuture are not doing remains uncertain. But Mr. Gill said the group was considering a wide range of options, including a media campaign to be organized by the Mercury public affairs firm, a lobbying effort by Heather Podesta & Partners, which is based in Washington, and increased pressure on companies that advertise on pirate sites.There are currently no plans to file any lawsuits, unless member companies pursue litigation on their own.Nicolas Chartier, the chief executive of Voltage Pictures, touched off an Internet uproar in 2010 when he filed suit against 5,000 unnamed web users via their IP addresses, seeking damages for illegal downloads of “The Hurt Locker.”Though wary of mass litigation, which invites the inevitable backlash and procedural quagmire, Mr. Gill said the group was closely watching Canada, where a legal process called “notice and notice” is now in place. Since January, Canada has required Internet service providers to immediately forward a notice of alleged copyright infringement to suspected thieves, rather than waiting for repeat violations, as in the United States.Canadian service providers, Mr. Gill said, now deliver seven times as many notices as their counterparts in the United States to those suspected of illegal downloading, a rate that they hope will discourage potential violators once they are told that they are being tracked. Jeremy Malcolm, a senior global policy analyst with the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a web freedom advocacy group, said his group — though often wary of Hollywood — actually favors a Canadian-style system, which makes notification easier but does not force more immediate action on service providers. “But we do feel it needs some fine-tuning,” Mr. Malcolm added. He said some American companies were using the notices to deliver demands for damages much larger than those permitted under Canadian law.Millennium, whose chairman, Avi Lerner, is an impetus behind the task force, was particularly damaged last year by the online theft of “The Expendables 3,” which leaked to the web on July 25, three weeks before its theatrical release. This month, police officers in London arrested a suspect in connection with the leak.But, Mr. Gill said, more than 60 million illegal viewings had already taken a heavy toll. In all, according to Boxofficemojo.com, “The Expendables 3” took in only about $206 million at the worldwide box office, down sharply from $305 million in sales for its predecessor. The box office in some countries, Mr. Gill said, fell by as much as 89 percent.Mr. Gill said the new task force would be more closely focused on piracy than the Motion Picture Association of America, which conducts a worldwide effort (and assisted in the recent arrest in the “Expendables” case), but must attend to the sometimes diverging needs of its six member companies, all big studios.And, Mr. Gill said, the group expects to press its aims with advertising or legislative initiatives that may be sharper than similar efforts by CreativeFuture, a Hollywood antipiracy group whose 350 members include the major studios, agencies and guilds — along with Millennium and other companies.“This is an aggressive game that’s only been played aggressively by the other side,” Mr. Gill said.Advertisement