By BROOKS BARNESAPRIL 19, 2015
ANAHEIM, Calif. —  This is the story of how Robert A. Iger, chief executive of the Walt Disney Company, solved a technology problem — how to bring the new “Star Wars” droid BB-8 to toy shelves and Disney parks — by playing with a ball on his office carpet.Last summer, Mr. Iger was doing quick homework on Sphero, a Colorado start-up that had been selected to participate in Disney Accelerator, a program pairing entrepreneurs with mentors from Disney’s senior ranks. Sphero is the maker of a $129 smartphone-controlled robotic ball, which can run for more than an hour on a charge and bounce safely down stairs.“I was impressed with the quality of it, and I was really impressed with the user interface,” Mr. Iger said in a telephone interview late last week.Then he had an idea. Just before his Sphero ball arrived, he had been poring over the designs for droids created for “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” the movie arriving in theaters in December. One in particular stood out: BB-8, a beeping, free-rolling, orange and white ball with a little half-sphere hat.AdvertisementBut BB-8 was complicated. During the filming of the movie, it was a prop built on rollers and controlled by a puppeteer, he said.Advertisement“You would see this guy pushing BB-8 around, actually controlling BB-8, but he gets the equivalent of airbrushed out,” Mr. Iger said.That presented a challenge for selling the new robot as merchandise. “What are we going to do with walk-around characters?” Mr. Iger said, referring to the real-life princesses, Mickeys and Buzz Lightyears that roam Disney’s theme parks. “You’ve got to have walk-around characters for BB-8, right?”So he asked his Sphero mentees — sworn to secrecy, of course — if they could solve the problem. They swiftly showed him a prototype.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I said, ‘That’s brilliant. That’s it,’ ” said Mr. Iger, who then routed Sphero to Disney’s consumer products division.The iPhone-controlled BB-8 toys, about the size of a large Granny Smith apple, will be sold in Disney Stores and other specialty retailers this holiday season. (Eighty manufacturing steps are involved.) Disney declined to discuss the price. A much bigger BB-8, similar to one Lucasfilm introduced at a “Star Wars” fan convention here on Thursday, will pop up at Disney theme parks around the world.An offhand remark by Kathleen Kennedy, president of Lucasfilm, during a convention panel revealed Mr. Iger’s involvement. Paul Berberian, Sphero’s chief executive, said in a telephone interview on Friday that his 60-person company was instantly besieged by reporters wanting more information.In particular, everyone wants to know how the head of BB-8 stays in place as the ball rolls beneath it. Magnets?“You’re just going to have to wait on that,” Mr. Berberian said.Sphero, which was founded with the goal of “using technology to bring physical play back into the lives of kids,” Mr. Berberian said, is working on a $40 million round of financing.Of the surprise Star Wars assignment, he said, “We were honored and scared at the same time.”A version of this article appears in print on April 20, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Start-Up Solves ‘Star Wars’ Droid Puzzle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »