AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The six-month rate was 0.08 percent. The four-week rate was 0.03 percent.The following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $300 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewer District, $100 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYDavie County, N.C., $54.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Hamilton County, Tenn., $65 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYNorth Texas Municipal Water District, $302.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAllen County, Ohio, $152 million of Mercy Health hospital facilities revenue refinancing and improvement bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Allen County, Ohio, $100 million of Mercy Health adjustable rate hospital facilities revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. Neshaminy School District, Pa., $77.3 million of debt securities. RBC Capital Markets.California Health Facilities Financing Authority, $157 million of revenue debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Chicago Public Schools, $296.7 million of revenue bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Cobb County, Ga., $59 million of student housing refinancing revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Connecticut Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $75 million of Hartford HealthCare revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Connecticut, $250 million of revolving fund general revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs. Genesee County, Mich., $60 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Keller Independent School District, Tex., $116.8 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Kentucky Infrastructure Authority, $75.4 million of wastewater and drinking water revolving fund revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Kentucky, $71.7 million of certificates of participation. KeyBanc Capital Markets. Lewisville Independent School District, Tex., $61.2 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Louisiana State University, $129.7 million of revenue and refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $130 million of revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Mercy Health, Ohio, $150 million of taxable bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Miami-Dade County, $347.9 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Midland Public Schools, Mich., $72.6 million of building and site bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Missouri Housing Development Commission, $60 million of single-family mortgage revenue bonds. George K. Baum.Nashville and Davidson County, Tenn., $113.5 million of electric system revenue bonds. Raymond James.New Jersey Economic Development Authority, $127.9 million of revenue and refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Northwest Independent School District, Tex., $137.6 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Bosc.Ohio Housing Finance Agency, $63 million of taxable residential mortgage revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Oregon State University, $51 million of general revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Pasadena, Calif., $123 million of taxable pension obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America. Pasadena, Tex., Independent School District, $50.5 million of unlimited tax general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, $262 million of revenue debt securities. Piper Jaffray. Phoenix, $391.3 million of civic improvement excise tax revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Rhode Island Health and Educational Building Corporation, $150.4 million of school revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Sacramento, Calif., Municipal Utility District, $200 million of electric revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.San Diego Unified School District, $168.4 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.San Mateo, Calif., Union High School District, $56 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.University of Delaware, $50.1 million of debt securities. Morgan Stanley.University of North Carolina at Wilmington, $60.1 million of student housing projects refinancing limited obligation bonds. Bank of America.University of Utah, $91 million of general revenue and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Washington Health Care Facilities Authority, $106.9 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America. Washington, $887.6 million of Energy Northwest revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Advertisement