AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week.The closing arguments will begin on Wednesday in the lawsuit filed by Maurice R. Greenberg against the federal government. Mr. Greenberg, the former head of the insurance giant American International Group, is suing the government over the terms of A.I.G.’s bailout in 2008, arguing that they were excessively harsh compared with the government’s handling of the bailouts of the big banks.The case went to trial last fall, and initially drew skepticism from legal experts. But after Mr. Greenberg’s lawyer, the prominent litigator David Boies, took apart numerous government witnesses, the case is now a tossup as it heads for its conclusion. —Aaron KesslerThe brinkmanship between Greece and its European lenders seems set to continue on Friday in Riga, Latvia, where finance ministers from the euro area countries will hold their monthly meeting. Greece reached a deal in February to extend its bailout program, but it has failed since then to unblock loans of more than seven billion euros.European lenders say they will not release the money until the leftist government in Athens agrees to carry out far-reaching reforms to the economy. But as Athens runs out of money — and as the chances rise that Greece will default and destabilize the single currency — the ministers will be under pressure to show they can do enough to narrow their differences with Greece to reach a deal at their mid-May meeting. —James KanterGeneral Motors, the nation’s largest automaker, will report first quarter earnings on Thursday that should reflect stronger sales in its core North American market so far this year. G.M. has been aggressively expanding its product lineup in a bid to gain market share in the United States, and is set to introduce several new models for its Cadillac and Chevrolet brands.The company will also disclose its executive compensation for 2014 on Friday, and reveal how a record number of recalls last year affected the paychecks of Mary T. Barra, the chief executive, and other top G.M. executives. —Bill VlasicTestimony in the trial of Sergey Aleynikov, the former Goldman Sachs computer programmer charged with stealing some of the Wall Street firm’s high-speed trading code, is expected to conclude this week in a courtroom in New York State Supreme Court in Lower Manhattan. But a lawyer for Mr. Aleynikov is trying to get the state judge presiding over the trial to dismiss the criminal charges before the matter goes to the jury.On Friday, Kevin H. Marino, the lawyer for Mr. Aleynikov, filed a brief with the court arguing that prosecutors working for Cyrus Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, had not produced sufficient evidence for a jury to convict Mr. Aleynikov. It is expected that the justice, Daniel P. Conviser, who already refused to let prosecutors call an expert witness to the stand, will hear oral arguments on the dismissal request on Monday. —Matthew GoldsteinSouthwest Airlines, United Airlines and American Airlines are all reporting earnings this week. In the wake of Delta Air Lines’ news last week about its strong first quarter, the major carriers are all expected to report significant profits in the usually weak quarter, mostly because of lower oil prices. Analysts will be also keeping an eye on the airlines’ capacity plans for the year, after Delta said it would cut some of its international service in the winter. —Jad MouawadSan Francisco is the host this week to the world’s top hackers, law enforcement officials and commercial cybersecurity firms at the annual RSA Conference, where attendees and panelists will, once again, try to answer the seemingly impossible: how to secure the nation’s companies, computer systems, critical infrastructure — and the billions of devices making their way online — from cyberattacks.Every year, hundreds of cybersecurity vendors offer solutions to the problem, and yet the number of data breaches has never been higher, and corporations still take months to discover hackers inside their networks. This year, the agenda will focus on the so-called Internet of Things, the myriad devices — ranging from refrigerators to cars to water purification tools — that are making their way online, and the daunting task of making them secure. —Nicole PerlrothAdvertisement