By NEIL GOUGHAPRIL 19, 2015
HONG KONG —  Chinese policy makers are dealing with a financial conundrum. Overall economic growth is slipping, which argues for looser monetary policy. But the risk is that any new money is diverted to the country’s frothy stock markets.Against this backdrop, the central bank and securities regulator appear to be taking coordinated action.On Sunday, China’s central bank freed roughly $200 billion for new lending, a widely expected stimulus measure devised to pump more money into the economy. It is the latest sign that economic growth may be slowing faster than the leadership in Beijing anticipated.The People’s Bank of China acted just two days after the country’s securities regulator curtailed sources of new funding for margin financing — or buying stocks on borrowed money. Shanghai’s main index more than doubled in the last 12 months, driven by an influx of inexperienced new investors and rising levels of borrowing to bet on shares.AdvertisementIn combination, the policies could help direct more of the new lending into productive sectors of the economy, while reducing the chance that the money further fuels the stock market.AdvertisementSunday’s action by China’s central bank was the second time since February that it cut the reserve requirement ratio for banks, or the amount of their deposits that they must maintain rather than lend. The ratio for the largest banks was reduced by one percentage point, to 18.5 percent — the biggest such decrease in seven years. The central bank has also cut benchmark interest rates twice since November.Policy makers are responding to the slowing economy. Figures released last week showed the growth rate had decelerated to 7 percent in the first quarter, its slowest pace in six years.“The move was widely expected, given last week’s weak data releases,” Qu Hongbin, an economist at HSBC in Hong Kong, wrote Sunday in a research note. “However, the magnitude of the cut — the largest since November 2008 — signals Beijing’s heightened concerns over the growth slowdown,” he said. Mr. Qu calculates the move could free 1.2 trillion renminbi, or around $200 billion, for new lending.Still, the cut does not automatically translate into new lending. China’s banks have grown wary of issuing loans to smaller or riskier borrowers, given the country’s slowing growth. And the banks’ profitability has come under pressure as Beijing has pursued financial overhauls, including steps toward full liberalization of interest rates.Most analysts expect that China will, in the coming months, make further reductions to reserve requirements for banks and to benchmark interest rates. But doubts remain over whether these steps will be enough to achieve the official target of about 7 percent growth for the full year.Despite easing moves so far, China’s slowing growth has meant that Beijing has been confronted by “rising skepticism about the ability of the government to generate an economic recovery as it typically did in the past,” Goldman Sachs analysts wrote in a research note on Sunday.The new rate reduction, and lower overall borrowing costs in recent weeks, “marks a new stage in policy making with a more aggressive stance,” they wrote. “We believe other loosening measures are likely to become more aggressive as well.”A version of this article appears in print on April 20, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: In Effort to Stimulate Economy, China Frees Up $200 Billion for Lending.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.