AdvertisementSupported byBy James KanterLEUVEN, Belgium — The sweet, earthy aroma from the brewery here is inescapable. The Stella Artois logos are hard to miss at the sprawling factory near the headquarters of the company, which employs thousands of workers across the country.For Belgium, the global beer giant Anheuser-Busch InBev is a corporate champion, a source of homegrown pride and the country’s largest company by market value. But its clout, which will only grow with the company’s $104 billion deal to buy SABMiller, is also the source of scrutiny.As a dominant player in Belgium, the company has enjoyed accommodations from the government that allow it to significantly lower its tax bills. While the official corporate tax rate is 34 percent, Anheuser-Busch InBev pays a tiny fraction of 1 percent on the profit of $1.93 billion it reported last year in Belgium.The friendly tax arrangement is part of a pattern that small countries like Belgium use to woo multinationals. Such deals are increasingly coming under fire, and the European Union’s competition commissioner is investigating whether some of them amount to illegal state aid.This week, the commissioner, Margrethe Vestager, is expected to announce the findings in some of the cases, potentially those involving Starbucks in the Netherlands and a unit of Fiat Chrysler in Luxembourg. Her office is also examining Belgium’s treatment of nearly 50 companies, including a unit of Anheuser-Busch InBev, although no immediate action is expected.The deal between Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller is the latest merger of mass-market beer brands.Such arrangements amount to “weapons of mass tax reduction,” said Marco Van Hees, who worked as a government tax inspector in Belgium. Mr. Van Hees was elected to the Belgian Parliament last year as a member of the leftist Workers’ Party of Belgium, which opposes corporate tax breaks.Since a combined Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller would potentially control nearly a third of global beer sales, antitrust regulators in Europe and the United States will also give the merger a hard look.“The purpose of the merger is simply size,” said Tom Pirko, head of Bevmark, a consulting company in Buellton, Calif., that has advised Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller in the past but is not involved in the purchase planning.“If you have the tax advantages in addition to having swallowed up your competitors,” he said, “you’re the king of the world — or at least the king of beers.”Such tax arrangements are highly controversial.Bigger countries, like Germany and France, complain that small locales like Belgium undermine European unity and siphon taxes away from markets where companies actually do a larger share of business and where tax rates are higher.In Belgium, workers complain that the government’s leniency on corporate taxes leaves individual taxpayers shouldering too big a burden. And smaller companies protest they are often left out of a game that favors big multinationals.“Multinationals like AB InBev pay some taxes like property and excise and they make the country look good,” said Frédéric Jouret, managing director of a supplier of branded beer glasses to Anheuser-Busch InBev. “But these income tax breaks,” he said, “have created severe inequalities in the way a business like AB InBev and my own can compete.”Mr. Jouret’s company, Durobor, did not pay Belgian income tax last year, because it lost money.There has been no accusation that Anheuser-Busch InBev has cheated on its taxes, although the United States’ Securities and Exchange Commission asked questions last year.The company acknowledged to the S.E.C. that its global effective tax rate was 11.1 percent in 2013, compared with 16.2 percent in 2012. (The nominal corporate tax rate in the United States is 35 percent.) The lower figure, the company said, was mainly the result of a “fair value adjustment” after it bought Grupo Modelo, a large brewer in Mexico.Tax skills are one of the hallmarks of the Brazilian investors who, through a series of acquisitions, built Anheuser-Busch InBev into a behemoth.Some of those investors also run the private equity firm 3G Capital, which caused a stir last year when it moved Burger King from the United States to Canada in a deal meant in part to lower its tax bill. A spokesman for 3G declined to comment on the firm’s tax dealings.If the acquisition of SABMiller goes through, Anheuser-Busch InBev has indicated that its headquarters would remain in Belgium.The company acknowledged, in a statement, that its “corporate tax payments in Belgium have been low in recent years,” but said it had complied “with all tax legislation, both in our home country Belgium and in all other countries where we do business.”The company said it made “treasury contributions” to Belgium last year of more than €650 million, counting excise duties and property taxes. And it said it was investing €55 million in the Stella Artois brewery in Leuven.One way that Belgium lets companies reduce their taxes is through what it calls a “notional interest deduction.” It is meant as a way to assess the cost of business risks. An explanatory brochure from the Belgian Finance Ministry defines it as “a fictitious interest calculated on the basis of their shareholder’s equity (net assets).”The competition commissioner is looking at a separate issue around so-called tax rulings in Belgium. The commission is concerned that the system grants large deductions to certain subsidiaries of multinationals, deals that are not necessarily available to domestic companies.Taken together, the arrangements can be highly advantageous.Mr. Van Hees, the tax inspector and politician, ranks companies based on the amount by which they have lowered their taxes in Belgium. Last year, Anheuser-Busch InBev landed at the top of the list, a place it has held numerous times since Mr. Van Hees began publishing his findings in 2010.While Anheuser-Busch InBev did not dispute Mr. Van Hees’s figures, it noted that he “belongs to a small, very left-wing political party.”The Belgian government says its tax system is meant to attract jobs and to safeguard competitiveness in areas like brewing, where the country has excelled for centuries.But unions question that rationale. They note that the company’s Belgian work force has already been halved, to about 2,700, in the last decade. They also predict that the company will load up on debt to buy SABMiller, leading to pressure for further cutbacks.Even if the vast majority of Anheuser-Busch InBev’s 154,000 employees are in other parts of the world, “Belgian beers stand for something,” said Roger Van Vlasselaer, the head of the white-collar BBTK union in Leuven, which represents members of Anheuser-Busch InBev’s staff.Anheuser-Busch InBev has defended its labor record, saying its employees are paid about 30 percent more than the average for workers across all industries in Belgium.Despite the tax investigations, it might be difficult to achieve consensus on a more balanced system across Europe.This month, the finance ministers from the European Union’s 28 nations agreed that their countries would start sharing information on the preferential tax arrangements they make with multinational companies. But critics in the European Parliament said the system would be too lax because the ministers had backed off a provision that would have given a significant role to independent monitors.Mr. Pirko, the beer industry analyst, said that without a coordinated international effort by tax officials, a vastly enlarged Anheuser-Busch InBev should find it even easier to strike favorable deals with countries like Belgium.“The bigger and more powerful these global companies become, the more you have the governments essentially becoming petitioners,” Mr. Pirko said. “The balance of power shifts every time we have another huge consolidation like this.”OpinionKate MurphyAdvertisement