
Political Economy By                     
HUGO DIXON | REUTERS

APRIL 19, 2015
Are the Tories and Labour the Tweedledum and Tweedledee of British politics?There is not much to choose between the British parties in economic election pledges. Both want to cut the deficit gradually, both want to splash out on the National Health Service, and both have a smattering of silly policies. The big differences are that Labour would tax the rich more and the Tories might take Britain out of the European Union.Given how much Labour has criticized the Conservative-led coalition government for budgetary austerity and how the Tories have in turn lambasted the opposition for fiscal irresponsibility, one might have expected them to be setting forth radically different views about how to manage the deficit, which is still 5 percent of gross domestic product.In fact, they both have sensible measured approaches to reducing the deficit. This is partly because the Tories have eased up a bit on their planned cuts, while Labour has sought to dress itself up as fiscally responsible.True, David Cameron, the Tory leader, would reduce the deficit a bit faster. But he has also come up with a large, off-balance-sheet spending plan — giving the tenants of housing associations the right to buy their homes at a discount. The government would compensate the housing associations for the discount, but this cost would be viewed as a capital outlay and thus not count toward the deficit.AdvertisementNot only do the two parties have broadly the same view about the deficit; they share similar spending priorities. The Tories have sought to banish fears that they are not good stewards of Britain’s much-loved National Health Service by promising an extra eight billion British pounds, or about $12 billion, a year for health care. They have also outbid Labour in their pledge to double free child care for parents with toddlers to 30 hours a week. The opposition is promising an increase to 25 hours a week.AdvertisementOne might have expected the Conservatives to be better on microeconomic policy. After all, Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, has a penchant for meddling in the market. He has promised, for example, to freeze energy prices and rail fares as well as to jack up the minimum wage and ban so-called zero-hour contracts, an extremely flexible type of employment deal that gives workers no guarantee of work.But Mr. Cameron has caught the meddling bug too. He has effectively matched Mr. Miliband’s pledge to freeze rail fares and increase the minimum wage. Meanwhile, he would force large companies to give workers an extra three days off each year to do charitable work — something that would add to businesses’ costs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One clear difference between the parties is on taxing the rich. Labour wants to increase the top rate of income tax, for those earning over £150,000 a year, from 45 percent to 50 percent. It also wants to scrap the so-called non-dom status, which allows some wealthy people to avoid paying tax on their foreign incomes. Although it is fair to tighten up on this privilege, the way Labour is proposing to do so could drive some people who contribute to the economy offshore.Finally, Mr. Miliband plans to introduce a so-called Mansion Tax on homes worth more than £2 million. Although housing is undertaxed in Britain, Labour’s proposal falls well short of a good idea. It would load taxes on a few people, mainly in London, but would do nothing to iron out anomalies lower down the property ladder. Far better to charge a flat percentage on all homes.Mind you, Mr. Cameron has come up with his own dubious housing policy: a plan to let couples leave homes worth up to £1 million to their children or grandchildren without any inheritance tax. It may be a good idea to cut death taxes, but doing so only for homes would give the British people yet another reason to invest in property, rather than more productive assets.Another big difference is that the Tories have promised to renegotiate Britain’s relationship with the European Union and then give the people a vote on whether to stay in. This is potentially extremely worrying, since quitting the European Union would be bad for the economy. That said, Mr. Cameron has not yet made any impossible demands on his European Union partners — with the possible exception of wanting to deny migrants access to benefits for their first four years in the country. He would almost certainly campaign to stay in himself.Meanwhile, if Labour won the election, the Europe issue would not go away. If the Tories are re-elected, they will bring back their referendum pledge — and, in such a future scenario, they might be led by somebody more euroskeptical than Mr.Cameron.Hugo Dixon is editor at large of Reuters News.A version of this article appears in print on April 20, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »