By LIAM STACKAPRIL 19, 2015
An internal review by BuzzFeed last week found three instances when editors deleted posts after an advertiser or employees from the company’s business side complained about their content, according to a memo sent to staff members on Saturday by the news and entertainment website’s editor in chief.The three deleted posts — out of more than 1,000 expunged for other reasons, according to the memo — had criticized products or advertisements produced by Microsoft, Pepsi and Axe body spray, a Unilever product. In the memo, the editor, Ben Smith, wrote that they were “pulled after an editor fielded a complaint from a business-side BuzzFeed staff member who worked with a brand mentioned in the piece.”The disclosure about the reasons for the deletions came four months after BuzzFeed unveiled editorial guidelines meant to highlight its continuing attempt to transform from a creator and aggregator of viral web content into a digital news organization. It also followed an admission this month by Mr. Smith that he had ordered editors to delete two other posts critical of BuzzFeed advertisers: Dove soap — also produced by Unilever — and the toy manufacturer Hasbro.Mr. Smith later reinstated the two posts, saying he had overreacted when asking editors to delete them. He told staff members in a note that the posts had been erased after he took issue with their opinionated tone and not because of complaints from advertisers. The results of the review were first reported by the website Gawker on Saturday.The three posts deleted under pressure from the company’s business side were removed before BuzzFeed published its editorial guidelines, and they were a small fraction of the 1,112 deleted posts identified by an internal review committee. The majority of those were not posts produced by the editorial department, or were removed because of what the review called “technical error,” according to the memo.AdvertisementThe three posts linked to advertising were deleted for different reasons, including the appearance of a conflict of interest and perceived bad taste, according to the memo.AdvertisementOne post, written in 2013 by Mark Duffy, BuzzFeed’s former ad critic, criticized a campaign for Axe body spray and was deleted after an unnamed advertising agency complained that it had accused the company of advocating “worldwide mass rape.” In the memo, Mr. Smith wrote, “I agreed that this was way outside even our very loose standards of the time.” Mr. Duffy was later fired from the company.A second post, about Microsoft Internet Explorer, was written in March 2013 by Tanner Ringerud, a former business-side employee who had moved into an editorial role two months earlier. It was deleted after BuzzFeed’s chief revenue officer complained that Mr. Ringerud should not have written it because he worked on a Microsoft ad campaign in his previous job with the company, creating the appearance of a conflict of interest, the memo said.BuzzFeed deleted the post, which Mr. Smith said inspired the company to institute a “cooling off period” for business-side employees who move into editorial roles. During that period, they are prohibited from writing about brands whose ad campaigns they had worked on in their previous jobs.The third post, titled “These Brands Are Going to Bombard Your Twitter Feed on Super Bowl Sunday,” was deleted after BuzzFeed’s business side complained that it criticized Pepsi’s Twitter feed, which the business side was producing content for during the Super Bowl.In the memo, Mr. Smith wrote that he had not considered that a BuzzFeed writer would write a post critical of advertising content being created by other BuzzFeed employees. “We decided it was inappropriate and deleted the post,” he said.Microsoft did not immediately return a phone call Saturday seeking comment. Unilever did not immediately respond to a phone call and an email. And Pepsi did not immediately respond to an email.In a January 2014 email that Mr. Smith sent to Samir Mezrahi, the author of the post, and which was provided to The New York Times, he explained that the post was being deleted because “it felt like a kind of stunt.”Mr. Smith also wrote: “I don’t think advertising and marketing are particularly interesting in general, but there just has to be a pretty high bar around writing about advertising that is going on in the building. It creates an appearance of a conflict I’m really uncomfortable with.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.