By MATT FLEGENHEIMERAPRIL 20, 2015
Rebecca Kimitch was on her couch, poring over a new story, when word of the Pulitzer Prize arrived.Her former colleague Rob Kuznia, now a publicist, was wandering across a college campus, avoiding the announcement lest he appear “egotistical” to his post-journalism peers.And Toni Sciacqua, managing editor of The Daily Breeze of Torrance, Calif. — with a team of seven local news reporters and a circulation of about 65,000 — followed the online feed alone from a computer in the newsroom.“We were all sort of watching it on our own, surreptitiously,” Ms. Sciacqua said in a telephone interview after the prizes were announced on Monday. “We didn’t want to look like we thought we were going to win.”In fact, they did not expect to. Though the paper’s series on corruption in a small school district had earned honors since its publication, The Daily Breeze received no notice about its Pulitzer prospects, as some larger newsrooms often do through contacts close to the process.AdvertisementMost had assumed that no news was bad news.“Apparently we didn’t rate for a heads up quite yet,” said Michael A. Anastasi, the executive editor of the Los Angeles News Group, the organization that oversees The Daily Breeze and several other papers.AdvertisementShortly after noon local time, a bellow from the city editor, Frank Suraci, ricocheted through the newsroom. Others, it seemed, had a slower connection.“I hadn’t gotten to that point in the YouTube,” Ms. Sciacqua said of the online announcement, “so it sort of spoiled my notification.”The Pulitzer citation said the paper had won the prize for local reporting, after an inquiry that revealed “widespread corruption,” and the outsize compensation of a superintendent, who was later fired.First came the flurry of phone calls and messages. An impromptu, Champagne-soaked celebration was arranged around a conference table.Yet there were complications.For one, Mr. Anastasi found himself in the wrong newsroom, tending to other business at The Los Angeles Daily News, another of the group’s publications. When Ms. Sciacqua informed him of the victory, he said, he began running toward the Daily News staff.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We won the Pulitzer!” he shouted, adding an expletive.In a video posted on the Daily Breeze website on Monday, Mr. Anastasi can be seen celebrating briefly, before getting on his way.“I’m going to head over to Torrance,” he said. “I guess I should have gone there in the first place.”Then there was Mr. Kuznia. The former education reporter left The Daily Breeze last August, he said, to become a publicist for the U.S.C. Shoah Foundation at the University of Southern California. The reasons were economic, he said.Advertisement“I had been given a raise, so I don’t want to make it sound like they weren’t aware,” he said of the paper’s management. “But it still just wasn’t enough.”Asked if he might consider a return to the profession now, Mr. Kuznia, 39, declined to answer.Moments later, Mr. Anastasi made his own wishes clear, if not the salary terms.“Rob,” he said, “has a standing offer to come back.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.