By KATIE THOMASAPRIL 20, 2015
The drug maker Teva Pharmaceutical Industries said on Monday that it had agreed to pay $512 million to settle claims that a subsidiary, Cephalon, paid generic manufacturers to keep their own cheaper versions of a drug off the market, a practice that the Supreme Court ruled in 2013 could be illegal in some cases.The lawsuit was brought by drug wholesalers and other companies that buy drugs directly from manufacturers, who argued they were forced to pay inflated prices for Provigil, a medicine that helps people with narcolepsy and other sleep disorders stay awake.The settlement, which must be approved by a judge, is the largest in the history of such cases ever paid to direct purchasers of drugs, lawyers for the plaintiffs said in a motion filed Friday with Judge Mitchell S. Goldberg of the United States District Court’s Eastern District of Pennsylvania.“That’s a great result for consumers,” said David A. Balto, an antitrust lawyer and a former Federal Trade Commission policy director. “This was an agreement that was a pretty naked effort to take generic drugs off the market.”AdvertisementDenise Bradley, a spokeswoman for Teva, said the company was pleased with the settlement but had no further comment. Lawyers for the drug purchasers also declined to comment.AdvertisementIn a common industry practice known as reverse payment settlements, Cephalon, which was acquired by Teva in 2011, paid generic manufacturers more than $200 million to agree not to begin selling their copycat versions until 2012, according to the lawsuit. The drug purchasers argued in their suit that, were it not for the deals with generic companies, the drug would have faced competition in 2006.The F.T.C. and consumer groups have criticized such agreements between brand-name manufacturers and generic companies as anticompetitive because, they say, the deals artificially delay the entry of cheaper generics, which hurts consumers. Sales of brand-name drugs typically fall precipitously after generic alternatives enter the market. In 2013, the Supreme Court ruled that the trade commission could sue pharmaceutical companies for potential antitrust violations in such cases.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Michael Carrier, a professor at the Rutgers School of Law — Camden who specializes in antitrust and patent law, said the size of the settlement showed that drug companies “feel that there is significant risk of being found guilty of violating the antitrust laws.”He and Mr. Balto said the Cephalon case was unusual because it clearly showed that the intent of the deals with the generic companies was to delay the entry of the drug.“You had smoking-gun evidence in a way that you don’t often have in these big antitrust cases,” Mr. Carrier said.As late as November 2005, just before it entered into the agreements with the companies, Cephalon disclosed that it expected to face generic competition in 2006, according to the lawsuit filed by the drug purchasers.And shortly after making the deals, Cephalon’s then-chief executive, Frank Baldino, said, “We were able to get six more years of patent protection. That’s $4 billion in sales that no one expected,” according to a lawsuit filed against Cephalon by the trade commission.The trade commission was not a party to the settlement and a trial in that case against Cephalon is scheduled to begin in June. The drug purchasers also sued the generic drug makers Mylan and Ranbaxy, but they were not part of this settlement. Mylan declined to comment and a spokeswoman for Ranbaxy could not be reached.A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Teva to Pay $512 Million to Settle Suit Over Delay of Sleep Disorder Drug.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.