By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 19, 2015
United States homebuilders are feeling more optimistic about the housing market, lifting their confidence this month to the highest level in 10 years.The National Association of Home Builders/Wells Fargo builder sentiment index released on Monday rose this month to 64 points, up from 61 in September. The last time the reading was higher was October 2005, at 68 points.Readings above 50 indicate more builders view sales conditions as good rather than poor. The index has been consistently above 50 since July last year.Builders’ improved optimism bodes well for a pickup in new home construction, which could help the overall economy. The supply of new homes has been scarce, so greater construction could result in more sales.AdvertisementThe latest builder index reflects a gradual but consistent strengthening in the market for new homes, said David Crowe, chief economist for the homebuilders’ association.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“With firm job creation, economic growth and the release of pent-up demand, we expect housing to keep moving forward as we start to close out 2015,” he said.Healthy hiring and smaller price increases for new homes have begun pushing up sales, which were crippled during the financial crisis and recovered slowly even after the downturn ended in 2009. Sales of new homes have soared nearly 22 percent in the past year. They hit a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 552,000 homes in August, the strongest pace since February 2008. Sales data for September is due out next week.AdvertisementThis month’s builder index was based on 384 respondents.Builders’ view of current sales conditions for single-family homes rose three points to 70, the highest reading since October 2005. Builders’ outlook for sales over the next six months surged seven points to 75. That’s the highest reading since August 2005. A measure of traffic by prospective buyers held steady at 47.A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; U.S. Home Builders Report Highest Confidence in a Decade.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.