By SYDNEY EMBERAPRIL 20, 2015
The celebrity talk show host Dr. Mehmet Oz plans to respond aggressively on Thursday to doctors who have criticized his medical advice and questioned his faculty position at Columbia University, a spokesman for the show said on Monday.In a strongly worded email sent last week to the university, 10 physicians wrote that Dr. Oz, the vice chairman of Columbia’s surgery department, had shown “an egregious lack of integrity by promoting quack treatments and cures in the interest of personal financial gain.” In particular, the doctors attacked Dr. Oz’s “baseless and relentless opposition to the genetic engineering of food crops.”Dr. Oz will address the letter in the lead segment of his syndicated, daytime talk show, “The Dr. Oz Show,” on Thursday, a spokesman for the show said. Dr. Oz will question the credibility of the letter’s authors, several of whom have ties to the American Council on Science and Health, a pro-industry advocacy group that has supported genetically modified foods, the spokesman said.Dr. Oz will also reiterate his position that genetically modified foods should be labeled, a point he has made several times on his show. The segment will not take all of the 60-minute show, but may run longer than is typical for a lead item, the spokesman said.AdvertisementThe episode will be recorded for broadcast on Thursday.Dr. Oz, a cardiothoracic surgeon, has faced a wave of scrutiny in the last year over health tips he has given on his show. In June, for instance, a Senate panel questioned him about his promotion of weight loss products, including green coffee bean extract. And in December, BMJ, the British medical journal, released a report that said about half of the claims made on Dr. Oz’s show were not supported by evidence.AdvertisementSony emails posted on WikiLeaks last week suggest that Dr. Oz had used his show to promote health products, including Sony’s fitness and health tracking devices. “The Dr. Oz Show” is co-produced by Sony Pictures Television and Oprah Winfrey’s company, Harpo Productions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a statement posted on his Facebook page last Friday, Dr. Oz said: “I bring the public information that will help them on their path to be their best selves. We provide multiple points of view, including mine which is offered without conflict of interest. That doesn’t sit well with certain agendas which distort the facts.”The email to Columbia — sent by Dr. Henry I. Miller, a fellow in scientific philosophy and public policy at the Hoover Institution, to Dr. Lee Goldman, Columbia’s dean of the faculties of health sciences and medicine — contended that Dr. Oz was “guilty of either outrageous conflicts of interest or flawed judgments about what constitutes appropriate medical treatments, or both.”Now in its sixth season, “The Dr. Oz Show” reached about 1.8 million viewers each weekday for the week ending April 5, according to Nielsen ratings.Dr. Oz’s position at Columbia does not appear to be in jeopardy. When asked whether Dr. Oz would keep his job, Doug Levy, the chief communications officer at Columbia Medical Center, said, “The university is committed to the principle of academic freedom, which means our faculty are encouraged to participate in public discussion.”A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Dr. Oz to Respond on Show to Criticism by Physicians.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.