By BEN SISARIOAPRIL 20, 2015
Pandora Media is replacing two board members, both longtime investors, with music-industry veterans, the company announced Monday.Timothy J. Leiweke, the chief executive of Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment in Toronto, will join Pandora’s board immediately, and Roger Faxon, the former chief of the music conglomerate EMI, has been nominated and will stand for election at Pandora’s annual shareholders’ meeting on June 4, the company said.Pandora has been trying to mend its frosty relationship with the music industry through promotional partnerships and data-sharing with artists. At the same time, Pandora is engaged in several major legal proceedings in which it is opposing music industry efforts to raise its royalty rates, an issue that has led to sharp criticism of Pandora by artists and advocacy groups.Next week, the Copyright Royalty Board, a panel of federal judges in Washington, will begin hearings to set a royalty rate for the use of recordings by Internet radio services like Pandora and iHeartRadio. The rate the panel sets currently accounts for almost half of Pandora’s expenses, and the uncertainty around the proceedings has weighed on the company’s stock.AdvertisementBefore Mr. Leiweke joined Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment, he was the chief executive of A.E.G., the sports and entertainment company controlled by the billionaire investor Philip F. Anschutz. After Mr. Anschutz called off a planned sale of A.E.G. in 2013, Mr. Leiweke left the company.Mr. Faxon left EMI in 2012, after a complex $4.1 billion deal was approved by European regulators to split EMI between Universal and Sony. Since then he has led his own investment company, A&R Investments, and sits on the board of ITV, a British broadcaster.AdvertisementMr. Leiweke and Mr. Faxon will replace Robert Kavner and David Sze, two longtime investors. Mr. Kavner has been on Pandora’s board since 2004 — at the time, it was still known as Savage Beast Technologies — and has been the lead independent director since 2010.Mr. Sze, a partner with the venture capital firm Greylock Partners, has been on the board since 2009. Pandora went public in 2011.An earlier version of this article misstated the value of a deal in 2012 to split EMI between Universal and Sony. It was a $4.1 billion deal, not $4.4 billion.A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Shake-Up on Board as Pandora Changes Tone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.