By DAVID BARBOZAAPRIL 20, 2015
The troubled Chinese property developer Kaisa Group has defaulted on its overseas debt, a situation that could make Western investors more wary of the country’s real estate market.Once a darling of global money managers, the developer, with its trail of financial problems, is now a case study for the risks of investing in China.For years, big investors plowed money into Kaisa, attracted by the tempting returns and the country’s soaring real estate market. The developer sold $2.5 billion in bonds to mutual funds and other major money managers.Then the company stumbled, as property prices slumped and reports of corruption surfaced. In February, Kaisa announced that it had $10.4 billion in debt, far more than it had previously disclosed.AdvertisementThe company has been negotiating with bondholders to restructure its debt.But the company announced on Monday that it had missed two large interest payments due last month on about $1 billion in United States dollar-denominated corporate bonds.AdvertisementIt is the first major Chinese developer to default on its overseas bonds, raising concerns that other companies could follow.Western players have been increasingly skeptical of the Chinese property market, and foreign investment in the sector has dried up of late. Like Kaisa, many developers have run up heavy debt loads, which are now proving worrisome in the current real estate slump.“When this first erupted, a lot of developers who wanted to raise money saw the cost of funding go up,” Wee Liat Lee, a property analyst at BNP Paribas, said in a recent interview. “Investors are now pricing in risk.”The default is the latest setback for Kaisa.The company began to unravel last fall after the Chinese authorities placed restrictions on the sale of many of its properties in the city of Shenzhen, where the company has its headquarters. The government did not offer an explanation for the decision, though some published reports said the company’s troubles were tied to an anticorruption campaign in Shenzhen.As shares of Kaisa plummeted, the company stopped answering inquiries from the news media and analysts. Credit-rating agencies downgraded the company’s debt and some global investors began anticipating a bankruptcy.Amid the tumult came a raft of resignations from top executives at the company, including the chairman and co-founder, Guo Yingcheng, who stepped down for health reasons. The Guo family then agreed to sell its 49 percent stake to another developer, Sunac China.With its financial problems mounting, Kaisa started pressuring bondholders on about $2.5 billion in overseas debt to make concessions. The company was essentially pushing investors to accept roughly 50 percent of the value of their holdings.The company warned that if investors did not agree, a bankruptcy could leave them with just pennies on the dollar. The bondholders rejected the initial proposal and have been bargaining for a better settlement.AdvertisementKaisa’s situation remains uncertain. It has delayed the filing of its 2014 financial results. Some of China’s biggest financial institutions have asked the courts to preserve its assets.Then, a week ago, Kaisa unexpectedly announced Mr. Guo had been appointed chairman again. He returned just after the Shenzhen government eased restrictions on the sale of some of Kaisa’s properties in Shenzhen.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His return has cast doubt on a planned $580 million sale of his family’s stake to Sunac China. While Sunac China has made no statements since Mr. Guo’s return, the company acknowledged that several of its executives had been forced to leave Kaisa’s office.Kaisa still declines to grant interviews with the news media or to meet analysts.Mr. Guo, who co-founded Kaisa in 1999, now seems to be firmly back in charge. And he appears to have the backing of Sino-Life, a midsize insurer that is one of the company’s major shareholders and also a partner in one of Kaisa’s Shenzhen developments.Kaisa recently borrowed about $225 million from Sino-Life. It plans to use the money to make a payment on a land deal the companies planned to co-develop in Shenzhen’s new financial zone.As for its overseas debt, Kaisa gave no further detail about the state of its finances. But it said in a filing on Monday that the company would “continue its efforts to reach a consensual restructuring of its outstanding debts.”A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Debt Default by Developer in China.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.