By STEVE SLATER and SINEAD CRUISE | REUTERSAPRIL 20, 2015
LONDON —  HSBC and Standard Chartered are looking at the viability of quitting London for a new home in Asia because a big increase in a tax on British banks makes staying in Britain increasingly painful.Several investors said that they wanted the two banks to do a thorough analysis of whether it made sense to move after Britain raised the bank tax by a third last month.Some investors are expected to quiz the banks’ bosses on the issue at shareholder meetings, including an investor gathering in Hong Kong on Monday.“There is a very clear risk that HSBC and StanChart reach a pain threshold where they think it is no longer worth staying in the U.K.,” said Richard Buxton, head of equities at Old Mutual Global Investors, which owns HSBC shares.AdvertisementThe tax has increased eight times since being introduced in 2010 to ensure that banks were making a “fair contribution” after the financial crisis. The latest rise was seen as a move to win over voters before the May 7 election in Britain.AdvertisementAberdeen Asset Management, the second biggest shareholder in Standard Chartered, with an aggregate stake of 9.4 percent, said the bank should consider the option.Four years ago, HSBC said it would review its domicile in 2015, although the bank declined to comment when a review might occur.The banks, which make most of their profits in Asia, face a combined $2 billion bill this year under the annual British bank tax, up from $1.5 billion last year and almost double what they paid in 2013.The opposition Labour Party plans to increase it by 800 million pounds to £4.5 billion, or $6.7 billion, a year for the banking industry as a whole, if it wins power, to pay for child care for 3- and 4-year-olds. Labour is neck and neck in opinion polls with the Conservative Party of Prime Minister David Cameron.Another hefty rise could be the final catalyst and force banks to move, said Chirantan Barua, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein.HSBC, which has described the levy as a tax on staying in London, faces a bill of $1.5 billion this year, about 7 percent of expected profits. Standard Chartered is set to pay $500 million, or about 9 percent of earnings.HSBC says it has two home markets, Britain and Hong Kong. It moved from Hong Kong to London in 1993 when it bought Midland Bank, and its most likely move would be back to its former home, one of the few places that could handle its $2.6 trillion balance sheet.AdvertisementThe bank began life in Hong Kong 150 years ago, with roots in financing trade between Europe and Asia. It issues most of the territory’s bank notes and has made $24 billion in profits there over the past three years, compared with a $4 billion loss in Britain over the same period.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.London has been home to Standard Chartered since it was formed in 1969, and its most likely new home would be Singapore, from where most of its businesses are already run.Analysts said the cost of moving could be between $1.5 billion and $2.5 billion per bank.HSBC told British lawmakers in February, before the tax increase, that the best location was still Britain. It postponed a review in 2011 because its chief executive, Stuart Gulliver, said there were too many moving parts to make a rational decision.Industry sources said that could still be the case for both banks. They are trying to improve profitability, cut costs, sell businesses, deal with old misconduct issues and simplify. Standard Chartered also gets a new chief executive this year, Bill Winters, who may want to raise capital.“On a 10- or 15-year view, I’d be surprised if both of them are still here,” said John-Paul Crutchley, a UBS banking analyst. “But I don’t think it’s an issue for the short-term. They have bigger priorities.”Yet it could be worth it. An analyst at JPMorgan, Raul Sinha, estimated that the higher tax on British banks would cut Standard Chartered’s earnings 13 percent in 2017, while a move away from Britain could lift its return on tangible equity, a key profitability measure, by 1.6 percentage points to 12.7 percent.Britain is also forcing banks to separate domestic retail operations by 2019, so if HSBC were serious about moving, it could spin off its British business at the same time, analysts said.But the complexity of all the issues in the mix makes a decision difficult. These include Europe’s pay rules, the risk of losing staff, how capital and leverage rules in places like Singapore compare, access to capital, political stability, credit ratings and the risk of regulatory change in any new jurisdiction.Britain’s strongest card is London, which ranks alongside New York as the most attractive global financial hub, in the Z/Yen Global Financial Centers Index.AdvertisementBanks, accused of saber-rattling with threats to move before, are also wary of stepping into a political minefield.“StanChart and HSBC might well be firing warning shots on their possible relocation to tell politicians they won’t be bullied,” said Paul Mumford, senior investment manager at Cavendish Asset Management, which owns stock in both banks. “But I think unless these firms start feeling that some politicians are in tune with what they offer the U.K., then we might see genuine action.”Steve Slater and Sinead Cruise are Reuters correspondents. A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.