AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel Abrams and Hiroko TabuchiThe alert hit HEB Grocery in San Antonio late Monday: Blue Bell Creameries, a Southwestern favorite and the country’s third-largest ice cream brand, was recalling all its frozen desserts over concerns of contamination by the potentially deadly bacteria listeria.HEB, which runs 300 stores across southern Texas, immediately placed a lock on its cash registers to prevent sales of Blue Bell ice creams. Within an hour, workers had banished all Blue Bell products from store shelves.The urgency with which HEB Grocery and other retailers have moved emphasizes the seriousness of a listeria outbreak that has plunged the ice cream manufacturer into the biggest crisis of its 108-year history. In a rare move for a company, Blue Bell decided late Monday to recall all its ice cream and other products from stores in more than 20 states, after a succession of smaller recalls and efforts to rid some of its manufacturing plants of the bacteria had failed. In a little more than a month, three deaths and several illnesses in Kansas and possibly some in Texas have been linked to the company’s products.Blue Bell took the drastic step as it scrambled to contain the spread of listeria, while trying to reassure its loyal customer base that it would impose stringent testing standards for any new products. But analysts voiced concerns that Blue Bell had acted too late, as the recalls eroded customer confidence. Restoring trust as the summer sales season approaches will be difficult, they say. “When there’s a recall and somebody does something quickly and when they handle it properly, we forgive it,” said Phil Lempert, food industry analyst for SupermarketGuru.com. “When it’s the entire product line or the entire company,” he said, “people are very concerned.” Last month, the company issued its first recall ever, urging customers to return 10 varieties of its frozen snack items. Workers at one of the company’s two plants in Brenham, Tex., traced listeria to a machine that wrapped ice cream sandwiches and other single-serving products, said Joe Robertson, Blue Bell’s advertising and public relations manager. The machine and the entire room were shut down and sterilized, and executives hoped that the issue was resolved.But the problem only grew worse. The Food and Drug Administration found more evidence of listeria, and Blue Bell continued to expand the recall as it learned of listeria cases from previous years that officials had linked to its products. On Monday, two tubs of cookie dough ice cream at the Brenham plant prompted a somber meeting of top Blue Bell executives. The tub had tested positive for listeria. Paul Kruse, the chief executive and grandson of one of Blue Bell’s first executives, huddled with Mr. Robertson and Ricky Dickson, the vice president for sales and marketing, in a conference room and decided that the company would recall all its products.“That was a tough decision right there, to do what we did,” Mr. Robertson said. “At that point, we knew that the decision had to be made, and it was the right decision.”Mr. Kruse, who pairs his suits with cowboy boots emblazoned with the words “Blue Bell,” apologized to customers in a video posted online on Monday. “We’re heartbroken over the situation and apologize to all of our Blue Bell fans and customers. “Ice cream is a joy and a pleasure to eat,” he added. “It certainly is for me, and I do it every day. And it should never be a cause for concern. For that, we apologize, and we’re going to get it right.”Although Blue Bell is still associated with the homespun appeal of a family-run company in Texas, it has grown into a major ice cream corporation with sales in more than 20 states and some overseas. Blue Bell was the nation’s third-largest manufacturer of ice cream in 2014, behind Nestlé (Haagen-Dazs, Dreyer’s and Edy’s) and Unilever (Ben & Jerry’s and Klondike), with 6.4 percent of the $13.8 billion ice cream market in the United States, according to data from Euromonitor. It is the second time in months that an ice cream company has recalled all its products over listeria. In December, Snoqualmie Gourmet Ice Cream, a high-end ice cream maker in Snohomish, Wash., removed all its ice creams, gelatos, custards and sorbets from retailers’ shelves after health officials linked two listeria cases at a hospital to tubs of its ice cream.Bill Marler, a personal injury lawyer and food safety advocate who is now working with Snoqualmie to make changes at its factory, said that the company had since overhauled its production processes, installing new flooring and sanitizing equipment, and adopting third-party sample testing for all batches of ice cream before they are shipped.Outside experts brought in to track down the source of the listeria infection discovered traces of the bacteria on pallets used by a supplier to deliver milk to the plant, Mr. Marler said. Snoqualmie now keeps pallets out of the production room, and it has also strengthened rules on cleaning uniforms, boots and strip curtains in production zones. Snoqualmie was cleared to start shipping ice cream again after 60 days.Mr. Marler stressed that Snoqualmie had immediately decided to recall all its products even though only a certain line of small-tub ice creams had been linked to the listeria case.“Limiting the recall might seem like a good idea,” he said. “But then if you keep expanding your recall, it’s a death by a thousand cuts. You look like you’re dragging your feet.” Blue Bell ships products to restaurants and supermarkets from 62 distribution centers around the country. This week, the company sent retailers a memo, Mr. Robertson said, to help address concerns from customers.“The big challenge for them is that they’re a consumer brand that does not really interact directly with their customers,” said Daniel Korschun, an assistant professor of marketing and a fellow at the Center for Corporate Reputation Management at Drexel University. Blue Bell, Mr. Korschun said, would be responsible for making sure that everyone that handled its products, down to the salespeople at the supermarket, knew what to say to customers.In addition, Blue Bell has been working behind the scenes to figure out what went wrong. The company has assembled a team of experts, Mr. Robertson said, and is working with the F.D.A. and health department officials. Blue Bell closed its plant in Broken Arrow, Okla., in early April. Workers at the company’s three other plants are testing machinery for bacteria 800 percent more than usual, down to the conveyor belts that shuttle chocolate chips around the factory.Listeria is commonly traced to milk, but it can also be found in soil. When employees move from room to room, their shoes are sprayed with disinfectant.Blue Bell is still making ice cream at its two Texas plants and one Alabama plant, although its products have been stripped from store shelves. All new products will be tested for listeria before being shipped, Mr. Robertson said, and the company hopes to have ice cream back in stores in two to three weeks.“Food and safety recalls are something that retailers take very seriously,” said Dya Campos, a spokeswoman for HEB Grocery. She said the grocer was referring all queries from shoppers to Blue Bell and that it would independently assess whether to carry the brand again once its products were deemed safe. Brendan Flaherty, a lawyer at the Minneapolis-based PritzkerOlsen firm, represents several people who may have been sickened after eating Blue Bell products, though he stressed that further DNA tests would have to be carried out to confirm a link. “The challenge of the outbreak is that they kept expanding the recalls in scope and time,” he said. “Now health department officials are reopening and looking at listeriosis cases that they previously never linked to specific products, and they could discover a lot more cases linked to Blue Bell.”Austin Ramzy contributed reporting.Advertisement