By EMILY STEELAPRIL 21, 2015
In July 2013, executives from the three companies that co-owned Hulu — Comcast, 21st Century Fox and Walt Disney — had a conversation about their joint venture. Hulu, the video streaming service, had been on the auction block, and lucrative bids had come in from two Comcast rivals, AT&T and the satellite operator DirecTV, among other potential buyers.Comcast told its counterparts that it could enhance Hulu’s value, which influenced their thinking about the fate of the service, according to several people with knowledge of the conversation, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the discussions were confidential. The issue was not money; some of the bids came in at more than $1 billion, one person said.Within days, Fox and Disney announced that the sale of Hulu had been called off for the second time in two years.The discussion among the companies, which took place at the Allen & Company conference in Sun Valley, Idaho, raises questions about the degree to which Comcast was trying to influence the operations of Hulu, which it acquired a stake in when it took over NBCUniversal in 2011. As part of the deal it struck with government regulators for that acquisition, Comcast had agreed not to “influence, interfere or attempt to influence or interfere” in the management or operation of Hulu. The company made similar agreements with the Justice Department and the Federal Communications Commission.AdvertisementComcast’s record of compliance involving Hulu as well as several other conditions it agreed to in the NBCUniversal deal is now in the spotlight as regulators scrutinize Comcast’s proposed $45 billion takeover of Time Warner Cable. The deal would unite the country’s two largest cable operators, controlling just under 30 percent of the pay television subscribers and 35 to 50 percent of the nation’s broadband Internet service, depending on how regulators define the market.AdvertisementThe Justice Department is evaluating whether the merger is anticompetitive and is scheduled to meet with Comcast on Wednesday to discuss it. The F.C.C. is considering whether the deal is in the public interest, and regulators in New York and California are also examining it.Should regulators approve the merger, they will most likely place conditions on it. How Comcast complied with the conditions of the NBCUniversal merger provides a window into how the company is likely to behave, some analysts and critics have said.“The track record is bad on conditions,” Senator Al Franken, a Minnesota Democrat who has urged regulators to block the deal, said in an interview on Tuesday. “They can’t be trusted, and they shouldn’t be.”A Comcast spokeswoman, Sena Fitzmaurice, said in a statement on Tuesday, “Comcast had no role in making, evaluating or reconsidering any management decisions at Hulu.”She added: “The decision not to sell Hulu was made only by the members of their managing board on which Comcast does not sit and has no role. At the time of the decision, executives of both Disney and Fox discussed publicly their compelling reasons not to sell.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Franken has been a vocal critic of the deal since it was announced last year. In an op-ed published this week, he pointed to a several issues related to the company’s compliance with the conditions that it agreed to as part of its NBCUniversal acquisition. Those include a fine by the F.C.C. for violating an agreement to create a stand-alone broadband product for people who wanted to subscribe to Internet service but not television. While Comcast offered the service, it was found to not actively promote it.Mr. Franken said that the deal should be blocked rather than passed with conditions and that putting conditions on it would not work because regulators do not have the resources to enforce them.Comcast said that of the more than 150 conditions placed on the transaction by the F.C.C., there was only one compliance concern, which was resolved. The company said it had fully complied with its consent decree with the Justice Department.Advertisement“In addition to the over 150 conditions from the F.C.C.’s NBCUniversal order, we’ve complied with the D.O.J. consent decree fully,” Ms. Fitzmaurice said. “Comcast is proud of our record of compliance with the NBCUniversal F.C.C. conditions.”News of the discussion about Hulu in Sun Valley was first reported on Tuesday night by The Wall Street Journal.Mr. Franken was one of six senators who on Tuesday urged regulators to reject Comcast’s proposed takeover of Time Warner Cable, arguing that the combination of the country’s two largest cable operators would give one company too much power over the future of television and broadband. The letter was sent to the Justice Department and the F.C.C., and came ahead of meetings between the regulators and the companies about the deal. .In the letter, the senators said Comcast’s “unmatched power” would harm competition, choke innovation and lead to higher prices, fewer choices and worse service for consumers. They said they had fielded complaints about the merger from consumers, advocacy groups and companies.The other senators who signed the letter were four Democrats — Elizabeth Warren and Ed Markey, both of Massachusetts, Ron Wyden of Oregon and Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut — and Bernard Sanders, the independent from Vermont.Comcast has argued that the deal does not reduce competition because Comcast does not now compete for customers with Time Warner Cable in any local markets. The company also said there would be benefits from the deal, such as more video-on-demand offerings and faster broadband speeds for current Time Warner Cable customers. Comcast has also pledged to expand its program that offers people with lower incomes a low-cost broadband option.A version of this article appears in print on April 22, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Track Record in Past Deals May Be Hitch for Comcast.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.