By JAD MOUAWADOCT. 19, 2015
Four days after its new chief executive, Oscar Munoz, was hospitalized, United Airlines said it appointed its general counsel, Brett J. Hart, as acting chief.The appointment takes effect immediately, United said, adding Mr. Munoz would be on medical leave. “At this time, it is too soon to know the course of treatment and timing of recovery,” United said in a statement.The appointment lifts a major uncertainty for the Chicago-based airline, which had been vague about the condition of its top executive since Friday when it announced he had been hospitalized.Henry L. Meyer III, United’s nonexecutive chairman, said earlier on Monday that the company’s board was working on a “corporate governance process” that it expected to complete by the end of the day.Advertisement“Brett has taken on increasing responsibility beyond general counsel over the last few years in the operations and customer-facing areas of the company,” Mr. Meyer said in a statement announcing the appointment. “I am confident in his ability to continue to implement the company’s strategy and Oscar’s mission of bringing United’s people together around the shared purpose of becoming the best airline for our customers and employees.”AdvertisementUnited said that its board remained “actively engaged in preparing for all potential outcomes regarding the company’s leadership structure.”For days, citing privacy concerns, United has declined to comment on the health of its chief executive, provide details about what led to his hospitalization or give any indication on his condition.The appointment of Mr. Hart caps a tumultuous month at United, which in September dismissed its chief executive, Jeff Smisek, during a corruption investigation into the airline’s trading favors with the chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.United said that in addition to being the airline’s general counsel, Mr. Hart was responsible for government and regulatory affairs, corporate real estate, customer experience, corporate security, community affairs, contact centers and food services.Before joining the airline, in 2010, he was executive vice president, general counsel and corporate secretary at Sara Lee, a partner at Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal, and a special assistant to the general counsel at the Treasury Department.Mr. Hart has a bachelor of arts degree in philosophy and English from the University of Michigan and a juris doctoral degree from the University of Chicago Law School.Mr. Munoz, a former railroad executive, joined the board of Continental Airlines in 2004. He became a board member of United when the two airlines merged in 2010.His arrival had been greeted positively by United’s unions, which hoped that it would signal an improvement in labor relations from the leadership of his predecessor. The airline’s union leaders expressed over the weekend their hope that Mr. Munoz would be able to resume his duties soon.The airline did not address how long Mr. Munoz’s medical leave might be.“They are being very cautious, but you can’t really fault them for it,” said Charles M. Elson, professor of finance and director of the John L. Weinberg Center for Corporate Governance at the University of Delaware, before the announcement of the interim C.E.O. “Remember they didn’t have anyone on the internal bench, which is why they went to a director when they replaced their chief executive. Now, they are trying to figure out what to do next.”A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: With Chief in the Hospital, United Asks General Counsel to Fill In.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.