By DAVID GELLESAPRIL 21, 2015
Eat or be eaten. That is the philosophy among drug makers that is underpinning a frenzied burst of consolidation and rapidly reshaping the global pharmaceutical industry.The deal making reached a fevered pitch on Tuesday when Teva, an Israeli maker of generic drugs, made an unsolicited $40 billion offer for Mylan, a rival based in the Netherlands.Just hours later, Perrigo, an Irish company that makes store-brand drugs, rejected a $29 billion takeover offer that Mylan made this month.And though no new deals were clinched on Tuesday, the developments added pressure on all three companies to either secure a target or risk becoming the prey. They also raised the prospect of more entrants joining the mix.Advertisement“Last year taxes were one of the main drivers,” said Jeffrey Loo, an equity analyst at S.&P. Capital IQ, referring to several health care deals driven by so-called tax inversions. “Now the main driver is getting bigger. Getting bigger gives you better pricing and better leverage and also gets you into more markets.”AdvertisementThis is especially true for generic drug makers, which rely less on research and development and more on maximizing profits from increasingly large global operations.Teva made this case on Tuesday, arguing that by acquiring Mylan it would grow into one of the world’s largest drug makers and the undisputed leader in generics. A Teva acquisition of Mylan would be the biggest health care deal of the year so far and also the largest acquisition ever proposed by an Israeli company, according to S.&P. Capital IQ.If combined, the companies would have annual revenue of about $30 billion and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization of about $9 billion. Teva said it could extract savings of about $2 billion annually from a combined company and that it would maintain its dividend if the deal went through.“Our proposal is compelling for both Teva and Mylan stockholders and other stakeholders,” Erez Vigodman, Teva’s chief executive, said in a statement.Its offer for Mylan, of $82 a share split between cash and stock, represents a 38 percent premium to Mylan’s stock price before it offered to acquire Perrigo. Shares of Mylan rose nearly 9 percent in New York, to $74.07.Another factor inspiring big companies to make big deals is the continuation of low interest rates, so debt is incredibly cheap, said Ken Cacciatore, an analyst at Cowen & Company.“They realize — like any management team should in any industry — that in this interest rate environment they should create value using any means possible,” Mr. Cacciatore said in an email.AdvertisementMylan declined to comment on either the Teva offer or the Perrigo rejection.But last week, Mylan took the unusual step of announcing it was uninterested in a takeover from Teva, even before such an offer had been made.“We have studied the potential combination of Mylan and Teva for some time and we believe it is clear that such a combination is without sound industrial logic or cultural fit,” Mylan’s executive chairman, Robert J. Coury, said in a statement. “Further, there would be significant overlap in the companies’ businesses and we believe that it is unlikely that any such combination could obtain antitrust regulatory clearances.”That was only the latest indication of Mylan’s desire to remain independent. Its offer for Perrigo was viewed as a defensive move because Teva was known to be interested in a takeover of Mylan at the time.Teva, however, ignored the message. And as the drug business consolidates, Teva would rather try to become bigger than see one of its main rivals get larger.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even though Perrigo rejected Mylan’s initial offer, Teva faces hurdles in its effort to acquire Mylan. Mylan is unlikely to simply walk away from its pursuit of Perrigo. But analysts think it will have to secure an agreement if it wishes to remain a stand-alone company.“If Mylan is really going to fight tooth and nail to stay independent, they need to pursue Perrigo harder,” Mr. Loo said. “If they don’t, Mylan may be bought out at a higher price.”Even if Mylan can’t secure a deal with Perrigo, Teva would most likely have to raise its offer.“If Teva wants Mylan, they are going to have to increase the purchase price and potentially reduce the stock component,” Mr. Loo said.Some analysts said Mylan would look for at least a 10 percent increase to the price being offered by Teva.“With the stock price at the $70 plus today, we don’t see Mylan agreeing to a price lower than $90,” Ronny Gal, an analyst with Sanford Bernstein, said in a note this month.AdvertisementAnother wild card is the various regulatory agencies involved in the three-way dance. Some investors thought that Mylan had a slight edge because of its incorporation in the Netherlands.“It makes it slightly more difficult for Teva to prevail as Dutch law is very deferential to the target’s board,” Chris Pultz, portfolio manager of Kellner Capital’s merger arbitrage fund, said in an email.And even if Teva does secure an agreement to take over Mylan, the deal will most likely face antitrust scrutiny.Teva thinks it could gain regulatory approval for a Mylan deal, according to people briefed on the matter but not authorized to speak publicly. To Mylan’s point about a cultural fit, these people said that Teva would make the case that the issue was shareholder value, not workplace harmony.Teva was complimentary of Mylan on Tuesday, refraining from the combative language that has recently characterized some tense takeover attempts in the drug industry.“We have long respected Mylan’s business, and we are confident that Mylan’s board of directors and stockholders will agree that our proposal represents a significantly more attractive alternative for Mylan and its stockholders than Mylan’s proposed acquisition of Perrigo,” Mr. Vigodman said.In some ways, the next move hinges not on Mylan or Teva but on Perrigo. If Perrigo ultimately agrees to enter into discussions with Mylan, that could provide a viable path forward for Mylan’s leadership and shareholders.But if Perrigo refuses to come to the bargaining table, Teva will have the upper hand in its pursuit.“This is just the beginning of what could be a very heated battle,” Mr. Pultz said.An earlier version of this article misstated the title of Robert J. Coury. He is the executive chairman of the drug maker Mylan, not its chief executive. The article also misspelled the given name of the pharmaceutical industry analyst for Bernstein. He is Ronny Gal, not Rony.A version of this article appears in print on April 22, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Teva Bids $40 Billion to Acquire a Rival.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.