By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 21, 2015
LONDON — Credit Suisse said on Tuesday that its profit rose 23 percent in the first quarter as the bank benefited from an uptick in market activity and measures it took to offset a sharp rise in the value of the Swiss franc.For the first three months of the year, Credit Suisse reported earnings of 1.05 billion francs, or about $1.1 billion. That compares with a profit of 859 million francs in the same period in 2014. Its results in the first quarter exceeded analysts’ expectations. Revenue rose 3 percent to 6.67 billion francs in the first quarter.But the bank’s stock fell on Tuesday after it reported that its common equity Tier 1 capital ratio — a measure of its ability to weather financial disturbances — declined to 10 percent, from 10.1 percent in the fourth quarter.The bank attributed the drop to a combination of the effect of weaker currencies, share purchases for employee compensation plans and methodology changes by regulators. Its shares were down 2 percent in trading in Zurich.AdvertisementIn January, the Swiss National Bank abruptly abandoned a cap on the Swiss franc against the euro, causing the value of the franc to surge. Credit Suisse, said it acted in the quarter to offset the appreciation of the currency and the effect of low interest rates, including cost reductions.“We delivered another quarter of strong and consistent performance,” Brady W. Dougan, the Credit Suisse chief executive, said in a news release. “Wealth management clients generated a particularly strong result, with improved margins, increased profitability and good net asset inflows from key growth regions.”AdvertisementThe quarterly results will be the last for Mr. Dougan, who is preparing to leave the bank, which he has led since 2007. In June, he will be succeeded by Tidjane Thiam, who leads the British insurance company Prudential.In the private banking and wealth management division, pretax profit declined 18 percent to 834 million francs in the first quarter, compared with 1.01 billion francs a year earlier.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bank said its year-over-year results were “muted” in the division because of the strength of the Swiss franc. But it added that its wealth management clients segment benefited from increased foreign exchange activity and higher sales and trading revenue after the Swiss National Bank announcement.Average assets under management in the private bank and wealth management division rose 6.3 percent, to 1.37 trillion francs.In the investment bank, Credit Suisse reported pretax income of 945 million francs in the first quarter, compared with a profit of 827 million francs a year earlier.The bank said that its fixed-income and equity trading businesses benefited from increased client activity and favorable market conditions, but revenue in its underwriting and advisory businesses declined from the prior year on a slowdown in leveraged finance underwriting activity and initial public offerings in the quarter.A report in the Business Briefing column on Wednesday about Credit Suisse’s quarterly results misstated the year the company made a profit of 859 million francs. It was in the first three months of 2014, not 2013.A version of this article appears in print on April 22, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Credit Suisse Stock Falls Despite Rise in Profits.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.