By EMILY STEELAPRIL 22, 2015
CHICAGO —  David L. Cohen stood between the rappers Ludacris and Chance on stage in the gymnasium of Alcott College Prep high school here one afternoon last month, holding up one of the dozen laptops they were giving away to the roaring crowd. The scene was like a pep rally for the Internet: Students waved posters emblazoned with Comcast’s logo and the hashtag #InternetEssentials.Mr. Cohen is one of the top executives at Comcast, the country’s largest cable operator, and is in charge of navigating its controversial $45 billion takeover of Time Warner Cable past regulators. He hadn’t slept at all the night before, he said, but made the trip to Chicago to promote the company’s Internet Essentials program, which offers families with low incomes broadband service for $10 a month.The program was put in place after Comcast acquired NBCUniversal in 2011 as part of more than 150 commitments it made to secure the transaction’s approval. Internet Essentials was scheduled to expire in 2014, but Comcast said last year — one month after announcing its deal with Time Warner Cable — that it would continue Internet Essentials indefinitely.Comcast has trumpeted the program as a success story and example of how it can live up to the conditions imposed as part its big acquisitions — the NBCUniversal takeover four years ago and now its proposed takeover of Time Warner Cable, which would combine the two largest cable operators in the country. Other broadband providers do not offer a similar program.AdvertisementCritics, however, call Internet Essentials a public relations stunt that failed to deliver on its promise, with restrictive qualifications, limited reach and poor service. Comcast committed to making the program available to 2.5 million low-income households. The company announced in March that the program had connected 450,000 families — or about 18 percent of eligible households. (Comcast officials say that the population is difficult to reach and that getting people to sign up for the service has been harder than they thought.)Advertisement“Regulators were sold a bill of goods,” said John Bergmayer, a senior staff lawyer at Public Knowledge, a consumer advocacy group that has criticized the effectiveness of Internet Essentials and is urging regulators to block the Time Warner Cable deal. “I’d be curious whether they spent more time marketing in D.C. to policy makers than to people who qualify for the program.”Lawmakers, public interest groups and corporations are now urging the regulators determining the fate of the Comcast-Time Warner Cable tie-up to scrutinize Comcast’s record with the Internet Essentials program as well as its broader history of compliance for the NBCUniversal acquisition.They point to several grievances, including the degree to which Comcast may have influenced the operations of Hulu, which it was forbidden to do under terms of the NBCUniversal deal. Comcast assumed one-third control of Hulu — along with 21st Century Fox and the Walt Disney Company — when it acquired NBCUniversal, and agreed to be a silent partner.Some television executives, for their part, said they had not complained publicly or to regulators about Comcast’s behavior for fear of retribution in their dealings with the company. But they complain about the difficulty they have had in making their content available for streaming in Comcast markets.Critics also point to Comcast’s decision to fight a condition that required it to place Bloomberg TV adjacent to Comcast’s own news networks on the channel lineup; Comcast went to court over the issue, but dropped its objections around the same time it announced the Time Warner Cable deal.Others cite the company’s failure to promote a stand-alone broadband service that is not tied to a television package, making it hard for people to find out about it or sign up for it.A Comcast spokeswoman, Sena Fitzmaurice, said in a statement that not a single television distributor or programmer has requested arbitration or filed a program carriage complaint in the four years since Comcast acquired NBCUniversal.AdvertisementMs. Fitzmaurice confirmed that Comcast had “one in a series of meetings” with the Justice Department on Wednesday. She declined to comment on the substance of those talks. Comcast was also scheduled to meet with the Federal Communications Commission.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A Justice Department spokesman also declined to comment. Last week, people with knowledge of the thinking of staff lawyers in the department said that they were leaning toward recommending that the transaction be blocked on antitrust grounds. That feedback would be preliminary and not binding on senior department officials, the people said.Critics of the proposed merger say that Comcast’s attitude toward compliance paints a picture of an already huge company that uses its heft to its advantage. They argue that the company’s deal for Time Warner Cable should be blocked outright — rather than passed with conditions — because regulators do not have the resources to police the company and monitor whether Comcast has complied. Even if they did, the punishments are minuscule; for instance, Comcast, which had more than $8 billion in profits in 2014, was fined $800,000 in 2012 after the F.C.C. found that it had violated a condition to provide an affordable stand-alone broadband service. While Comcast offered the service, it did not actively promote it, the F.C.C. found.“I don’t think the history of conditions is exactly a fabled story,” said Michael Copps, a former Democratic member of the F.C.C. and a special adviser to Common Cause. “I don’t see any conditions that would make the Comcast-Time Warner Cable deal serve the public interest.”Comcast said that its record of compliance is stellar. The company said that in four years, there were no violations with its consent decree with the Justice Department and only one issue with the more than 150 conditions it agreed to with the F.C.C.“I hope they are looking at it a lot because it is an impressive track record,” Mr. Cohen said in an interview after the Chicago rally.The Internet Essentials program, he said, is much more than a public relations move or negotiating tactic. “It is so much deeper and more important than anything to do with any transaction,” he said. “If people came up and said you are doing all this because it is important to get the Time Warner Cable deal done, I would look at you like you came from Mars.”Comcast also denies that it was involved in or tried to influence the 2013 sales process involving Hulu.In July of that year, top executives from Comcast, Disney and Fox had a conversation at a conference in Sun Valley, Idaho. People with knowledge of the discussion, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, say Comcast outlined how it could enhance the value of Hulu. That conversation, these people say, influenced the decision by Disney and Fox not to sell the streaming service, which was announced within days of the conference.AdvertisementMs. Fitzmaurice said in a statement that “the decision not to sell Hulu was made only by the members of Hulu’s managing board on which Comcast does not sit and has no role, and there was no effort by Comcast to influence that decision.”Comcast also occasionally made its opinion known about the operations of Hulu, executives involved with the management of Hulu said. While Comcast had no formal involvement on Hulu’s board, the executives said that Comcast spoke up during other meetings about issues like what programming should be made available on the service.Ms. Fitzmaurice said, “Comcast has had no role in management or strategic decisions at Hulu — we are purely passive investors and a content provider to Hulu.”A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Comcast Critics Cast Doubt on Its Intentions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.