By AARON M. KESSLER and DANIELLE IVORYAPRIL 22, 2015
The Justice Department has begun a criminal investigation of the guardrail maker Trinity Industries and is examining the company’s relationship with the Federal Highway Administration, according to people with knowledge of the effort.At least five potential witnesses, including one former federal highway agency official, have been interviewed in recent weeks by investigators, and at least one grand jury subpoena for documents has been issued, according to the people.The Justice Department is seeking documents and other records related to a federal whistle-blower case that Trinity lost last October. In that trial, a jury found the company liable for defrauding the government by failing to disclose design changes to its guardrail, called the ET-Plus.The changes, made in 2005, are suspected of making the units more likely to jam when hit head-on, causing the metal rail to spear the vehicle. Trinity has said that its failure to disclose the changes was an oversight and that they did not affect the performance of the guardrail. The Justice Department investigation was first reported by Bloomberg News.AdvertisementThe Justice Department’s investigation follows the highway agency’s announcement last month that Trinity’s guardrails had passed a series of eight crash tests, which were ordered by the government after the jury’s verdict. Some lawmakers, including Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, have denounced the tests as flawed.AdvertisementA prosecutor in Washington with the Justice Department’s criminal fraud division is involved in the investigation, as are special agents with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The Transportation Department’s Office of Inspector General is working with Justice Department officials as well, according to the people with knowledge of the inquiry.Trinity has not been contacted by either the Justice Department or the inspector general’s office, said a spokesman for the company, Jeff Eller.“Should they do so, we will respond openly to all requests for information,” Mr. Eller said. The Federal Highway Administration had no comment.A Justice Department spokesman declined to comment.The investigation is being spearheaded by the Boston offices of the F.B.I. and the Transportation Department. It is not known why the Boston office is taking the lead. At least one F.B.I. agent and two inspector general investigators based there have been helping to lead the questioning of witnesses.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While the full scope of the criminal investigation remains unclear, federal agents have been gathering information regarding the interactions of Federal Highway Administration officials and Trinity before and after the agency was first made aware, in 2012, of the previously undisclosed changes to the ET-Plus.According to a person briefed on the case, investigators have specifically inquired about one of the agency’s officials, Nicholas Artimovich, who, as The New York Times reported in October, had raised concerns over the safety of the ET-Plus in February 2012, only to have no action taken by the agency on the matter.“There does seem to be a valid question over the field performance,” Mr. Artimovich, a senior engineer, wrote in an email to his colleagues in February 2012, after an agency engineer based in South Carolina raised questions about the guardrails. In a separate email to an outside safety expert a month later, Mr. Artimovich wrote that it was “hard to ignore the fatal results.”The highway agency subsequently prepared a draft letter to be sent to Trinity to conduct additional testing of the ET-Plus to ensure it was safe. But the letter was never sent to the company, according to interviews and a review of the trial documents by The Times.AdvertisementWhile states are ultimately responsible for their highway equipment, the Federal Highway Administration plays an important role in approving products for federal reimbursement. About 200,000 of the ET-Plus systems are on the nation’s roads, federal officials estimate.The whistle-blower case against Trinity was filed by a competitor, Joshua Harman, on behalf of the highway agency. Mr. Harman discovered Trinity’s undisclosed redesign during separate litigation in 2011. The agency, however, chose not to participate in the whistle-blower case.Though the verdict last year dealt with fraud against the government, the trial offered a public airing of safety concerns about the ET-Plus. Last year, leading up to the trial and afterward, more than 30 states banned the product. After the verdict, Trinity temporarily halted sales of the guardrails.Then in December, Virginia’s attorney general became the first state attorney general to file a lawsuit against the company.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Guardrail Maker Is Said to Be Focus of U.S. Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.