AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinThe dispute between Verizon and some of the most popular and prominent TV networks escalated on Wednesday when Disney said that the new, slimmer FiOS cable offering violated agreements with all of its cable networks.FiOS introduced a less expensive cable package, called FiOS Custom TV, on Sunday that gives customers a base package of 35 channels, then allows them to choose two out of seven category-specific packages, like sports (ESPN, Fox Sports 1) or pop culture (Comedy Central, MTV). The package costs $55 a month, a discount from the average household cable bill of $90, according to the research firm SNL Kagan. Several media companies were caught off guard, and ESPN quickly came out against the new offering. Now Disney, the network’s parent company, has criticized it as well. “The issue here is that Verizon made unilateral decisions on how to offer ABC Family, Disney Channels, ESPN and ESPN2 that are in violation of our existing agreements,” Disney said on Wednesday. The company’s channels are spread throughout several tiers on the FiOS plan, with ESPN in sports, ABC Family in the pop culture plan and the Disney Channel and Disney Junior in the children’s category.A spokesman for Fox Networks, which has cable holdings that include FX and Fox Sports 1, said, “We reject Verizon’s view that it can pursue the new packaging scheme it announced yet still comply with our agreements.” And Cameron Blanchard, an NBCUniversal spokeswoman, said that the Verizon deal “does not comply” with agreements with its cable holdings, which include Bravo, USA and MSNBC. The dispute is happening as a growing number of consumers are choosing to cut the cord — forgoing conventional TV altogether — and instead relying on streaming services like Netflix or HBO Now that cost less. The changing landscape of the television industry has prompted companies to adjust and slimmed-down offerings like Verizon’s have long been anticipated. “The days of the 500-channel universe are over,” Leslie Moonves, the chief executive of CBS, said at a corporate conference last month. “The days of the 150-channel universe in the home, while not necessarily over, are changing rapidly. There’s going to be people who are going to be slicing it and dicing it in different ways.” And, so far, Verizon has showed no signs of backing down from its new plan. In a conference call with investors this week, Verizon’s chief financial officer, Fran Shammo, said he believed that the cable package complied with existing contracts. “Look, this is a product that the consumer wants,” he said. “It’s all about consumer choice.”An advertisement for the new cable package on Verizon’s website features a young man with a tattooed arm holding a remote control, with the slogan: “Pay for the type of channels you love. Stop paying for the ones you don’t.”Verizon reaches a little more than five million homes, which means it represents a little less than 6 percent of households that subscribe to paid TV service in the United States, according to SNL Kagan. In the FiOS offering, customers can subscribe to additional tiers for $10 a month. That was one reason that Anthony DiClemente, a media analyst at Nomura, was skeptical that customers would wind up spending only $55 a month. “The pricing is not as attractive as it may seem,” he said. “If you look at the details of this plan, the savings don’t really justify the benefits to the consumer.”Craig Moffett, an analyst at MoffettNathanson, said he thought the new package most likely violated existing contracts. “I’m sure Verizon will win in the court of public opinion but whatever halo comes from that won’t last long and it probably won’t be terribly material,” he said.Mr. Moffett said that the move was surprising since Verizon was also planning to start a mobile-first TV service this year. It has previously said it wants to begin with about two dozen channels. “Why do something so flagrantly provocative at a time when you’re going to depend on these suppliers for the wireless business?” he said.Advertisement