AdvertisementSupported byBy Aaron M. KesslerWASHINGTON — The unusual trial of Maurice R. Greenberg’s $40 billion lawsuit against the government ended on Wednesday in much the same way it started, with both sides presenting starkly different narratives about the 2008 taxpayer bailout of the American International Group.“Not surprisingly, just about everything is still in dispute in this case,” Judge Thomas Wheeler wryly commented from the bench as he adjourned Wednesday afternoon, prompting chuckles among those in attendance.David Boies, the lawyer for Mr. Greenberg, the former A.I.G. chief executive, sought to frame the case as less about A.I.G., or the $182 billion bailout itself, and more about the limits of executive power and whether the federal government had overstepped its bounds. The company’s shareholders, he argued, were shortchanged when the Federal Reserve imposed harsh terms — like a 14 percent interest rate and a 79.9 percent equity stake — that it did not have authority from Congress to apply.Kenneth M. Dintzer, who represented the Justice Department, argued just as strongly that not only did the Fed have the authority but that A.I.G’s shareholders never lost any money, which should preclude them from crying foul. The plaintiffs’ shares, he told the judge, “would not have had any value if not for the government’s actions” and instead would have been wiped out in bankruptcy.Even the valuation of A.I.G.’s shares remained in dispute. Mr. Dintzer cited stock charts that showed the stock price plummeting before the taxpayer bailout, then surging once the Fed’s emergency loan was announced. Mr. Boies said the stock was depressed after the collapse of Lehman Brothers and called for considering a previous, higher price as the baseline.In the end, Mr. Greenberg’s lawsuit, brought on behalf of A.I.G. shareholders but without the company’s cooperation — its board testified for the government — ended largely in a stalemate that will now be broken by Judge Wheeler of the United States Court of Federal Claims here. The trial, which started in October and lasted several weeks, took a long break before closing arguments on Wednesday, providing both sides with time to submit extensive briefs to the judge staking out their positions.Many legal analysts say the case is too close to call, which is a far cry from the outright ridicule Mr. Greenberg faced when he originally brought the suit. As a bench trial, the outcome rests in the hands of one man. Judge Wheeler is expected to rule in the next few months. The judge, as was his habit during much of the trial, sat stoically during the four hours of arguments on Wednesday, which makes divining his intentions risky. But he occasionally peppered Mr. Boies and Mr. Dintzer with questions as they stood mere feet away, nearly eye to eye.The judge sat alone in the center of a huge dais normally used by a panel of appeals court judges, and he and the lawyers at times seemed dwarfed by their cavernous surroundings in the second-floor courtroom usually reserved for the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. (The proceedings had been moved to the chamber from Judge Wheeler’s modest courtroom to provide more space for observers.)The case is likely to wind up in the same ornate room eventually. An appeal is all but certain no matter what Judge Wheeler decides.While some legal analysts said the issues that came to light in the trial made it worthwhile regardless of the outcome, others were distressed that the case had made it so far.“Greenberg got lucky with a judge who decided he wanted to listen to a claim that should have been laughed out of court,” said Dennis M. Kelleher, a former partner at Skadden Arps who runs the financial advocacy group Better Markets. “There’s a reason an appeals court uses three judges and not one. Because one person can always decide whatever he wants.”Advertisement