By CONRAD DE AENLLEAPRIL 22, 2015
Renewable energy was never a bargain compared with fossil fuels like natural gas and coal. Steep price declines in those commodities, especially lately, make it even tougher for alternatives like solar, wind and hydroelectric power to compete.Natural gas costs about $2.60 per thousand cubic feet, barely half as much as a year ago and over 80 percent less than its 2005 peak. Coal prices have fallen too, although less sharply. Even so, technological improvements and a persistent push from regulators for utilities to use cleaner fuel sources are keeping supply and demand for renewables high and reducing cost disadvantages over the long haul.“We’re seeing a secular increase in renewable capacity regardless of the current price of fossil fuels,” said Francis O’Sullivan, director of research and analysis at the M.I.T. Energy Initiative, a multidisciplinary group that studies energy issues.“Capital costs, particularly for solar, have been falling quite dramatically over the last four or five years,” he said. “Similar gains in competitiveness likely will not be achieved for conventional generation; that technology is much further along on the maturity curve.”AdvertisementBut the price gap is still there, even if it’s closing. That’s slowing momentum toward renewables in the short run, said Deborah L. Byers, an expert on United States oil and gas at Ernst & Young. “Costs have come down on wind farms built in the last few years, and they’re making money, but we haven’t seen installations of new wind farms, either,” she said.M.I.T. estimates that a megawatt-hour of electricity, enough to power about 500 homes for an afternoon, will cost $65 to $70 this year if generated from water or land-based wind facilities; offshore wind and solar cost around twice as much. Natural gas is expected to beat them all easily: $40 for the same amount of electricity.The impact of plunging fossil fuel prices on renewables has not been greater in part because energy tends to be bought through long-term contracts. Southern California Edison, for instance, buys power in agreements lasting 10 to 30 years. Deals are signed continually — often on better terms for the utility — as old ones expire.Advertisement“The newer the agreement, the lower the price” for renewables, “because the technology is improving and their prices are becoming more competitive,” said Robert Laffoon-Villegas, a spokesman at Southern California Edison.Makers of solar panels can slice the silicon wafers from which they’re made ever thinner, making each panel cheaper by using less material. Wind turbines are built larger, stronger and out of lighter-weight materials, increasing efficiency.Other breakthroughs, like new storage methods, are making renewable energy more user-friendly, said Dan Reicher, director of the Steyer-Taylor Center for Energy Policy and Finance at Stanford University. “If you’re running the grid, you’re much more interested in a kilowatt-hour of intermittent solar or wind power if you know it can be managed,” he said. “The sun shines in the day but power is used at night; that’s where storage comes in.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.New industrial-scale batteries facilitate storage, as do improved pumping techniques. Power generated during off-peak hours is used to push water uphill; when demand rises, the water is released, allowing gravity to supply the grid. Another method relies on compressed air.Renewables accounted for 13 percent of American electricity generation in 2013, according to the United States Energy Information Administration. It forecasts the proportion to rise to 18 percent in 2040.But renewables are still more expensive than gas. Utilities use them in part because they have to. Thirty states have mandates to increase the proportion of electricity generated from renewables, according to the E.I.A., including all Northeastern states except Vermont.Some organizations, such as the Institute for Energy Research, a Washington think tank, say mandates prop up electricity bills by raising demand for energy from more expensive sources. But certain renewables, like solar, wind and hydroelectric power, enjoy economies of scale that fossil fuels do not, others say, resulting in lower costs from the increased demand.“Renewables have the advantage that their marginal cost is close to zero,” Mr. O’Sullivan said. “When you develop a renewable facility and are able to get a connection to the grid, you’ll always be the lowest-cost power source.”But you have to build the installation first. The investment and regulatory approvals needed to harness renewable energy are considerable.Economies of scale and competition among providers of renewable energy and between them and fossil fuel companies propel technological improvements that bring down the price of renewables and stimulate sales that finance the next round of innovation. Advances have been so swift and steady, especially in solar, that producers are inclined to bet on the future when they bid on contracts. “The numbers tend to be quite aggressive,” Mr. O’Sullivan said, below what would be profitable today.AdvertisementAggressive but perhaps not imprudent. M.I.T. projects the cost of electricity produced from onshore wind to drop about 10 percent by 2030, with declines of about 30 percent forecast for offshore wind and solar. Meanwhile, gas prices are forecast to rise about 25 percent. “Further declines in the cost of renewables are likely,” Mr. O’Sullivan said. “The slope of that decline is where the debate is; prices won’t always march downward. But if renewables become a low-cost source, the grinding of teeth regarding fossil fuel usage will end.”A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page F4 of the New York edition with the headline: Renewables’ Hope Springs Long-Term.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.