By ROBERT STRAUSSAPRIL 22, 2015
It wasn’t quite a Jed Clampett moment: Instead of shootin’ for some food, Samuel Kier was drillin’ for some salt in his salt wells in the appropriately named Saltsburg in Indiana County, Pa., close to Pittsburgh.He kept finding this smelly and gooey black stuff coming from the ground, fouling the salt — sometimes almost spontaneously catching fire.Trying to make lemonade out of this lemon, he experimented with the gooey stuff. By 1848 he started selling a distillate of it as Seneca Oil, an elixir, and then a proto-Vaseline as a topical ointment.It wasn’t until 1851 that Mr. Kier became the first oil baron when he started manufacturing Carbon Oil, a kerosene that would replace whale oil as a fuel for lamps. By 1853, Mr. Kier was making as much as $40,000 a year, a mighty sum, from his new refinery.AdvertisementBy the late 1850s, prospectors were billowing about western Pennsylvania, looking for deposits of what came to be called “petroleum,” much like those who prompted the California gold rush a decade earlier.In the last decade, too, prospectors — this time mostly larger mining corporations — have come to seek a new Pennsylvania fuel bonanza in the Marcellus shale fields. While it may seem incongruous in the modern day, Pennsylvania was where the American oil industry started, well before it moved southwest to places like Texas, and now it is experiencing a renaissance.“Kier discovered so much oil, he didn’t know what to do with it,” said Charles McCollester, retired professor of industrial labor relations at Indiana University of Pennsylvania. “The Delaware Indians in northwest Pennsylvania, where oil would bubble to the surface, considered it the blood of the Evil One oozing out of the Earth.”In 1859, Edwin Drake drilled the first big mechanical oil well in Titusville, Pa. Mr. Drake’s well, only 69 feet deep, produced the first “gusher,” the oil coming out so quickly it was difficult to cap. It made Mr. Drake and his backers rich for two years, until those who came after him drilled so much in places around him, like Oil City and Pithole, that they drove the price down, forcing Mr. Drake to close shop.“Oil has always been a boom and bust,” said Philip Scranton, professor of history emeritus at Rutgers.AdvertisementNonetheless, thanks to the modern techniques of horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, there has been an 1860s-like growth of shale drilling in Pennsylvania throughout the northern counties and southwestern part of the state. According to Mark Price, a labor economist with the Keystone Research Council in Harrisburg, in 2005, there were only eight wells dug in the state’s Marcellus region. By 2008, the state had 335 new wells, and three years later, nearly 2,000 wells were drilled. He said there was not a big explosion in new wells right now, but he expected the industry to stay at its current levels for a while.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the 19th-century Pennsylvania oil boom years, cities would be founded, grow exponentially in a short time, then become almost ghost towns as prices rode the roller coaster down. Titusville, site of Mr. Drake’s well, went from 250 residents in 1859 to 10,000 five years later. Pithole was four huts when the boom came in early 1865 and had 50 hotels or rooming houses by the year’s end.Pennsylvania’s current boom is similar, if more modest.“Certainly, no matter how you feel about shale drilling, where it has been concentrated, you can point to some economic benefit,” said Mr. Price, offering the far southwestern corner of Pennsylvania as an example. “Greene County has seen an explosion of R.V. parks, where workers have come to live at least temporarily. In the course of the Great Recession, where the rest of the economy was thrashing around, these communities thrived, but then could be threatened when the drillers moved on.”Mr. Price estimates that about 20,000 people work in the fuel-mining industry in Pennsylvania. “It is a good amount, but only 1 percent of all workers in the state. Nice to have, but it’s not transforming the state’s economy.”During the 19th-century boom, the domestic output of crude went from 2,000 barrels in 1859, the year of Mr. Drake’s well, to four million barrels in 1869 and 10 million in 1873.“Around that time, Bradford County had the first billion-dollar field,” said Samuel Slocum, manager of the Penn Brad Oil Museum in Custer City. “They had drilled 40,000 wells producing 82 percent of world’s oil.“But then when the electric bulb came around, there was no need for kerosene, and the car had not been invented, so it all just died.”In any case, said Mr. McCollester, prospectors found bigger deposits in Texas, particularly the 1901 gusher known as Spindletop.“That signaled the end of the Pennsylvania boom. People just moved on to Texas,” he said. There is still a bit of conventional oil drilling in western Pennsylvania, and the brands Pennzoil and Quaker City are reminders of the state’s past oil glory, but the oil is mostly refined as a lubricant, not the in the larger quantities used for fuel.There has been speculation that the refineries the Pew family built for its huge Sun Oil business in the 19th and early 20th centuries along the Delaware River in and near Philadelphia will be revived. Delta Air Lines has taken over some to refine its own fuel, “but that is a small business, not more than a few hundred workers,” said Professor Scranton of Rutgers. “Still, oil has a rich history in Pennsylvania, and what is going on now is, in many ways, a smaller version of the past.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.