By ANTHONY DePALMAAPRIL 22, 2015
BRIDGEPORT, Conn. —  It is no secret that Mayor Bill Finch idolizes President John F. Kennedy. He has converted a room off his office into a shrine filled with campaign buttons, banners and busts of the former president.He says that of all President Kennedy’s accomplishments, what fired his imagination most was the challenge to send a man to the moon. “He raised our aspirations and expectations,” Mayor Finch said during an interview in the Kennedy Room, “and that’s what I’m trying to do here in Bridgeport.”One of the first things that Mayor Finch, a tall, white-haired 59-year-old, did after becoming mayor in 2007 was to sign an executive order promoting sustainability, committing his city to a range of clean-energy policies that will reduce carbon emissions by 2020. That is a pretty tall order considering the rundown condition of the city, Connecticut’s largest, and the presence on the city’s shore of the 400-megawatt Bridgeport Harbor Generating Station, one of the last coal-fired power plants in the region.There was not much that the mayor could do about the behemoth coal plant, which continues to operate, but he has achieved some noteworthy results in his attempt to turn his city green. A recent report from the United States Energy Department highlighted Bridgeport’s efforts to build the largest fuel-cell generating station in North America.AdvertisementWhat most people think of as fuel cells are found in futuristic vehicles that emit only water. Figuring out how to carry around the hydrogen has stalled development and kept fuel-cell cars out of showrooms. But the confluence of government incentives, utility company needs and local willingness to team with innovators helped stationary fuel cells arrive in this city.AdvertisementStationary fuel cells — far larger than those in cars and hooked up to continuous sources of fuel — can take the place of electric power plants. Bridgeport’s 14.9-megawatt fuel-cell complex generates enough electricity to power 15,000 of the city’s 51,000 homes. In addition, a 1.4-megawatt fuel cell is about to go online at the University of Bridgeport, and work will start soon on a 2.8-megawatt fuel cell that will be part of a renewable energy complex on a closed landfill in the city.It seems odd to think of fuel cells as new technology when the basic concept behind them was first laid out in the 1800s. Basically, they operate like batteries but are able to continuously turn out electricity as long as hydrogen passes through or around an electrolyte barrier to combine with oxygen. Despite the simplicity, fuel cells have not been widely adopted because early models used platinum, which made them uneconomical compared with conventional power generation.Modern fuel cells rely on a variety of cheaper materials. For example, those here have electrolytes composed of molten carbonate, a salt mixture.Fuel cells do not burn the fuel they use. Rather, like batteries, they rely on a chemical process to convert fuel to electricity.The NASA space program has been using fuel cells for decades. An accident involving an onboard fuel cell endangered the Apollo 13 moon mission in 1970.Mayor Finch recalled that when he saw the 1995 Ron Howard film about the mission he asked himself why, if fuel cells were being used in space when he was a teenager, they were not everywhere on earth 25 years later. He asked essentially the same question when he took office in 2007.His impatience is shared by others. “We would love for it to be further along, but we have to be patient,” said Frank Wolak, vice president for government relations at FuelCell Energy, which has its company headquarters in Danbury.Mr. Wolak said the industry was slow to adopt new technology, but when innovation is embraced rather than resisted, change can be rapid. FuelCell built the world’s largest fuel-cell power plant, a 59-megawatt complex in Hwasung City, South Korea, which went online in 2014.AdvertisementCloser to home, a state incentive program intended to drive innovation, combined with city tax policy and the enthusiastic support of Mayor Finch, who is also co-chairman of the United States Conference of Mayors Climate Protection Task Force, helped persuade reluctant utility companies to embrace alternative technologies.FuelCell built the plant here on a once-contaminated but now remediated industrial tract near Interstate 95 in less than a year. Individual cells are like gigantic Legos, each about the size of a large shipping container, that are made in Torrington and then shipped to the site for final assembly.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While they are operating, the cells run with practically no vibration and no noise except for the hum of blowing fans. On a day when the Bridgeport Harbor Generating Station was spewing clouds of exhaust that could be seen for miles, the fuel cells produced no visible emissions.Dominion Energy owns the plant, and Eversource, a utility that provides power to Connecticut, buys the electricity it produces.Fuel cells come in different types, and they use a variety of sources for the hydrogen that powers them. The large complex here runs on natural gas, which initially is heated to about 1,000 degrees to break out the hydrogen. Then the chemical process is similar to that of a standard hydrogen fuel cell.The fuel cell complex here is 47 percent electrically efficient, a measure of the electricity derived from the fuel source, in this case natural gas. The 650-degree to 750-degree heat coming off the fuel cell is used to generate additional electricity, which raises the units’ efficiency rating to 51 percent, about double that of a coal plant generating the same amount of electricity.The extreme heat and chemical processes break down the components of the cells, requiring that they be replaced every seven years. However, their design makes that as easy as lifting one unit and replacing it with a new one. The components of the old cell can then be recycled.Fuel cells produce very little nitrogen oxide, sulfur dioxide or particulate matter. Because natural gas is the fuel source, the unit does give off carbon dioxide, but less than half that of a coal-burning plant of similar size.AdvertisementThe project qualifies under Connecticut’s Renewable Energy Portfolio specifications, even though the natural gas it uses is not a renewable energy source.“The expectation that renewable resources is going to be a universal solution is just not practical,” Mr. Wolak said. “There needs to be a diversity of solutions.”Mr. Wolak said he believed that fuel cells represented a bridge to cleaner technologies, and could run on alternative fuels like biogas and the methane from wastewater treatment plants. One of his company’s plants in California uses the methane from decomposing onion skins as fuel.Deciding how to classify fuel cells in the clean-energy mix can be a matter of compromise. Nathanael Greene, director of the renewable resources project at the Natural Resources Defense Council, has supported the inclusion of fuel cells in renewable energy portfolios because doing so encourages innovation.But as technology progresses, clean-energy advocates like Mr. Greene think it may be time to reconsider including fuel cells that rely on natural gas in renewable portfolios. “At some point these policies need to pivot toward pushing the next step of evolution,” Mr. Greene said.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page F5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Mayor’s Green-Power Moonshot.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.