AdvertisementSupported byBy Steve LohrDustin Bond of Cottonwood Heights, Utah, trimmed his electricity bill last summer by about 40 percent thanks to the sensors and clever software of a digital thermostat.His Nest thermostat monitors the household and outside temperatures and the family comings and goings, and it offers energy-saving suggestions and nudges on a smartphone app. Mr. Bond’s story seems proof of the bright energy future made possible by the new Internet-era devices of the so-called smart home.But his experience also points to the uncertain impact on energy consumption of the digital transformation of household mainstays like thermostats and light bulbs. Mr. Bond says he bought the Nest device mainly for its looks, a stylish circle of stainless steel, reflective polymer and a color display. Still, he found he enjoyed tracking his home energy use on his smartphone, seeing patterns and making adjustments.“It’s not a big deal to me to save a few bucks on my energy bill,” Mr. Bond said. “But how it works is really cool.”The energy-saving promise of the smart home faces challenges of adoption and economics. Take the Nest device, a pioneer among Internet-connected thermostats, which was introduced in 2011. Independent research studying hundreds of households, and thousands in control groups, found significant energy savings — 7 to 17 percent on average for gas heating and electric cooling. Yet as a percentage of a household’s total gas and electric use, the reduction was 2 to 8 percent.A helpful savings, but probably not enough of a monthly utility bill to be a call to action. Then, there is the switching cost. Conventional thermostats cost a fraction of the $249 Nest device.But the larger benefit of the new home technology may be beyond the home, as it contributes to the ecosystem of energy efficiency. Add up many household energy-saving steps at the right time, and peak loads for utilities are reduced, requiring less power generation. The cleanest, cheapest imaginable power plant is the one that is never built.“If you can shift the load for a few hours on a summer day, that is a big deal to the utility company,” said Jonathan Koomey, a research fellow at the Steyer-Taylor Center for Energy Policy and Finance at Stanford University. “That’s where the big saving is going to be.”Utilities across the country recognize the potential. Many are beginning to offer reward programs for households using their smart thermostats to curb energy use during peak hours and sometimes rebates for the purchase of Internet-connected thermostats from Nest, Honeywell, Ecobee and others.Smart home products extend well beyond those that nod toward energy efficiency. They span an array that includes video surveillance cameras, motion-detection security systems, door locks, garage door openers, automated window shades, stereo speakers and bathroom scales. What defines the smart home device industry in addition to being digital and in the home is that the products can typically be remotely monitored and controlled from a smartphone or tablet app. And that Internet access opens the door to security and privacy threats, just as there are with any smartphone app or home Wi-Fi network.The emerging smart home industry is largely a byproduct of the technology, economics and consumer culture of the smartphone. A cool gadget in the home is one more thing at the beck and call of the screen in your hand. “People are experiencing the connected home as an extension of the smartphone,” said Frank Gillett, an analyst at Forrester Research.At Home Depot, Joe Zuniga, a district manager who oversees eight stores in the Washington, D.C., area, agrees about the importance of the smartphone. But the connected home experience, he said, is only as good as the value of the home device connected to that smartphone app. Home Depot, he said, began with the Nest thermostat in 2011 and now has 700 smart home offerings in its stores and online.Energy management, Mr. Zuniga said, is one of three principal reasons people come in to buy digital home products, along with devices for safety and security, and for comfort and convenience. When customers are looking at thermostats and light bulbs, he said, “energy saving can be a big driver.” But, he added, “you do have to educate the public — here’s what it can do.”Regardless of the motivation — coolness, environmental concerns or pocketbook savings — sales of energy-related smart home products are rising rapidly. According to the research firm Parks Associates, 10 million smart thermostats, plugs, power strips and lights were sold last year, valued at $850 million. By 2017, Parks predicts, that market will nearly double to 19 million products worth $1.6 billion.Big companies are scooping up promising start-ups. Google bought Nest last year for $3.2 billion. And then Nest, as a Google subsidiary, paid $555 million for Dropcam, a maker of video surveillance cameras, to add to Nest’s thermostat and smoke alarm. “The connected home will come one product at a time,” said Maxime Veron, head of hardware product marketing at Nest.Samsung, the consumer electronics company, paid $200 million for SmartThings, one of several start-ups making hubs and software to enable users to control a variety of smart home devices from a single app. Samsung plans to design its new televisions and appliances to work with the SmartThings software, for convenience and energy savings.And Apple has introduced technology to stitch together the software for automated home apps, a programming environment for developers called HomeKit.Old companies, too, are retooling their products for greater energy efficiency and connectivity. Philips and General Electric, for example, have introduced connected versions of their electricity-sipping bulbs made with light-emitting diodes. The price of LED bulbs has dropped sharply in the last few years, as fabrication and manufacturing efficiencies accelerate.Last fall, General Electric introduced its GE Link bulb for $15. The LED light uses 80 percent less energy than an incandescent bulb and lasts for more than 20 years with normal use. It also can be controlled from a smartphone app.The energy and long-term cost savings of LED lights appear overwhelming, but adoption still lags. With the GE Link bulb, the company is adding another ingredient beyond energy efficiency. “It’s the convenience and use cases with smartphones that make it compelling,” said Tom Boyle, chief innovation officer of G.E.’s lighting division. The G.E. bulbs connect to a smartphone app created by Wink, one of the hub and software makers for communicating with different devices. Wink is a spinoff of Quirky, an invention commercialization start-up in which G.E. holds a stake. The integration ventures like Wink, Samsung’s SmartThings, Revolv and iControl face the formidable challenge of trying to simplify the baffling complexity of products and communications standards in the automated home. They are the equivalent of operating systems for the smart home.Keith Friedlander of Lloyd Harbor, N.Y., bought the Wink hub and LED lights from Home Depot last year and has struggled to make the software and devices behave. “Setting it up required an engineering degree, and it still doesn’t really work,” Mr. Friedlander said. “For all the utopian promises, it’s easier to turn the lights on and off by hand.”In Columbus, Ohio, Kevin Hisner had an easier time. He installed the Wink hub, LED lights and dimmers fairly easily, with a few questions answered promptly by the Wink support staff. Mr. Hisner said he appreciated the energy savings but mostly installed the smart lights for the convenience of being able to fine-tune the lighting with his smartphone and “never walk into a dark room.”Wink, despite teething problems, is growing apace since it was introduced last July. It is on track to have one million users controlling 3.2 million devices by the end of this year, said Brett Worthington, general manager of Wink.Smart home technology, Mr. Worthington said, is “still too difficult to set up and use.” He added, “We’re getting there, but there’s still a ways to go.”The smart home’s energy-saving potential, as well, is a work in progress.Advertisement