By RICHARD SANDOMIROCT. 19, 2015
ESPN on Monday named Kevin Merida, a managing editor at The Washington Post, as editor in chief of The Undefeated, the network’s two-year-old digital project about the intersection of sports and race. His hiring appears to increase the likelihood that the long-delayed site will actually get off the ground.ESPN created The Undefeated in 2013, but it has never advanced beyond a webpage with links to 19 articles. The site’s failure to get underway has been attributed to its founding editor in chief, Jason Whitlock, a columnist without executive experience. Mr. Whitlock was dismissed from his position in June after internal turmoil, much of which was written about in the website Deadspin.Now, Mr. Merida, the first African-American to be a managing editor at The Post, is seeking to succeed where Mr. Whitlock could not. On Twitter, Mr. Merida wrote: “Incredible talent already @espn #TheUndefeated, and more will be coming. Looking forward.”In a statement, he said the site would “become a home for innovative storytelling, new voices and the exploration of athletes and ideas by writers you’ll want to read.” Later, in an email message, he said he had left The Post after more than two decades there “for the challenge and adventure of trying something new at this stage of my career, and to tap into the creative side of my brain in new ways. And because I believe we can create something special with The Undefeated that doesn’t currently exist now.”AdvertisementHe said ESPN had not determined a start date yet.Marie Donoghue, an ESPN executive vice president who oversees the site, said in a statement that Mr. Merida’s hiring “represents a key step in the evolution of the site and ESPN’s commitment to this ambitious project.”The Undefeated is one of three ESPN websites created around the work and reputation of a well-known personality. Mr. Whitlock, a columnist with a reputation for writing provocative and divisive columns about race, was hired to run The Undefeated by John Skipper, ESPN’s president. Nate Silver took his data analysis site FiveThirtyEight from The New York Times. Bill Simmons, a columnist whose influence at ESPN expanded to include being editor in chief of Grantland, left in May after his contract was not renewed. He is now at HBO.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Whitlock, who moved to Fox Sports last week, wrote on his new blog: “Why did I fail at The Undefeated? There are numerous reasons, including my foolish belief I could manage like a football coach. I learned there’s an art to corporate politics that I’m not good at.”He also cited cost-cutting at ESPN and a “cultural shift” that has led to the recent departures of Mr. Simmons, Keith Olbermann and the radio and TV talk-show host Colin Cowherd, who is now at Fox.Since Mr. Whitlock’s departure, the site has been run on an interim basis by Leon Carter, an ESPN vice president.Advertisement“Among the challenges will be developing an identity for The Undefeated,” Mr. Merida wrote in his email. “Not to mention all the other challenges of a start-up — hiring the right talent, organizing it the right way, creating a culture, discovering your audience, etc.”A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: ESPN Hires a Washington Post Editor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.