By ANDREW E. KRAMERAPRIL 22, 2015
MOSCOW —  European antitrust regulators are striking at Gazprom’s core, going after the Russian energy giant’s pricing policies and its politically hued control over natural gas pipelines.But market forces, more than regulatory pressures, are stacking up against the company, as it struggles to maintain its earnings power and geopolitical heft.Long used by President Vladimir V. Putin to further Russia’s economic and political interests, Gazprom has used its muscle to dictate prices and set terms for natural gas supplies across Europe. This worked for years because customers had few other options.But politics, Gazprom is quickly realizing, are not always good for profits.Those same policies are making it difficult to maneuver, as Gazprom finds itself competing against a wide array of ever more deft and efficient private drillers and shippers in the natural gas industry. In Europe, cheaper liquefied natural gas shipped from Qatar is taking the place of Gazprom gas.AdvertisementGazprom’s direct role in the Kremlin’s foreign policy is only adding to the challenges. As Russia has deepened its ties to Asia, Gazprom has been saddled with a $50 billion commitment to build a new pipeline to China that will take years to produce profits. At home, its substantial debts and Western sanctions over the Ukraine crisis have sharply limited its borrowing abilities.Advertisement“The biggest problem for Gazprom is its weakness across the board,” said Matthew Rojansky, the director of the Wilson Center’s Kennan Institute for Russian studies in Washington. “That will apply anywhere they try to operate. They are just not the dominant force they were five years ago.”He added, “The difference between Gazprom today and Gazprom five years ago is its ability to think in terms of poker, to simply intimidate other people off the table with sheer resources, is gone.”Still, politics may trump profits, when it comes to the antitrust case.The European Commission accused Gazprom on Wednesday of abusing its dominance in charging higher prices in Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland, countries largely dependent on Russian gas. The company, regulators said, also pursued “an overall strategy to partition Central and Eastern European gas markets,” by reducing customers’ ability to resell the gas to other countries.Gazprom denied that it had violated any rules, defending its hybrid model that blends corporate and government strategies. Regulators, it expected, would consider that the company has “socially significant functions and has the status of a strategic government-controlled business entity.”
            While Europe is moving to diversify its supplies, the European Union still depends heavily on Russia for its energy needs. Such dominance is now under scrutiny by antitrust regulators, which accused the Russian natural gas giant Gazprom of inflating prices and quashing competition.        Finland76%Sweden54%Square size represents the total energy imports into each country (excluding intra-E.U. trade) in 2014.Estonia 66%NetherlandsDenmark9%Latvia 71%$76 billionin energy importsfrom all countriesLithuania85%Black area represents percentage from Russia.34%Poland$18 billion88%Germany$61 billionBelgium38%Czech Republic64%46%Slovakia$5.5 billion100%Austria9%Britain11%Slovenia29%France18%Romania42%Hungary90%Croatia48%Ireland3%Bulgaria85%Greece31%Italy$63 billionSpain11%27%Portugal8%Malta 3%Cyprus 1%Square size represents the total energy imports into each country (excluding intra-E.U. trade) in 2014.Netherlands$76 billionin energy importsfrom all countriesBlack area represents percentage from Russia.34%Poland$18 billion88%Italy$63 billionSweden 54%27%Finland 76%Spain11%Portugal 8%Lithuania 85%France18%Czech Rep. 64%Hungary 90%Austria 9%Germany$61 billionRomania 42%46%Slovakia 100%Bulgaria 85%Britain11%Denmark 9%Ireland 3%Belgium38%Croatia 48%Slovenia 29%Latvia 71%Greece31%Estonia 66%Cyprus 1%Malta 3%APRIL 22, 2015
The model — and specifically its function for the state — is likely to complicate the case.Even though regulators are taking aim at a business strategy that is losing favor, Mr. Putin may not be willing to back down. Gazprom’s pipeline politics have played an important foreign policy role in Eastern Europe for more than a decade.Still, analysts say that any forceful response is likely to wait until after July, when European Union member states vote on whether to renew financial sanctions on Russia. Russia has been hoping for an easing of sanctions.“If the sector sanctions don’t come off, Russia will hit back,” said Cliff Kupchan, chairman of the Eurasia Group. “Worsening energy relations with the E.U. will be one more reason why Russia will see no downside to escalating the fight in Ukraine.”AdvertisementAfter the fall of Communism, Gazprom seemed to be making a smooth transition to a profit-focused company, from its origins as the Soviet Ministry of Natural Gas. Early in his tenure, Mr. Putin put in place policies that were favorable toward investors, which bolstered profit. When the company lifted restrictions on foreign stock ownership in 2006, its share price briefly soared.Mr. Putin compared its product — energy — to a candy everybody in Europe wanted. But he said it would be held tight in Russia’s “sweaty fist.”Gazprom became central to a political and economic strategy of reasserting Russia’s influence in the former Soviet and satellite states of Eastern Europe. Gazprom’s gas sales were also a good source of revenue for the Kremlin, adding to the country’s wealth of oil exports.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Countries that offered Russia geopolitical advantages, such as the lease of a naval base in Ukraine under the former government, won lower energy prices in exchange. Those that did not were penalized, as when Russia shut off the gas going to Ukraine in 2006 and 2009 and blocked flows to Europe, too.But Gazprom’s strategy, the same one under scrutiny by regulators in Europe, has been losing sway.Sales of the company’s main product, gas shipped by pipeline from Siberia to European utilities, were down one-fifth in the first quarter compared with historical averages, analysts say. Liquefied natural gas shipped from Qatar and elsewhere was cheaper.This year, Gazprom’s base price for natural gas was about $330 per thousand cubic meters, the standard unit for gas trading in Europe. Gas offloaded from liquefied natural gas carriers from the Middle East cost about $270.Prices on those cargoes tumbled after the shale gas boom in the United States dried up demand outside Europe. And new liquefied natural gas operations in the United States, according to experts, may further weigh on prices. New supplies of gas are also coming online in the next decade from Azerbaijan and possibly Iran, if tensions ease over that country’s nuclear program.With competition rising, customers also are not as willing to sign binding, long-term contracts, the type that Gazprom has readily used.“It is just getting more difficult to sell its gas at its own terms,” said Adnan Vatansever, a lecturer at King’s College in London, who did a study on Gazprom’s long-term contracts. He estimates that such contracts are set to decline by a third within the next decade.Advertisement“On the bright side, if Europe moves towards a more competitive market and Gazprom gets convinced that it needs to abide by the rules, this may eventually help to depoliticize” the perennially troubled Eurasian gas trade, Mr. Vatansever added.The Ukraine crisis — and its various political ripples — are amplifying the financial pressure for Gazprom.As tensions have escalated with Europe and the United States, Mr. Putin has been trying to shift Russia’s trade focus to Asia. Last year, Russia struck deals to supply natural gas to China for 30 years from fields in Siberia, to be shipped via two new pipelines. Eventually, Russia could ship more gas to China than to Germany, currently its largest customer.But the plan is years from bearing financial fruit for Gazprom. Just one of the pipelines is projected to cost about $50 billion, and hoped-for Chinese financing has been slow in materializing.It’s an expensive undertaking, particularly at a time when Gazprom already faces financial troubles.Gazprom has $6 billion of debt coming due this year. But the company cannot easily refinance those bonds and loans. The Western sanctions target the company’s banking arm, Gazprombank; it can only tap the market for short-term loans.“Gazprom was always an arm of the Russian state,” said Mr. Rojansky of the Kennan Institute. “It’s not just that people are finally realizing this and taking action against the Russian state, but that it now seems that Russia is vulnerable to such action.”Stanley Reed contributed reporting from London.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Weakened Gazprom Is Target.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.