By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 22, 2015
The stock market operator Euronext said on Wednesday that its chief executive, Dominique Cerutti, will leave in July and take the top job at Altran, a French engineering consultancy.Mr. Cerutti had been the top executive at Euronext since 2009, joining the company two years after it was acquired by the New York Stock Exchange in an international push. He served as chief executive of the Euronext operating unit and, at one time, deputy chief executive of NYSE Euronext.He oversaw Euronext’s return to independence in an initial public offering last year, after the sale of NYSE Euronext to IntercontinentalExchange. Euronext operates stock exchanges across Europe, including stock markets in Paris, Amsterdam and Lisbon.“Whilst I am looking forward to this new challenge, I am particularly proud of all that has been achieved at Euronext in the past 18 months,” Mr. Cerutti said in a news release. “I am confident that Euronext will continue to create outstanding shareholder and client value as a result of the strong base which has been established.”AdvertisementMr. Cerutti will join Altran as chairman and chief executive on July 29, Altran said in a news release.AdvertisementEuronext said that its board had asked its governance and nomination committee to begin the search process for a successor.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Dominique Cerutti successfully navigated the company through its complex separation from IntercontinentalExchange to its subsequent I.P.O. in an extremely short timeframe and positively repositioned the group as a leading independent exchange in Europe,” Rijnhard Van Tets, the Euronext chairman, said in the news release.Shares of Euronext closed up less than 1 percent at 40.10 euros in trading in Paris on Wednesday. Based on its market capitalization, the company is worth 2.8 billion euros, or about $3 billion.An engineer by training, Mr. Cerutti spent more than 20 years at IBM before joining NYSE Euronext in 2009.Altran, based in Paris, provides engineering consulting services to a variety of industries, including the aerospace, defense, finance and telecommunications sectors. The company posted revenue of €1.76 billion in 2014 and employs about 23,000 people in more than 20 countries.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.