AdvertisementSupported byBy Jenny AndersonLONDON — A 36-year-old futures trader who operated from his London-area home indicated Wednesday that he would oppose extradition to the United States on criminal fraud charges, including claims that he had helped set off a huge crash in the United States stock market, known as the flash crash, in 2010.Appearing in court in London dressed in a canary yellow sweatshirt and white track suit pants, the trader, Navinder Singh Sarao, a British national, sat behind a glass wall looking dazed by the proceedings around him.His defense lawyer, Joel Smith, said that the arrest had come as a “bolt out of the blue.”Aaron Watkins, representing the United States government, requested that bail not be set for Mr. Sarao considering the gravity of the charges and the potential prison time he faces. The Department of Justice and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission have filed criminal and civil charges against Mr. Sarao, accusing him of wire fraud, commodities fraud, commodities manipulation and spoofing, a form of market manipulation. Prosecutors contend that he made 26 million pounds, or $40 million, in illegal profits over four years.Asked whether he would consent to being extradited, Mr. Sarao shook his head, indicating that he would not.Mr. Smith argued that Mr. Sarao, who was born and raised in Britain and attended Brunel University in London, has strong community ties that would deter him from fleeing the country. He lives with his parents, one brother lives down the street and another one lives nearby. His father is retired, while one brother is an information technology consultant and the other an optician.He said that Mr. Sarao has £100,000 in a betting account and £5 million in a trading account, of which £4.7 million is a loan.Bail was ultimately set at £5,050,000. Mr. Sarao will provide £5 million, his parents will provide £30,000 and each brother will provide £10,000. “These are very large sums,” District Judge Quentin Purdy said. “But this case involves very significant sums.”Various conditions were put on Mr. Sarao’s bail, including a prohibition on Internet use. Mr. Sarao will face a curfew from 11 p.m. to 4 a.m. and will have to carry a mobile phone with him that does not have access to the Internet. He will be required to check in with the Hounslow police department between 12 and 4 p.m. every Monday, Wednesday and Saturday. Mr. Smith said the Internet restriction might pose a challenge, questioning whether even watching television might violate it.Mr. Sarao’s parents will also have to hand over their passports, which are set to expire in June, and they are not to renew them.The judge suggested that his brothers also surrender their passports. One agreed, but the other has vacations planned. They were not ultimately asked to give up their documents.The issue of Mr. Sarao’s finances came up as the parties discussed bail. When Mr. Smith tried to offer £100,000 in equity in the family home, commenting on the importance of a family home, the judge inquired where the other £26 million might be. Such sums would enable Mr. Sarao to buy something “even more lush than Hounslow,” a joke aimed at the reputation of his neighborhood, which is next to Heathrow Airport.The next court date in May 26 to hear challenges to the extradition request.Mr. Sarao was arrested in London on Tuesday. It was confirmed in court that his passport was seized and he spent the night in custody.Mr. Sarao appeared to lack the bravado woven through the criminal complaint. At one point, Mr. Sarao told his broker that when the Chicago Mercantile Exchange contacted him to inquire into his suspicious orders, he told them to “kiss my ass.”A month before the flash crash, Mr. Sarao set up a corporate entity in the Caribbean island of Nevis, the criminal complaint said, calling his firm Nav Sarao Milking Markets.During the crash in May 2010, the Dow fell nearly 600 points in a matter of minutes, rattling individual investors and institutional investors alike. Regulators have struggled to piece together what happened, offering up various explanations, many of which have been contested. Although the major indexes recovered most of the losses, the event shook investors’ confidence in the markets, and the exchanges and regulators that police them.In the criminal complaint, Mr. Sarao is accused of entering and withdrawing thousands of orders worth tens of millions of dollars on hundreds of trading days to push down the price of futures contracts tied to the value of the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, a practice indicated to be spoofing. Once the price fell, Mr. Sarao would buy the contract and reap the profits, according to the criminal complaint.Prosecutors contend that on the day of the flash crash, May 6, Mr. Sarao placed large orders repeatedly over several hours, leaving the market vulnerable to big moves when another big trade came in from an investor in the United States.Advertisement