By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 22, 2015
LONDON — A British regulator on Wednesday fined an arm of Bank of America Merrill Lynch 13.3 million pounds, or about $19.8 million, for failing to properly report tens of millions of client transactions over a seven-year period.The Financial Conduct Authority of Britain said that Merrill Lynch International incorrectly reported details regarding client transactions ranging from the identity of counterparties to the trading times of some transactions. The fine related to more than 35 million transactions between November 2007 and 2014.Merrill Lynch also didn’t report another 121,000 transactions at all during the period, the regulator said.The fine was the largest the Financial Conduct Authority has ever imposed for such failures. The regulator’s predecessor had previously issued a so-called private warning to Merrill Lynch in 2002 and fined the company £150,000 in 2006.Advertisement“Proper transaction reporting really matters,” Georgina Philippou, the Financial Conduct Authority acting director of enforcement and market oversight, said in a news release. “Merrill Lynch International has failed to get this right again — despite a private warning, a previous fine, and extensive F.C.A. guidance and enforcement action in this area. The size of the fine sends a clear message that we expect to be heard and understood across the industry.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Merrill Lynch settled at an early stage of the investigation. Otherwise, it would have faced a fine as high as £18.9 million.AdvertisementMany of the reporting issues were identified by Merrill Lynch and self-reported to the regulator, according to the final notice in the enforcement action.“We are wholly committed to complying with all F.C.A. requirements and continuously seek to improve all necessary aspects of our reporting,” a Bank of America Merrill Lynch spokesman said. “While regrettable, today’s decision principally refers to self-identified issues which we have sought to remediate as quickly as possible. We can confirm that no clients were financially impacted as a result.”The fine equated to about £1.50 for each line of incorrectly reported data and was higher than the £1 per line the agency had imposed in three prior cases “because past fines have not been high enough to achieve credible deterrence,” the Financial Conduct Authority said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.