AdvertisementSupported byBy Jenny Anderson and Chad BrayLONDON — Tesco, Britain’s largest grocery store chain, capped a year marred by an accounting scandal, management turmoil and shrinking market share with a whopping loss of 6.4 billion pounds, or about $9.5 billion, it announced on Wednesday.It was the largest loss in the company’s nearly 100-year history, and it revealed damage everywhere: Sales fell; its pension deficit ballooned; real estate assets were marked down; restructuring costs were incurred; and money was paid to cover previous overstated profits.A year earlier, Tesco’s pretax profit was £2.26 billion.Dave Lewis, Tesco’s new chief executive, has acted decisively to shutter stores, lay off staff and restructure the beleaguered company, but said Wednesday the difficulties would continue and noted a few bright points.“The results we have published today reflect a deterioration in the market and, more significantly, an erosion of our competitiveness over recent years,” Mr. Lewis said in a news release. “We have faced into this reality, sought to draw a line under the past and begun to rebuild, and already we are beginning to see early encouraging signs from what we’ve done so far.”Simply, he said, more customers are buying more items at Tesco.But he acknowledged that it would be a long way back, a sentiment echoed by many analysts.“To say that Tesco had a nightmare year in the 2015 fiscal year would be an understatement,” said Clive Black, an analyst from Shore Capital, a firm based in London.The company has steadily lost market share in recent years to discount retailers like the German grocers Aldi and Lidl, and it has faced pricing wars with its British rivals. It has also been mired in investigations concerning a £263 million overstatement of profit.The latest results included £7 billion in one-time charges, including £4.7 billion to reflect a reduction in the value of its real estate portfolio. The company will contribute £270 million a year to its pension fund, whose deficit swelled to £3.9 billion from £2.6 billion because of falling bond yields.Shares of Tesco were down more than 4 percent in late-day trading in London.Tesco said it posted sales of £69.7 billion for the fiscal year, down from £70.9 billion in the prior-year period. The company’s trading profit, which excludes gains and losses on its property portfolio, fell to £1.4 billion in the year, from £3.3 billion in the prior-year period. The trading profit figure is closely watched by analysts.Mr. Lewis, a former Unilever executive who joined Tesco in September, has made broad changes at the company, closing more than 40 stores, cutting thousands of jobs and selling a variety of noncore assets. He has put his top executives on the floor at various stores to help understand and improve the customer experience.The company has also changed its top leadership. In addition to Mr. Lewis, the retailer added John Allan, a deputy chairman of the electronics company Dixons Carphone, as its new chairman in March.Matt Davies, the chief executive of the auto parts chain Halfords, will take over as chief executive of its British operations in May, a month earlier than expected, Tesco said on Wednesday.Mr. Black of Shore Capital said that the moves were part of a larger strategy. “We see this update as a steppingstone and not a definitive event,” he said.Mr. Lewis acknowledged the challenges.“The market is still challenging, and we are not expecting any letup in the months ahead,” he warned in the statement. “When you add to this the fundamental changes we are making to our business and our offer, it is likely to lead to an increased level of volatility in short-term performance.”Advertisement