By REUTERSAPRIL 22, 2015
TOKYO — Japan on Wednesday posted its first monthly trade surplus in nearly three years, as exports of cars and electronics picked up, an encouraging sign that economic growth may be back on track after a sluggish start to the year.The 8.5 percent annual increase in exports in March, reported by the Finance Ministry, matched the median estimate in a Reuters poll and was higher than a revised 2.5 percent increase in the year that ended in February.Weighed down by lower oil prices, imports tumbled 14.5 percent by value, more than the 12.8 percent drop expected by analysts, leaving Japan with a trade surplus for the first time since June 2012. The drop in imports was the biggest decline since November 2009.The trade balance came to a surplus of 229.3 billion yen, or $1.9 billion, versus the median estimate of ¥50 billion.AdvertisementDisappointing data on manufacturing and consumer spending have raised doubts about the strength of domestic demand, while weakness in China and Europe have clouded the export picture. At the same time, strong external demand is seen as important to bolstering the economy as it emerges from an unexpected recession last year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Exports will continue to expand, and shipments to the United States will lead the way,” said Hiroaki Muto, senior economist at Sumitomo Mitsui Asset Management. “The trade surplus is also likely to grow larger as oil prices push down imports. This is a positive for economic growth. There are a lot of good signs in this trade data.”AdvertisementPolicy makers are eager to see exports accelerate because exports are an important driver of corporate earnings, which they hope will eventually translate into higher salaries for workers and stronger consumer spending, helping the economy break out of years of deflation.Exports to China, Japan’s largest trading partner, rose 3.9 percent in March because of higher shipments of nonferrous metals and electronics. That compared with a 17.3 percent decline in February. Exports to Asia as a whole rose 6.7 percent, versus a 1 percent decline in February.Shipments to the United States rose 21.3 percent in March, faster than a 14.3 percent gain in the previous month, as Japan sent more cars to the United States.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.