By STEPHEN CASTLE and DOREEN CARVAJALAPRIL 24, 2015
LONDON — After a four-year legal battle for control of Claridge’s and its two sister landmark hotels in London, two British billionaires have sold their shares in the chain to a Qatari group, ending a long struggle over the luxury properties.The holding company, Coroin, issued a brief statement on Thursday saying that the twin brothers, David Rowat Barclay and Frederick Hugh Barclay, had sold their stakes in Coroin to the Constellation Hotels Group of Qatar for an undisclosed sum.The Barclays, who also own The Telegraph newspaper in London, had been deadlocked in a fierce, and at times acrimonious, struggle over control of the prestige hotels with another shareholder, the Irish property tycoon Patrick McKillen.Mr. McKillen, who was backed by the Qatari group, will keep his shares and remain involved with the hotels, pursuing renovations that had stalled during the legal struggles. He had said in the past that he made numerous offers to buy out the Barclay brothers — who had tried to take control of the company — but the struggle had become so personal that they stopped talking to each other.AdvertisementLast year Mr. McKillen said that he would “never sell” his 36 percent stake to the Barclay brothers. In the end, it was the Barclays who disposed of their stake, albeit to another party.AdvertisementThe brothers — together with another Irish property developer, Derek Quinlan — sold to Constellation their combined 64 percent interest in Coroin, which owns Claridge’s, as well as the Berkeley and the Connaught hotels.The Barclay brothers and Mr. McKillen are satisfied with the outcome, which brings to an end their long-running legal feud, according to Richard Faber, who represents the Barclay family interests.The dispute over the ownership of the three luxury hotels had been conducted in courts in London and Dublin.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We have also reached an agreement to ensure an end to any litigation,” Mr. Faber said in a statement, “so that there is a clear focus on investing in the continued success of these iconic hotels.”The purchase by Constellation is the latest of several high-profile acquisitions in Europe in recent years by the Qatari group. In 2013 it paid 301.5 million pounds, or $451 million, for InterContinental Hotels Group’s 57-year lease on a 447-bedroom property close to Hyde Park in London. Last year it also agreed to buy the Paris-Le Grand Hotel, also from InterContinental Hotels Group, for 330 million euros, or $354 million.But gaining a controlling stake in the chain that owns Claridge’s, the Connaught and Berkeley hotels, marks a significant new step.Since the 19th century, monarchs and celebrities have retreated to Claridge’s for its $20,000-a-night suites or indulged in tea and scones in its Art Deco reading room.The hotel also starred in a hit BBC documentary, “Inside Claridge’s,” which chronicled its daily dramas.The London luxury hotels have long been popular with wealthy Middle Eastern visitors, and over the years investors from Abu Dhabi and the ruling family of Qatar had sought to buy the properties.AdvertisementStephen Castle reported from London, and Doreen Carvajal from Paris.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.