By LIZ MOYEROCT. 19, 2015
The trading tactic known as “spoofing” is again under scrutiny, with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission accusing a Chicago-based trader of a “pattern of manipulative and deceptive spoofing” for three years from December 2011 to January 2014 in various futures contracts.The case, filed on Monday in the Federal District Court in Chicago, is the regulator’s fourth spoofing case since new rules under the Dodd-Frank Act sought to abolish the practice. The C.F.T.C. says that the trader, Igor Oystacher, and his firm 3 Red Trading L.L.C., engaged in spoofing in futures contracts for copper, crude oil, natural gas, and the Standard & Poor’s 500 E-mini, among others.In spoofing, a trader tries to trick others into believing there are large orders for futures contracts in order to draw them into the market. What the trader has actually done is place large orders for futures intending to cancel them, artificially driving prices up or down in a way that creates an opening for the trader to profit off tiny price differences.In Mr. Oystacher’s case, the agency contends that he placed large orders to either buy or sell futures through 3 Red at the same or worse price than the current best bid or offer.AdvertisementThen he canceled those orders while simultaneously placing big orders for the same futures at or above the current best bid or offer.AdvertisementThe strategy enabled Mr. Oystacher to buy or sell futures in quantities and at prices that would not otherwise have been available, the C.F.T.C. said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Greg O’Connor, 3 Red’s chief compliance officer, said in an emailed statement: “The charges are completely without merit. The C.F.T.C. has oversimplified complex trading and is now trying to classify legitimate trading and risk management as a market infraction. We stand behind the trading at issue as it does not contradict available guidance nor violate the law.”He added that 3 Red cooperated with the agency over a four-year review of its trading.Spoofing creates the illusion of false market depth.“Spoofing seriously threatens the integrity and stability of futures markets because it discourages legitimate market participants from trading,” said Aitan Goelman, the C.F.T.C.’s director of enforcement.The trick will be in proving intent. Order cancellations are a common occurrence in the securities markets as the use of algorithms and other computer-driven trading strategies, including high-frequency trading, transformed the way markets operate over the last decade.This month, the Securities and Exchange Commission announced a $1 million settlement in a spoofing investigation of its own. The securities regulator had accused the New York-based proprietary trading firm Briargate Trading and its co-founder, Eric Oscher, of spoofing securities listed on the New York Stock Exchange.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.