AdvertisementSupported byCommon SenseBy James B. StewartIn the topsy-turvy world of negative interest rates in Europe that has now become a reality, a benchmark for an array of loans fell below zero for the first time this week. The three-month Euribor rate, set by a panel of European banks, hit negative 0.001 percent on Tuesday.Denmark, Switzerland, Germany, Finland, Sweden and Austria have all issued bonds with negative yields, meaning investors holding to maturity may not get all their money back. Even Italy and Spain sovereign debt has traded in negative territory in recent weeks. This month, Switzerland became the first government to sell a 10-year bond at negative yields.Negative interest rates have led to the equally strange phenomenon of banks paying borrowers to take loans.If someone is really willing to pay me to take a loan, I’d like to get in on the action.So I set out this week to see how — and how much — I could borrow at negative rates. I realize I might not be considered a safe-haven borrower on par with Switzerland, but I have a good credit score and have never missed a mortgage payment. (When I was in school during the inflation-laden 1970s, the concept of negative interest rates was so outlandish it wasn’t even mentioned in economics courses.)I discovered that, like many things that seem too good to be true, it wouldn’t be easy. But at least in theory it’s possible.Negative interest rates have proved a conundrum for economists. A major factor in creating this situation has been the European Central Bank which, in pursuing a strategy of doing “whatever is needed” to preserve the euro, as Mario Draghi put it, has been buying substantial amounts of sovereign debt.Whatever the cause of negative-rate loans, Goldman Sachs called them “the new normal” in a recent research note. Most mortgages in Spain, Portugal and Italy have adjustable rates pegged to Euribor, and some of these have slipped into negative territory. At least one large Spanish mortgage lender, Bankinter, has been paying negative interest to borrowers by deducting the amount from the principal of their loans, The Wall Street Journal reported. (Bankinter had pegged some mortgages to a benchmark denominated in Swiss francs, which is even deeper in negative territory than Euribor.)These all appear to be existing variable-rate mortgages. But in Denmark, where the government’s debt has been returning negative yields since 2012, one of the country’s largest mortgage lenders, Nordea Kredit, originated a negative-rate mortgage in January, according to Danish news reports. Moreover, in Denmark many lenders offer interest-only loans and will finance the purchase of property outside Denmark.One way to cash in on negative rates would be to buy European real estate — an apartment in Paris, for example — and borrow from a Danish mortgage lender. With an interest-only loan, the bank would pay you even as you collected rent from a tenant. Fortunately, I checked some of the Danish banks’ websites before booking a flight to Copenhagen, since the issuance of negative-rate loans there has been suspended while the government studies the situation. (Among other problems, Danish banks’ computers weren’t programmed to handle negative rates.)Elsewhere in Europe, the fate of negative-rate mortgages is clouded by litigation, since existing mortgage agreements didn’t indicate what would happen if negative rates occurred. Even in Switzerland, banks aren’t issuing negative-rate mortgages, according to Michael Blaser, managing director of Wüst und Wüst AG in Zurich, an affiliate of Christie’s International Real Estate. But he noted there were a handful of old contracts in some banks that weren’t fixed to a minimum of zero percent.“This led to some very rare cases in which a customer got negative rates,” Mr. Blaser said.Still, Swiss mortgage rates are amazingly low: Credit Suisse quoted 1.02 percent for a variable rate pegged to three-month Swiss franc Libor, and 1.05 percent for a three-year fixed-rate mortgage. But non-European Union buyers of residential property need a Swiss residency permit. And Swiss banks will generally issue mortgages only for properties in Switzerland.Several bankers I consulted also pointed out that borrowing and buying real estate in a foreign country involve currency risks. My Parisian apartment plan could expose me to three currencies: I earn money in dollars, but would be borrowing in Danish krone and buying the apartment in euros.And of course I’d have to actually buy real estate, which might be a good investment, but requires upkeep and management. Far easier would be to exchange my existing mortgage on my New York apartment for one with a negative rate one that would pay me money, or to borrow in dollars and swap that for a negative-rate loan in euros, krone or francs.I discussed this approach with Andy Hill, director of market practice and regulatory policy for the International Capital Market Association in London, who said that it’s possible, at least in theory. He said a broker-dealer could help me execute a swap — a transaction in which one income stream is exchanged for another.In my case, I’d trade the payment stream on my mortgage for, say, a negative-rate payment stream on euro-denominated debt, capturing the spread between the two. My counterparty would make my interest payments, and I’d make his — and in this case, since they are negative, I would be receiving payments.Sounds like a great deal, although once again, as Mr. Hill pointed out, I’d have to assume the currency risks, which might erase any interest rate gains.But don’t hold your breath. I contacted four major banks and none were willing to help. No one seems interested in swap transactions of less than $10 million. You also have to be an “eligible contract participant” under Dodd-Frank legislation, which means, among other criteria, that individuals need net assets of over $10 million. And then there are transaction costs, which would diminish any rate advantages.No one I spoke to knew of any individuals who had swapped into a negative-rate loan, although they thought wealthy individuals with a good private-banking relationship could probably do it. But they said some large corporate clients are using the strategy, and it’s also becoming popular with hedge funds.That may be an early warning sign: “Too often these strategies get crowded, unwind rapidly, and can end in significant foreign currency corrections,” Mr. Hill said. “And a few tears for the last to get in and out.”For now, I think I’ll sit out the negative-rate phenomenon. My simple United States dollar 15-year fixed-rate mortgage at 3 percent is looking pretty good.Advertisement