AdvertisementSupported byBy Jenny AndersonLONDON — Navinder Singh Sarao, the 36-year old British trader arrested Tuesday on United States criminal charges that he helped cause the May 2010 flash crash, faces a mountain of legal challenges, not to mention emotional and financial ones.Fortunately, there are people ready to offer him advice and sympathy, including some of Britain’s most famous white-collar criminals. (Mr. Sarao has not been convicted and has indicated that he will fight extradition.)On Thursday, Nick Leeson, whose unauthorized trading brought down Barings Bank – known as the Queen’s bank because Queen Elizabeth had an account there — and who is now a successful conference speaker, noted that the time he spent facing extradition was the toughest part of his five-year ordeal — apparently including four and a half years in a Singapore prison.“To give you an idea of how trying the time was dealing with extradition, it was the only time I seriously considered suicide as an option,” Mr. Leeson posted on Twitter on Thursday. “The uncertainty, the fear and the constant speculation by the media drive you to the brink of manic depression each and every day.”Mr. Leeson was not alone in offering support. Prominent fund managers came to his defense, convicted criminals warned him of the perils of fighting extradition, and the world’s most famous British rogue trader was in high demand to talk about his own experience, offering ample evidence of second acts.David Bermingham, known as one of the NatWest Three, was convicted in the United States with two colleagues for conspiring with Enron’s chief financial officer, Andrew S. Fastow, to enrich themselves at the expense of their former employer, National Westminster Bank, or NatWest, which is now part of the Royal Bank of Scotland.Mr. Bermingham’s advice to Mr. Sarao: Get an American lawyer, cut a deal and serve time – regardless of guilt or innocence.“Make your life less bad,” he said in an interview. “It is a matter of cast-iron certainty that 98 percent of indictments end in plea bargains,” he said.Of course, Mr. Sarao is innocent until proven guilty. He will be back in court in August to present his case against extradition to the United States.Attempts to reach his lawyer, Joel Smith, were not successful on Thursday.The logic of cutting a deal, Mr. Bermingham says, is clear: If Mr. Sarao fights the case in an United States court and loses, he faces many years in prison. If he fights the charges and wins most, but loses a few, he could still face a long sentence. If he fights extradition and loses — which Mr. Bermingham believes would be the case because of severe weaknesses in the British extradition system – he arrives in the United States a “fugitive from justice” with less bargaining power.“It doesn’t take Einstein to work out that your innocence becomes a sideshow,” Mr. Bermingham said.Mr. Sarao has been charged with wire fraud, commodities fraud, commodities manipulation and “spoofing,” a form of market manipulation whose appearance in documents related to the case has prompted concern about widespread market-rigging.Many, including Mr. Leeson, have questioned the likelihood that a futures trader operating from his home, a rowhouse under the flight path of Heathrow Airport, could have taken down the United States stock market for some 15 minutes, creating panic among institutional and retail investors. Those charged with policing the markets took five years and a whistle-blower to file allegations against Mr. Sarao.“It looks to me like he was the trigger for a lot of heavier, forceful speculation and is being singled out,” Mr. Leeson wrote on Twitter later in the day. He later told LBC Radio, a talk-radio station in London: “It just doesn’t ring true. I hate to jump to conclusions, but is he a scapegoat?”Mr. Sarao appeared in court on Wednesday and indicated that he would fight the extradition. His lawyer, Joel Smith, said the arrest came as a “bolt out of the blue” and argued that he should be released on bail. The judge awarded bail of 5.05 million pounds, of which Mr. Sarao will pay £5 million. Terms of his bail include a curfew, a requirement to check in with the police three times a week and a ban on Internet use.Having experienced extradition, Mr. Bermingham is a vocal critic of the system. If the United States wants to extradite someone, he said, it can do so without a probable cause hearing. “We will put anyone on a plane to America because a U.S. prosecutor says he is a bad person,” he said. If the British authorities want to extradite someone, the threshold for evidence is higher.“There is a difference in the requirements between the two countries,” said Richard Kovalevsky, a lawyer at Pinsent Masons in London. “You require a lower threshold to extradite to the U.S. than you would from the U.S.”Mr. Bermingham was charged in June 2002, but his extradition was not sought until 2004, after Britain passed its 2003 extradition treaty. He and his colleagues fought the extradition for two years, with public support. The case prompted an emergency session of Parliament and street protests in 2006.After Mr. Bermingham and his co-defendants spent a year in limbo awaiting trial in Texas -- one of them developed a love of cowboy boots to hide his tracking device -- they pleaded guilty. Mr. Bermingham served time in a California prison before returning home to serve out the final 10 months in Britain.Asked about his time in prison, Mr. Bermingham commented, as the British often do, on the weather.“I was in California, and the weather was lovely,” he said. “It has a real bearing on people’s temperment.”Advertisement