By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONAPRIL 23, 2015
The family office for the Google chairman Eric E. Schmidt has purchased a large stake in the $36 billion hedge fund, D. E. Shaw.The 20 percent stake is one of the last vestiges of the bankrupt Lehman Brothers, a prime asset that the estate had been shopping around for more than a year. Hillspire, the family office that serves as an investment vehicle for Mr. Schmidt, bought the stake for an undisclosed price.“I’ve always regarded Eric as a kindred spirit — someone who shares our belief in the power of groundbreaking innovation, analytical rigor, and extraordinarily gifted employees,” David E. Shaw, the founder of D. E. Shaw, said in a statement.Mr. Schmidt has been a longtime investor in D. E. Shaw, he said in a statement.D.E. Shaw is known for once employing Lawrence H. Summers, who went on to serve as President Obama’s economic policy adviser. It uses quantitative trading strategies, harnessing computers to help scour data to find opportunities to trade.AdvertisementFor more than a year, Goldman Sachs bankers working for the Lehman estate had struggled to drum up interest in the stake, which the bank bought a year before it collapsed. At the time, the biggest hurdle for prospective buyers was not the price — which was said to be between $550 million and $800 million — but the terms of the stake itself, according to people who were briefed on the matter last year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Blackstone Group, Dyal Capital and Affiliated Managers Group were among the investment firms that considered buying the stake.AdvertisementBut ultimately the others firms declined, some because of the terms of the agreement that were negotiated in early 2007. Lehman paid about $800 million and a contingency based on future performance for the stake. As part of the deal, Lehman paid a large upfront sum and then additional payments in 2009 and 2012.The stake is passive, and Hillspire will not have a seat on the board. But it will receive a percentage of the firm’s profits.Passive stakes in hedge funds have become increasingly popular among investors like family offices and pension funds. Last month, the private equity unit of Neuberger Berman Group bought a 20 percent stake in the activist hedge fund Jana Partners. Dyal Capital Partners, the unit, also considered buying the D. E. Shaw stake, according to one person briefed on the matter.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Google Chairman’s Family Office Buys Stake in Fund.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.