
Breakingviews By                     
DOMINIC ELLIOTT

OCT. 19, 2015
Deutsche Bank’s turbocharged restructuring under its new co-chief executive, John Cryan, has put the stick before the carrot. The latest step in the plan, introduced on Sunday, will split each of the German lender’s securities and asset-gathering businesses in two. And four senior managers are to leave.The personnel changes should help Deutsche Bank come to terms with the scandal in its past. Out go the transaction banking head, Stefan Krause; the European boss, Stephan Leithner; the asset-gathering chief, Michele Faissola; and the co-head of investment banking, Colin Fan. Many of their divisions are either shrinking or being given to other managers.That means five of the six executives singled out by the German regulator, Federal Financial Supervisory Authority, or BaFin, for incompetence or worse over the Libor-fixing scandal will have parted ways with the bank or been demoted by the end of the year. Though Deutsche Bank has said it disagrees with BaFin’s findings, the bloodletting at a minimum should help the bank repair relations with that supervisor.Clients and investors also probably will be heartened by the prospect of future accountability. Deutsche Bank is separating the business of dealing with institutional fund clients from private and retail wealth management. And the high-octane trading businesses that have led to most of the bank’s fines – for missteps including Libor and foreign exchange-benchmark manipulation – will have to stand alone now.It all feels like a foreshadowing of how the bank’s planned shake-up of investment banking, to be confirmed on Oct. 29, will turn out. Mr. Cryan’s predecessor, Anshu Jain, already had pledged to cut up to 150 billion euros, or $171 billion, of trading assets. The assets were expected to come from the fixed-income side, run by Mr. Fan. That looks even more likely now that Garth Ritchie, head of equities, has been promoted to run that business.Mr. Cryan’s next task is ensuring that the good bankers stick around. He warned them that this year’s bonuses might be endangered after the €5.8 billion of write-downs announced this month. He’ll need to deliver a convincing and charismatic case for why Deutsche Bank can be great again. The negative part of his job is going well; now for the positive.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »