AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesWhen Antonio Weiss left the investment bank Lazard for a post at the Treasury Department last year, many on Wall Street wondered whether the firm would be able to retain its place as a premier broker of major mergers and acquisitions.Mr. Weiss, regarded as one of the best deal makers of his generation, had advised clients including the beer maker Anheuser Busch InBev and the cigarette maker Reynolds American on their multibillion-dollar transactions. In his absence, other investment banks sensed an opportunity to seize market share.But on Thursday, Lazard announced strong first-quarter earnings and continued to make the case that its advisory franchise would be just fine — even with Mr. Weiss now serving as counselor to Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew.Revenue from Lazard’s advisory business — essentially fees from advising companies on deals and restructuring — rose 9 percent to $302 million, a record for the firm. Asset management revenue was up 3 percent to $271 million for the quarter, also a record.The advisory revenue came mostly from deals announced six to 12 months ago. They included advising on GlaxoSmithKline’s complex multibillion-dollar transaction with Novartis, Rockwood’s $6.2 billion sale to Albemarle, LabCorp’s $6.2 billion acquisition of Covance and Shire’s $5.2 billion purchase of NPS Pharmaceuticals. Typically, investment banks receive their rich fees once deals are closed.But in recent months, even after Mr. Weiss stepped down as the former global head of investment banking at Lazard, the firm has continued to advise on prominent mergers. In the coming quarters, Lazard expects to collect tens of millions of dollars in fees from the completion of deals including AT&T’s $67 billion acquisition of DirecTV; Reynolds American’s $27.4 billion acquisition of Lorillard, which also involves a $7 billion sale of assets to Imperial Tobacco; and Lafarge’s 29.6 billion euro merger of equals with the cement maker Holcim.Last month, Lazard emerged as the sole adviser to H.J. Heinz — the food maker owned by 3G Capital and Warren E. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway — in its combination with Kraft Foods, the biggest deal of the year.3G Capital was one of Mr. Weiss’s most lucrative relationships, and the Heinz deal, which came together in a matter of weeks, quickly emerged as a definitive test for Lazard and its chief executive, Kenneth M. Jacobs.“Antonio is a great banker,” Mr. Jacobs said in an interview on Thursday. “A firm like Lazard will always miss someone like him.”But Mr. Jacobs, a veteran deal maker himself, welcomed the chance to focus on a complex deal like the merger between Kraft and Heinz.Investors are eagerly awaiting guidance from management about when higher short-term interest rates will impact the banks’ bottom lines.“You can’t lead a firm like Lazard if you’re not willing to roll up your sleeves and work on transactions,” he said. “The fun is doing the deals.”Blair W. Effron, the chief executive of the independent investment bank Centerview Partners, which was the sole adviser to Kraft, worked across the table from Mr. Jacobs on the deal.“His contribution throughout was essential,” Mr. Effron said of Mr. Jacobs. “The idea that there was someone to speak with about inevitable disagreements that came up, structural and otherwise, and find solutions and get to the right outcome, that is what was needed.”Mr. Jacobs emphasized that he had a large team working with him on the deal, but that Lazard’s franchise was based on its ability to discreetly get big deals to the finish line.“On the advisory side, our competition are the big global platforms, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley,” he said. “That’s who we’re competing against day to day.”Unlike the junior bankers working in the “engine room,” Mr. Jacobs didn’t spend his weeks toiling away of spreadsheets at dawn.“The input Ken has isn’t making a model at 3 a.m., it’s that he knows what to do with that data,” Mr. Effron said. “It’s about the quality of the input rather than the quantity of the time.”Mr. Effron said their good working relationship also helped the deal come together.“It’s diplomacy,” Mr. Effron said. “Ken knows when to push his side, and when to back off. He is really good about making sure that everyone puts each issue in the appropriate context. Not every issue is a five-alarm fire. But when Ken says it’s important, you know it’s important.”Lazard’s adjusted net income was up 27 percent to $103 million for the quarter. But profit using generally accepted accounting principles was down 31 percent because of a $63 million charge the bank took to restructure its debt.“Interest rates were not likely to go down much more, and we can’t predict when they are going to go up,” said Mr. Jacobs. “It was an opportune time to do it.”The firm’s shares ended the day down slightly to $56.21 a share, or off 35 cents.Lazard, which in recent years faced pressure from the activist investor Nelson Peltz to trim its costs, continued to make moves that allocate more profits to shareholders. It increased its quarterly dividend 17 percent to 35 cents a share. The firm said its goal was for compensation costs to grow slower than overall revenue did.Although Mr. Jacobs said mergers and acquisitions activity remained robust, he added it was impossible to know when the music might stop. “These are hard to predict,” he said.Advertisement