AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill VlasicDETROIT — General Motors, the nation’s biggest automaker, said on Thursday that its net income climbed to $945 million in the first quarter on the strength of vehicle sales in its core North American market.The results were far better than in the same period a year ago, when costs associated with safety recalls limited G.M.’s quarterly profit to $125 million.The company said that its results were lifted, in particular, by sales of new pickup trucks in the United States.G.M. still struggled in some of its international operations. It said it had a pretax loss of $239 million in Europe during the quarter, and a loss of $214 million in South America.Earnings were also reduced in the quarter by special charges, including a $428 million charge to stop production of vehicles in the troubled Russian market.In addition, G.M. took a charge of $150 million in the quarter to increase the amount of money set aside to compensate victims of accidents tied to defective ignition switches.The additional funds increase the total compensation program to about $550 million. The program, which is administered by the lawyer Kenneth R. Feinberg, has so far made compensation offers to the families of 87 people killed in accidents linked to faulty ignitions that could suddenly cut engine power and disable airbags.G.M. said it had also begun to repurchase shares as part of a program to buy back $5 billion in common stock by the end of next year.The company said it had repurchased 19.4 million shares through Tuesday. The buyback program was initiated after a group of hedge funds complained about G.M.’s stagnant stock price and threatened a proxy fight to force the automaker to take steps to increase the value of its shares.Net revenue in the first quarter was $35.7 billion, down from $37.4 billion during the same period a year ago. Some of the reduction was tied to lower production in Russia and Brazil.The automaker’s North American results improved substantially from last year. G.M. said it had a pretax profit of $2.2 billion in the region in the first quarter, compared with about $600 million in the same period in 2014, when the company incurred $1.3 billion in costs for safety recalls.Mary T. Barra, the company’s chief executive, called the first-quarter results a “solid foundation” for the rest of the year.“Continued execution of our plan, including our capital allocation framework, will drive profitable growth, return on invested capital and shareholder value,” Ms. Barra said.While G.M. has already absorbed the heaviest costs resulting from last year’s record number of recalls, it is still under investigation by the Justice Department for its handling of the ignition-switch problem. It did clear one legal hurdle recently when a federal bankruptcy judge ruled that the automaker could not be sued for economic damages for loss of value of defective models.Despite the good performance in North America, investors were somewhat disappointed by G.M.’s overall results in the quarter. The company’s stock price fell more than 3 percent on Thursday to close at $35.92 a share.Besides the drop in revenues, G.M. sold slightly fewer vehicles in the quarter — about 2.4 million — than it did in the same period in 2014, and its global market share remained flat at about 11 percent.One analyst said that G.M. must prove it can meet expectations for improved profit margins before the stock market will reward it with an improved share price.“One of the key ways for G.M. to shed its value-trap image will be to develop a track record of execution and meeting expectations,” said Brian A. Johnson, an equity analyst with Barclays.Advertisement