AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonThe private equity giant Kohlberg Kravis Roberts on Thursday posted slightly weaker first-quarter profit as it deals with more modest growth.The firm, led by Henry R. Kravis and George R. Roberts, said its economic net income, a metric that includes unrealized gains or losses, was $599.4 million in the quarter, representing a 5 percent decline, compared with $630.3 million in the same period a year earlier.But the earnings, which amounted to 62 cents a share after taxes, handily beat expectations of 53 cents a share in a survey of analysts by Thomson Reuters.The results amounted to a positive turn for K.K.R., which was dragged down by roiling oil markets last year and reported an 89 percent profit drop in the fourth quarter of 2014. Rivals like Apollo also suffered losses from investments in energy after oil prices collapsed in the second half of the year.Investors are eagerly awaiting guidance from management about when higher short-term interest rates will impact the banks’ bottom lines.This year, K.K.R. undertook a series of transactions, including the sale of its final stake in Alliance Boots to Walgreen and an exit from the stock photography and video platform Fotolia, which it sold to Adobe. These transactions helped lift K.K.R.’s distributable earnings, a measure of the amount of cash generated that will be given to shareholders, by 16 percent to $516.5 million, compared with $446.8 million in the period a year ago.Over all, in K.K.R.’s private investment portfolio, economic net income rose 17 percent, to $568.5 million, compared with the year-ago period.Its portfolio of public investments proved more difficult, with a reported economic net income of $2.8 million in the quarter, compared with $97.8 million in the previous year. K.K.R. attributed the 95 percent drop in income to losses from its portfolio of collaterized loan obligations and credit investments.Over the past year, K.K.R. has changed how it breaks down the economic net income for each of the three segments it reports to more accurately reflect the income generated in each segment.K.K.R. uses nonstandard metrics for its results. Following generally accepted accounting principles, the private equity firm reported a gain of $270.5 million for the quarter, compared with a $210 million gain in the period a year earlier.It announced a dividend of 46 cents a share.Advertisement