AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill Vlasic and Mary M. ChapmanDETROIT — The United Automobile Workers union plans to resume discussions with Fiat Chrysler Automobiles after nearly two-thirds of the company’s hourly workers rejected a proposed new contract.The union said on Thursday that 65 percent of Fiat Chrysler’s 36,000 hourly workers voted against the tentative agreement, which included wage increases and bonuses but failed to put a cap on the number of lower-paid workers.Dennis Williams, the union’s president, said in a statement that the U.A.W. would return to talks with Fiat Chrysler, but he did not address the possibility of turning to General Motors and Ford for a new contract that would set a template for all three American automakers.He said the union would notify Fiat Chrysler that “further discussions” were needed but did not set a timetable for the talks or a deadline for a possible strike.“We don’t consider this a setback,” Mr. Williams said. “We consider the membership vote a part of the process we respect.”The election was the first time in more than 30 years that hourly workers at the company had rejected a contract agreed to by the U.A.W. leadership.The margins of defeat were stunning at some of the company’s biggest assembly plants in Michigan, Ohio and Illinois.More than 80 percent of the 5,000 workers at a Jeep plant in Toledo, Ohio, for example, voted against the agreement, underscoring the intense dissatisfaction with the company’s divisive two-tier wage structure and its plans to shift car production to Mexico.Mr. Williams did not indicate why he believed that the contract failed or what the union will focus on in the next round of talks.But he did indirectly refer to members who have been vocal about the contract’s failure to address a cap on lower-paid, entry-level workers who make $9 to $12 an hour less than the top hourly wage of $28.“No matter what we do, what action we take, the ultimate decision and the power of the union is our members, and they make the final decision,” he said.Fiat Chrysler said in a statement that it was “disappointed that U.A.W. members voted not to ratify the tentative agreement.”“The company will make decisions based on our industrial objectives, and looks forward to continuing a dialogue with the U.A.W.,” the company said.The proposed deal called for raises for entry-level workers, who earn $16 to $19 an hour, that would top out at $22 to $25 an hour by 2018. Veteran workers were in line for raises that would increase their wages to just under $30 an hour, from $28. In addition, the contract called for $3,000 signing bonuses.Martha Grevatt, a veteran worker at the Warren Stamping plant in Warren, Mich., said rank-and-file rejection of the contract was the right outcome. “Most of us in Tier 1 find the tiers divisive and at odds with union principles, plus they can pull wages down for everybody,” she said.“A lot of us have been working alongside Tier 2s for some years now,” Ms. Grevatt said. “When we voted for the tiers in 2007 it was hypothetical. Now it’s about people we know. And we see them suffer.”David E. Cole, emeritus chairman of the Center for Automotive Research in Ann Arbor, Mich., said: “It just didn’t start very well with the locals, and the question is, What’s next? I think the fact that Tier 2 was not eliminated was the key thing.”Mr. Cole said that Mr. Williams faced a challenge in persuading workers at Fiat Chrysler, which is in a weaker financial position than its Detroit competitors, to vote for a contract.“Dennis Williams understands the business side very well,” he said. “The bottom line is, none of the companies will do anything to put themselves in a noncompetitive position. But the trick is, how do you sell that?”Fiat Chrysler is not the only automaker facing labor strife. Ford workers are considering a local strike on Sunday at the Kansas City plant that produces the popular F-150 pickup trucks. Ford was given a five-day notice on Tuesday by the U.A.W. to resolve issues specific to that factory or face a work stoppage.Advertisement