By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONAPRIL 24, 2015
Laurence D. Fink, the chief executive of BlackRock, appeared to have been criticizing activist shareholders when he recently urged corporate chieftains not to be bullied by investors with short-term interests.But Barry Rosenstein, the billionaire activist, disagrees. Mr. Rosenstein said he ran into Mr. Fink on the same day that he sent that message in letters to every chief executive of the 500 biggest companies in the United States.“We started talking about it and the first thing he said was, ‘You know everybody interprets this as my being anti-activist and I’m not,’” Mr. Rosenstein, who founded the $11 billion hedge fund Jana Partners in 2001, said in an interview in the coming “Wall Street Week” that will air on Sunday morning.Mr. Fink caused a stir on Wall Street with his letter, which evoked memories of corporate raiders of the 1980s like Carl C. Icahn. Then, activists were painted as greedy investors who would buy up large stakes in companies and then push for changes, sometimes exiting only when the companies would pay them to get out of the company.AdvertisementToday, activist investors like Daniel S. Loeb and even Mr. Icahn have become more sophisticated, rebranding themselves as actors of positive change. Their war chests have swelled over the last few years as activists posted some of the best returns within the hedge fund industry.Advertisement“The effects of the short-termist phenomenon are troubling both to those seeking to save for long-term goals such as retirement and for our broader economy,” Mr. Fink wrote in his letter two weeks ago.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Fink was referring to the fact that companies in the United States spent close to $1 trillion in 2014 on dividends, stock buybacks and other refinancing, often under pressure from activist investors like Mr. Rosenstein.Mr. Rosenstein tried to soften the blow dealt by Mr. Fink.“I think he’s just saying that companies shouldn’t just knee-jerk, just return capital. They ought to determine what the best return on invested capital is,” Mr. Rosenstein said.Jana has been behind several closely watched activist campaigns in companies across America, including Safeway, the supermarket chain, and Hertz, the car rental company. Under pressure from Jana and another hedge fund, PetSmart agreed to be bought by BC Partners for $8.7 billion, in the biggest private equity deal of last year.Mr. Rosenstein was speaking in an interview with Anthony Scaramucci and Gary Kaminsky, the co-hosts of the revamped “Wall Street Week,” a weekly investing program sponsored by Mr. Scaramucci’s investment firm SkyBridge Capital.Mr. Rosenstein did not bring up one of Mr. Fink’s solution to discouraging some activist investors: changing tax policy to penalize investors who don’t hold onto a stock for at least three years.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.