AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill VlasicDETROIT — General Motors said on Friday that it paid its chief executive, Mary T. Barra, a total of $16.2 million in compensation last year, in spite of the company’s record number of safety recalls in 2014.The compensation package, revealed in G.M.’s proxy statement, said Ms. Barra earned a salary of $1.57 million, with the remainder of her pay coming in other cash compensation and stock awards.The company said Ms. Barra exceeded an internal compensation target set after she took over the top job at G.M., the nation’s largest automaker, early last year upon the retirement of her predecessor, Daniel Akerson.But G.M. said she and other senior executives could have earned more money if other performance measures had been met.It was the first year that G.M. had been freed from restrictions on executive pay tied to its 2009 bankruptcy and $49 billion government bailout.Still, Ms. Barra’s 2014 compensation was less than that earned by other chief executives of domestic automakers.Sergio Marchionne, the chief executive of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, earned more than $35 million during the year, when he completed the merger of the Italian carmaker Fiat and Chrysler, which also needed a federal bailout to survive the last recession.Ford Motor’s chief executive, Mark Fields, received $18.6 million in total compensation in 2014. Mr. Fields took over the chief executive job in the middle of last year from Alan R. Mulally, who retired.The hefty compensation awards partly reflect the strength of the United States market for new vehicles. Last year, automakers sold 16.6 million new cars and trucks, which represented the industry’s best performance since 2007.The executive paychecks are likely to become an issue this summer during negotiations on a new contract between the Detroit automakers and the United Auto Workers union.The New York Times has exposed missteps and delays by automakers and federal safety regulators in responding to deadly defects in automobiles during what became a record year for recalls.Union officials have said they are intent on securing raises in the coming contract for more than 130,000 American factory workers employed by G.M., Ford and Fiat Chrysler.Already, G.M. said in February that it would give each of its 48,000 union workers up to a record $9,000 in profit-sharing — more than the contract called for.Currently, longtime union workers earn $28 an hour, and entry-level workers earn about $19 an hour. The union’s president, Dennis Williams, has repeatedly said that factory workers should be rewarded for their part in restoring the domestic manufacturers to solid profitability.At a news conference this year, Mr. Williams indicated that he would use executive compensation levels as a bargaining tool in seeking raises for the blue-collar workers.“If they want to talk about wages, I’d be happy to talk about their salaries,” he said.Ms. Barra’s compensation last year was about triple what she earned in 2013, when she was G.M.’s head of global product development.She took over the company’s top job in January 2014, just weeks before G.M. began recalling millions of small cars with defective ignition switches that can cause a sudden loss of engine power and disable airbags.An independent compensation expert hired by G.M., Kenneth Feinberg, has made settlement offers to the families of 87 people who died in vehicles with faulty ignitions.The ignition crisis also set off a huge shake-up in G.M.’s engineering and safety operations, and led the company to perform dozens of subsequent recalls on a wide range of vehicles throughout the year.G.M. also revealed the compensation packages of other executives of Friday. Mark Reuss, the company’s product chief, received $9.5 million in salary, other cash compensation and stock awards, and its president, Daniel Ammann, took home $8.5 million.Michael Millikin, who is retiring as G.M.’s general counsel, was paid $5.8 million.All of G.M.’s top executives were absolved of wrongdoing in the safety crisis by an internal investigative report prepared by the former federal prosecutor Anton Valukas.But the Justice Department is still investigating the company for its handling of the switch problem. G.M. dismissed 15 employees as a result of its internal investigation, including at least five lawyers who reported to Mr. Millikin.Advertisement