By STEVE FRIESSAPRIL 24, 2015
LAS VEGAS —  Shareholders of Wynn Resorts on Friday rejected the bid by Elaine P. Wynn, co-founder and former wife of the chief executive, Stephen A. Wynn, to remain on the company’s board, ending the most public and awkward proxy battle in the company’s 13-year history.Ms. Wynn, who is the third-largest shareholder, appeared sanguine and poised as the results were announced at a shareholder meeting, aware that the odds had been against her. The board’s governance committee decided in March to eliminate her seat and endorse two other incumbent board members.That extraordinary step was necessary, the company said, because Ms. Wynn’s recent actions had not been in the company’s best interest and threatened to cause Mr. Wynn, 73, to lose control of the $13 billion hotel-casino conglomerate.Among the concerns was Ms. Wynn’s lawsuit against her former husband, in which she sought to be released from a shareholder agreement that requires his permission for her to sell anything more than $10 million in stock a year. That agreement began after their 2010 divorce, in which Ms. Wynn received half of Mr. Wynn’s shares of the company. In the suit, filed in 2012, she sought the right to liquidate as much of her assets as she wanted.AdvertisementBecause Mr. Wynn and Ms. Wynn are required to vote together on company matters, Ms. Wynn began her proxy battle with 19.3 percent of the vote. Yet most of the company is owned by large institutional investors, including T. Rowe Price and Vanguard, and it was expected that they would not buck the board’s recommendations. Vote totals were not released.AdvertisementMs. Wynn, 72, who sat beside the company’s longtime interior designer, Roger P. Thomas, in the second row of the Wynn Las Vegas hotel-casino’s show theater, left the meeting without comment. But later she said in an email:“While I am certainly disappointed by the result of today’s vote, I am hopeful that I have once again served as an agent for change and improvement for this company, which I love so deeply.” She added: “It remains to be seen if the directors of this company will deliver on the commitments they have made to greater independence, diversity and oversight of management. I, however, as the third-largest stockholder, remain committed to holding all accountable.”The company, feeling heat after Ms. Wynn made diversity on the board a campaign issue — because she was the only director who is not white and male — reaffirmed its promise to address the matter.“We wish to thank all of our stockholders for their support throughout this process,” the company said in an email. “We look forward to expanding the board with one or more qualified, diverse and independent directors by the end of 2015.” The email went on to “thank Ms. Wynn for her service on the Wynn Resorts board of directors.”Mr. Wynn and the company’s lawyer, Kim Sinatra, addressed the half-filled theater from the stage. The current board of directors, including the re-elected members J. Edward Virtue and John J. Hagenbuch, sat in the front row, as did Mr. Wynn’s current wife, Andrea Hissom Wynn.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While there was no audible reaction to the outcome when Ms. Sinatra announced it, a shareholder, Ellyce Remick, used the question-and-answer period to chastise the company for removing Ms. Wynn. Her remarks yielded some applause, and one older female attendee shouted, “I agree.”Mr. Wynn made no remarks about his ex-wife’s defeat.The battle has been a rough one. The company has issued several statements and missives to shareholders outlining ways it said Ms. Wynn had potentially harmed the company. Besides the lawsuit, it contended that she had made it difficult for Mr. Wynn to cash out the stock he receives as his bonus — each needs the other’s permission to sell — and had not contributed much to board operations.In the last week, Mr. Wynn tried to soften the assault by appearing on “The Charlie Rose Show” to say that he supported Ms. Wynn and believed that the board had erred in trying to oust her. Yet when Ms. Wynn trumpeted the endorsement in a news release, the company replied with a claim that she had taken Mr. Wynn out of context.Ms. Wynn was joined, notably, by her nephew, Andrew Pascal, a former president of Wynn Las Vegas hotel and a onetime heir apparent to Mr. Wynn. Mr. Pascal left the company shortly after his aunt’s divorce. His purchase of vacant property across the street from the Wynn hotel with partners, who include the Australian billionaire James Packer, became a point of controversy in the board’s campaign against Ms. Wynn. The company suggested she should have recused herself from board discussions about efforts to acquire the same property because she may have shared sensitive information with her nephew. Ms. Wynn denied the claim, and the company has produced no evidence of such behavior.Ms. Wynn has said she has no intention of selling any large portion of her shares if she wins her lawsuit. After the Wynns, T. Rowe Price controls 16.8 percent of the company, leading the board to worry that any substantial sale by Ms. Wynn could make the company vulnerable to a shift in control.A version of this article appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Wynn Resorts Removes Chief’s Ex-Wife From the Board.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.