By JAD MOUAWADAPRIL 24, 2015
There was an unmistakable shift in tone in the airline industry this week as the nation’s top carriers all reported record earnings because of lower fuel prices and strong demand for domestic air travel.The airlines kept their planes full as they reaped the benefits of their yearslong drive to consolidate the industry into fewer, bigger carriers. The performance was particularly striking because the first quarter is traditionally the weakest of the year.“We are pleased to report record first-quarter profits, exceeding the prior record set just last year,” said Doug Parker, the chairman and chief executive of American Airlines.There was a similar theme at United Airlines, Delta Air Lines and Southwest Airlines in the last few days.Advertisement“The business is performing quite well,” Richard Anderson, Delta’s chief executive, said last week.AdvertisementAt Southwest, Gary C. Kelly, the chairman and chief executive, was also gloating about his airline’s financial performance. “We are thrilled to report an exceptionally strong first quarter,” he said Thursday. Net income, he added, “far surpasses any first quarter in our history.”For all the carriers, the biggest factor by far was the big drop in oil prices in recent months. American paid $1.5 billion for fuel in the first quarter, a drop of more than 40 percent from the period last year, or nearly $1.2 billion less.United’s fuel bill in the first quarter was 36 percent lower than in the period last year. Delta expects it will save $2 billion in fuel by the end of the year. Southwest paid $2 a gallon for fuel in the first quarter, compared with $3.08 a gallon last year.Wall Street analysts, who have long been skeptical that airlines could be anything but perennial underperformers, saw encouraging signs at every carrier.One analyst at Barclays noted that American Airlines had posted better-than-expected revenue, Southwest was reining in its costs, and United, which has struggled since its merger with Continental, seemed to be turning a corner.For passengers, the downside was that airlines are reaching these records by also increasing fares, packing flights and increasing revenue via baggage and other fees.Some airline executives foresaw challenges ahead. The sudden drop in fuel prices had led to fuel hedging losses for carriers in the last quarter, and a stronger dollar is hurting ticket sales abroad.AdvertisementAmerican said on Friday that its revenue in the first quarter had been dented by the stronger dollar and “economic softness” in Latin America, one of its biggest international markets. Its revenue in the first quarter was $9.8 billion, a decline of 1.7 percent from the first quarter last year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The carrier said that it had nearly doubled its first-quarter earnings, to $932 million in the quarter, up from $480 million in the period last year.United on Thursday posted net income of $508 million in the first quarter, in contrast to a loss of $609 million in the period last year. Its passenger revenue for every seat-mile rose nearly 1 percent to 11.85 cents, while its cost per seat-mile dropped 13 percent to 13.74 cents.At the same time, a profitable industry is once more investing in new planes and better domestic service. United said Thursday it would replace the 50-seat airplanes in service with bigger ones, a move that includes putting 10 Boeing 777s into domestic service, from international.Southwest said first-quarter earnings were $453 million, up from $152 million in the year-earlier period. Revenue was $4.4 billion, up 6 percent. It spent $381 million to pay dividends and make share purchases.Still, airlines remain cautious about adding too much new capacity to the market. Delta said last week it was reducing its international flights by the end of the year. American said during its conference call with analysts Friday that it would be delaying its delivery schedule for some of the latest Boeing 787s scheduled for 2016 until 2017 because of weak international demand.Additionally, the big three United States carriers are waging an unusual public and political battle against their rivals based in the Persian Gulf, saying they face unfair competition from state-owned rivals. Delta, United and American have requested that the Obama administration review open-skies agreements with the United Arab Emirates and Qatar.In a letter to several administration officials last week, Delta, United and American said they were disappointed that the government had not immediately frozen new flights from Emirates, Etihad and Qatar Airways, and said their rivals were “rushing” to add new service to the United States.The airlines also are paying dividends to shareholders and buying back their shares, a sign that their balance sheets are more solid than just a few years ago, when the sector was struggling through bankruptcy and mounting losses.“We continue to believe share repurchases are one of the best ways to use the cash windfall from lower jet fuel,” Helane Becker, an airline analyst at Cowen and Company, wrote in a research note Friday.A version of this article appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Airline Industry Reports a Giddy Start to the Year.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.