AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Richard BealesEric E. Schmidt, the executive chairman of Googloe, is reprising the adult supervisory role he played with Google’s founders.Not for him the frivolity of, say, a sports team investment like the $2 billion that Steven A. Ballmer paid for basketball’s Los Angeles Clippers. Mr. Schmidt’s family vehicle, Hillspire, is instead buying 20 percent of the $36 billion hedge fund firm D.E. Shaw from the estate of bankrupt Lehman Brothers.Passive investments in private hedge fund management firms are awkward assets. Controlling founders, in this case David Shaw, can typically veto any transfer. They also value their privacy. The Affiliated Managers Group made Lehman an offer north of $500 million for the same stake in 2014, according to news reports, but that deal didn’t happen. One reason may be that public companies like Affiliated Managerscan’t guarantee keeping information on their holdings to themselves.That leaves few natural buyers. Lehman bought pieces of a number of hedge funds before the financial crisis, and some other institutions have also purchased slices. Neuberger Berman’s Dyal Capital Partners unit specializes in such investments, recently snapping up a 20 percent stake in activist investment firm Jana Partners. Family offices regularly seed new hedge fund firms. But Mr. Schmidt’s purchase of a big existing stake is unusual.Lehman paid at least $750 million D.E. Shaw, according to media reports. But 2007 was the end of a financial bubble, and D.E. Shaw’s business mix was different then. The roughly 5 percent ratio of market value to assets under management for two publicly traded hedge fund firms, Och-Ziff Capital Management and Fortress Investment, would imply a value below $400 million for 20 percent of D.E. Shaw. That’s a rough comparison, though, and it may be that Mr. Schmidt paid something near Affiliated Managers’ reported offer last year.Assuming that the price represents the five-to-seven times earnings typical in such deals, Hillspire will get an investment yield in double digits, a rare beast these days. Still, such a big bet on one firm is a testament both to the Google chairman’s huge wealth – estimated by Forbes at $9.3 billion – and to his belief in D.E. Shaw. It’s a very grown-up kind of investment.Richard Beales is assistant editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement