AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelWhen Comcast announced its $45 billion takeover of Time Warner Cable in February 2014, the notion that television viewers would have the freedom to pay for exactly what they wanted to watch and how they wanted to watch it seemed like something that might be possible in the distant future.That changed quickly in the last six months — much more so than industry executives and observers had expected. Networks like HBO and CBS introduced streaming services that did not require cable subscriptions. Sony, Dish Network and Apple prepared television offerings aimed at people who pay for Internet but not television. Netflix’s subscriber base soared to 40.3 million in the United States.This rapidly shifting landscape loomed large in the minds of regulators, who appeared poised to block the deal on the grounds that Comcast would have too much power over the Internet and declared victory on Friday after Comcast and Time Warner confirmed that the merger had been abandoned. The transformation underscores the growing importance of the Internet as the ultimate gateway for information and entertainment and just how quickly the market shifted underneath Comcast. The company pitched the Time Warner Cable deal as a merger between two cable companies that — while the first and second largest in the country — did not compete for customers in any local markets and would have an unprecedented national platform to create new video and broadband services. The announcement that the deal was off came two days after meetings between Comcast and federal regulators, who had signaled that they were leaning toward blocking the merger. It also came after Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. told Justice Department lawyers two weeks ago that they had his support to challenge the transaction, according to a senior Justice Department official who spoke on the condition of anonymity.The Justice Department confirmed that it had significant concerns that the proposed merger “would make Comcast an unavoidable gatekeeper for Internet-based services that rely on a broadband connection to reach consumers.”“This is a victory not only for the Department of Justice,” Mr. Holder said in a statement, “but also for providers of content and streaming services who work to bring innovative products to consumers across America and around the world.”That sentiment was echoed by Tom Wheeler, the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, in a statement. Federal regulators zeroed in on the fact that the future of the cable business was the Internet and that, if the merger went through, the combined company would control nearly 60 percent of the country’s high-speed broadband customers. It would also control just under 30 percent of pay television service.Regulators concluded that the company would have both the power and the incentive to limit video competition at the very moment new and innovative streaming options were being created, according to senior officials at the Justice Department and the F.C.C.The intense regulatory scrutiny did not stop chatter about a new round of consolidation in the industry. On Friday, bankers representing Time Warner Cable and Charter Communications, which is tied with Cox Communications as the country’s third-largest cable operator, began early talks, according to a person with knowledge of the discussions. Last year, Charter, backed by the billionaire John C. Malone, lost out to Comcast in the bidding for Time Warner Cable, and Mr. Malone said the company would try again if the Comcast takeover fell through.A Charter spokesman declined to comment on Friday.Robert D. Marcus, chief executive of Time Warner Cable, said in an interview that the company was evaluating all its options, including continuing on its own, participating in a new round of deal activity — either as a buyer or a seller — or buying back shares.“All tools are available and at our disposal,” he said. “We will do what is best for our shareholders.”Both Comcast and Time Warner Cable pledged to move forward after devoting 14 months and enormous resources to the failed transaction. For Comcast, related costs were $237 million in 2014. The deal did not include a breakup fee.“Today, we move on,” Brian L. Roberts, Comcast’s chief executive, said in a statement. “Of course, we would have liked to bring our great products to new cities, but we structured this deal so that if the government didn’t agree, we could walk away.”Mr. Marcus said he did not want to dwell on what could have been. “We are 100 percent as an organization focused on the future,” he said. One thing that is certain is that regulators are more focused than ever before on preventing gatekeepers from controlling the Internet.A major shift happened this year with the adoption of new so-called net neutrality rules that defined high-speed service as download speeds of 25 megabits a second or higher, up from four megabits per second. That redefinition — a recognition that people needed faster Internet for activities like watching video — led to a significant change in the size of the market that a combined Comcast-Time Warner Cable would control, to about 57 percent of the country’s broadband Internet service coverage from about 35 percent.Regulators feared that an even bigger Comcast could use its heft to prevent innovation. Their rationale was that the company would have controlled a majority of the country’s broadband pipes that streaming outlets like Netflix, Amazon and others rely on to deliver videos to viewers. At the same time, most customers would have had little choice if they wanted to switch to an alternative Internet service.Comcast, as the country’s largest cable operator, would also have had tremendous bargaining power with television companies. It could have thwarted their attempts to create new streaming services, like those from HBO and CBS, that would have provided a real alternative for consumers who did not want to pay for traditional cable subscriptions.Television executives said that in recent weeks regulators had asked them whether Comcast and Time Warner Cable competed with the television companies to distribute programming to consumers. Some executives said Comcast had already made it difficult for them to make their content available for streaming in its markets.Some prominent companies publicly opposed the deal, including Netflix, the television group Discovery Communications and Dish Network, the satellite television provider.The companies said an enlarged Comcast would have anticompetitive leverage to push around Internet companies and TV networks. Other media companies complained privately and said they were worried that Comcast would retaliate if they spoke out publicly.Comcast vigorously denied the accusations from its rivals and business partners, calling them spurious and noting that they came only after Comcast refused to grant self-interested business requests.Regulators ultimately concluded that forecasting the future was too difficult and that there was no way to create conditions that would cover every activity the new giant might enter. Enforcing any such conditions would also have been challenging.“The regulators can look at things different than we do,” said Michael J. Angelakis, Comcast’s chief financial officer. “But we have to respect their opinion.”Advertisement