By SAM ROBERTSAPRIL 25, 2015
Gilbert Haroche, a co-founder of Liberty Travel, which began by busing vacationers to the Catskills and grew to become a national enterprise that delivered millions of thrifty tourists to more distant locales, died on Thursday in Manhattan. He was 87.The cause was complications of colon cancer, his son Maurice said.In 1951, fresh out of New York University, where he studied engineering and business, Mr. Haroche teamed up with a classmate, Fred Kassner, to open a two-desk, two-telephone agency in Times Square, which they called Liberty Travel. At its peak, in the late 1990s, the company, based in Ramsey, N.J., had 3,200 employees in 300 offices in 45 states.In 2008, Liberty, which was privately held, and its subsidiary, Gogo Worldwide Vacations, which markets packages to other travel agencies, were acquired by Flight Centre, an Australian travel company, for a reported $135 million.The two partners were in their 20s when they began expanding to destinations beyond the Catskills, like Miami, the Caribbean, Mexico and Hawaii. They pioneered discount “deluxe economy packages” that included airfare, hotel, car rentals, transfers and other extras that a traveler typically would have had to book separately.AdvertisementMr. Kassner died in 1998.Maurice Haroche said that Liberty became the fifth-largest travel agency in the United States, including corporate travel agencies, and the largest in leisure travel.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Haroche practiced what he preached. He was a globe-trotting vacationer, typically touring in his yacht. This year, he sold his full-floor, seven-bedroom apartment in the Sherry-Netherland on Fifth Avenue for nearly $70 million.Gilbert Donald Haroche was born in Manhattan on June 21, 1927, the son of Josue Haroche, a cosmetics salesman, and the former Claire Goldstein, a homemaker. He graduated from Stuyvesant High School, served in the Navy from 1944 to 1946 and graduated from New York University in 1950 with a Bachelor of Science degree.AdvertisementBesides his son Maurice, he is survived by his wife, Charlene; his sons Andre and Bob; his daughters Marcella Leone and Kim; and 10 grandchildren.A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2015, on Page A26 of the New York edition with the headline: Gilbert Haroche, 87, Builder of an Economy Travel Empire.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.