AdvertisementSupported byFair GameBy Gretchen MorgensonShould they stay or should they go?The typical investor may not think in such stark terms when she votes for corporate directors at companies’ annual meetings. At most of these confabs, director re-elections are noncontroversial.But that’s not the case this year at Tempur Sealy International, the mattress manufacturer based in Lexington, Ky. When its shareholders convene in Boston on May 8, they will decide whether three of the company’s top officials, including its chief executive, should be ousted. Agitating for change at Tempur Sealy is H Partners, a low-profile New York investment firm that happens to be the company’s largest shareholder. H Partners wants three people overseeing the company to get the boot: Mark A. Sarvary, Tempur’s chief executive since 2008 and a director; and two longer-term directors, Christopher A. Masto and P. Andrews McLane, the chairman of the board. Some of H Partners’ complaints about the Tempur board and its oversight are familiar. The firm contends that the company’s long-tenured directors don’t own enough stock and are not open to giving a large shareholder a seat at the table. But there’s something unusual about the Tempur board that H Partners also finds troubling: Two of the current and long-term directors were named to the board back when it was owned by the private equity firms TA Associates and Friedman Fleischer & Lowe. Usually, when a private equity firm’s investment in a company ends, its representatives do not remain on that company’s board. But Mr. McLane, who has been chairman of the Tempur board since 2002, was a managing director at TA Associates. Although he retired from the firm in 2008, he remains a senior adviser there. Mr. Masto, who also joined the Tempur board in 2002, is co-founder of Friedman Fleischer & Lowe and currently its vice chairman.“It is poor corporate governance for these private equity representatives to remain on the board for so many years after their firms exited,” said Usman Nabi, a partner at H Partners. Naturally, Tempur objects to the criticism that H Partners has leveled against it. The company says that it prizes the feedback it receives from its private equity directors and contends that they are especially valuable in an industry that’s dominated by private equity. Both Simmons and Serta, Tempur’s competitors, are owned by the same private equity firm.In extensive filings encouraging Tempur shareholders to support the existing management and board, the company also said it was actively executing a clear strategy to enhance stockholder value. “We believe H Partners’ demands make its intentions clear: Remove the team overseeing and implementing the current strategy, setting Tempur Sealy adrift while awarding H Partners key roles at your company,” the company said in a letter to shareholders.Still, judging from Tempur’s stock performance, H Partners seems to have struck a chord with other holders. On Feb. 9, H Partners filed a 13-D disclosing its almost 10 percent stake. The stock rose almost 9 percent on the news; since then, it has jumped an additional 14 percent. H Partners is not a quick-hit investor. Its average holding period for investments is six years. The firm, which started buying Tempur shares in late 2012, has $1.5 billion in assets. Initially it was a believer in the company’s management. But as Tempur missed projections and its performance began to lag, the investment firm said that its concerns grew. Urging other shareholders to withhold their support from the chief executive and two other Tempur directors, H Partners has argued that the company’s performance has suffered partly because Mr. Sarvary is not up to the challenges facing the two recently combined bedding companies. After it acquired Sealy in 2013, Tempur suddenly had nine times the factories and six times the number of employees that it had in 2008, H Partners said. Since then, the company has missed many of its financial forecasts, and last year, its operating margins fell to 19.4 percent, from 24.5 percent. During the three years before Feb. 9 of this year, when H Partners disclosed its stake, Tempur Sealy’s stock significantly underperformed the peer group that the company chose as a benchmark for investor returns and executive compensation. The entrenched board, whose members hold few shares of the company’s stock, is at the root of Tempur Sealy’s problems, H Partners says. While corporate governance experts say directors and executives should have a substantial ownership stake in a company, the 20 board members and executive officers own shares amounting to only about 2.4 percent of the stock outstanding. The 68,556 shares owned outright by Mr. Sarvary, for example, amount to 0.1 percent of the stock outstanding, the proxy shows. (These figures do not count option holdings; Mr. Sarvary holds 910,748 exercisable options.) The average director tenure on Tempur’s board is also a problem, H Partners said. Six of the 11 directors have been on the board for longer than 10 years, well above the average tenure among large companies. According to a 2014 report from Spencer Stuart, an executive search firm, average director tenure among companies on the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index was 8.4 years in 2014, down from 8.6 in the previous year. Two-thirds of those boards had an average director tenure of six to 10 years. Neither Mr. Sarvary nor any of the other directors would comment for this column. But the company said in an email that from Aug. 4, 2008, when Mr. Sarvary became chief executive, through Feb. 8 of this year, Tempur’s stock performed more than 4.5 times as well as the S.&P. 500. Stay tuned to see how many Tempur shareholders side with H Partners in its skirmish. In the meantime, it’s good to see that for board members, complacency is not an option. And that’s great for all investors.Advertisement