AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Sue Desmond-Hellmann, chief executive of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Tell me about your early years. Were you in leadership roles?A. I grew up in Reno, Nev., as one of seven kids. It was a magical childhood. My dad owned a drugstore that was just about a mile away from our home, and it was the center of family life. My brothers were delivery boys, and I was a bookkeeper for a while. I wouldn’t say I was a leader early on, but I was a fierce student. I loved everything — science, math, reading — and I loved learning.My parents are really great, and they always had a sense that everybody has something to contribute, and they always thought about how to bring out the best in people. So when I meet people, I’m always thinking, “What am I going to like about you?” I’m not thinking, “How are you going to let me down?” When you went to college, did you have an idea what you wanted to do for a career?I knew when I was very young I wanted to be a physician. The pharmacy at our drugstore was raised a bit so they could look over the whole store, but it also had a side area with a door. My earliest memories that drove my fondness for medicine were seeing my dad at the side door. If something embarrassing needed to be discussed, and if someone just needed a kind word or a piece of advice or was struggling, it wasn’t uncommon for him to say, “Let’s talk over here.” Seeing how much that meant to people and the impact he had on people’s lives meant a lot to me.What were your first experiences managing people?When I was a chief resident. There’s a saying in medicine: “See one, do one, teach one.” Living the “teach one” part of it was the most important management lesson I learned. You have to be supportive enough so that someone feels capable, enabled and powerful, but you also have their back so that things don’t go wrong.The stakes are so high in medicine, so that part of managing is stark. There’s a sweet spot in peak performance where you’re bringing all your intellect, assets and capabilities to the task, and you’re not paralyzed by the challenge. I think that’s what great management is all about — making sure people are right in that sweet spot, and not feeling incapable because they’re scared.What are some other leadership lessons you’ve learned over the years?One is to be yourself. Think about the attributes you have and use them as an asset to drive your mission. And if the company needs something different, you still show up as you and then find somebody who’s better than you at those things to help you.As I was getting promotions and being asked to do bigger things, I sometimes thought, “Any minute now I’ll figure out the person I need to be to do this job.” I then recognized that the person was me and that I would use my assets to the best of my ability. It sounds so simple, but that was really powerful.The other thing I learned is the importance of being predictable and reliable, and that gets to values. When you have shared values and you know where you’re going, things just become easier. People don’t have that burden of always thinking, “I wonder what he would do or she would do.” It’s pretty clear.This is your first C.E.O. role. Any small moments when you realized the impact of your voice was bigger than you had expected?I have definitely experienced those little moments. I’m intensely interested in what people do. I love learning. And so if you’re presenting to me in a meeting, I’m locked in. I’ve read the material you gave me, and I want to learn something, so I’m going to ask you questions.I heard somebody’s voice quiver in a meeting at the foundation, and I started thinking like a doctor, wondering if they had a sore throat or a tremor. I wasn’t thinking of the most obvious reason, which is that they were terrified of me. So I made sure people in the company knew that I ask questions because I’m interested, not because I think there’s something wrong.People have also asked me about simple preferences. I like drinking tea, but now I am surrounded by tea. It’s endearing and lovely, and people are so kind. But my husband warns me about what he calls “C.E.O. disease,” which means that life revolves around you. It’s extremely important to me that that not be the case.How do you hire? I would ask you why you’re interested in the role. How has your career path brought you to this point? Where have you been, and where are you going? I want to hear about how you lead and manage, and I want examples. I want to understand how you think about managing people who are struggling, and how you bring out their best.I also like to have an experience with a candidate that’s not a formal interview. I’ll meet them in the lobby, and have a meal or a coffee. You learn a lot about someone by watching how they treat others. Respect for others is the essence of teamwork and collaboration.Finally, I want to know about people’s track records. What did you accomplish in different roles? What about disappointments? Innovation is filled with failures, and when people describe their experiences, I get a sense of their ability to get things done with a team, but also their resilience. If you thought the answer was going to be yes and it was no, how did you deal with it?If you could ask somebody only one or two questions in a job interview, what would they be?What matters most to you? And how do you make that happen?Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about the challenges of leading and managing. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice.Advertisement