
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

OCT. 19, 2015
It is impossible to watch a sports event these days without being inundated with advertisements for the rival fantasy sports companies DraftKings and FanDuel. As Richard Sandomir reported in The New York Times, they have bought nearly $200 million in television commercials since August, outspending longtime sports advertisers like pizza chains and beer brands.For an industry that was hardly noticed five years ago, it has now become a multibillion dollar operation with investors like Robert K. Kraft, owner of the New England Patriots, and Jerry Jones, owner of the Dallas Cowboys, along with Major League Baseball and television networks NBC and Fox.There may be no better sign that a business has hit the big time than when it is being investigated by the Justice Department for possible wrongdoing.First, an employee of DraftKings acknowledged that he might have used inside information from the company about how fantasy sports players were constructing their teams to win $350,000 in a contest run by FanDuel. Since then, it has emerged that a number of leading winners in the contests are employees of the two companies, raising fairness questions when these contests are promoted endlessly in advertisements with breathless references to the millions of dollars available to ordinary players.AdvertisementSince then, The New York Times reported that the Federal Bureau of Investigation has interviewed some prominent players in the contests, including questions about whether deposits have been accepted from people in states that outlaw paying to join fantasy sports. And last week came a report in The Times that a grand jury subpoena was issued to the Fantasy Sports Trade Association, an industry lobbying organization, as part of an investigation being conducted by the United States attorney’s office in Tampa, Fla.AdvertisementThe government is seeking the minutes of board meetings, according to two people who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the case publicly.In any preliminary investigation, it is not clear what potential violations might be the focus of the inquiry. Federal gambling statutes are a hodgepodge, relying mostly on state laws in defining the offense. There is no single definition of what constitutes “gambling” or a “wager,” and it should come as no surprise that the states are all over the map in identifying what types of betting are permissible or illegal.Daily fantasy sports contests fall into a gray area of the law because they involve a mix of skill — selecting the players for the team — and chance. So whether they are illegal depends on how broadly state laws prohibiting certain forms of gambling are interpreted.Fantasy sports are specifically exempted from the definition of a “bet or wager” in the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act, which prohibits accepting payments for gambling that occurs over the Internet when it would be illegal under federal or state law in the place where it was made. The statute was attached at the last minute as a rider to port-security legislation in 2006, aiming at online foreign poker sites that were quickly gaining popularity.The law does not define what constitutes gambling, instead targeting the use of payment systems, like credit cards or electronic fund transfers, used to finance the games. The exemption for fantasy sports does not legalize them, only that using banks and electronic payments to participate in a game does not run afoul of this particular law.And in an interesting twist, the statute also exempts securities transactions, perhaps showing that Wall Street trading is not really all that far from Las Vegas casinos.Another federal law that takes aim at gambling is the Wire Act, adopted in 1961 at the urging of then-Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy as a means to fight the bookmaking operations of crime syndicates, such as the Mafia. It prohibits using a “wire communication facility” for the transmission of bets or wagers “on any sporting event or contest.” The statute has a safe harbor allowing a bet if it was legal both where it was placed and received, which means state law can determine whether there was a violation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Another statute focusing on organized crime’s involvement in betting is the Illegal Gambling Business Act, adopted in 1970. The law makes it a crime to operate an “illegal gambling business” that involves at least five people, and is in operation for more than 30 days or has gross revenue of $2,000 a day. The statute is broader than the Wire Act by reaching any form of gambling, and like other federal laws, it relies on state law to determine whether the wager was illegal.AdvertisementOther laws dependent on state gambling laws to prove a federal offense include the Travel Act and the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, better known as Rico.The fantasy sports companies could come within the federal gambling statutes if their operations run afoul of a state law. Participating in daily fantasy contests is banned in five states: Arizona, Iowa, Louisiana, Montana, and Washington. Last Friday, the Nevada attorney general issued a memorandum to the Gaming Control Board declaring that daily fantasy sports “constitute gambling games, sports pools, and/or lotteries,” and therefore the companies are subject to the licensing requirements under state law. Of course, Nevada has a stake in limiting competition for the sports books at its casinos, a major source of revenue for them.Offering participation in a daily fantasy contest to residents of states that view it as gambling does not necessarily mean the companies are violating state law. But the F.B.I. may be trying to build a case by looking at where the participants are coming from to see if the states prohibit them from doing so.The possible use of confidential information by employees of FanDuel and DraftKings for their own participation in contests looks like insider trading because it involves taking information that belongs to the corporation and misusing it for personal gain. But the insider trading laws apply only to transactions in securities and commodities, which leaves out daily fantasy sports.The mail fraud statute, which was first enacted in the 19th century to combat illegal lotteries that sprang up after the Civil War, could be used, along with the wire fraud provision, to target misuse of confidential information. The victims would be other daily fantasy sports players who were misled into believing that competitors did not have access to information that would influence who wins the prize for accumulating the most points.The challenge in pursuing this type of fraud case is that winning is dependent on what the actual athletes do in a game, not just who is selected. So if many players are picking Tom Brady for their teams, information about that could be almost meaningless to the contest’s outcome if he throws six touchdowns with no interceptions, making it hard to prove the information was material.Another problem with pursuing this type of violation is that the other players may not believe they were actually victimized. In an op-ed article in The Times, Mark St. Amant said about claims of misuse of information, “But the truth is, I don’t care. And I doubt most players do, either.” It is tough to prove fraud when those who appear to be defrauded don’t actually think they were misled.Daily fantasy sports falls into a crevice in the federal laws on illegal gambling. The only time Congress directly addressed the contests was the exemption in the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act. But that was when it was little more than a hobby for some die-hard sports fans, not the advertising sensation it has become.The question is whether the federal government will step in to establish uniform rules for an area that has been largely unregulated, or continue to rely on a mélange of state laws defining what constitutes gambling that could make it difficult for the fantasy sports companies to stay within the law.Advertisement We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »