AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — Since its inception, TPG has been best known for the leveraged buyouts of prominent companies including Continental Airlines, Neiman Marcus and a now-bankrupt Texas utility that was a big player in the energy sector.But perhaps the brightest spot in its ever-growing constellation of investment vehicles is a relatively low-profile fund that has invested in a diverse array of firms: a cellphone tower operator in Myanmar, a Brazilian airline led by the founder of JetBlue, and the Silicon Valley darlings Uber and Airbnb.Now that fund, TPG Growth, is preparing to announce on Monday that it has raised $3 billion for its latest pool of capital, as the firm and its rivals continue to move away from their roots and expand their offerings for the big institutions and wealthy families that are their investors.“We’re taking the resources of the whole firm and are delivering them in a different way,” William E. McGlashan Jr., who leads the fund, said in an interview. The rise of the fund is notable because it comes at a time when traditional big private equity firms have adapted and refocused in response to a decline in the leveraged buyouts that once defined their business. The Blackstone Group’s biggest business is its real estate arm, while Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, Apollo Global Management and others have pushed into more varied offerings.TPG’s new approach is much different from the leveraged buyouts that brought the firm acclaim — and, later, pain as the credit boom that propelled a surge in private equity megadeals deflated. TPG’s reputation took huge hits that it has sought to answer for in the last six years, including the failure of the Texas power utility TXU and the fire sale of the lender Washington Mutual.Over all, TPG’s private equity funds of late have posted some disappointing returns, with the firm’s sixth buyout fund returning about 11.7 percent as of Sept. 30, according to the Washington State Investment Board. By contrast, TPG Growth’s second fund has featured a return of 29 percent. (The firm is dealing with other headaches as well, including dueling lawsuits with its former spokesman over allegations of securities rules violations.) Not that TPG, whose first major deal was the takeover of Continental Airlines in 1993, will back away from buyouts. The firm is in the midst of raising its latest private equity fund, though executives declined to comment on that process.But James Coulter, a TPG co-founder, said that the firm had plenty of room to offer different types of investments to its investors, known in the industry as limited partners.“The market has grown up in a way that adding value across different types of investments is more important,” he said.Leading TPG Growth is Mr. McGlashan, who has been with TPG for 11 years and brought in Bono and the Edge of U2  as investors in the guitar maker Fender. He joined the firm after stints as both a venture capitalist and an entrepreneur, including at a health supplements company.Mr. McGlashan notes that the firm’s flagging venture capital unit had no special quality that set it apart from its scores of competitors. But what such a business could do was marshal the entire firm’s resources and pursue interesting deals that didn’t make sense for the main leveraged buyout fund.What arose was TPG Growth, whose mandate stretches from traditional investments for control of companies to taking minority stakes and seats on corporate boards. The common thread was finding a business with significant prospects for growth.While other investment firms have created growth funds of their own, TPG has one committee oversee all of the firm’s investments. That also means letting TPG Growth use the firm’s resources, from industry deal teams to various advisers.“Because we’re embedded within this bigger ecosystem, I have a tool kit that operates in many different sectors,” Mr. McGlashan said.For instance, TPG Growth helped the online survey company SurveyMonkey buy a rival business in a complex deal that no other investor would touch. “They have the perspective of, ‘We’ll get in there, and we’ll do real work,’ ” said Dave Goldberg, the chief executive of SurveyMonkey.Of special interest to Mr. McGlashan are investments involving developing countries. He traveled extensively as a child, and — unusual for a rising private equity executive in the West — he moved his family to Mumbai for a year in 2013 to be closer to TPG’s deal team there. That time helped lead to TPG Growth’s backing of Apollo Towers, a new cellphone tower operator in Myanmar that represents the first investment by a major Western private equity firm in that country. And then there is STX, which opened for business last year with an ambitious goal: fill in the gap between huge blockbusters and independent productions in Hollywood while also tapping into the Chinese movie market. Robert Simonds Jr., the longtime movie producer who runs the studio, said the venture arose from brainstorming sessions with his Yale classmate, Mr. McGlashan. “They put us in a place that I can’t imagine would have happened if they hadn’t been involved,” Mr. Simonds said in a telephone interview from China. “A huge part of why these people had joined the company is because we looked like a start-up, but were also tied at the hip with McGlashan, and his team gave us credibility.”Perhaps the most interesting investments for TPG Growth are its early forays into now-prominent start-ups in Silicon Valley. The fund took part in a $258 million investment round in Uber that valued the car-ride service at about $3.5 billion — far less than the roughly $40 billion valuation it now commands. (The firm actually invested its own money in Uber at a slightly lower $2.75 billion value.) And it participated in an investment in Airbnb that valued the home-rental start-up at $10 billion.“Their peers thought TPG was crazy when they were doing the Uber deal,” said Mr. Goldberg of SurveyMonkey, who is also an investor in TPG. “I think they’ve gotten credit for being the first in their peer group.”Other investors have also appeared pleased with the results of TPG Growth and its wide-ranging approach.“They’re exposing you to everything from the most interesting tech companies to new emerging-market opportunities — in one fund, all while protecting their downside and protecting you,” said Paul Wachter, the chief executive of Main Street Advisors and an investor in TPG Growth.Advertisement