AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week.The Copyright Royalty Board, a panel of three federal judges in Washington, will begin hearings on Monday on royalty rates for webcasting and Internet radio services like Pandora and iHeartRadio for the next five years. The case is being closely watched in the music industry, where streaming has become increasingly popular but artists have complained about low earnings from online outlets.The judges’ decision will be particularly consequential for Pandora, which now pays almost half its revenue to license recordings. The music industry supports an increased rate, while Pandora and others including iHeartMedia — the broadcaster formerly known as Clear Channel, which operates iHeartRadio — want a lower rate. The judges’ decision is expected by December. —Ben SisarioApple’s explosive sales in China are continuing to be the main driver of its financial growth. When Apple discloses its earnings for its second quarter on Monday, analysts predict the company will report selling roughly 60 million iPhones, thanks in large part to the Chinese New Year holiday in February. Apple’s big-screen iPhones have been especially popular in China, and the company says it is only a matter of time until most of Apple’s sales come from that region. —Brian X. ChenInvestors will be focusing on international operations when two carmakers, Ford Motor and Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, report first-quarter earnings this week. Both companies are expected to post good results in the booming United States market. But Ford, which reports on Tuesday, has been investing heavily in China to increase production and sales there, while trying to return its troubled European operations to profitability.Fiat Chrysler, which releases earnings on Wednesday, is also struggling in Europe, where the industry has been in steady decline, and is opening factories in Brazil and China to build Jeep sport utility vehicles for sale in global markets. —Bill VlasicEuropean bank earnings season shifts into high gear this week as a half-dozen of Europe’s largest lenders report their first-quarter results. The Spanish lender Santander, the French bank BNP Paribas and the British lenders Barclays, Lloyds Banking Group, the Royal Bank of Scotland and Standard Chartered are all scheduled to announce the results of their operations. Operating conditions have been generally positive for banks in the first quarter, and lenders are getting past conduct issues that have dogged previous results. —Chad BrayLufthansa, the German flag carrier, will hold its annual shareholders meeting in Hamburg on Wednesday, barely a month after a co-pilot for the group’s Germanwings subsidiary was found to have deliberately crashed his plane into the French Alps — killing himself and 149 others, and throwing the company into perhaps the worst crisis of its 60-year history.Presiding over the meeting will be Carsten Spohr, Lufthansa’s chief executive, who took the helm a year ago with a mandate to reduce costs sharply in the face of mounting competitive pressure and tense relations with pilots, who have carried out a series of costly strikes. —Nicola ClarkSeveral of the world’s largest oil companies will report earnings for the first quarter. BP and Total of France announce results on Tuesday. They will be followed by ENI of Italy on Wednesday and Royal Dutch Shell and Exxon Mobil on Thursday.Analysts are forecasting a sharp drop in earnings compared with a year earlier because oil prices are about 50 percent below last year’s levels and natural gas prices in the United States are also low. Bernstein Research in London forecasts that BP’s earnings will fall by 62 percent, to $1.2 billion, and Royal Dutch Shell’s net income will be down 49 percent, to $2.3 billion.The one bright spot for the major oil companies has been refining, where strong demand, low oil prices and cost-cutting have improved profitability, even at hard-pressed European refiners. At companies like Total and Shell, a good refining performance is likely to have partly cushioned the impact of the oil price drop. —Stanley ReedElon Musk, Tesla’s chief executive, is expected to announce two new battery products at a news event Thursday evening in Los Angeles. One battery will be for home use, and the other will be for utility companies. By storing energy generated by solar panels, the batteries may solve one of the biggest problems of the emerging boom in solar use — finding a way to use power when the sun is not shining. —Farhad ManjooBNP Paribas, the largest French bank, is scheduled to face formal sentencing on Friday for having processed dollar transactions on behalf of countries including Sudan and Iran, in violation of sanctions imposed by Washington. The bank pleaded guilty last year to criminal charges in the case and agreed to pay $8.9 billion in penalties. The sentencing in a federal court comes after the bank this month won a Labor Department waiver that allows it to continue operating asset management businesses in the United States. —David JollyOn Saturday, more than 40,000 Berkshire Hathaway shareholders will descend on Omaha for the annual meeting of the company, which is celebrating its 50th anniversary. The gathering is known as Woodstock for Capitalists. Warren E. Buffett, Berkshire’s chairman and chief executive, and Charles T. Munger, its vice chairman, take questions for more than six hours, and their answers often make news.Likely hot topics include the company’s recent investment in Kraft, its stakes in IBM and Coca-Cola, the debate around companies’ buying back their own shares and, a perennial favorite, succession planning. —Andrew Ross SorkinAdvertisement