

      By HIROKO TABUCHI and 
    
JOSH KATZ

APRIL 26, 2015

What’s in or out: an analysis of six billion Google searches shows how clothing styles spread from state to state.
Related Article
Jogger pants burst out of the gym and onto the streets in a big way last year, and Google’s data shows interest percolating along both the East and West coasts, with early blips spotted in Oregon, home to Nike, maker or some of the most popular jogger pant styles. Akin to jeans for millennials, the pants  have gone national, with  jeans stalwarts like Gap and Levi’s jumping on the bandwagon.In mid-2013, Jason Bolin, a designer in Jackson, Miss., featured jumpsuits and wide-legged palazzo pants in a series of fashion shows. Whether by chance or circumstance, searches for both spiked there before spreading. (Beyoncé’s sister, Solange Knowles, and Kim Kardashian have also sported jumpsuits.) And of course, the film “American Hustle” dazzled viewers with 1970s styles, particularly a leopard-print palazzo pant set worn by Jennifer Lawrence.A craze for puffy, princess-style tulle skirts swept weddings and baby showers across Utah. “It has something to do with our romantic, conservative culture,” Sherene McClellan, who runs Tulle Skirt Shop, an Etsy store based in Mount Pleasant, Utah. “If we have a chance to steer our girls to being sweet and romantic rather than sultry and sexy, that’s going to happen.”The peplum dress has also fallen off the radar on runways and in the streets.  “People have worn it and they’ve enjoyed it and now they’re ready to move on,” said Lisa Green of Google.While search patterns this year may suggest that skinny jeans have lost their appeal, the data also could indicate that the skinny silhouette has become so ubiquitous a standard that shoppers no longer define them as such. Besides, skinny “is still the shape of choice for hipsters globally,” Ms. Sideri said.Retro bathing suits, mainly higher-waisted two-piece styles, have upstaged string bikinis. Said Ellen Sideri,  chief executive of ESP Trendlab: “The string was more Brigitte Bardot in the ’60s. Spring 2015 is more about the ’50s and ’70s.”Source: GoogleMethodology: Google analyzed six billion queries related to the apparel category from January 2012 to February 2015. The data was analyzed by Olivier Zimmer of Google, a fashion data scientist, and Yarden Horwitz, a fashion brand strategist. Search data is not comparable between trends.Advertisement