By BEN SISARIOAPRIL 26, 2015
Jay Z took to Twitter on Sunday to defend his new streaming music service Tidal, after news reports suggested that the app was slipping into early oblivion.In more than a dozen messages posted in rapid succession, Jay Z, the rap star and entertainment mogul, defended Tidal’s performance. “Tidal is doing just fine,” he wrote, noting that the company has “over 770,000” subscribers. “We have been in business for less than one month.”Jay Z paid $56 million for Tidal’s parent, the Swedish technology company Aspiro. Aspiro reported that it had 500,000 subscribers at the end of 2014 for its music services, which are now available in more than 30 countries.With a star-studded but awkward announcement in March, Jay Z positioned Tidal as an artist-friendly outlet for exclusive content, and said that the company would be majority-owned by artists. Among the initial group of co-owners were Madonna, Kanye West, Beyoncé, Daft Punk, Jack White and Alicia Keys.AdvertisementThe announcement drew complaints from some other artists, among them the band Mumford & Sons, whose members mocked Tidal’s celebrity backers as “plutocrats” in an interview with The Daily Beast.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last week, Tidal was the subject of more bad publicity when technology bloggers noticed that it had fallen below 700 in Apple’s app store rankings. Just days before, the company had announced that it was replacing its chief executive and had also laid off about a dozen people, as part of what the company said was a planned reduction.AdvertisementThe competition for music apps is intense, with players like Spotify, Rhapsody and Rdio steadily building audiences for years, and Apple reportedly ready to introduce its own streaming service as early as June.In his tweets, Jay Z accused unnamed companies of “spending millions on a smear campaign” against Tidal. He defended its business model, noting its use of video, exclusive content and experiments like giving fans early access to concert tickets. But he also asked for patience.“We are here for the long haul,” he wrote. “Please give us a chance to grow & get better.”A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Music Service Isn’t Troubled, Jay Z Says.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.