By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINAPRIL 26, 2015
For the legal profession, the trial of three lawyers charged with concealing Dewey & LeBoeuf’s failing financial situation from investors in the once mighty New York law firm may well be the most closely watched trial in years.But the trial, which begins jury selection in State Supreme Court in Manhattan on Monday, will not be a fast-paced, riveting episode.Rather the trial of the three men — Steven Davis, Dewey’s former chairman; Stephen DiCarmine, the firm’s former executive director; and Joel Sanders, the former chief financial officer — promises to be a long legal slog with the proceedings expected to last about six months, meaning a verdict may not be reached until after Labor Day.The process of seating a jury could itself take several weeks. The judge presiding over the case, Justice Robert M. Stolz, has tentatively scheduled opening statements in the case to begin on May 26, leaving the lawyers plenty of time to find jurors who can make the commitment to a long trial.AdvertisementJury selection is beginning a little more than a year after Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, unsealed a lengthy indictment against the lawyers and a former junior employee of the law firm, which once employed 1,300 lawyers and whose historical roots stretched back a century. Mr. Vance charged the men with orchestrating a scheme to conceal Dewey’s poor finances from lenders and creditors, including insurers that invested in a debt offering to raise about $150 million. Dewey & LeBoeuf collapsed in bankruptcy in May 2012.AdvertisementThe three former executives of the firm are each charged with dozens of criminal counts and could spend years in prison if convicted. It is one of the rare times that the top managers of a big United States law firm have been criminally charged.The trial of the fourth former Dewey employee, Zachary Warren, who worked as a client relations manager at the firm and is now a lawyer himself, is scheduled to begin after the trial of Mr. Davis, Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders is completed.The trial of the Dewey executives will be one of the most prominent cases involving white-collar defendants brought by Mr. Vance’s office. The trial will be getting underway as another state court jury enters its third day of deliberations in the criminal case against Sergey Aleynikov, a former Goldman Sachs programmer who was charged by Mr. Vance’s office with stealing some of the Wall Street bank’s high-frequency trading code. The trial of Mr. Aleynikov has been difficult at times for Mr. Vance’s office, as the judge has issued a number of unfavorable rulings for the prosecution.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Friday, after the jury completed its second day of deliberation, Justice Daniel P. Conviser indicated he still had reservations about some elements of the charges filed against Mr. Aleynikov and whether prosecutors had proved their case. If the jury finds Mr. Aleynikov not guilty or Justice Conviser decides to set aside a guilty verdict by the jury — something that seldom happens — it could raise the stakes for Mr. Vance’s team in the trial of the Dewey lawyers.Once testimony in the Dewey trial begins, prosecutors are expected to put on the stand some of the seven former employees of the law firm who have already pleaded guilty and agreed to cooperate with the investigation. The employees, most of whom once worked in Dewey’s finance and accounting departments, are expected to testify about the background to the potentially incriminating emails sent by the defendants that were cited in the indictment.Representatives for some of the insurers that invested in Dewey’s bond offering also are likely to testify as well, said several people briefed on the matter but not authorized to speak publicly because prosecutors have not publicly announced the witnesses.A major defense strategy for the defendants will be to argue that they did not intend to deceive investors and instead were doing everything possible to prevent the collapse of the once mighty law firm, whose revenues plummeted as work on big ticket corporate mergers dried up during the financial crisis. The defendants will also argue that the firm intended to pay all the investors back.In a ruling on March 31, Justice Stolz said he would permit the defendants to introduce evidence that “they acted in a good faith belief that Dewey would be able to right itself and pay its debts and that, but for the unexpected departure of income-producing partners and the publicity of the investigation, it would have.”It is possible the trial could also produce some surprises, such as revealing the identities of the lawyers at Dewey who went to prosecutors to complain about the actions of the defendants. It has been unclear precisely how the investigation that resulted in the charges against the defendants began.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Trial of Ex-Dewey Lawyers Is Expected to Be Lengthy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.