AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.03 percent.The rate on the six-month issue was 0.09 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $300 million of debt securities. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $227.6 million of turnpike revenue bonds. Competitive.Polk County, Iowa, $73.9 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYHumble Independent School District, Tex., $218.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Palm Beach County, Fla., $56.8 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYMemphis, $65.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Pennsylvania Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $94.9 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKBrookhaven, N.Y., $83.6 million of debt securities. Roosevelt & Cross.Build New York City, $50 million of Ethical Culture Fieldston School project revenue bonds. Bank of America.Connecticut Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $50 million of Hartford Health revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Genesee County, Mich., $60 million of water supply system revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Grossmont Healthcare District, Calif., $209 million of general obligation bonds. Goldman Sachs.Illinois Housing Development Authority, $102 million of multifamily housing revenue floating rate notes. Goldman Sachs.Kennewick, Wash., School District, $116.8 million of general obligation and refinancing bonds. D. A. Davidson.Maine Municipal Bond Bank, $68.2 million of refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Miami-Dade County School Board, Fla., $122.3 million of certificates of participation. J. P. Morgan Securities.Nebraska Public Power Generation Agency, $169 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.University System of New Hampshire, $110 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York Dormitory Authority, $275.4 million of State University of New York facilities revenue bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.New York Dormitory Authority, $68.9 million of Orange Regional Medical Center obligated group revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Northwest Independent School District, Tex., $137.6 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. BOSC.Tallahassee, Fla., $102 million of health facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Tennessee Housing Development Agency, $162.3 million of housing finance program bonds. RBC Capital Markets.University of Maryland Medical System, $75.9 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.West Virginia Housing Development Fund, $51 million of housing finance bonds. Raymond James & Associates.Advertisement