
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

APRIL 26, 2015
Natalia Shuman  is senior vice president and general manager of the Europe/Middle East/Africa and Asia-Pacific regions for Kelly Services, the recruitment consultancy. She is based in Singapore.Q. Do you remember your first job?A. I was 19, still at university in St. Petersburg studying economics and finance. My father had passed away and I had to make money on my own to somehow support my family. I joined a tiny recruitment firm on a part-time basis and I was given significant responsibility early on to hire and manage people who were much older than I was.It was 1993 and the Soviet Union had just broken up and many large Western companies like Coca-Cola, McDonalds, Unilever and Philip Morris were coming to Russia looking to build their presence and recruit local staff. My first job was to find local talent and match them with jobs in a foreign company.Q. What do you remember of these early days?A. Up until that time in the Soviet Union, we’d been operating as a zoo. What I mean is that we all got fed, and provided with accommodation and medical care. When I entered university, I pretty much knew what salary I would have two years after graduation, five years after and what kind of career progression I would have. It was all based on the university an individual attended. Everything was planned for me; the government would give me a flat, a car, and a set monthly salary.AdvertisementAnd then suddenly in 1991-1992 everything came down, and from a zoo it became a jungle. We had to fight pretty much for everything. But I was lucky because my recruitment firm exposed me to Western culture immediately and it widened my perspective. It was a fascinating experience. For example, at the time, Russian people were not used to smiling. I guess it was quite a gloomy, cold environment [laughs], so our candidates always looked very serious and Westerners thought they were unfriendly, negative or rude. So I had to educate candidates on how to smile during an interview.AdvertisementQ. In 2000 you moved to New York to open a Wall Street office for Kelly Services. Was that a cultural shock?A. Kelly Services had acquired the St. Petersburg agency that I initially worked for. They asked me to open an office in Moscow, and I grew it to over 80 people. I had a big team, an assistant, a driver, and I was well known in the market. But when I went to New York, I had to start from zero again. It was hard at the beginning, particularly trying to understand the American psyche. In Russia, at least when I was growing up, it was all about the team and it was even hard for me to say “I.” In the U.S. it was all about “I” and how can “I” realize my potential and my dreams. That attitude was very foreign to me. And, of course, the authoritative management style that I’d learned in Russia didn’t work very well in the U.S.Q. So what are the early lessons you learned?A. When I arrived in New York, I was pretty confident about myself and thought I had achieved a lot, knew a lot and was on top of the world. But I went quickly crashing back down to earth when I realized there is a lot to learn. The developed country was so different from the emerging market. The major lesson I quickly learned is that I needed to reinvent myself. I was fortunate that many people were willing to help me.One of my best moves was to apply for an executive M.B.A. program at Columbia. I thought this was necessary in order for me to progress in my career internationally. I needed to understand the basics of management in the Western world. To be honest, I feel I learned more from the other students in the program than I did from the professors. The students were already accomplished managers in different industries from all over the world. I would highly recommend this experience to young executives.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. Now that you head two regions, you must travel a lot. How do you balance everything?A.  Whenever I can, I take my husband and my 8-year-old daughter with me. With the move to Asia, my husband chose to semi-retire from Wall Street and now has a lot of flexibility work-wise, so in the summer, during my daughter’s school break, we base ourselves in Switzerland and my travel time is minimized.For me, it’s all about harmonizing and integrating both professional and personal lives together. I don’t separate my family and my work. I often discuss my business issues at home with my husband at the dinner table, and my daughter knows all my bosses and my team members by name. Whenever I can, I bring her into the office so she sees where I work and what I do.It wasn’t always like this. My husband and I exchanged roles: When we met in New York, he was working in investment banking and he used to travel intensely, every other week. When our daughter was born, I was able to work from my home office and I did that for about four years.Q. Not every company is comfortable with managers’ working from home. How did you persuade your company to let you do it?AdvertisementA. I think whenever an employee wants to work from home, he or she has to think about the value proposition for the employer. At the time, I was responsible for one of Kelly’s biggest customers based in New Jersey, not far away from where I lived. So I argued that I would be closer to them and able to cater to their needs much faster. Besides, this was a global role and, sometimes, I had to travel. My residence was close to the airport with direct flights to Europe and Asia and I would save the company’s travel costs. I was the first employee in this type of senior role that Kelly allowed to be home-based. And today, there are 40 people in similar positions doing the same.Q. You have 20 years of experience as a manager. Has your style of management changed over this time?A. Early on, I would set very high standards for my team, maybe too high, and people would be discouraged and give up before they reached success. With time, I’ve learned to translate my high standards into more reachable milestones that are more achievable.Q. As a woman, have you experienced any constraints in your career?A. No. But I’ve certainly observed some other women struggling with that, even today — more in Europe than in Asia. Here in Asia, because of the economic growth, women can move into bigger positions if they have initiative and ambition; there are more possibilities offered to them because of that rapid growth. Not so much in Europe: Its slower growth and more traditional business model still make it very much a man’s world.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »