AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberRefinery29, a fashion and lifestyle media company, will announce on Tuesday that it has closed a $50 million round of financing from Scripps Networks Interactive and the advertising giant WPP. The investment values the company at about $300 million, according to a person with knowledge of the deal, and brings its total financing to $80 million.The company, based in New York City, said it would use the new financing to build its brand by expanding internationally. It also said it would invest in video and entertainment, and in improving its presence on mobile devices and in social media.“Taking the brand global is a big, big focus,” said Justin Stefano, co-founder and co-chief executive of Refinery29.“It wasn’t that we needed it to fund our operations,” Mr. Stefano added. “It was a question of how quickly we could achieve what we wanted to achieve.”Refinery29 is the latest digital media company to attract significant financing. Last year, Vox Media, a publisher whose sites include SB Nation and The Verge, closed a $46.5 million round of financing, valuing the company at about $400 million. And in August, BuzzFeed, the news and entertainment site, raised $50 million in new funding, valuing it at roughly $850 million.Since Refinery29 was founded in 2005 as a discovery site for independent designers, it has grown rapidly, becoming a hub for the fashion world. More recently, the company has made a push into more serious news, with coverage of technology, politics and culture. On Monday, for instance, the site had a report on the funeral in Baltimore for Freddie Gray, a 25-year-old whose death on April 19 after an encounter with police touched off a week of protests.Refinery29, also known as R29, is regarded as a model for native advertising, which appears seamlessly beside posts on makeup and beauty. The company said 83 percent of its revenue in 2014 — more than $50 million — was tied to native advertising. The site grew to 15.9 million unique visitors in the United States in March, from 6.7 million in the same period last year, according to comScore. Refinery29 said its internal Google analytics showed traffic of about 25 million monthly unique visitors globally.On Wednesday, Refinery29 will host its first NewFront presentation, during which it plans to showcase original content, including tutorials, documentaries and scripted series.The NewFronts, or new upfronts, are an annual series of presentations where some of the biggest Internet companies and publishers showcase their original programming to attract digital advertising dollars.Advertisement