AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersInitial tests have found five probable new cases of the rapidly spreading avian influenza on commercial poultry sites in Iowa, affecting an estimated six million birds, state and federal agriculture officials said on Monday.Additional tests are pending to confirm the highly pathogenic H5N2, agency officials said. Positive results would push the outbreak’s national tally to more than 15.1 million affected birds from flocks in 13 states.“This is a big deal,” said Iowa’s secretary of agriculture, Bill Northey. “Going forward, the question is, are we done? Or does this mean more birds as we go forward?”Iowa officials have quarantined the five farm sites, Mr. Northey said. Positive test results would mean that more than 9.5 million birds in Iowa have been affected by the virus.Iowa farms, on average, house an estimated 60 million egg-laying hens, he said.Also on Monday, federal agriculture officials confirmed that a Wisconsin turkey farm with more than a million birds had tested positive for the virus. More than 1.9 million commercial production chickens and turkeys in Wisconsin have been affected by H5N2, state and federal officials have said.The potential economic cost of the outbreak is unclear. The number of birds affected by the outbreak so far represents a fraction of the United States commercial flock. Poultry processors slaughtered nearly 8.7 billion chickens in 2014 and about 237 million turkeys, according Agriculture Department data.Hormel Foods, based in Minnesota, said last week that avian influenza might drag its 2015 fiscal year earnings toward the lower end of forecasts. More than two dozen of the poultry suppliers for Hormel’s Jennie-O Turkey Store unit have been hit by the outbreak. Minnesota is the largest turkey-producing state in the country.Last week, Mexico, the biggest buyer of United States chicken, halted imports of live birds and eggs from Iowa.In the latest outbreak in Iowa, initial positive tests for H5 avian influenza viruses were found on a commercial egg-laying farm with an estimated 1.7 million birds in Sioux County; a 250,000-pullet farm in Osceola County; and in two commercial egg-laying operations in O’Brien County with a total of 338,000 birds, the Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship said.Mr. Northey said a fifth egg-laying farm in Sioux County with 3.7 million chickens was identified on Monday as probably infected.Last week, officials in Iowa said that a lethal strain of bird flu had been found in hens at an egg-laying facility near the city of Harris.Two bird flu strains have been discovered in the United States this year. The H5N2 strain is in Arkansas, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, North Dakota, Oregon, South Dakota, Washington and Wisconsin. The H5N8 strain has been identified in California and also in Idaho, Agriculture Department data showed.The virus has not been reported in the country’s leading chicken-meat producing states in the South, which include Georgia, Arkansas, Alabama, Mississippi and North Carolina. The virus can kill nearly an entire infected flock within 48 hours. Millions of turkeys and chickens are in quarantine waiting to be culled, and large flocks have already been destroyed.In the avian influenza outbreak of 1983 to 1984 in the Northeast, the largest in American history, about 17 million birds were culled.Advertisement