By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDAPRIL 27, 2015
Shares of DuPont leapt on Monday after an influential shareholder advisory firm backed efforts by the activist investor Nelson Peltz to win seats on the industrial conglomerate’s board.DuPont’s stock was up more than 4.5 percent by midafternoon, to $74.79, after Institutional Shareholder Services recommended that investors elect two of his four nominees, including Mr. Peltz, instead of two of the company’s directors.The backing of I.S.S., the biggest proxy advisory firm, is a big win for Mr. Peltz and his Trian Fund Management as they engage in a bitter fight over the board of the company. The battle is one of the biggest this year between an activist shareholder and a stalwart of corporate America, as hedge funds and other investors seek to shake up companies.On one side is DuPont, the chemical maker that traces its history back 213 years to a gunpowder manufacturing operation. On the other is Mr. Peltz, who has previously pressed for change at the likes of H.J. Heinz and PepsiCo.AdvertisementBoth sides have proposed settlements in recent months, only to spurn each other’s offers as the company heads toward a shareholder election on May 13.AdvertisementIn its report, I.S.S. argued that the company — formally E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company — was in need of change, which an engaged and prepared new director could provide.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is not a broken company, but there is compelling evidence that the dissidents are onto something in their critique,” the proxy adviser wrote. “Operating efficiency is not what it should be, yet instead of addressing the core issues, the board and management, at least in their communications with shareholders, are more inclined to obfuscation than accountability.”The 32-page report was highly critical of DuPont, arguing that the conglomerate had failed to meaningfully cut costs and had missed several financial performance targets. While I.S.S. declined to come down on a prominent argument of Mr. Peltz’s campaign, that the company should break itself up, it argued that the incumbent board had failed to clearly articulate to shareholders clear goals and a vision.While DuPont has argued that Mr. Peltz would establish a “shadow management team” that would undermine the board and push for a breakup of the company, I.S.S. countered that Trian’s willingness to devote research analysis and other preparation was perhaps necessary for a company in need of revival.Ultimately, the proxy advisory firm recommended that shareholders vote in favor of Mr. Peltz and John H. Myers, a former head of General Electric’s asset management arm.DuPont responded in a statement that it strongly disagreed with I.S.S.’s conclusions. “This demonstrates a fundamental lack of understanding of our business and the needs of a global science company,” the company said. “DuPont’s board has the right mix of experience and skills required to lead a global science and technology company of DuPont’s scale.”A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: I.S.S. Backs Peltz.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.