By MIKE ISAACAPRIL 27, 2015
For many young political reporters, the apex of television journalism is landing a job as a correspondent for CNN. For Peter Hamby, it is landing an editorial spot working at a hot smartphone app.Mr. Hamby, a national political reporter for CNN, said on Monday that he would soon join Snapchat, the photo and video messaging start-up that is popular with young audiences, in an editorial capacity.The move seemed curious considering Snapchat’s origins as a Silicon Valley photo application, best known as a conduit for disappearing “selfies” between teenagers. Photos, text and video messages sent using Snapchat usually disappear from the app after no longer than 10 seconds.But Snapchat has shown aspirations to expand beyond messaging, dabbling at being a media platform. In January, Snapchat introduced its “Discover” section, an area inside the app that showcases original content from about a dozen established publishers including ESPN, National Geographic and CNN.AdvertisementRoughly one million people view CNN’s Snapchat Discover content every day, according to two people with knowledge of the efforts, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. A CNN spokesman declined to comment on its Snapchat partnership.AdvertisementSnapchat is part of an elite club of highly valued technology start-ups. The company, now based in Venice, Calif., has raised more than half a billion dollars in venture capital and is valued at more than $15 billion.Jill Hazelbaker, a Snapchat spokeswoman, said of Mr. Hamby that the company was “thrilled to have him on board.” Mr. Hamby did not respond to requests for comment. Politico earlier reported Mr. Hamby was joining Snapchat. Mr. Hamby’s move away from a more established media outlet to a fledgling brand is not unprecedented. Ben Smith, a long-established political reporter, left Politico in 2011 to join BuzzFeed, then a new media start-up known for its list-style articles and cat videos. In January 2014, Vivian Schiller, a veteran of television and digital news outlets, including The New York Times, joined Twitter as the company’s head of news, though she has since left the company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Evan Spiegel, Snapchat’s co-founder and chief executive, is described by people with knowledge of his thinking as being fascinated with the media industry and as holding the curated editorial approach of some of the world’s top publications in high regard.The company’s efforts to move into original content have been spurred in part by this fascination, said these people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Snapchat has been building up its staffing from media companies; in November, the start-up hired a reporter from The Verge, a technology news site.Mr. Hamby, who worked for CNN for nearly a decade, was known for his willingness to experiment with new forms of digital media to deliver news broadcasts. He has a following of more than 50,000 people on Twitter and in 2013 published a widely circulated paper on the effects of digital technologies on campaign and political journalism.“CNN is proud to be one of the first news organizations to partner with Snapchat,” CNN editors said in an internal memo to the company’s Washington bureau. “Now we’re sharing one of our best and brightest with them.”Mr. Hamby will still appear on CNN as a contributor, CNN said, though he will not officially work at the company as an employee.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: A CNN Reporter Is Moving to Snapchat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.