
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN and


NEIL UNMACK

APRIL 27, 2015
Fear is keeping traders on the sidelines of the latest mega-deals in the pharmaceutical industry.Teva Pharmaceutical Industries is offering $40 billion for Mylan, which has put $33.5 billion on the table for Perrigo. These would usually be catnip for those wagering on the outcomes of announced mergers. But recent failures have made them skittish. And these two hostile battles come with cross-border complexity, antitrust concerns and a poison pill. No wonder arbitrageurs are wary.The overall logic behind Teva’s and Mylan’s moves looks sound. Recent tie-ups among generic and specialty drugmakers have been replete with large cost cuts and increased pricing power. Teva, for example, believes it could save $2 billion a year by owning Mylan.Both deals dangle juicy spreads, too. Mylan’s proposal to Perrigo is 17 percent above the current price, while Teva’s offer is 8 percent higher.On the face of it, that should have arb traders salivating. After all, event-driven funds received $3.8 billion of new money to put to work in the first quarter, according to Hedge Fund Research. And they have some making up to do. Last year, a number of failed deals hit them hard – including AbbVie-Shire and 21st Century Fox and Time Warner. These depressed returns for merger arbitrage funds to 3.47 percent over the past year, compared with 4.17 percent for the average hedge fund.AdvertisementThe trouble is, both deals are replete with potential pitfalls. First, American, Irish, Dutch and Israeli securities law are all involved. National politics may come into play, too – Teva is regarded as an Israeli gem, for example.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Then there are antitrust issues. Mylan and Teva have developed versions of the other’s biggest product, and the combined firm would control about a quarter of the American generic market. Mylan cited these concerns in a scathing public rejection to Teva’s offer.AdvertisementMylan also has a potential deal-killer called a stichting — a Dutch independent foundation consisting of all stakeholders in a company that has the power to block hostile takeovers.Betting on a Mylan-Perrigo marriage has its own issues. The large spread is in part the result of Teva’s bid inflating Mylan’s stock. And if the deal goes far enough to be put to a vote, Mylan’s shareholders may reject the deal to avoid paying over the odds.Going long Perrigo and short Mylan, for example, would be a disaster if Mylan ended up in Teva’s arms. The risk of another Arbageddon looks too much for most traders.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »