By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDAPRIL 27, 2015
A three-way takeover battle in the world of generic drugs appeared poised to escalate on Monday, as the pharmaceutical company Mylan pointedly rejected a $40 billion takeover bid from an Israeli competitor, Teva.The widely expected move sets up the potential for a drawn-out fight, even as Mylan is pursuing an approximately $33 billion takeover bid for another competitor, the Irish company Perrigo, that so far has also been rejected.Behind the flurry of deals is a continued wave of mergers in the drug manufacturing industry as companies look to restock their product pipelines. That has become especially true for so-called generic pharmaceutical makers, which focus on taking advantage of worldwide distribution platforms.But Mylan firmly and sharply rejected Teva’s bid to become the industry’s biggest generic drug company, deriding its unwanted suitor as a tangle of flawed corporate culture and mismanaged operations.Advertisement“We do not wish to make Teva’s problems Mylan’s problems, or to inflict them on Mylan’s shareholders and other stakeholders,” Robert J. Coury, Mylan’s executive chairman, wrote in a letter to Teva. “This potential combination is clearly in no one’s best interest.”AdvertisementTogether, Teva and Mylan would have about $30 billion in annual revenue and about $9 billion in earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. But Mr. Coury pointed to a list of problems with the takeover approach on the table, from an insufficient deal price — Mylan will not begin negotiating unless a bid surpasses $100 a share, while Teva is offering about $82 a share — to many issues at Teva.Among them, according to Mylan, are instability in Teva’s leadership, including three chief executives in eight years and poor financial performance.Apparently driving the takeover bid, Mr. Coury wrote, are simply Teva’s desire to grow bigger and to make up for the impending loss of exclusivity on a profitable treatment for multiple sclerosis.Because Teva’s takeover proposal includes stock, that could leave Mylan shareholders owning part of a newly combined company that Mylan thinks would be far weaker, according to the letter.“It calls for two fundamentally different and conflicting cultures to be integrated under a board and leadership team with absolutely no proven ability to deliver sustainable shareholder value,” Mr. Coury wrote.Mr. Coury also highlighted the possibility that a merger of Mylan and Teva would be blocked by antitrust regulators, pointing to Comcast’s recently ended bid for Time Warner Cable. Any potential deal would need to include provisions for undertaking any and all actions necessary to win government approval in a short period.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At times, Mylan’s rebuff of its competitor appeared to verge on the personal. Mr. Coury criticized Teva’s unsolicited takeover bid as unnecessarily bare-knuckled and coming out of the blue.“Through your leadership, you had the opportunity to set the right tone, and show the world that there is a new Teva,” Mr. Coury wrote in the letter, which was addressed to the Teva chief executive, Erez Vigodman. “Instead, you chose to approach Mylan in a way that demonstrates that the old Teva is very much still alive, which only continues to beg questions about Teva’s credibility.”AdvertisementIn a statement, Teva said that it was committed to pursuing a takeover of its rival, one that it pledged to complete as soon as possible. The Israeli company reiterated that its offer represented a 38 percent premium to the trading price for Mylan shares before it offered to buy Perrigo.“While we are disappointed that Mylan has formally rejected our proposal, the Teva board and management team are fully committed to completing the combination of Teva and Mylan, and we stand ready to quickly complete a transaction that is compelling for both Teva and Mylan stockholders,” Mr. Vigodman of Teva said in a statement.Mylan’s legal incorporation in the Netherlands has afforded the company some legal defenses against the Teva approach. The drug maker is relying on a Dutch anti-takeover maneuver: issuing preferred shares to an outside foundation that will temporarily assume voting control, which will buy it some time.Teva’s next step will most likely be taking its offer directly to investors in Mylan, who appeared dismayed by the company’s firm rejection of the takeover bid. Shares of Mylan fell 5.7 percent on Monday, to $71.72.But shareholders in Teva also appeared fretful that the company might end up offering too high a price to win. The company’s American depositary receipts fell 4.3 percent, to $61.63.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mylan Rejects $40 Billion Takeover Bid by Teva in a Battle Over Generic Drugs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.