AdvertisementSupported byInside EuropeBy Paul Taylor | ReutersBRUSSELS — “We’re going bust.”“No, you’re not.”“You’re strangling us.” “No, we’re not.” “You owe us for World War II.” “We gave already.”The game of chicken between Greece and its international creditors is turning into a vicious blame game as Athens lurches closer to bankruptcy with no cash-for-reform agreement in sight.Europe’s political leaders and central bankers agree with Greek politicians on only one thing: If Greece goes down, they don’t want their fingerprints on the murder weapon.If Athens runs out of cash and defaults in the coming weeks, as seems increasingly possible, no one wants to be accused of having pushed it over the edge or of failing to try to save it. Greece’s leftist government has already identified its culprit of choice: Germany, which is accused of having inflicted toxic austerity policies on Greeks, causing a humanitarian crisis.Eurozone governments are preparing the ground to blame the novice government of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras for having blustered, obstructed, failed to meet commitments and evaded hard choices while Athens burned.“We are doing everything we can to save Greece from itself, but in the end, it’s up to them,” is the message pouring out of Berlin, Brussels and the International Monetary Fund’s headquarters in Washington. Mr. Tsipras and his outspoken finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, tried at first to mount a coalition against Berlin, touring France, Italy, Britain, Brussels and media studios after their election. They found no allies outside the media.Mr. Tsipras revived demands for reparations for the Nazi German occupation of Greece in 1941-44, which his government put at 279 billion euros, or $303.5 billion — more than its €240 billion bailout from the eurozone and the I.M.F.Berlin responded that it had already compensated victims and that a 1990 agreement with the four victorious World War II powers on German unification had put an end to war claims. Chancellor Angela Merkel has been careful to express good will and tried to build a relationship of trust with Mr. Tsipras while insisting that Greece must meet its lenders’ conditions, which include fiercely resisted pension cuts and labor reforms. “Everything must be done to prevent” Greece’s running out of money, she said last week after talks with Mr. Tsipras. “On the German side, we are prepared to provide all the support that is asked of us. But, of course, reforms must be done.”Investors briefly hoped her pledge might be a turning point, similar to the 2012 vow of the European Central Bank president, Mario Draghi, to do “whatever it takes to preserve the euro.”But Ms. Merkel’s comments could also be interpreted as an exercise in preemptive blame avoidance. Unlike Mr. Draghi, she did not say who should do everything to stop Greece’s going bust. Her finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, is openly skeptical of whether Athens can avoid crashing out of the eurozone.Angry eurozone finance ministers made clear they were far from a deal with Greece, rejected Mr. Varoufakis’s plea for early cash in return for partial reform and told him they would not even discuss longer-term funding and debt relief until Greece signed and implemented a full overhaul plan.While Greece’s leaders insist Europe must heed and respect the democratic will of the Greek people, its creditors reply that they, too, have democratic mandates from their voters.In Mr. Varoufakis’s narrative, eurozone countries did not lend all that money to save Greece in the first place but to protect their own banks, which had imprudently lent Athens billions.Nonsense, say eurozone officials. Those banks took losses in 2012 when Greek debt to private bondholders was restructured.Mr. Varoufakis has widened the circle of blame to include the E.C.B., accusing it of “asphyxiating” Greece by starving its banks of liquidity and severely limiting their short-term lending to the government.That prompted an indignant response from Mr. Draghi, who told the European Parliament that the central bank’s support for Greece amounted to some €110 billion, but it was barred by treaty from monetary funding of governments.Insiders say the E.C.B. is determined that the central bank will not be the institution that pulls the plug. If it considers support for Greek banks is no longer tenable, it will seek a political decision by European Union governments.The European Commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, is eager to hold Mr. Tsipras’s hand until the last minute in the hope that the prime minister will impose an unpalatable economic reform deal on left-wingers in his Syriza party before it is too late.For Mr. Juncker, one of the fathers of Europe’s single currency, the departure of a single member from the 19-nation eurozone would be a grievous blow to the bloc’s global standing and could set a dangerous precedent, encouraging investors to speculate against other member states in future crises. Even if Greece stayed in the eurozone, a default on debt owed to other European governments or the E.C.B. would be one of the most acrimonious moments in the history of the European Union.Amid mutual recrimination over ruined Greek savers and cheated European taxpayers, some fear demonstrations and violence in Athens. If it happens, there will be plenty of blame to go around, but no one to take responsibility. Paul Taylor is a Reuters correspondent.  Advertisement