By BETH GARDINEROCT. 19, 2015
LONDON — As fears grow of a future in which antibiotics are powerless against rampaging infections in humans, experts are stepping up the call to act on what they say is a large part of the problem: overuse of the drugs on farm animals.Antibiotics are mixed with animals’ feed or water to prevent illness and encourage growth in intensive, large-scale livestock operations where thousands of cows, pigs or chickens are housed in close quarters. In the United States, more than 70 percent of all antibiotics go to animals.That breeds resistant strains of bacteria that enter the food supply and the wider environment and can share their antibiotic-outwitting genes even with bugs that do not originate in animals, scientists say. While many nations have sought to rein in antibiotic overuse in humans, administration of the drugs to livestock is largely unregulated, and is increasing along with global demand for meat, eggs and dairy.Globally, livestock consumed 63,000 tons of antibiotics in 2010, and their use is expected to grow by two-thirds by 2030, said Dr. Juan Lubroth, chief of animal health at the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization.Advertisement“This is the biggest single use of antibiotics and it’s uncontrolled,” said Ellen Silbergeld, a professor of environmental health sciences at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. “I was born at the dawn of the antibiotic era, and probably before I die the antibiotic era will be over.”AdvertisementThe spread of multidrug-resistant “superbugs” would make now-minor infections life-threatening and drive death and disease to levels not seen since the 19th century, scientists say. “It would increase the rates of neonatal death among infants, it would make transplant and other kinds of surgery highly hazardous” and push up rates of maternal death in childbirth, Ms. Silbergeld said.“We’re talking about the 1880s. This is not a clock we really want to wind backwards,” she said. “We’re destroying most of our drugs.”If resistance continues to rise, 10 million additional people could die annually by 2050, more than are now killed each year by cancer, according to a December report from a commission appointed by Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain to investigate the problem globally. The cumulative loss in economic output would reach $60 trillion to $100 trillion in 35 years, the report said.Mr. Cameron warned last year that inaction could lead to “an almost unthinkable scenario where antibiotics no longer work and we are cast back into the dark ages of medicine.”Sally Davies, England’s chief medical officer, has called drug resistance a “ticking time bomb” that ranks alongside terrorism and climate change as critical threats.Agriculture is driving about half of the resistance increase globally, and could be responsible for as much as 80 percent of the problem in the United States, where the large-scale, intensive approach to food production originated, said Jim O’Neill, a former chief economist at Goldman Sachs and the chair of the British commission.Mr. O’Neill said he hoped to see a United Nations agreement on tackling antibiotic resistance within a year, and has urged the Group of 20’s 2016 host, China, to put the issue on the summit meeting’s agenda.AdvertisementThe farming and veterinary pharmaceutical industries say they use and make antibiotics responsibly, and that agriculture’s role in creating resistance is exaggerated.Dr. Richard Carnevale, vice president for regulatory, scientific and international affairs at the Animal Health Institute, an association of animal drug companies, said antibiotic use in animals made only a small contribution to the wider resistance problem.“In the whole scheme of things, it’s a relatively minor impact from what we can see, and I think that the situation gets a little blown out of proportion,” he said. “Unfortunately, agriculture gets lumped in and blamed with a lot of the problems in humans that really have nothing to do with animals.”Trudy Wastweet, director of congressional relations at the American Farm Bureau Federation, said farmers and the food production companies they contract with use preventative antibiotics only for specific, discrete periods, for example on piglets whose immune systems are vulnerable when they are being weaned.“There’s a frustration in agriculture that the use of these products is not understood,” Ms. Wastweet said. “Judicious use of those drugs on the farm, that is the norm, that is a standard of care our American livestock producers use.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Critics say antibiotic use on United States farms is routine, leading to resistant strains of bacteria like E.coli and salmonella that taint meat and are released into air and water via the vast amounts of manure produced.When Consumer Reports magazine bought ground beef at stores around the United States, it said in an August article, tests showed that 18 percent of the conventionally raised samples were tainted with bacteria resistant to three or more classes of antibiotics. Industry executives called the story misleading.Even more worrying, experts say, is the spread of intensive livestock production to developing countries, where huge farms are now common and the presence of counterfeit and poor-quality drugs create resistance even more quickly. Industrial-scale agriculture is likely to become even more widespread as poorer countries’ economies grow and their expanding middle classes demand the meat, eggs and dairy products commonly consumed in the developed world.The emergence of the highly drug-resistant New Delhi E.coli superbug, first identified in 2009, was a frightening taste of what the future may hold, and it traveled quickly around the world.Advertisement“Bacteria don’t know any borders,” said Ms. Silbergeld. “And of course food doesn’t know too many borders, either.”China, which produces half the world’s pigs, has focused on reining in overuse of antibiotics in humans but has yet to confront animal use, Mr. O’Neill said. Nor has India, a hotbed of antibiotic misuse and drug-resistant bugs, he said.Brazil, a major chicken exporter, is another big user, said Dr. Lubroth, of the Food and Agriculture Organization. He also pointed to Southeast Asia, where antibiotics are used in fish farming, risking the release of superbugs into lakes and rivers, as well as on the seafood the region exports.Europe has done the most to restrict antibiotics in agriculture, though its rules are a patchwork. Denmark, a big pork producer, outlaws antibiotic use on animals for all but disease treatment.Most contentious is the use of low levels of antibiotics in healthy animals to encourage them to grow faster.“They can fatten up the animals and get more from them at less cost,” Mr. O’Neill said. “And so until recently it’s been a rough argument with consumers” to restrict the drugs and risk raising food prices.In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration has asked veterinary pharmaceutical companies to voluntarily remove growth promotion from drug labels as an acceptable use for those antibiotics that are also important in human medicine. It also urged that the administration of such drugs be supervised by a veterinarian. Health experts have criticized those guidelines, part of a broader Obama administration strategy on drug resistance, as too lax. Last year, an F.D.A. report said agricultural use of medically important antibiotics had increased 16 percent from 2009 to 2012.Dr. Bernard Vallat, director general of the World Organization for Animal Health, an intergovernmental body, said half its 180 member nations deemed growth promotion an acceptable use, though he said the United States shift could prompt change.AdvertisementConsumer pressure, too, may drive a reduction in antibiotic use. In March, McDonald’s said chicken served in its United States restaurants would be free of antibiotics used in humans within two years. Others have made similar pledges. Perdue says half its chickens are now raised without antibiotics.Dr. Vallat said veterinary oversight of antibiotics was key, calling, too, for better training of veterinarians in developing countries. Dr. Lubroth said improving hygiene would reduce the need for antibiotics, as could the development of new animal vaccines.It is not enough just to criticize developing countries without changing practices in the West too, he emphasized: “We can point fingers, but we should also hold up mirrors.”A version of this special report appears in print on October 20, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.