By JOHN KOBLINAPRIL 28, 2015
Al Jazeera America, the cable network that started 20 months ago to great fanfare and with big budgets, came under fire on Tuesday after the network was sued by a former employee and lost two executives.Matthew Luke, formerly the network’s director of media and archive management, filed a lawsuit in New York Supreme Court claiming wrongful termination. Among other allegations, Mr. Luke said he was fired after he complained to the company’s human resources department about his boss, Osman Mahmud, who, Mr. Luke said, told him to exclude female employees from meetings and not involve them in projects that they had previously worked on.In the suit, Mr. Luke asserted that Mr. Mahmud mistreated female employees and exhibited anti-Semitic behavior, including expressing a desire to replace an Israeli cameraman with a Palestinian. A female senior vice president who resisted fulfilling that request was later transferred to another position, the lawsuit says. The suit further claims that Mr. Mahmud said that “whoever supports Israel should die a fiery death in hell.”Mr. Mahmud did not immediately respond to a request for comment. In an interview with The Washington Post, he denied making the comment about Israel, saying, “I have never even thought of that at all.” He called the accusations that he had mistreated women “a pack of lies.”AdvertisementThe network said that it did not comment on pending litigation. “The company takes these matters seriously and will respond in the appropriate forum,” an emailed statement said. “Al Jazeera America’s commitment to diversity and inclusion is fundamental to its mission.”AdvertisementJeffrey A. Kimmel, the lawyer representing Mr. Luke, said in a statement that after his client reported Mr. Mahmud to human resources, “the response was to circle the wagons and fire the messenger. This is a clear violation of the law. One would expect more from an organization whose mission statement is ‘to be recognized as the world’s leading and most trusted media network.’ ”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Also on Tuesday, Al Jazeera America announced that two top officials — Diana Lee, who was the executive vice president for human resources, and Dawn Bridges, the executive vice president for communications — were leaving. It was not immediately clear if the departures were related to the lawsuit.Ehab Al Shihabi, the chief executive of Al Jazeera America, said to his staff in a memo on Tuesday that working for a cable station can be “extremely time consuming” and “after having spent time reflecting on their work/life mix, they had independently made the difficult decision” to leave.He said both executives would depart in early May.When Al Jazeera bought the cable channel Current TV for $500 million to start an American cable network, it was said to be the most ambitious television project since the introduction of Fox News. Al Jazeera America opened bureaus, spent lavishly and recruited veteran TV journalists like John Seigenthaler and Ali Velshi.But in the nearly 20 months since Al Jazeera America went on the air, it has struggled to match the ratings of its frail predecessor, Current TV.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Sexism and Anti-Semitism Charged in Al Jazeera America Lawsuit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.