AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinA dispute between two jurors — including an accusation of “food tampering” in the jury room — could prompt a mistrial in the criminal case against Sergey Aleynikov, the former Goldman Sachs programmer charged with stealing some of the firm’s high-frequency trading code.Justice Daniel P. Conviser of State Supreme Court in Manhattan told the 12-member jury on Tuesday that he would consider overnight whether to declare a mistrial. The jury of nine women and three men had completed its fourth full day of deliberations.The judge said he wanted to speak to the two unidentified jurors again on Wednesday morning to determine whether they could continue deliberating. He also said he might simply decide to scuttle the proceedings.The deliberations have moved slowly, with jurors sending back more than a dozen notes either seeking information about specific terms in the criminal statutes that Mr. Aleynikov is charged with violating or requesting to rehear testimony from some of the witnesses who took the stand during the nearly two-week trial.Mr. Aleynikov, a 45-year-old Russian immigrant, was indicted on two counts of unlawful use of secret scientific material and one count of unlawful duplication.Jurors, based on written questions they have sent to the judge, appear most confused about some of the elements and terminology in the charge of unlawful use of secret scientific material.The news of the jury room dispute came as a surprise and appears to involve a female juror who arrived an hour late to the courthouse in Lower Manhattan on Tuesday morning. Until now, there was no indication of friction in the jury room, but it is not uncommon for tensions to flare as deliberations grind on.The courtroom was closed for nearly an hour while Justice Conviser; prosecutors working for Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney; and Mr. Aleynikov’s lawyer, Kevin H. Marino, interviewed the two jurors and then debated how to proceed. During the closed-door proceeding, Mr. Marino could be heard yelling through the door.When the courtroom was opened, Justice Conviser said that Mr. Marino had asked for a mistrial while prosecutors opposed the request. The judge, who initially described the situation as a “conflict in the jury room,” said he was reluctant to declare a mistrial and “pull the plug” on the proceedings. Justice Conviser said he would do so if he determines the two jurors cannot continue the deliberations without prejudicing the proceedings.Mr. Marino would not consent to replace the two jurors with alternates, leaving the judge few options.“Under New York State law, if the defense does not consent, the judge would need to have a very good reason to substitute in an alternate,” said Benjamin Brafman, a prominent criminal defense lawyer who is not involved in this case.Justice Conviser, who several times during the trial has indicated he has reservations about whether prosecutors proved that Mr. Aleynikov broke any criminal law, said prosecutors might want to reconsider the entire matter in light of the jury dispute.The exact nature of the dispute is a bit of a mystery, but it apparently involves the female juror and a male juror. Mr. Marino said the female juror was complaining about being the victim of “food poisoning.” Jeremy Glickman, an assistant district attorney, said she never actually expressed concern about “food poisoning.” Justice Conviser said the phrase used was “food tampering.”Mr. Marino referred separately to something about an avocado and a sandwich.The potential for a mistrial is just the latest bizarre twist in the case.The decision by Mr. Vance to pursue a criminal case against Mr. Aleynikov has been controversial, given that he was first prosecuted and convicted in federal court in New York in 2010. A federal appeals court later overturned the conviction and dismissed the charges, but Mr. Vance indicted Mr. Aleynikov a few months later on charges of violating state laws.Mr. Marino has asked Justice Conviser several times during the trial to dismiss the case against his client. He is likely to renew his request to have the criminal charges dismissed even if a mistrial is declared.Ben Protess contributed reporting.Advertisement