AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill VlasicWASHINGTON — In the sharpest comments of his young tenure as the nation’s top auto safety regulator, Mark R. Rosekind promised on Tuesday to take aggressive action on vehicle recalls that move too slowly and continue to endanger lives.Mr. Rosekind, who took over as administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in December, took particular aim at Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, saying that its efforts to fix more than a million Jeep sport utility vehicles with potentially dangerous gas tanks had fallen far short of expectations.“We’re very displeased with what’s going on,” Mr. Rosekind said. “The numbers are horribly low, and that translates into lives at risk.”He also criticized Takata, the Japanese auto supplier, for not fully cooperating in the recall of millions of potentially dangerous airbags.Speaking at a conference called Retooling Recalls, Mr. Rosekind said his agency was reviewing options to speed up the Jeep and Takata recalls. He said regulators could require Fiat Chrysler to change how it repairs the affected Jeeps.“This is an opportunity to do whatever we need to do as aggressively as we need to do it,” Mr. Rosekind said of the current recall of 1.56 million Jeep sport utility vehicles.Fiat Chrysler agreed two years ago to install trailer hitches on the Jeeps to provide protection in rear-end collisions, which can result in catastrophic fires.When the agreement was made, regulators had tied 56 fatal fires to exploding gas tanks in the rear of 2002-7 Jeep Liberty sport utility vehicles, and 1993-98 Jeep Grand Cherokees.But there have been a number of postcollision fires since then, and the recall has gone slowly. Only 4 percent of the Grand Cherokees have been fixed, and just 27 percent of the Liberty models.Mr. Rosekind said his agency was studying a “full range” of options, including possibly expanding the recall to 2.7 million Jeeps with rear gas tanks, or changing the recall to add even more protection for vulnerable fuel tanks.A spokesman for Fiat Chrysler said the company was “engaged in intensive efforts to accelerate our performance and improve customer response.” Fiat Chrysler has maintained that the vehicles are safe to drive, even if trailer hitches are not installed.But Mr. Rosekind said he was determined to step up the agency’s enforcement and investigative efforts, particularly after the auto industry set a record of nearly 64 million vehicles recalled in 2014.“Enforcement is critical,” he said. “If people aren’t following the law, N.H.T.S.A. has to use every tool available to it.”He did not say how he might accelerate the recall of millions of Takata airbags, which are used in vehicles made by several manufacturers. Regulators are fining Takata a maximum of $14,000 a day to get the company to better cooperate with the agency’s investigators. The company has said it is committed to working with the safety agency.“The endgame is pretty clear,” Mr. Rosekind said. “If all these airbags aren’t safe, then we need to make them safe.”Mr. Rosekind is scheduled to travel to Detroit this week to meet with the chief executives of General Motors and Ford Motor, as well as officials from Fiat Chrysler.He said the meetings were part of a larger effort to sustain momentum toward improving vehicle safety that emerged last year from G.M.’s ignition-switch crisis, in which millions of small cars were recalled. The defect has been linked to as many as 90 deaths.Mr. Rosekind, however, worries that carmakers may become lax over time on improving recall completion rates, which now average about 70 percent.And he expressed concern that lawmakers would not follow through on pledges to raise government spending on auto safety and increase his agency’s authority to fine automakers.The recall conference on Tuesday was attended by representatives of several auto companies, including G.M.Mr. Rosekind credited G.M. with using a “horrendous situation” to spur change in its corporate practices. “Let’s credit their improvement,” he said. “But they’re not done yet.”Advertisement