By PETER EAVISOCT. 1, 2015
Consumer lending firms that focus on borrowers with weak credit have done surprisingly well in the last few years. Many survived the financial crisis of 2008, the Great Recession, and even went on to post strong profits in the face of an onslaught of new regulations. Now, though, these lenders face pressure from an unlikely source: the big Wall Street banks that have long provided the financial underpinnings for their operations.The large banks lend money to the consumer finance firms, which use it to make high-interest loans to individuals. But recently some banks have begun tightening the terms of the financing in a way that could have far-reaching implications for the consumer finance industry.The banks apparently tightened their terms as a response to the increase in regulation of the consumer lending industry. The new language was introduced as the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, a federal agency set up after the financial crisis to police consumer lending, has been stepping up its oversight of consumer lenders. The lenders have come under scrutiny for a range of practices that can lead borrowers to believe they are paying far less in interest and fees than they actually are.The banks are leaning on the consumer lenders at least in part to protect their own interests. Even so, it’s as if Wall Street is starting to act as an indirect enforcer, rather than just an enabler of the consumer lenders.Advertisement“As the C.F.P.B. has escalated its scrutiny, the banks have gotten skittish,” Shakir Taylor, a credit analyst at Standard & Poor’s, said. “It’s relatively new language, and it may be the new standard.”Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the case of two consumer lenders, World Acceptance and Regional Management, the banks added legal triggers that could be set off if the companies run afoul of regulators. The legal amendments could be especially significant for World Acceptance, which is facing the prospect of an enforcement action by the C.F.P.B.AdvertisementWorld Acceptance and Regional Management both make installment loans, which borrowers may use to buy household goods or to help finance larger purchases. The loans usually have to be repaid within six to 36 months. Critics of consumer lenders say that borrowers are often sold insurance products that substantially increase the effective cost of the loan. They also assert that lenders press borrowers to refinance loans in a confusing way that allows the lenders to book more in fees and interest without substantially reducing the amounts that borrowers owe.Such criticisms have been directed at World Acceptance, whose slogan is, “Life is hard enough; getting a loan doesn’t have to be.” The company is something of a survivor. Its high level of profitability helped it maintain the support of its lending banks during the financial crisis. World Acceptance’s profits are in part driven by the interest rates on its loans, which, according to the company, range between 25 and 199 percent.In June, an ominous change quietly appeared in World Acceptance’s loan agreement with Wells Fargo and other banks. The amendment said that any serious regulatory action against World Acceptance that had a “material” impact on its business could constitute default. If this new clause were to be activated, the banks would, in theory, have the right to seize the lender’s assets.The amendment came at a particularly inopportune time for World Acceptance. In March last year, the firm said that the C.F.P.B. was planning to investigate its business. Then, in a filing in August, World Acceptance disclosed that the bureau’s enforcement division was considering recommending legal action against the company. In the filing, World Acceptance said that it planned to present its position on its practices to the bureau, adding that it “continues to believe that its marketing and lending practices are lawful.”If the bureau takes strong action against World Acceptance, the firm’s bankers would have to decide whether any sanctions would have a significant negative effect on World Acceptance’s business. In the August filing, the company acknowledged that an action by the C.F.P.B. “could have a material adverse affect on the company.” But in an emailed statement, World Acceptance seemed to suggest that it did not expect the C.F.P.B. case would lead to a breach of its loan agreements.“To be clear, the company does not believe that an event of default under its loan agreement is the most likely outcome and strongly disagrees with any assertion to the contrary,” the statement said.AdvertisementThe C.F.P.B. declined to comment on its investigation. Wells Fargo declined to comment on its loan agreement with World Acceptance.Given the regulatory threat to World Acceptance, it might be expected that Wells Fargo and the other banks would add a regulatory action clause to their credit agreement. But Bank of America and other banks added almost identical language to a credit agreement with Regional Management, a consumer lender that does not appear to be facing regulatory threats.Regional Management declined to comment.If a regulatory action occurred, the banks may of course decide against pushing a consumer lender into default. Seizing the consumer lender’s assets, in this case its loans, may not produce enough proceeds to pay off the banks’ line of credit. The loans may be worth less than the consumer lenders said.In the case of World Acceptance, the banks may want to edge away slowly, to make sure they get paid back in full over time. In the latest credit agreement, they are cutting the size of World Acceptance’s credit line, to $400 million in March 2017, from $630 million. “The banks are saying, ‘Every single penny you generate, you use to pay us back,’” said Whitney Tilson, a hedge fund manager who is betting against World Acceptance’s stock.Of course, the banks may decide to keep lending to consumer lenders facing regulatory actions, especially if banks believe that the lenders are for the most part acting in a legal manner. Still, it’s possible that the recent changes to the credit agreements signal a change on Wall Street.Large banks may not want to be seen financing companies that make loans that have very high interest rates and go bad in large numbers, further harming the credit of individual borrowers. In turn, the changes to the credit agreement may persuade the consumer lenders to stay well within the guardrails as they conduct their business. As Mr. Tilson said of World Acceptance, “Their entire business model depends on having that line of credit.”A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Subprime Lenders Feel a Pinch in Funding.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.