AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressDEARBORN, Mich. — Ford’s net income fell in the first quarter, hurt by lower sales of popular vehicles like the F-150 pickup and a stronger American dollar.The automaker says the picture should improve as the year progresses, and it is still forecasting a full-year pretax profit of $8.5 billion to $9.5 billion, up from $6.3 billion in 2014.“We feel we are very much on track to that breakthrough year we talked about,” the company’s chief financial officer, Robert L. Shanks, said on Tuesday.Ford’s net income fell 6.6 percent to $924 million in the January-March period, and first-quarter earnings were 23 cents per share. compared with 25 cents in the same quarter a year ago. The results fell short of Wall Street’s expectations. Analysts surveyed by FactSet had forecast earnings of 26 cents per share.One reason for the miss was that analysts had expected a tax rate of 29 percent for the quarter, but Ford’s actual rate was 34 percent. That difference was worth about 2 cents per share, the company said.Revenue fell by 5 percent, or $2 billion, to $33.9 billion. That fell short of forecasts of $34.3 billion.Ford shares dropped 5 cents, to $15.86. Mr. Shanks said 70 percent of the drop in revenue — or around $1.4 billion — was related to the strong United States currency. The dollar has climbed 8 percent so far this year against the euro and other major currencies. Last week, General Motors said that currency exchange had cost it $1.8 billion in first-quarter revenue.Ford’s global sales fell 1 percent to 1.6 million. Sales rose in Asia and Europe but were down in North America, South America and the Middle East and Africa.Ford said the release of the all-aluminum version of its F-150 pickup, which went on sale late last year, ended up hurting North American sales because dealers did not yet have a full inventory. Two plants, in Michigan and Missouri, make the F-150, but only the Michigan plant was fully operational in the first quarter. The Missouri plant started making the new truck on March 13.Mr. Shanks said F-150 sales were down 40 percent, or about 60,000 vehicles, for the quarter, and dealers were not expected to have normal levels of trucks on their lots until the summer. Sales of the Ford Edge S.U.V. were also down significantly — about 15,000 vehicles — as the company changed over to an updated model.Ford raised its guidance for full-year North American margins to 8.5 to 9.5 percent, up from 8 to 9 percent.The company is struggling to sell small cars in the United States, China and elsewhere; last week, it cut a shift at the Michigan plant that makes the Focus because of weak sales. While sales rose in Europe, particularly for commercial vehicles like the Transit van, revenue fell because of the stronger dollar. Ford lost $185 million in Europe in the first quarter, a $9 million improvement from a year ago.Advertisement