
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

APRIL 28, 2015
With Loretta E. Lynch sworn in as the new attorney general, we can look back at the legacy of Eric H. Holder Jr., who had the third-longest term in that office in American history. In the area of white-collar crime, the reaction to his leadership of the Justice Department has been mixed, with questions raised about whether too much emphasis was put on penalizing organizations at the expense of pursuing cases against individuals.Any assessment of Mr. Holder’s tenure begins — and for many probably ends — with the response to the financial crisis. When he took charge of the Justice Department in early 2009, the full effects of the crisis were hitting the economy and hundreds of billions of dollars in bailouts were being funneled to leading financial institutions.Like the savings-and-loan crisis of the late 1980s and the accounting frauds that led to the demise of corporate giants like Enron and WorldCom in the early 2000s, the expectation was that a wave of prosecutions would ensue. Yet the wait continues with no prominent criminal cases filed against executives.Soon before leaving office, Mr. Holder gave federal prosecutors a 90-day deadline to pursue civil or criminal charges against individuals involved in the packaging of securities backed by subprime mortgages that faltered starting in 2007. It is unlikely that any significant criminal prosecutions will emerge because any evidence of misconduct is probably stale by now, and civil lawsuits can result only in financial penalties that may be paid by companies on behalf of executives.AdvertisementThe first few years of Mr. Holder’s term included few cases from the Justice Department that took aim at companies at the heart of the financial crisis. Prosecutors closed criminal investigations into the American International Group, Lehman Brothers and Countrywide Financial without filing charges.Attorney General Eric Holder discusses the Department of Justice’s belief that no company, no matter how big, is above the law, including the big banks.Mr. Holder’s approach to financial crisis cases in those years was perhaps best summarized by his statement at a Senate hearing in 2013. Asked by Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, why the global bank HSBC did not face criminal charges for aiding money laundering in its Mexican affiliate, Mr. Holder said, “I am concerned that the size of some of these institutions becomes so large that it does become difficult for us to prosecute them when we are hit with indications that if you do prosecute, if you do bring a criminal charge, it will have a negative impact on the national economy, perhaps even the world economy.”AdvertisementMr. Holder sent a message — intended or not — that the Justice Department was not going to aggressively pursue cases involving large banks because some were just “too big to jail.” Of course, no bank can actually be jailed, but the issue was whether organizations would have to take responsibility for conduct during the financial crisis, especially when no executives were facing charges.I suspect that if Mr. Holder could get a “do-over” on that frank admission, he would take it back in a heartbeat. Once it was out there, though, the Justice Department ramped up investigations into banks for their role in selling securities tied to subprime mortgages in the years before the financial crisis. This led to a wave of settlements in which billions of dollars became the starting point for negotiations. Bank of America, JPMorgan Chase and Citigroup paid penalties that were the equivalent of a year’s worth of their profits to settle cases.Mr. Holder’s language became much more aggressive, including a video in which he affirmed the Justice Department’s position that no individual or company was “too big to jail.” When Bank of America agreed to $16.65 billion settlement of civil charges, Mr. Holder said that “this historic resolution — the largest such settlement on record — goes far beyond ‘the cost of doing business.’”All of these settlements, however, came well after the financial crisis. Persuading large banks and Wall Street firms to pay record sums proved to be easy pickings for the Justice Department because no institution seemed to have the stomach to risk going to trial. In one case in which Bank of America did fight in court over a mortgage program used by Countrywide Financial before its acquisition, the bank suffered an embarrassing loss that resulted in a penalty of more than $1 billion and the negative publicity that accompanies a finding of fraud.Even when it cracked down on banks by demanding guilty pleas, the Justice Department proved rather accommodating. In settlements related to manipulation of the London Interbank Offered Rate, or Libor, and violations of the economic sanctions law, it made sure that the collateral consequences of the conviction were kept to a minimum so that a bank’s ability to stay in business was not put at risk.Perhaps the greatest irony of the various settlements with the banks was the effect on their stock prices. They learned a lesson from the Securities and Exchange Commission’s lawsuit in 2010 against Goldman Sachs for its sale of a collateralized debt obligation. The filing of the case took everyone by surprise, resulting in a sharp drop in the firm’s share price. Afterward, word of a bank’s settlement leaked out well in advance of the formal agreement, and its shares would usually rise in response because of the certainty the settlement provided to Wall Street that at least a portion of the bank’s problems were behind it.AdvertisementMr. Holder did oversee a number of successful white-collar prosecutions that will have a lasting effect. Cases involving economic sanctions laws, the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and manipulation of financial benchmarks showed that prosecutors would aggressively pursue misconduct by any organization that had an effect on American companies and markets. An initiative begun before Mr. Holder’s tenure to crack down on tax evasion through secret foreign accounts has continued to gain momentum, with Swiss bank secrecy almost a thing of the past.When Mr. Holder put an emphasis on pursuing banks for their role in the financial crisis, the Justice Department unearthed a statute that gave it a powerful weapon to pursue violations that amounted to fraud. The Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act, or Firrea, adopted during the S.&L. crisis, contains a provision that allows prosecutors to obtain civil penalties for violations of the mail and wire fraud statutes that affect financial institutions. This turned out to be particularly potent in pressing the banks to settle and will be a featured part of future enforcement efforts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lack of individual prosecutions related to the financial crisis and other misconduct by banks remains the sticking point in any assessment of Mr. Holder. Although a few midlevel traders have been charged in connection with Libor manipulation, no top executive has been indicted. This was in sharp contrast to the accounting fraud cases in which chief executives like Jeffrey K. Skilling of Enron and Bernard J. Ebbers of WorldCom were convicted of fraud. Despite the difficulties in prosecuting individuals, the public expectation was that at least some senior officers would be charged.Mr. Holder pointed to those difficulties in a speech in September 2014 in asking for new laws to reach corporate executives. “In an age when corporations are structured to blur lines of authority and prevent responsibility for individual business decisions from residing with a single person, we ought to consider whether the law provides an adequate means to hold the decision makers at these firms properly accountable,” he said.Of late, the Justice Department has made a point of saying that it wants to single out individuals. Leslie R. Caldwell, the assistant attorney general for the criminal division, said on April 10 that “prosecuting individuals, including corporate executives, for their criminal wrongdoing is a top priority for the criminal division.”Whether that shift in emphasis leads to future prosecutions of corporate executives remains to be seen. But if it does, it will be Mr. Holder’s successor, Ms. Lynch, who receives the credit. His legacy in white-collar crime cases is that large financial institutions bore the brunt of federal enforcement efforts, and there will always be a suspicion — fair or not — that executives got away with something.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »