By NIKI KITSANTONISAPRIL 28, 2015
ATHENS — Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras of Greece said on Tuesday that he might resort to calling a public referendum on any deal with the country’s international creditors if the package seems to go beyond the political mandate that brought his leftist government into power.The statement came a day after Mr. Tsipras overhauled his negotiating team in an effort to accelerate debt talks and unlock crucial rescue funding. The shake-up sidelined the finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, who has frustrated eurozone officials with his abrasive style and perceived foot-dragging, installing a more mild-mannered Foreign Ministry official, Euclid Tsakalotos, to handle day-to-day discussions.Greece’s international creditors might not welcome the prospect of a referendum on a deal with the Greek government.Putting an agreement to a vote by the Greek public “will cost money and create great political uncertainty,” the Dutch finance minister, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, said in a television interview on Tuesday. Mr. Dijsselbloem is the head of the Eurogroup of finance ministers, which is leading the negotiations with Greece.Advertisement“I don’t think we have the time,” he said, adding, “Neither do the Greeks have time.”But Mr. Tsipras expressed confidence that Greece would swiftly secure a deal with the country’s creditors. He said he expected an agreement by May 9, just three days before Greece must make a debt repayment of around 760 million euros, or about $826 million, to the International Monetary Fund.Greece’s finances have run perilously low, feeding speculation that the country will default on its debt or be forced to leave the eurozone.AdvertisementMr. Tsipras, whose government was elected in January, made his remarks in a live television interview that started late on Monday and finished in the early hours of Tuesday. The 40-year-old prime minister emphasized that his government’s priority was to pay salaries and pensions.Pushed to reveal his course of action in the event of a deadlock in talks with creditors, Mr. Tsipras said he would turn to Greek citizens.“If I find myself in the difficult position of an agreement which falls outside our mandate, then the Greek people will have to give the answer,” he said, adding, however, that “I am certain we will not reach that point.”He ruled out calling for an early general election. “Obviously I’m not going to go to elections,” he added. “What for?”Underlining that his government’s mission was to “stop the vicious circle of austerity, misery and looting,” Mr. Tsipras repeated his opposition to more pension cuts and mass dismissals in the labor market.He said, however, that an unpopular property tax, which his Syriza party had promised to abolish, might have to stay in place until 2016 because of budgetary constraints. He also appeared more flexible on the sale and lease of state assets, suggesting that port and airport deals could proceed.AdvertisementIn a bid to scrape together the cash to cover domestic commitments and debt obligations, the government passed a decree last week obliging state entities to hand over their spare cash. The move has raised some money, but it remains unclear whether it is enough to cover looming repayments as the country’s mayors and university academics, among others, push back against the measure.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Officials of the new negotiating team, being coordinated by Mr. Tsakalotos, started work late Monday on drafting legislation that, it is hoped, will win over creditors. The bill is to include “fiscal issues, tax administration, the auction of frequencies for TV channels, taxation of TV commercials and administrative reform,” according to the Finance Ministry.The question is whether the legislation can be completed, and pushed through Greece’s Parliament, quickly enough to ensure the timely release of a €7.2 billion bailout installment.The changes made by Mr. Tsipras to the negotiating team buoyed markets, and stocks and bonds rose again on Tuesday, suggesting a degree of optimism about a potential deal. But the continuing uncertainty has rattled Greeks, who have withdrawn billions of euros in deposits from banks in recent weeks. That has undermined banks that depend on emergency funding from the European Central Bank.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Greek Prime Minister May Ask Public to Vote on Debt Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.