By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 28, 2015
LONDON — The British bank Standard Chartered, which generates most of its earnings in Asia, said on Tuesday that its profit had declined 22 percent in the first quarter. The bank cited an exit from some business lines, an increase in impairments for bad loans and “challenging” trading conditions, particularly in currency-hedging products.For the three months ended March 31, Standard Chartered, based in London, said pretax profit fell to $1.47 billion, from $1.88 billion in the first quarter of 2014.Standard Chartered reported its results just days after HSBC, a competitor that also generates much of its revenue income in Asia, said it was formally reviewing whether to move its headquarters from London as it faces a shifting regulatory landscape that includes a bank tax that has hit lenders based in Britain particularly hard.Andrew Halford, the bank’s group finance director, said that Standard Chartered continues to review its headquarters location but has made “no change” in its position. He said the last formal review by the board was two or three years ago.AdvertisementMr. Halford noted that the lender expects the British bank levy will cost it $540 million this year, up from $366 million in 2014.AdvertisementSome shareholders and analysts have suggested that Standard Chartered and HSBC would be better off with their headquarters elsewhere.“It is something our board reviews from time to time,” Mr. Halford said on a conference call with journalists on Tuesday. “There is no change in our position as of today.”This year, Standard Chartered announced a sweeping overhaul of its top management and directors in hopes of turning around its business.Peter Sands, the Standard Chartered chief executive, will leave the bank later this year and be replaced by William T. Winters, the former head of JPMorgan Chase’s investment bank. Mr. Sands has been chief executive since 2006.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Viswanathan Shankar, the head of its business in Europe, the Middle East, Africa and the Americas, and Jaspal Singh Bindra, the bank’s chief executive in Asia, are both expected to leave the bank this year. Three longstanding directors will also step down this year, and the bank intends to shrink the size of its board.John W. Peace, the Standard Chartered chairman, is expected to leave in 2016.The bank’s operating income, which is similar to revenue in the United States, declined 4 percent to $4.39 billion in the first quarter, compared with the same period a year earlier.“Trading conditions remain challenging, and the actions we are taking to de-risk, cut costs and build capital are having an impact on near term performance,” Mr. Sands said in a news release.“However, underlying business volumes generally remain strong,” he continued. “We remain confident in the strength of our franchise, the opportunities in our markets and in our ability to build returns to an attractive level in the medium term.”AdvertisementThe bank said that impairments for loans and other credit risks rose 80 percent to $476 million in the first quarter, from $265 million in the prior-year period.The size of impairments improved from the third and fourth quarters of last year, but loan impairments from corporate and institutional clients remain “elevated,” Standard Chartered said.Shares of Standard Chartered were down nearly 3 percent to 10.85 pounds, or about $16.46, in midmorning trading in London on Tuesday.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Standard Chartered Results.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.