By STANLEY REEDAPRIL 28, 2015
LONDON — The slump in oil prices continued to erode the profit of European oil companies, as results from BP of Britain and Total of France showed on Tuesday. But at both companies, the declines were offset by strong performances at their marketing and refining businesses.Adjusted earnings fell 20 percent at BP and 22 percent at Total, but the results were better than analysts had expected. They also showed the advantages in difficult times of being a big business that finds and produces oil as well as refines and sells it.“The decline in exploration and production earnings is offset by refining and marketing, which is the main benefit of the integrated model versus a pure exploration play,” Biraj Borkhataria, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets in London, wrote in an email.When oil prices were higher, refining units were a drag on major oil companies’ earnings. That is because the high crude costs squeezed margins on refined products like gasoline and diesel, whose prices, especially in Europe, were depressed by oversupply. But now, the units’ performances have improved as they pay lower prices for crude and demand is strong.AdvertisementBP, based in London, said that its earnings, adjusted for one-time items and inventory changes, declined to $2.6 billion, compared with $3.2 billion in the first quarter of last year.AdvertisementThe drop was mostly a result of crude prices that averaged $54 a barrel in the first quarter of this year, compared with $108 a barrel in the period a year earlier. Profit at the company’s crucial exploration and production unit slumped to $600 million, compared with $4.4 billion a year earlier.As the price of crude oil fluctuates, why some countries are faring much better than others.Partly compensating for that drop were refining and exploration earnings of $2.2 billion, compared with $1 billion a year earlier, and $449 million worth of tax credits, mainly in the United States and Britain.BP took an additional $332 million provision for loss claims stemming from the deadly 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, bringing total charges to $43.8 billion.Despite the lower earnings, BP also said it would hold its dividend steady at 10 cents a share.“The dividend is the first priority within our financial framework, and the board is committed to maintaining it, as we have today,” Robert W. Dudley, the company’s chief executive, said in a statement.BP is benefiting from the streamlining measures that Mr. Dudley was forced to put in effect to pay for damages from the Deepwater Horizon spill.Total is also run by a cost-cutter, Patrick Pouyanné, who led a reorganization of the company’s refining units before taking over as chief executive after the death of Christophe de Margerie in a Moscow plane crash last year.Total said that its adjusted earnings for the quarter fell 22 percent, to $2.6 billion. Operating income at its exploration and production unit declined 56 percent to $1.4 billion, but refining and chemical profits roughly tripled to about $1.1 billion.AdvertisementBP has sold some of its less profitable refineries and focused on its better ones, including a unit in Whiting, Ind.Mr. Dudley recently sold BP’s 25 percent stake in a North Sea gas pipeline called CATS for nearly $500 million. The company also cut its capital expenditure in the first quarter by 26 percent, to $4.5 billion, and said it expected to sell another $3 billion in businesses this year.Mr. Dudley said that BP would “take advantage of any opportunities presented by the lower price environment to further reduce capital expenditure or costs.”BP’s financial fortunes still remain somewhat clouded by the continuing legal issues surrounding the 2010 disaster, which left 11 workers dead and spilled millions of barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Judge Carl Barbier of the United States District Court in New Orleans could levy fines this year of up to $13.7 billion against the company, which would be particularly painful with oil and natural gas prices at the current low levels. BP insists that it should owe less than a quarter of that under the penalty formulas in the Clean Water Act.In court papers BP recently filed, it said exorbitant environmental penalties would deplete its American business of available cash this year, even if crude prices recovered. It had claimed that its local exploration and production unit could be forced to cut thousands of workers and billions of dollars in annual investments, causing economic suffering around the Gulf region.BP has argued in court that it has made a “herculean” effort to ease the environmental impact of the spill, which soiled hundreds of miles of beaches. But prosecutors say that large penalties are needed as a deterrent to keep oil companies on alert for safety issues as drilling in the Gulf goes deeper, while environmentalists insist that the full impact of the spill on wildlife in the region is still not known.Fadel Gheit, a senior oil company analyst at Oppenheimer & Company, said he was confident BP would survive its remaining legal hurdles. “People have to remember the company has $32 billion in cash,” he said. “They are absolutely all right.”Clifford Krauss contributed reporting from Houston.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Collapse in Oil Prices Drives Down Profit at BP and Totals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.