By ELIZABETH OLSONAPRIL 29, 2015
The job market seems to have become a little better for law school graduates, but it could just be a numerical blip.A slightly higher percentage of last year’s graduates landed legal jobs compared with graduates from 2013, according to figures released on Wednesday by the American Bar Association. But the increase appears to be a result of fewer law school graduates rather than a better hiring market.Ten months after graduation, the nation’s 204 accredited law schools that award the J.D. degree reported that 71 percent — or about 31,160 graduates — of the class of 2014 were employed in long-term, full-time posts that either required them to pass the bar exam or preferred those who had law degrees. For the purposes of the report, “long term” meant positions that were expected to last at least one year, and “full time” meant 35 or more hours a week.Elite law schools — including Cornell, Duke, Columbia and the University of Chicago — had the highest percentage of such employment.AdvertisementIn 2013, 31,368 graduates, or 67 percent, were employed roughly nine months after their 2013 graduation under the same terms.AdvertisementThe bar association said that the small drop in the total number of employed graduates was most likely a result of fewer people finishing law school in 2014 than in the previous year.There were about 2,700 fewer law school graduates in 2014 because of a drop in enrollment, a development that has led to fewer candidates for entry-level legal jobs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The uptick in employment for 2014 graduates was minimal for long-term, full-time positions that required passing the bar exam. About 59.9 percent of 2014 graduates found such jobs compared with 57 percent in 2013.The difference was largely because more people got jobs for which a J.D. was preferred. An additional 11 percent of the class of 2014 found jobs in that category — pushing the overall percentage higher.Because the definition of a position for which a J.D. is preferred is elastic, law schools use it to include not only positions that are well paying, such as compliance officers, but also those like paralegals, for which in-depth legal education is helpful but that could be performed without a three-year law degree.According to statistics from the National Association of Law Placement, such jobs often pay 25 percent less than positions that require passing the bar exam.The unemployment rate for last year’s graduates was a bit lower as well. Nearly 10 percent of the graduates reported they were jobless and looking for work — down from about 11 percent in the comparable reporting period for 2013 graduates.In 2014, the bar association pushed back the employment reporting period to 10 months from nine months at the behest of law schools, in order to better account for all those employed after passing the bar. But the additional month did little to alter the outcomes.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.