AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelWhat a difference 14 months make.Time Warner Cable was bloodied and bruised last year when it agreed to its now-scuttled $45 billion sale to Comcast. The company was hemorrhaging subscribers after a battle over fees with CBS produced a monthlong blackout of the network on its service.Its executives had been sharply criticized for deploying a failed plan for the past half-decade during an ugly war with Charter Communications, which had been pursuing a hostile takeover. And its customer service ratings were at the bottom of the industry. Today, Time Warner Cable is in a stronger position, giving the company greater control over its destiny. There is no doubt that Time Warner Cable is suffering from whiplash after the sudden implosion last week of the Comcast deal that had been over a year in the making. But it has steadily improved its business since the deal was announced in February of last year, and analysts forecast continued progress.Meanwhile, Time Warner Cable, the country’s second-largest cable operator, after Comcast, can pursue an acquisition of its own, which gives the company more leverage in negotiations with potential suitors. “The dynamics have definitely changed,” said Kannan Venkateshwar, a media analyst with Barclays. “They are definitely in the driver’s seat now.”Time Warner Cable is scheduled to report earnings on Thursday, when industry observers will be looking for clues about whether the company plans to buy, sell or go it alone. Robert D. Marcus, chief executive of Time Warner Cable, said in an interview after the collapse of the Comcast deal last week that the company was evaluating all of those options in order to find which best maximizes shareholder value. “All tools are available and at our disposal,” he said.Despite the intense regulatory scrutiny that led Comcast to call off the deal for Time Warner Cable, an appetite for deal-making persists. Indeed, the rationale for industry consolidation has only grown stronger in the past year, some analysts said. A larger cable company would have more heft in negotiations with TV networks over the cost of programming; those discussions have grown increasingly fierce in recent years.At the same time, there is an array of new streaming television services that do not require subscriptions to cable, like those from HBO and CBS, putting more pressure on traditional cable operators. A combined company could pool resources to invest in new television-watching technologies, which could help lure people to keep their cable subscriptions rather than cut the cord in favor of a streaming service.Investors also are eager for a sale, some analysts said, with shares in cable companies trading at a premium because of the speculation for continued merger activity. At Time Warner Cable, for instance, shares are up more than 30 percent in the last 18 months. Shares in Charter are up about 35 percent during the same period.“Time Warner Cable recognizes that shareholders involved in the stock obviously are involved because of M.& A.,” said Amy Yong, a media analyst with Macquarie. Hours after Comcast and Time Warner Cable announced that their deal was off, bankers representing Time Warner Cable and Charter started preliminary talks, according to people with knowledge of the discussions. This represents a second chance for Charter. Backed by the billionaire John C. Malone, Charter set off a round of maneuvering last year in a hostile takeover attempt. Time Warner Cable rejected the cash and stock offer, calling it “grossly inadequate” and later was saved by the deal with Comcast.Mr. Malone has said emphatically that his camp would be back if the Comcast-Time Warner Cable fell apart. And back they are. Executives from Time Warner Cable and Charter are expected to meet next week, according to one person with knowledge of the discussions. It is unlikely that Charter would again try a hostile pursuit this time, which could once again bruise the reputation and the value of Time Warner Cable, said one person with knowledge of the company’s thinking.Charter will report earnings on Friday, which will provide further insight into its plans.“There is no longer any doubt about their interest,” said Craig Moffett, a media analyst with MoffettNathanson Research. “What is left to determine is whether Time Warner Cable wants to be acquired and whether they can do a friendly deal.”While some industry observers said that a merger with Charter seemed almost inevitable, others point out that it is not without hurdles. There are big questions about the target price at which Time Warner Cable would agree to a deal, as well as whether there are any other suitors.Time Warner Cable could effectively block a deal with Charter deal by pursuing an acquisition of its own. One target, analysts said, could be the cable operator Bright House Networks. Bright House was to be sold to Charter for $10.4 billion, but that deal was contingent on the Comcast-Time Warner Cable deal.If Time Warner Cable did make an acquisition, Charter would need to raise substantially more debt funding in order to buy Time Warner Cable, Mr. Venkateshwar noted.Conversely, Charter would have more leverage to make a bid for Time Warner Cable if it pursued an acquisition of Bright House, which would give Charter more capacity to borrow money and make a cash-rich offer for Time Warner Cable, Mr. Moffett said.Time Warner Cable also could decide to remain independent. In the last quarter of 2014, the company recorded its strongest performance in years, with both fewer losses of video subscribers and increases in its broadband business. While the company faces challenges, analysts expect those healthier trends to continue.“Time Warner Cable was coming off of a very challenging point of time in its life,” said Rich Greenfield, an analyst with BTIG Research. “They were not selling because they were doing great. They were selling because they were struggling. What would be the rush to sell unless there is an incredible offer?”Advertisement