By REUTERSAPRIL 29, 2015
Time Warner reported quarterly profit and revenue above analysts’ expectations, helped by higher advertising and subscription revenue at its Turner division and Home Box Office network.Revenue at Turner, which owns channels like CNN, TNT and Cartoon Network, as well as NCAA.com, rose 4.5 percent in the quarter, helped by the N.C.A.A. Division I men’s basketball tournament and growth in Turner’s news businesses.Advertising revenue at Turner grew 4 percent, while subscription revenue rose 3 percent. Vijay Jayant, an Evercore ISI analyst, said the advertising growth at Turner was better than expected.Revenue at HBO, whose popular shows include the hit medieval fantasy series “Game of Thrones,” increased 4.4 percent.AdvertisementHBO’s stand-alone streaming service, HBO Now, started on Apple devices this month, in time for the fifth season premiere of “Game of Thrones,” reaching millions of viewers who do not subscribe to pay TV. Time Warner said the “Game of Thrones” premiere was watched by a total of 18.1 million people in its first two weeks, over a million more than the viewership for the previous season’s first episode.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Turner and HBO together account for more than half of Time Warner’s total revenue.Revenue in the company’s Warner Bros. Studio business rose 4.3 percent, helped mainly by higher licensing revenue from the subscription video-on-demand sale of “Friends” and the box-office success of Clint Eastwood’s war film “American Sniper.”AdvertisementThe company’s net income, however, fell to $970 million, or $1.15 a share, in the quarter that ended on March 31, compared with $1.29 billion, or $1.42 a share, a year earlier. Net income was hurt by an increase in marketing costs primarily related to the release of HBO Now and higher spending on original programming.Excluding items, the company earned $1.19 a share from continuing operations. Revenue rose to $7.13 billion, from $6.80 billion. Analysts on average had expected earnings of $1.09 a share and revenue of $7 billion.Shares of Time Warner rose 0.5 percent.A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Higher Ad Revenue Helps Time Warner Top Forecasts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.