By SYDNEY EMBERAPRIL 29, 2015
The streaming service Hulu has signed an exclusive deal to stream episodes of “Seinfeld,” adding the classic television sitcom to its expanding slate of programming.The deal with Sony Pictures Television, announced on Wednesday during Hulu’s Digital Content NewFronts presentation, includes all nine seasons of the show, which will be available on Hulu’s subscription service starting in June.“For our last announcement of the morning, it’s a big one,” said Craig Erwich, the senior vice president for content at Hulu.Hulu paid $700,000 to $900,000 an episode, said a person with knowledge of the deal who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the details were not made public. Netflix and Amazon also bid for the rights to stream the show, the person said.AdvertisementHulu’s announcement is another sign that the company is regaining momentum after a slip in its profile. Although it was the early leader in the streaming business — introducing a wave of consumers to the idea that they could watch their favorite shows without a cable or satellite subscription — it has since been overshadowed by competitors like Netflix. And as more people forgo traditional TV subscriptions in favor of streaming options, companies like Apple, HBO and Sony have also rushed in with offerings to capture these so-called cord cutters, making it increasingly hard for Hulu to stand out.In response, Hulu is investing more in exclusive content deals and original programming. At its presentation, Hulu announced that it had signed an exclusive, multiyear streaming agreement with AMC Networks, giving it the rights to stream future AMC shows, including a spinoff of “The Walking Dead” called “Fear the Walking Dead.” Hulu trumpeted its streaming rights to “Empire” and “Family Guy” on Fox, “South Park” on Comedy Central, “Fargo” on FX, and Bravo’s shows. Hulu has also made deals to stream programs from FX Networks and Adult Swim and Cartoon Network, both owned by Turner Broadcasting System.AdvertisementThe company also promoted its original programming like “Casual,” a new show directed and produced by Jason Reitman. The program features a dysfunctional family — a bachelor brother and his divorced sister who are both navigating the dating world while living in the same house. Hulu also unveiled plans for a nine-hour series based on Stephen King’s novel “11/22/63,” starring James Franco.Hulu, which is owned by Comcast, 21st Century Fox and Walt Disney, also announced it was unifying its two brands, the free Hulu and the subscription service Hulu Plus, under the name Hulu. It will still offer free streaming of some content for users on desktop and laptop computers, though subscribers who pay $8 a month will have access to all Hulu’s content, which they will be able to watch on any device.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the end of the presentation, Jerry Seinfeld appeared onstage to praise the marriage of “Seinfeld” and Hulu.“That people will only watch television like this in the future is so obvious,” he said, referring to streaming and online video. “You could have put the DVD in, but I guess nobody wanted to do that.”Mr. Seinfeld also appeared at Crackle’s upfronts presentation in mid-April to promote “Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee,” his show for that service.A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Hulu Captures ‘Seinfeld’ in Hunt to Add Content.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.