AdvertisementSupported byBy Landon Thomas Jr.Pimco, the global bond giant, said on Wednesday that Ben S. Bernanke, the former Federal Reserve chairman, would become a senior adviser to the firm.Mr. Bernanke was hired in a similar capacity by the hedge fund Citadel, reflecting what was most likely an intense bidding war for Mr. Bernanke’s services by financial services firms.That Mr. Bernanke landed at asset-management firms based in Newport Beach, Calif., (Pimco) and Chicago (Citadel), highlights as well the extent to which power and influence in the markets are shifting away from classic Wall Street investment banks after the 2008 financial crisis.For example, when Robert E. Rubin was seeking to return to the private sector in 1999 after stepping down as Treasury secretary, he was lured to Citigroup by Sanford I. Weill, who was seen as a Wall Street kingmaker.As the country’s largest bond investor, Pimco spends more time and energy than just about any other financial firm trying to guess the Fed’s next move, and over the years its ties with the central bank have been close.From 2007 to 2011, Mr. Bernanke’s predecessor, Alan Greenspan, worked as an adviser to the firm.And in late 2008, Pimco was among a few select investment firms to be hired by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to carry out its ambitious plan to buy billions of dollars of securitized mortgages to stimulate the economy.Since 2010, the Fed chairman is also a voting member of the Financial Stability Oversight Council, a government body responsible for assessing broad financial risks.One area of focus for the council is whether large asset managers like Pimco and BlackRock should be designated as “systemically important” and thus be subjected to tighter regulation. Pimco and its peers have aggressively lobbied against such a designation.Mr. Bernanke, who is a fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington, will not be a formal Pimco employee. According to a person who was involved in the discussions between Pimco and Mr. Bernanke, his contract states that he will not seek to influence any person or organization in Washington with regard to matters important to Pimco.Terms of Mr. Bernanke’s pay were not disclosed.Mr. Bernanke did not respond to a request for comment.The tremendous flow of funds to money-management firms — largely a result of Mr. Bernanke’s unconventional bond-buying policies — has increased pressure on these institutions to generate high returns in a low-interest-rate environment.In that regard, Mr. Bernanke can provide an insider’s edge while also serving as a A-list draw for big-ticket investors.In a statement, Pimco, which oversees $1.6 trillion, said that Mr. Bernanke would contribute his economic expertise to the firm’s investment process and engage with clients.Advertisement