By ROBERT D. McFADDENAPRIL 29, 2015
She never ate dessert in public. But at night, by the dim light of the refrigerator, she gorged on goodies. Then one day in 1961, Jean Nidetch, a 214-pound Queens housewife with a 44-inch waist and an addiction to cookies by the box, ran into a neighbor at the supermarket.“Oh, Jean, you look so good!” the neighbor said. “When are you due?”That was it. Mrs. Nidetch, who had tried many times to subdue her compulsive eating — dieting, losing weight, then gaining it all back again — had to do something.She shed 72 pounds and helped found Weight Watchers, the organization that turned the drab, frustrating diet into a quasi-religious quest, with membership commitments, eating systems, inspirational meetings and cookbooks, food products and motivational success stories to reinforce the frail will.Mrs. Nidetch, the organization’s public face for decades, proclaiming its manifesto that managing weight is a lifelong task, died on Wednesday at her home in Parkland, Fla., according to a Weight Watchers spokeswoman. She was 91. A visitor in 2011 found that she weighed 142 pounds, the same as she did after her dramatic weight loss in the early 1960s.AdvertisementWith her overweight husband and two overweight friends, Mrs. Nidetch (pronounced NIE-ditch) incorporated Weight Watchers in 1963. It spawned thousands of franchises and enrolled millions around the world. It came to encompass weight-control classes that resembled group therapy sessions, summer camps for overweight children, a daily syndicated television program, magazines in America and Britain and many other enterprises.Raised in a family that ate as a consolation for disappointment and pumpkin-shaped all her young life, Mrs. Nidetch became a vivacious celebrity delivering the Weight Watchers message and her own rags-to-riches story in magazines, best-selling books, lectures and radio and television appearances. She became a familiar guest of Johnny Carson and Merv Griffin, a svelte 5-foot-7 platinum blonde with a voice like Ethel Merman’s.In 1973, 16,000 Weight Watchers jammed Madison Square Garden for the group’s 10th anniversary. It was like a revival. Bob Hope, Pearl Bailey and Roberta Peters were there, but the star, in a drift of white chiffon, was Mrs. Nidetch, a combination Cinderella and Aimee Semple McPherson with her own evangelical message: Overeating is an emotional problem with an emotional solution. Crowds surged for her autograph, to touch her or even to make eye contact. She looked as if she had never had a cookie in her life.Weight Watchers went public in 1968, turning its founders into multimillionaires, and in 1978 the company was sold to the H. J. Heinz Company for $71.2 million. Mrs. Nidetch, who had been president in its early years, was in charge of public relations until 1984, traveling widely and making public appearances for Weight Watchers International, one of the world’s most successful weight-loss businesses.She was born Jean Evelyn Slutsky in Brooklyn on Oct. 12, 1923, the daughter of David and Mae Rodin Slutsky. Her father was a cabdriver and her mother a manicurist. Her compulsive eating habits began as a child, she recalled in a memoir, “The Story of Weight Watchers” (1970, with Joan Rattner Heilman).Advertisement“I don’t really remember, but I’m positive that whenever I cried, my mother gave me something to eat,” she wrote. “I’m sure that whenever I had a fight with the little girl next door, or it was raining and I couldn’t go out, or I wasn’t invited to a birthday party, my mother gave me a piece of candy to make me feel better.”Jean and her younger sister, Helen, grew up chubby and struggled physically and emotionally to control their weight. But Jean was a talker and popular in a circle of overweight friends. She graduated from Girls High School in Brooklyn and joined the Internal Revenue Service as a clerk in 1942.In 1947, after a two-year courtship largely spent gourmandizing, she married Mortimer Nidetch. They had two children, David and Richard. Richard died in 2006. The marriage ended in divorce in 1971. She was married again, for a few months, to a bass player she met on a cruise in 1975.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Survivors include her son, David, and three grandchildren.After several years in Tulsa, Okla., and Warren, Pa., the Nidetch family settled in a modest apartment in Little Neck, Queens, in 1952 and Mortimer became an airport bus driver. Mrs. Nidetch raised funds for charitable groups, including the North Hills League for Retarded Children, and was its president for two years.She ate compulsively. She tried pills, hypnosis and fad diets, but cycles of weight loss and gain went on. In 1961, after encountering the woman who thought she was pregnant, she went to a city obesity clinic. For 10 weeks, she pretended to follow its diet. But she was obsessed with Mallomars, chocolate-coated marshmallow cookies. She hid them in the hamper and at night gorged on them in the bathroom.Trapped in a gluttonous secret life, she decided she had to confide in someone. She invited six friends, all overweight women, to her home for what turned into a group confessional, an exorcism of caloric demons that was the informal beginning of Weight Watchers. They all went on a diet, pledging mutual help through the abysses of anxiety, doubt and gnawing hunger. It worked. They soon brought more overweight friends to the meetings. Within two months, 40 women were attending.In October 1962, Mrs. Nidetch reached her goal of 142 pounds and vowed to undertake a mission to help others lose weight. With Felice and Albert Lippert, an overweight couple she had helped, she and her husband formed a corporation, and Weight Watchers was born in a loft over a movie theater in Little Neck in May 1963.The program featured weekly meetings with dieters paying a $3 fee, weighing in and providing mutual support. The original Weight Watchers diet was the nutritionally balanced regimen recommended in city obesity clinics: lean meat, fish, skim milk and fruits and vegetables. It banned alcohol, sweets and fatty foods.But the crucial ingredient was psychological — journals to keep track of what one ate, diets with realistic goals and lifelong maintenance programs, supportive magazines and books, television forums, camps, and meetings like those for alcoholics, with confessions and motivational speakers.AdvertisementThe business boomed. Hundreds of franchises were organized around the world. By 1968, five million people had enrolled. Mr. Lippert handled the business, and Mrs. Nidetch was its public image. She became a dynamic speaker and a role model whose background and common-touch sincerity captivated listeners. If I can do it, anybody can do it, was her message.She wrote “Weight Watchers Cookbook” (1966), “Weight Watchers Party & Holiday Cookbook” (1984) and “The Jean Nidetch Story: An Autobiography” (2010) as well as a regular column for Weight Watchers magazine. In her later years, she was a consultant to the company, which has been controlled since 1999 by Artal Luxembourg.Mrs. Nidetch established scholarship programs at the University of California, Los Angeles, and the University of Nevada. In 2006, she moved to Florida to be near her son, David. Even in retirement, she continued preaching the Weight Watchers gospel.“We ourselves hold the instrument that makes us fat,” she said, waving an imaginary fork in a 2011 interview with The Sun Sentinel of South Florida. “I just shake my head when I see someone eating cake and saying, ‘Oh, I wish I wasn’t heavy.’ But they keep eating the cake!”A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Jean Nidetch, 91, Is Dead; Founded Weight Watchers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.