AdvertisementSupported byBy Niki KitsantonisATHENS — The Greek Parliament enacted legislation on Wednesday to reopen the former state broadcaster ERT, which was abruptly shut down by the previous government as part of its austerity program.The move, which paves the way for the rehiring of hundreds of state employees, is a significant step toward fulfilling an important election campaign pledge of the leftist Syriza party of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras.It was unclear how the news would be received by the country’s international creditors, which are waiting for Greece to flesh out a list of planned economic overhauls before they release another tranche of rescue loans. If Athens does not receive the aid in the coming weeks, it is at risk of default.Antonis Samaras, a conservative who was prime minister at the time, described ERT as a “haven of waste” when he shut down the television and radio broadcaster in June 2013, leaving 2,600 people out of work. The decision provoked angry demonstrations and led the government’s junior coalition partner to withdraw its support.Mr. Samaras’s administration later established a smaller broadcaster, named Nerit, with a staff of around 700.Mr. Tsipras’s government has pledged to move Nerit’s staff to the revived ERT and rehire around 1,500 additional employees at an annual cost of 30 million euros, or $32.7 million. Officials have insisted that the sum will be covered by television license fees and not burden the budget.The new ERT will incorporate programming from an online protest channel that laid-off ERT staff have been operating for the past two years.The revival of ERT carries strong symbolism for Mr. Tsipras, who has described the broadcaster’s closure as a “great wound.” But it comes at a time of rising pressure on his government to commit to belt-tightening and revenue-raising measures.Greece’s creditors have signaled in recent weeks that they are running out of patience with Athens’s foot-dragging during negotiations to unlock a €7.2 billion installment of bailout funding.On Monday, Mr. Tsipras overhauled his negotiating team in an apparent effort to accelerate the negotiations, diluting the role of Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis, who has frustrated eurozone officials with his abrasive style. The initiative appeared to partly appease creditors. But the prime minister raised fresh concerns just hours later, when he suggested that he might call a referendum if a potential agreement with creditors would have to include terms that were contrary to his mandate to fight austerity measures.A list of proposed economic overhauls — including measures to improve the collection of value-added tax on the Greek islands — is to be discussed by Greek officials and creditors’ representatives at the technical level in Brussels on Thursday, a Greek Finance Ministry official said.In Athens, Mr. Varoufakis was the focus of media attention again after being set upon by anarchists at a central Athens restaurant. The minister, who was visiting a taverna in the district of Exarchia, a neighborhood popular with anarchists, had had dinner with his wife late Tuesday when a group of around 40 people jeered and threatened them, the restaurant’s owner told Greek television.A few members of the group hurled glasses at the couple but did not hit them, Mr. Varoufakis said in a statement on Wednesday. It “was not an organized incident, an attempt to seriously injure us, a provocation, or part of an orchestrated effort over the past few days aimed at my political ‘deconstruction,’ ” he said, in an apparent reference to news coverage suggesting that he has been sidelined in the negotiations with creditors.He said that he had spoken with “some of the angriest” members of the group on leaving the taverna, and that tempers had eased.Unlike ministers of the previous, conservative-led coalition government, Mr. Varoufakis has moved about Athens quite freely, forgoing the protection of bodyguards, and has largely not been heckled since his appointment in January.Advertisement