By RACHEL ABRAMSAPRIL 29, 2015
Lumber Liquidators reported a net loss in the first quarter as the company continued to dispute accusations that its Chinese-made laminate flooring contained dangerous levels of formaldehyde.The company on Wednesday posted a loss of $7.8 million, or 29 cents a diluted share, in the first three months of the year, in contrast to net income of $13.7 million, or 49 cents a diluted share, last year.The retailer also disclosed that the Justice Department was seeking criminal charges against the company under the Lacey Act, an environmental conservation provision that prohibits the sale of wildlife or plants taken illegally. The company previously said that the department was considering such charges in connection to illegally harvested wood products.Shares of Lumber Liquidators, which have fallen nearly 50 percent this year, dropped nearly 20 percent to close at $26.76.AdvertisementThe gloomy earnings report followed a report in early March on the CBS program “60 Minutes” that accused Lumber Liquidators of selling Chinese-made laminate flooring that violated California’s rules for formaldehyde emissions. Since then, the company has been focused on damage control, insisting that its products are safe as used in the home and offering free indoor air testing to reassure worried consumers.Those assurances, however, have not kept the company’s stock from tumbling. In late March, the Consumer Product Safety Commission announced an investigation into the company’s flooring products.AdvertisementCosts related to the fallout, including legal fees and air quality tests, have reached more than $15 million, the company said Wednesday.Strong sales in the first two months of the year helped buffer a 12.8 percent drop in March, after the “60 Minutes” report.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Robert M. Lynch, the company’s president and chief executive, said that the company was not increasing its purchases of laminate flooring from China and that it had been decreasing its sourcing from China even before the accusations surfaced.Same-store sales fell 1.8 percent for the quarter, and total sales grew 5.6 percent, to $260 million.Despite its woes, Lumber Liquidators said it expected to open 25 to 35 new stores this year.The company also announced that its chief financial officer, Daniel E. Terrell, would step down effective June 1. Gregory A. Whirley Jr., who has worked at the accounting firm Ernst & Young for more than a decade, will serve as senior vice president for finance as the retailer searches for a permanent replacement.A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Quarterly Loss at Lumber Liquidators After Consumer Flooring Complaints.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.