By GLENN RIFKINAPRIL 29, 2015
Growing up as the youngest of three children, Emily Kanter vividly remembers the countless dinner conversations with her parents, Michael Kanter and Elizabeth Stagl, about the couple’s natural products retail shop in Cambridge, Mass.“The business has always been the fourth child in our family,” Ms. Kanter said. “And it has always been the most needy and demanding.”The store, Cambridge Naturals, has also been a highly successful and beloved community resource, as much a cause and a mission as a company, during the more than 40 years since the couple opened the doors.Today, as they near their mid-60s, they are in the process of handing over ownership of the business to Ms. Kanter, a carefully considered decision that required deep discussion and introspection for parents and child. Given that their two older children had no interest in the store, the couple had considered selling the business before they began serious conversations with Ms. Kanter and her husband, Caleb Dean, more than two years ago.AdvertisementTheir quandary is not unusual in the natural products and food industry, where thousands of former activists and health food pioneers opened retail stores in the 1970s and 1980s to promote better health, organic food and spiritual lifestyles.AdvertisementThose who stuck with it — there are an estimated 5,000 such independent stores around the country — are now reaching retirement age and face a decision on whether to close, sell out to strangers, or turn the business over to their children, who were reared on carrot juice, almond butter sandwiches and a shared desire to carry on the mission.“My parents were getting to the point where they didn’t want to be involved day to day but they still cared about the business and its future,” Ms. Kanter said.For Ms. Kanter, the allure was strong. She had worked at the store through high school and college and had a deep affinity for her parents’ original objective of providing organic, fair-trade food and products in a local, independent setting. “It became more and more appealing to me to step into the ownership role and take advantage of a business that has such a presence in the community,” she said.So with a business card that reads “Second Generation Co-Owner,” Ms. Kanter has taken the leap, having moved back east from Portland, Ore., last summer. Turning 30 this year, she is not unlike fellow second-generation offspring taking the reins of their parents’ small businesses, especially in the world of natural products. The trend is so prevalent that it spurred a trade group, the Natural Products Association, to create a Next Generation Leadership Committee, now headed by Ms. Kanter.For Ms. Kanter’s parents, the decision to turn the business over to their daughter has been both exhilarating and stress-inducing, which is why they are making the transition slowly over the next couple of years. The plan is to transfer ownership stock gradually over the next 10 years.“This was never just a business for us,” Mr. Kanter said of the store, which has grown into a $3.2 million operation with about 20 employees. “It was more of a larger mission to bring products and information to people to help improve their lives, offer solutions for health issues and to be active in the community. The transition is an attempt to keep that mission alive in some form for another 40 years. It’s exciting to think of it as a legacy, something bigger than we are.”The stakes are high. Retail Insights, a consulting firm in Brattleboro, Vt., that specializes in the natural products industry, estimates that the industry has grown from around $1 billion in the early 1980s to $63 billion in 2014.AdvertisementFamilial business transitions in many cases are fraught with obstacles. Tales are widespread of families split by generational succession battles, and the natural food and products industry is hardly exempt.“There are more ways for it to go wrong than for it to go right,” said Jay Jacobowitz, president and founder of Retail Insights. He estimated that one in five such businesses has a second generation waiting in the wings. “So they are interested, but are they capable?” he asked.Mr. Jacobowitz said that age and lack of experience were impediments for many would-be owners. He pointed out that owners of large businesses usually send a scion to a job outside the company to get essential business seasoning, then bring them back to take over.“Lacking that outside experience, the kids can come in with a sense of entitlement and an arrogant attitude and that can be very damaging,” he said. Taking time to get outside advice in order to set reasonable expectations is critical.In some cases, circumstances can interfere with such advanced planning. When Summer Auerbach’s father learned he had cancer in 2004, the family’s business, Rainbow Blossom Natural Foods Market in Louisville, Ky., which her parents had opened in 1977, was struggling financially. Ms. Auerbach’s grandfather reached her with a life-changing phone call.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I was 22 years old, planning to go to graduate school, and I didn’t realize the severity of what was happening at home,” Ms. Auerbach said. “My grandfather said: ‘Your dad is dying; your grandmother is dying too. The family business is in financial trouble. Your family needs you.’ ”This was a weighty responsibility for a young woman with entrepreneurial ambitions and no plans to join the family business. But Ms. Auerbach went home thinking she would help out for a while and then resume her own business career.Given the family circumstances, as well as the presence of newly opened Whole Foods and Wild Oats natural food markets in Louisville, Ms. Auerbach faced a daunting challenge, especially given her age and lack of experience. But she quickly displayed a natural flair for business, and her father, who eventually recovered, provided a steady sounding board. He decided to start another business and told her: “You are so passionate about this and you’ve shown the leadership abilities. This business is all yours.”Under Ms. Auerbach’s leadership, Rainbow Blossom Natural Foods not only recovered but it even thrived. The company has grown to five locations and has more than doubled its sales.Advertisement“I had planned on going to grad school but it never happened,” she said. “I’ve gotten a better business education by doing this.”In Adam Stark’s case, his apprenticeship in his mother’s store began after high school. At first, he just wanted out. “I thought of it as a necessary evil on the way to grander and more glorious things I wanted to achieve.” Mr. Stark said.His teenage rebellion long past, Mr. Stark, now 40, was just recently named co-owner of Debra’s Natural Gourmet, a popular natural food and products outlet in West Concord, Mass. He has worked full time there for the past 15 years and immersed himself in learning about health issues and nutritional supplements.Debra Stark just turned 68 and has no specific retirement date in mind. But she is thrilled that her son has decided to take over.“I have two children, Adam and the store,” Ms. Stark wrote in a message to the store’s employees. “And the thought over these years that one child, the store, would be left an orphan someday always left me feeling bereft.”The handoff, however long it takes, is not without tension. “We butt heads every day,” Mr. Stark said. “We have a similar vision of what the business should be; what it should stand for; how to relate to customers, vendors and the larger community. But it’s more about how things are managed.” A decision to work together in the store only one day a week has eased the tension.“The day we’re there together, my impression is that he wouldn’t mind if I wasn’t there,” Ms. Stark said with a laugh.However these second-generation ownership plans evolve, the experience closely mirrors familiar parenting angst.“She will make decisions that we know are wrong and will turn out wrong,” Mr. Kanter said about his daughter. “She’ll make some we think are wrong and will turn out right. We just have to be clear and step back. That’s going to be tough emotionally, but not impossible.”A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Natural Product Retailers Make Way for the Next Generation .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.