By JACK EWINGAPRIL 29, 2015
FRANKFURT — Bank loans to the private sector rose for the first time in three years, according to data published on Wednesday by the European Central Bank, a signal that stimulus measures might be easing the credit crisis that has been stifling eurozone growth.Loans to the private sector excluding banks rose 0.1 percent in March compared with a year earlier, the central bank said. It was the first annual increase since March 2012.The data come amid other signs that the eurozone banking system is finally recovering from a crisis that began in 2008.Bank lending is an essential component of economic growth, and the data will further raise hopes that the eurozone is emerging from a period of slow growth alternating with recession that started in 2009.AdvertisementThe central bank data is also evidence that large purchases of government bonds by the European Central Bank, a form of money printing known as quantitative easing, are having the desired effect of encouraging banks to lend more.AdvertisementThe central bank has been buying government bonds and other debt using newly created money. The stimulus program in effect pumps cash into the economy and drives down market interest rates, making credit more affordable for borrowers.“The recovery should have legs,” Peter Vanden Houte, an analyst at ING Bank, said in a note to clients. “The E.C.B. should feel assured that its monetary policy is really working.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mortgages and other lending to households produced the increase, while lending to businesses continued to fall on an annual basis. But analysts also expect lending to firms to resume growing soon.Recent surveys have shown improvements in business and consumer optimism, and some analysts have begun increasing their estimates for eurozone growth. Economists at Morgan Stanley, for example, have raised their forecast for growth in 2015 to 1.4 percent in the eurozone, compared with an earlier forecast of 1 percent.Many economists also expect inflation to return to the eurozone this month after several months when consumer prices declined. The European Union statistics office will publish a first estimate of April inflation on Thursday. Modest inflation is considered healthy for growth, while falling prices are thought to be a serious risk.A study published on Monday by the European Central Bank showed that the disparity in lending rates between healthier countries like Germany and struggling nations like Spain has been narrowing. In addition, banks are more willing to lend to banks in other eurozone countries than they have been in recent years.At the same time, economists warn that the eurozone recovery has benefited from temporary factors, like low oil prices. Greece, and uncertainty about whether the government will be able to pay its debts, remains a drag on confidence, which could discourage companies from investing.“Problems in Greece will continue to pose a risk,” Tom Rogers, an economist who advises the consulting firm Ernst & Young, said in an email. “But today’s data offer further evidence the eurozone recovery is becoming more durable.”A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Private Sector Loans in Europe Are Up for First Time in 3 Years.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.