By JACK EWINGAPRIL 29, 2015
FRANKFURT — Volkswagen, Europe’s largest carmaker, said on Wednesday that net profit rose 19 percent in the first quarter as the auto market in Western Europe recovered.But earnings at the company, the world’s second-largest automaker after Toyota, remained dependent on the high-end Audi and Porsche brands. Cars with the Volkswagen insignia were only marginally profitable, even though they account for most of sales volume.The figures underline the challenges that Volkswagen faces after the departure of Ferdinand Piëch, a scion of the Porsche family who dominated the company for more than two decades but resigned as chairman of the Volkswagen supervisory board on Saturday after losing a power struggle.While Volkswagen remains profitable and dominates the European market, it has fought in the United States and is suffering from economic slumps in Russia and Brazil, which are important markets. Growth in China has slowed markedly.AdvertisementVolkswagen said that net profit for the group rose to 2.9 billion euros, or about $3.2 billion, in the first three months of 2015, from €2.5 billion a year earlier. Sales rose 10 percent to €52.7 billion.AdvertisementOperating profit improved at the division that produces Volkswagen-brand cars, rising 17 percent to €514 million, from €440 million a year earlier. The unit benefited from cost-cutting as well as growth in European markets like Spain that are recovering from a deep economic crisis.Despite the improved earnings, Volkswagen-brand cars made an operating profit equal to 2 percent of sales in the quarter, up from 1.8 percent a year earlier, the company said.Together, Audi and Porsche vehicles accounted for four times as much profit as the Volkswagen-brand unit even though they produce less than one-third as many cars.“We have always emphasized that 2015 will be a challenging year for the automotive industry as a whole, and also for us,” Martin Winterkorn, the Volkswagen chief executive, said in a statement. “Nevertheless, our key figures for the first quarter show that the Volkswagen Group remains on course, despite the headwinds.”Mr. Winterkorn emerged the victor on Saturday from a power struggle that broke into the open this month. Mr. Piëch, who had been either chief executive or chairman of the company since the early 1990s, had indicated in an interview with German magazine Der Spiegel that he was disenchanted with the performance of his onetime protégé.But Mr. Winterkorn refused to leave voluntarily. And he won the support of labor representatives, who under German law have half of the seats on the supervisory board, as well as the state of Lower Saxony, which owns 20 percent of Volkswagen’s voting shares.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Porsche family, descendants of Ferdinand Porsche, designer of the car that later became known as the Beetle, also sided with Mr. Winterkorn. The Porsche family owns a majority of the voting shares. Mr. Piëch is a grandson of Mr. Porsche, but he has long had tense relations with his cousins.Volkswagen benefited from the recovery of the European automobile market from lows, the figures released on Wednesday showed. The company’s unit sales in Western Europe rose 6.5 percent to 780,000 cars, including a 25 percent increase in Spain, which has been one of the countries hardest hit by the eurozone economic crisis.AdvertisementIn the United States, though, sales slipped 1.4 percent to about 132,000 cars during the quarter, including Audi and Porsche. Volkswagen-brand cars have only 2 percent of the market so far this year, according to Kelley Blue Book, down from 3 percent in 2012.“VW is struggling because they don’t have the S.U.V. products they need right now,” said Karl Brauer, a senior analyst at Kelley Blue Book. “That’s the hot segment right now.”Mr. Brauer said that VW sales in the United States could improve as the company rolled out the latest version of its Golf, which has received favorable reviews. Worldwide, profit on Volkswagen cars could begin to improve, Mr. Brauer said, as the company intensifies efforts to share components among many different vehicles, a strategy that reduces costs.Worldwide, sales of Volkswagen brand cars fell 1.3 percent, to 1.5 million vehicles, during the first three months of the year. The company recorded big declines in Brazil, where unit sales fell 17 percent for all its brands because of a slumping economy, and Russia, where sales plunged 35 percent as the ruble weakened and the country sunk into recession.Sales in China, Volkswagen’s largest market, rose 1.9 percent to 897,000 vehicles. Cooling growth in the country is another worry for Volkswagen, analysts say.Volkswagen also produces Skoda and Seat economy cars, Lamborghini and Bugatti sports cars, and Bentley luxury cars. Sales of all those car brands rose in the quarter except Bentley, which sold 2,232 vehicles, compared with 2,579 a year earlier.Sales of Scania and MAN trucks also declined in the quarter because of problems in Brazil and Russia, Volkswagen said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.