By STANLEY REEDAPRIL 29, 2015
VILA NOVA DE FOZ CÔA, Portugal — After a long, grinding descent through rocky terraces planted with almond trees, Thierry Aubry eased a battered four-wheel-drive vehicle to a halt on a patch of level ground above the wild Côa River in northeast Portugal.The place, known as Cardina, is a pastoral idyll, nestled in a gorge overlooking deep pools skimmed by swallows. It was also, archaeologists are discovering, an appealing spot for ancient humans. It is high enough above the river to avoid flooding, yet provides access to food and water.Excavations in the elevated patch of land have found evidence of long habitation from about 12,000 to 30,000 years ago, including tools and the remains of two buildings that may have been meeting places.“There is something special about the Côa Valley,” said Mr. Aubry, a French archaeologist for the nearby Côa Museum. He is part of a dedicated group of scientists who have made breakthrough finds in the area over the past two decades.AdvertisementMuch of the valley’s special quality would have been lost if a hydroelectric dam had been completed not far downriver. The backed-up water would have inundated places like Cardina. Despite strong opposition, construction on the dam had begun before it was halted in 1995 by the Portuguese government, in part because politicians came to realize that the riverbanks concealed a treasure trove of ancient art. In 1998, the area was designated a Unesco World Heritage site.AdvertisementOver the past quarter century, archaeologists have discovered what experts say is the world’s largest assemblage of open-air ice age art, centered on the Côa River. Thousands of engraved images decorate the rocky cliffs above the river and nearby.Some, like a big, bold scraping of a stag high above the riverbank at Penascosa are easy to spot, but others are hidden under outcroppings and badly worn and are difficult to recognize without the help of a guide.Before the Côa discoveries, it was widely assumed that it was almost impossible for unprotected ice age art to have survived to the present. Now archaeologists are finding more sites in places like Spain, Germany and the Nile Valley in Egypt.The Côa findings have “changed the map” of our ancient history, Mr. Aubry said.Some of the Côa’s best art can be seen at night, when local guides like Miguel Torres use powerful lights to illuminate the faint outlines of deer, horses, ibexes and extinct cattle called aurochs. While many of the etchings have been damaged over the thousands of years since their creation, some would clearly make the greatest hits of the ice age. In one remarkable image, the animals’ heads are drawn in two or three overlapped positions to create the illusion of movement.Researchers like Mario Reis, a scientist who likes nothing better than to clamber like a goat through the dry brush, checking rocks for images, continue to add to the list of finds. An archaeological park has been established that covers about 80 square miles, and there is an elegant museum dedicated to making the art more accessible to visitors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What stands out about these drawings for Mr. Aubry and other archaeologists is that they are in the open — not in caves like the paintings found at places like Lascaux in France. Archaeologists are shifting to the view that ice age art was not mostly done on the walls of caves but survived there in disproportionate quantities because it was protected from the elements.The thought is that the people who made the art were not “cave men” but lived in the open, in places like Cardina, and used art to communicate among themselves and with other groups.While far more data is needed to flesh out the details about these people, it helps that the Côa area remains sparsely inhabited and is perhaps not so different from what it might have been like tens of thousands of years ago. “It gives us the opportunity to look at an unmodified landscape and how people interacted with their environment, “ said João Zilhão, an archaeologist at Barcelona University, who led the effort in 1990s to have the Côa declared a Unesco World Heritage site.AdvertisementMr. Aubry said that the ice age people, who built encampments along the river, were most likely taking advantage of the location’s advantages. The rock pools of the river were good places to trap fish, like the shad thought to have made spring runs in those times. Groups of people needed to stay in place long enough to dry the fish to preserve it to eat later in the year. A plateau above the river probably had water holes that attracted animals to hunt.Much of the art found along the river appears unlikely to have been created for the magical or ritualistic purposes often attributed to work of this era. The groups of hunter-gatherers, Mr. Zilhão and others theorize, were signposting important places like fords in rivers or hunting paths, or marking out territories for various groups that were in contact across a distance from the Portuguese coast to the interior of the Iberian Peninsula.“Anyone who has worked on the period has tremendous respect for the capacity of these people,” said Paul Bahn, a British author and archaeologist. “They were really the same as us, transmitting information over great distances.”And thanks to the movement that stopped the building of a hydroelectric dam that would have submerged this ice age heritage, scientists can go on studying the ways of the ancient inhabitants of the Côa Valley.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.