By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 29, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea — Samsung Electronics said Wednesday that its first-quarter net profit had plunged 39 percent as consumers switched to bigger iPhones made by its rival, Apple, squeezing earnings from its mobile business to less than half of what they had been a year earlier.The company reported that its net profit in the three months that ended in March had been 4.63 trillion won, or $4.33 billion, compared with 7.49 trillion won a year earlier. That was less than the forecast of 4.97 trillion won in a survey of analysts by FactSet, a financial data provider. Samsung, the maker of Galaxy smartphones, said its mobile division generated 2.74 trillion won in quarterly profit, compared with 6.43 trillion won a year earlier.The South Korean company said its profits would increase during the second quarter as its newest flagship models, the Galaxy S6 and the curved-screen S6 Edge expanded sales after their global introduction earlier this month. But shipments of those high-end phones will not suffice to offset an expected decrease in sales of middle- to low-end models, it said. Marketing expenses will also go up, putting pressure on the profit margin.Analysts estimate that Samsung sold more smartphones than Apple during the first quarter but that Samsung lost ground in the high-end market to Apple after iPhone models with bigger screens came out last fall. Apple on Tuesday reported that it sold 61 million iPhones in the first three months of the year.Samsung, which does not disclose its smartphone shipments, is estimated to have sold 81 million smartphones during the quarter, according to analysts. But most of the sales increase came from midlevel handsets like the Galaxy A series. The period did not include the introduction of the S6 models.Samsung said its quarterly revenue had fallen 12 percent from a year earlier to 47.12 trillion won, while operating income had dropped 30 percent to 5.98 trillion won, in line with Samsung’s earnings preview earlier this month.A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.