AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersThe highly pathogenic H5 avian flu turned up in initial tests at five more farms in Iowa, including a commercial egg operation housing up to 5.5 million birds, Iowa’s agriculture department said on Thursday.If the virus is confirmed at the farms in additional tests underway at a federal Agriculture Department laboratory, the number of American cases could surpass 20 million birds and result in the biggest death toll in a bird flu outbreak in United States history.The latest case, at an egg farm in Buena Vista County, could be the largest single operation to be hit in the current outbreak.The egg farm’s owner, Rembrandt Foods, one of the top egg producers in the United States, confirmed the outbreak but disputed the number of birds affected. The state did not identify the affected farm by name.Avian flu was probable at four other commercial farms in Buena Vista, Sioux and Clay Counties, the Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship said. If the virus is confirmed at all five farms in the coming days, the number of sites where H5 has been found in Iowa would rise to 17.Hours earlier on Thursday, state officials confirmed that an Iowa-based chicken broiler breeding farm had initially tested positive for the virus. The farm, in Kossuth County, was comparatively small, with an estimated 19,000 birds. But it was thought to be the first time in this outbreak that the virus had affected a broiler breeding farm; such farms are said to have better biosecurity systems. And it underscores the potential for the outbreak to have a wide-ranging effect on the country’s poultry supply chain. Infections with the H5N2 strain have picked up pace in the last few weeks. On Monday, officials in Iowa reported probable cases at five farms affecting an estimated six million chickens, and a turkey farm in Wisconsin with more than a million birds tested positive. Two bird flu strains have been found in the United States this year. The H5N2 strain has been reported in Arkansas, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, North Dakota, Oregon, South Dakota, Washington and Wisconsin. It has also been identified on farms in Ontario, Canada.The H5N8 strain has been identified in California and also in Idaho, according to the Agriculture Department.The potential economic cost of the outbreak is unclear. The number of birds affected by the outbreak so far represents a fraction of the United States commercial flock. Poultry processors slaughtered nearly 8.7 billion chickens in 2014 and about 237 million turkeys, according Agriculture Department data.The virus can kill nearly an entire infected flock in 48 hours. In the outbreak of 1983 to 1984 in the Northeast, so far the largest in American history, about 17 million birds were culled.Advertisement