AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter EavisThe Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which has recently faced strong criticism of its oversight of Wall Street, announced on Thursday that its head of bank supervision plans to leave at the end of year.The New York Fed gave no reason for the resignation of the official, Sarah J. Dahlgren, who was promoted in recent years as part of the Fed’s efforts to bolster its regulatory efforts. It did not name a successor.Ms. Dahlgren, 51, will remain in her position as the head of the financial institution supervision group until Oct. 1. For the final three months, she will assume the role of adviser to William C. Dudley, the president of the New York Fed.“Sarah has been tireless in her service to the bank and she has accomplished much during her long and distinguished tenure,” Mr. Dudley said in a statement. “She has never been afraid to take on the most difficult assignments and has done so with the highest levels of professionalism, integrity and dedication to public service.”Ms. Dahlgren has been at the New York Fed since 1990.Her departure comes at an uncomfortable time for Mr. Dudley.The New York Fed came under heavy scrutiny after traders at JPMorgan Chase ran up huge losses in 2012 in a failed trading strategy that became known as the London Whale scandal.Then, last fall, Carmen M. Segarra, a former New York Fed examiner, described an incident in which she said that the regulator had been overly deferential toward Goldman Sachs. Ms. Segarra provided tape recordings of New York Fed meetings that were featured in a report by ProPublica, an investigative news organization, and “This American Life,” a radio show.At a contentious Senate hearing in November on the New York Fed’s regulatory track record, Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, berated Mr. Dudley, saying, “You need to fix it, Mr. Dudley, or we need to get someone who will.”Ms. Dahlgren has played a central role in Mr. Dudley’s plans to “fix” the New York Fed’s supervision after the financial crisis of 2008. Asked what the New York Fed was doing to improve, Mr. Dudley, in a previous interview, cited the promotion of Ms. Dahlgren, among other actions.Ms. Dahlgren appeared to share Mr. Dudley’s desire to clean up the ethical culture of Wall Street after a long series of banking scandals. “The job of the leader is to encourage and foster the good and squash the bad,” Ms. Dahlgren said in a recent speech that addressed culture at financial institutions.Turf battles may also be affecting decisions of senior staff members at the New York Fed. Since the crisis, the New York Fed has lost some regulatory power to supervisors at the Federal Reserve Board in Washington. An employee from the board, for instance, is chairman of the powerful Fed committee that oversees large financial institutions. Ms. Dahlgren is on that committee.One question is whether Ms. Dahlgren will end up working for a firm that she used to regulate. The Fed has rules that aim to minimize the conflicts that can arise when its employees go to work on Wall Street.In November, The New York Times reported that a New York Fed regulator went to work for Goldman, where he received information from a person who was still at the Fed.Ms. Dahlgren gained prominence within regulatory circles for her work during the most worrying phase of the 2008 crisis. Timothy F. Geithner, then president of the New York Fed, called on her to work on the bailout of the American International Group.“That weekend, I was here working on Lehman,” she later told the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission. “I was up all weekend until Tuesday morning, hoping I could go home early. And that didn’t happen for another seven to eight months.”Advertisement