By DAVID JOLLYAPRIL 30, 2015
PARIS — Perhaps only in France can a regular shareholders’ meeting become an affair of state.Shareholders of Renault, the French automaker, awarded double voting rights on Thursday to long-term investors, handing a victory to President François Hollande’s government.The approval of the plan came over the objections of Carlos Ghosn, the chairman and chief executive of Renault, who opposed the measure on the grounds that it might destabilize the company’s lucrative alliance with Nissan Motor.Renault, in which the state has long held a stake, had publicly urged shareholders to support a resolution maintaining the one-vote system. But on Thursday, it fell short of the two-thirds majority needed, garnering just under 61 percent of the shares voted.The company might still be able to challenge the legality of the government’s action, French commentators have said. Mr. Ghosn did not address the issue after the resolution failed, and a Renault spokeswoman said afterward that he was not immediately available to comment.AdvertisementThe dispute centers on a rule that takes effect this year. Known as the Florange law, it is named for a town in eastern France where Mr. Hollande made a promise to protect French jobs. Until now, companies had the option of granting special voting rights for long-term investors, and many prefer to, but the new law makes it mandatory unless it is specifically rejected by shareholders.AdvertisementThe government argues that long-term investors give companies room to develop strategy without the stress of meeting quarterly expectations. Skeptics say the law may be an elaborate shield against foreign takeovers and will hurt companies by shielding them from market discipline.Mr. Hollande’s economy minister, Emmanuel Macron, shocked Renault on April 8 by informing it that the state had employed stock options to buy 14 million more shares in the automaker, raising its stake to 19.7 percent from 15 percent.Mr. Macron is a former investment banker who has made a point of brandishing his pro-market credentials, a contrast to his predecessor, Arnaud Montebourg, who hails from the left of Mr. Hollande’s Socialist party and sometimes seemed to go out of his way to provoke business leaders.Mr. Macron has sought in recent weeks to reassure Renault’s leadership that it had Mr. Hollande’s full confidence. But he said the government was determined to ensure that the carmaker, which it views as a strategic enterprise, adopted double voting rights. He has promised to reduce the government’s stake to 15 percent once that goal was attained.The move looked different to Renault’s board, however. Mr. Ghosn is one of France’s best-known and highest-paid executives, and much of his reputation rests on his role in the Renault-Nissan alliance, which has helped Renault remain relatively strong in a weak European market even as other midrange automakers, including its larger French rival, PSA Peugeot Citroën, have suffered.Although Renault controls its Japanese counterpart with a 43 percent stake, Nissan’s 15 percent cross-holding in Renault does not have voting rights. That imbalance rankles some in Japan, especially considering that Nissan has outperformed Renault in recent years. Mr. Macron’s stake-building, which was carried out clandestinely with stock options, touched directly on that sensitive spot, and there has been speculation in the news media that Nissan might seek to reopen the question of its nonvoting status.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The introduction of double voting rights would considerably accentuate the existing asymmetry,” the Renault board said in a statement just before the meeting.It estimated that adoption of the Florange law would leave the state with a 28 percent voting share, compared with none for Nissan. (The double voting rights, which accrue only to investors who have registered their shares and held them for two years, creates a complicated weighting system because the total number of votes must still add up to 100 percent.)Advertisement“Nissan has made known that this would disturb the equilibrium of the alliance,” the statement said. Daimler, the German maker of Mercedes-Benz cars and a partner of the two allies, “has the same concern,” it added.Mr. Macron said in a statement after the vote that it had been an “important” step, one that was “consistent with our desire to defend a long-term capitalism, that values and favors shareholders who are in it for the long haul and who stick with companies through thick and thin.”And he fired back against critics of the financial operation by which the state acquired the new shares, saying: “It’s a normal practice in the market, perfectly regular and transparent.” And he reiterated that they would be sold and the stake returned to 15 percent.Denis Branche, a partner at the French asset-management company PhiTrust Active Investors, said it was not surprising that the resolution failed. He noted that the weight of the state’s holding was magnified by the low shareholder participation rate on Thursday, with just 72.5 percent of shares voted.“That’s precisely the point, why we oppose the double voting rights,” said Mr. Branche, who led a campaign to urge companies to retain the traditional system. One big shareholder, endowed with double rights, “can block practically any resolution they like,” including things like capital increases that would lessen their control.A similar dispute animated the April 17 shareholders’ assembly of Vivendi, the media giant that owns the Universal Music Group. In that case, though, it was the board, led by Vincent Bolloré, the company’s chairman and largest shareholder, who supported the enhanced voting rights. In the end, Mr. Bolloré faced down a shareholder rebellion to get the measure through.Georges Daverat, a Renault shareholder who attended the meeting on Thursday, said he was “totally furious” about the government’s intervention, particularly the fact that the state had used the options to but its stake, what he said amounted to insider trading.“The Florange law is bad in itself,” Mr. Daverat, who is also a business law professor at the Sorbonne, said. “So that just adds insult to injury. One-share/one-vote is balanced. One-share/two-votes is unbalanced, it goes against logic.”A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Renault Grants Rights.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.