AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The Royal Bank of Scotland said on Thursday that it fell to a loss in the first quarter as the British bank was again weighed down by restructuring and litigation costs.In a news release, R.B.S., based in Edinburgh, said that it booked 1.3 billion pounds, or about $2 billion, in charges for its efforts to radically reshape the lender and for potential fines and settlements related to continuing inquiries into potential misconduct by its employees. That includes lawsuits and investigations into the selling of mortgage-backed securities in the United States and suspected manipulation of foreign currency markets.R.B.S. was among a group of the world’s biggest banks that agreed in November to pay a combined $4.25 billion to end investigations by United States, British and Swiss regulators over accusations of conspiracy to manipulate the currency markets.But the bank remains in discussions with other government authorities to resolve the currency inquiries, including “advanced settlement discussions” with the Justice Department, the bank said.“I’d like to get as many of these issues out of the way in 2015 as we can,” Ross McEwan, the R.B.S. chief executive, said on a conference call with journalists. “We’re just not going to tolerate this sort of activity going forward in our business.”R.B.S. said it set aside about £334 million for potential currency trading settlements in the quarter.Investors are eagerly awaiting guidance from management about when higher short-term interest rates will impact the banks’ bottom lines.For the three months ended March 31, R.B.S. reported a loss of £446 million, compared with a profit of £1.19 billion in the first quarter of 2014. The same period a year earlier included £129 million in restructuring costs.Excluding restructuring and litigation charges, the bank reported an adjusted operating profit of £1.63 billion.“While we’re pleased with the results at an operating level, neither you nor I are pleased to be announcing a loss,” Mr. McEwan said.Net interest income, the measure of what a bank earns on its lending after deducting what it pays out on deposits and other liabilities, rose to £2.76 billion in the first quarter, from £2.7 billion in the same period a year earlier.Operating expenses rose to £4.09 billion, from £3.41 billion in the first quarter of 2014.Mr. McEwan is in the process of trying to reshape the bank into a Britain-focused retail and corporate bank.In February, the lender, which once had ambitions of being a global investment bank, announced plans to dismantle its investment bank and reduce its geographic footprint to about 13 countries from 38. That will result in significant job losses, including in the United States.“This is going to be another tough year as we restructure this bank,” Mr. McEwan said.The bank also is in the process of repaying a bailout of £45 billion it received during the financial crisis from the British government, which has a roughly 80 percent stake in the lender.Advertisement