By STANLEY REEDAPRIL 30, 2015
ABERDEEN, Scotland — Royal Dutch Shell said on Thursday that its earnings for the first quarter fell by 56 percent compared with a year earlier, as improved performance in marketing and refining failed to offset the effects of the plunge in oil prices.The Anglo-Dutch company’s profit, adjusted for inventory changes and one-time items, was $3.2 billion, compared with $7.3 billion in the same period a year earlier. Still, the results beat analysts’ consensus forecasts.But analysts said that there was cause for concern in Shell’s results. In an indication of how quickly a drop in oil prices can erode margins, the company said that its earnings from finding and producing oil and gas were $675 million for the quarter, compared with $5.7 billion a year earlier.Shell said that the price it received for oil in the first quarter was 52 percent lower than the same period in 2014, while the price of natural gas fell by 27 percent. The fall in prices directly cut $4.7 billion from earnings.As the price of crude oil fluctuates, why some countries are faring much better than others.“Cracks starting to show” was the language that Biraj Borkhataria, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets in London, used in a note to clients on Thursday.AdvertisementHe pointed out that profits in what Shell calls “integrated gas,” which mostly refers to liquefied natural gas, fell sharply to about $1.2 billion, compared with about $3.3 billion a year earlier. Liquefied natural gas has been an important earner for Shell and a big part of the calculus in its recent $70 billion bid for BG Group, which was once part of British Gas and is a major player in liquefied natural gas.AdvertisementShell continues to struggle in the Americas, where it lost $1.1 billion in the quarter, in part because of low prices for shale gas in the United States as well as costly preparations for drilling in Alaska this summer. It is preparing “a small armada” of ships including two drilling rigs for this effort, Shell’s chief financial officer, Simon Henry, told reporters on Thursday.Refining and marketing, as well as chemical sales, on the other hand, showed strong improvement, together earning $2.6 billion, compared with about $1.6 billion in the same period a year earlier. Shell said that refining profit margins were better in all regions.In recent months, refining, which has been a struggling business at most major oil companies because of oversupply, has improved because of lower prices for the crude oil used in the process and relatively strong demand.Ben van Beurden, Shell’s chief executive, said in a statement that “in what is clearly a difficult industry environment, we continue to take steps to further improve competitive performance.”Mr. van Beurden said that Shell had sold about $2 billion worth of assets this year that the company considered nonstrategic. These sales included onshore oil properties in Nigeria that are vulnerable to sabotage and oil theft. Shell also sold 185 gas stations in the United States.Mr. van Beurden, who became chief executive at the beginning of last year, is trying to offload marginal assets like the Nigerian onshore fields and some refining and marketing networks. He is focusing on Shell’s more profitable businesses like liquefied natural gas as well as exploration and production in deep water in the Gulf of Mexico and elsewhere.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Its most important move was its offer in April to buy BG, which would be Shell’s biggest deal ever, by far.BG should help Shell bolster its exploration and production unit by adding BG’s portfolio of discoveries and properties under development in Brazil, East Africa and elsewhere. Shell, in turn, would apply its much larger capital resources and development expertise to the combined company.BG also bolsters Shell’s leading position in the production and distribution of liquefied natural gas, although that business may struggle in the coming quarters because liquefied natural gas prices are linked to oil with a time lag of three to six months.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.