AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioSFX Entertainment, the troubled promoter of dance music festivals, has extended a deadline for offers to buy all or parts of the company, as its stock remains low and problems at one of its marquee festivals in Georgia last weekend have led to a review by municipal authorities.The company announced on Thursday that bids for the company or its various assets — which include dozens of festivals around the world and the online music store Beatport — would be due Oct. 14 rather than on Friday. The original deadline was set in August after Robert F. X. Sillerman, the company’s founder and chief executive, failed to complete a takeover that had been agreed to in May.Mr. Sillerman’s bid to buy the stock he did not already own — he currently controls almost 38 percent of the outstanding stock, according to a recent filing — had valued the company at $774 million, including debt. But as doubts grew over Mr. Sillerman’s ability to secure financing for his bid, the company’s stock plunged more than 80 percent, far below the price Mr. Sillerman had agreed to pay.SFX’s announcement on Thursday signaled to investors that a sale of at least some of its assets was likely. The company also said that Mr. Sillerman had agreed to “vote all shares beneficially owned by him in favor of a transaction involving the sale of the company” as recommended by a special committee set up by the board to review sale bids.SFX began in 2012 with an ambitious plan to spend up to $1 billion acquiring festivals and other properties related to the trend for electronic dance music. The genre’s popularity, and its value to the music industry, has continued to grow since then; according to one estimate, the global value of the genre is worth $6.9 billion. But SFX, which went public in October 2013, has piled on $295 million in debt and remained unprofitable even as it has grown to become a major festival promoter.As its problems mounted, SFX canceled its One Tribe festival outside Los Angeles and presented a smaller edition of its Electric Zoo in New York. The TomorrowWorld festival last weekend in Chattahoochee Hills, Ga., outside Atlanta, was projected to be one of the company’s major attractions, with up to 190,000 attendees expected.But the event was plagued by heavy rain, and thousands of festivalgoers were reportedly left stranded when shuttle buses stopped running. The festival restricted access on Sunday to campers already at the site, and it offered refunds to those who were affected. Tom Reed, the mayor of Chattahoochee Hills, promised “a dissection of what went wrong and a process to ensure it does not happen again.”SFX’s announcement on Thursday was met with some approval by investors, with the company’s stock up in early trading. But Richard Tullo, an analyst at Albert Fried & Company who has frequently been critical of the company’s management, showed the skepticism that SFX has faced recently among many investors.In a research note, Mr. Tullo said a sale of “non-core assets,” including some festivals, could save the company. But he added: “Investors have every right to doubt today’s headlines as Bob Sillerman has given them no reason to believe in the go-shop process. However, if the statement has integrity, we speculate it’s good news.”Advertisement