AdvertisementSupported byBy Mary Williams WalshIf there is a path leading out of the realm of “systemically important financial institutions,” the American International Group may already be on it, the insurer’s chief executive told securities analysts on Friday.The chief executive, Peter Hancock, made his remarks in a conference call to discuss A.I.G.’s first-quarter profit, which was $1.22 a share, a little better than the $1.19 a share that analysts had predicted. He also described the measures A.I.G. had been taking to strengthen its balance sheet and reduce risk.One analyst asked whether A.I.G. might go so far as to change its corporate structure to escape its current designation as a systemically important financial institution, or SIFI.“The discussion of the off ramp certainly means that there is a strategic question to be answered at some point down the road,” Mr. Hancock replied.The analyst pointed to General Electric’s surprise announcement in April that it would break up its big financial division, GE Capital, and sell most of it, in part because GE Capital has also been designated a nonbank SIFI, along with A.I.G., Prudential Financial and MetLife.Institutions that are so designated face heightened oversight by the Federal Reserve and will have to build up their capital and generally use less borrowed money. Detailed rules are still being developed, but many analysts think that by making SIFIs more stable, the rules will also make them less profitable.MetLife has sued the Financial Stability Oversight Council, which identifies the SIFIs, to have its designation rescinded. And Prudential’s chief financial officer, Robert Falzon, told a Senate panel on Thursday that while Prudential did not agree with the designation, “what is not clear to us is what we can do to change the outcome, or even to reduce our systemic footprint.”Mr. Hancock’s remarks suggested that he found SIFI status less objectionable and thought A.I.G. could work with its Fed regulators.“We are still awaiting greater clarity on exactly how SIFI rules will be applied in the future,” he said. But so far, the Fed has “prioritized derisking exactly along the lines that management would have done already,” he said.A.I.G. has about 200 other regulators, he said — in the 50 states, the District of Columbia, the nation’s territories and the many countries where A.I.G. does business.“Should you get off this off-ramp, the other 200 regulators are also very interested in how we run the company,” Mr. Hancock said. “So it’s not clear to me getting off that off-ramp changes management’s flexibility in any material way.”The discussion came two days after standing-room-only hearings in both the House and the Senate about how the insurance industry is regulated and what changes are needed in light of the global financial crisis.In the United States, the individual states are the primary regulators of insurance, but that system was called into question in 2008 when troubles at A.I.G. required a $182 billion taxpayer bailout led by the Fed and the Treasury. State regulators had been examining the individual parts of A.I.G. before the crisis, but the holding-company system turned out to be so vast and complicated that no state could examine all of it at once, leaving big pockets of hidden risk.Under the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul act of 2010, that job is to be the Fed’s once the SIFI rules are put in place. But internationally, another set of capital and liquidity rules is being drafted for insurers, causing consternation among state insurance commissioners and some of the companies they regulate.Michael McRaith, head of the Treasury’s federal insurance office, told the legislators that the international insurance standards body had already adopted the world’s first method for measuring the total capital of big global insurance systems and was now refining it and working on systems for absorbing big losses.But Mr. Falzon of Prudential said that companies were concerned that if the international standards were issued first, they would end up misaligned with the United States’ rules.“We strongly believe that all efforts should focus on getting domestic standards right before agreeing to any international standards,” he said.Advertisement