AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — Factories in the United States expanded in April at the same pace as in March, but manufacturers are starting to curtail hiring in a possible sign of weakness. And data also released Friday showed that construction fell in March as an increase in nonresidential construction was offset by declines in home building and government projects.The Institute for Supply Management, a trade group of purchasing managers, said on Friday that its manufacturing index was unchanged at 51.5. The index had dropped in the previous five months, though any reading above 50 signals expansion.American manufacturers have faced a drag in recent months from falling oil prices and a stronger dollar. The drop in oil prices has cut into demand for pipelines and equipment used by drillers and energy companies. At the same time, the dollar has risen in value over the last year against the euro and other currencies, causing American-made goods to be more expensive abroad and hurting exports.The drag from the West Coast ports disruption continues, as shipments have been delayed because of a labor dispute that was largely settled in February and March.New orders and productivity improved in April, but the employment component of the index slipped below 50 to 48.3. The drop in the employment indicator could indicate less hiring ahead and the possibility of layoffs, or it could be a blip.Bradley Holcomb, chairman of the ISM’s manufacturing business survey committee, said he expected factory employment to rebound.“It’s more of tapping the brakes to assess where this manufacturing economy and overall economy are going,” he said. " “We’re obviously off to a slow start in the first quarter.”In March, construction in the United States fell 0.6 percent to a seasonally adjusted $966.6 billion after a flat reading in February, the Commerce Department said. Construction activity has fallen or shown no gain in four of the last five months, underscoring the economic toll from a severe winter.For March, housing construction dropped 1.6 percent as both single-family construction and apartment building contracted. It was the biggest slide since June. Also in March, spending on government projects fell 1.5 percent, the third straight decline.One bright spot in March was a 1 percent rise in nonresidential construction, with gains in hotels and office buildings. Economists are forecasting a rebound in coming months as warmer weather lifts activity.Also Friday, the University of Michigan said consumer sentiment in April rose to its second-highest level since 2007.The index rose to 95.9, from 93 in March, beaten since the recession began only by January’s reading of 98.1. Over the last five months, sentiment has been, on average, at its highest level since 2004.Richard Curtin, chief economist of the Michigan survey, attributed the April increase to optimism over consistently low inflation and low interest rates and improving prospects for jobs and incomes.Since March 2014, the American economy has produced a healthy 3.1 million job gains. The government said on Wednesday that the economy grew at an annual rate of just 0.2 percent from January through March. But economists expect growth to strengthen in the spring.“Consumers appear to be shrugging off recently disappointing economic data and stock market choppiness,” Jim Baird, chief investment officer for Plante Moran Financial Advisors, said in a research note. “Despite evidence that the economy slowed considerably in the first quarter, sentiment remains relatively high and suggests that the important consumer spending engine isn’t at risk of stalling.”Advertisement