AdvertisementSupported byBy Aaron M. KesslerAuto manufacturers nearly across the board reported strong April sales gains in the United States, powered by the continued rise in sales of pickup trucks and crossover sport utility vehicles.The industry sold 1.45 million vehicles last month, up 4.6 percent from a year ago, according to Autodata. The seasonally adjusted annual rate rose to 16.5 million, up 450,000 from April 2014.General Motors, the nation’s biggest automaker, posted a 6 percent increase last month compared with the previous year. It was its best month for crossover vehicle sales, which were up 25 percent companywide.Ford also had its best month for S.U.V. sales. The shift by Americans away from cars has been striking. April was the 20th consecutive month that trucks and S.U.V.s outsold cars in the United States, according to Jessica Caldwell, senior analyst at Edmunds.com.The rise of compact and subcompact S.U.V.s, which compete in price with traditional midsize sedans, has opened up sport utilities to consumers who previously could not afford them. Small S.U.V.s — like the forerunner Buick Encore, with sales up 29 percent in April for a 16th consecutive month of gains — are attracting not only those who are downsizing from larger vehicles, but especially drivers of smaller cars.“A lot of people thought it would have an effect on larger S.U.V.s, but it’s actually having the strongest effect on small and midsize cars,” Ms. Caldwell said.Dave Winslow, vice president for digital strategy at Dealertrack, said traffic at online car sites indicated a curious trend: Shoppers who research small cars, and even see them in person, are increasingly deciding on compact S.U.V.s when they actually get to a showroom.“You may start off looking for a Camry and when you get there, come across a compact S.U.V. and decide to move up,” Mr. Winslow said. “They find out they can get a better value.”Indeed, the typical small S.U.V. may cost only a few hundred dollars more than a comparable car. And gas mileage is increasingly competitive as well.Mr. Winslow said the popularity of entry-level S.U.V.s created something of a quandary for automakers — they have made small sport utilities more attractive at the expense of their own car brands.“They’ve created this great deal point in compact S.U.V.s that’s made it more challenging to push their own new sedans out,” he said.As a result, he said, automakers will probably increase their incentive spending on sedans over the summer to move those cars off the lot — a potential boon for consumers.Overall Chevy-brand sales were up 3 percent, while Cadillac rose 14 percent and GMC had a 20 percent gain. Only the Buick brand posted a loss, down 5 percent, as all but the Encore S.U.V. fell by double digits. The numbers for some of G.M.’s largest S.U.V.s fell in April: Chevy Tahoe sales were down 19 percent, and the GMC Yukon fell 15 percent.The Ford brand was up 5 percent. Its luxury Lincoln division rose 20 percent for its best April since 2008. Sales of Ford’s powerhouse F-150 pickup continued to remain sluggish, though, as F-series sales dropped 1 percent.Among Ford’s challenges was the supply of the new aluminum-bodied F-150. The company said that its assembly plant in Kansas City, Mo., would continue to increase production through the second quarter.Fiat Chrysler continued its winning streak with its 61st consecutive month of sales gains, up 6 percent in April compared with last year. The Jeep brand again led the way, with sales up 20 percent.The company’s Chrysler brand was up 26 percent in April, the Ram division gained 4 percent, and Dodge fell by 16 percent.Nissan posted a 6 percent increase in sales in April, and Toyota said it was up slightly at just under 2 percent for the month. Hyundai’s sales were up 3 percent, and Volkswagen reported that overall sales were down 3 percent for the month.Advertisement