AdvertisementSupported byIn DebtBy Stephen J. LubbenAn important feature of the Dodd-Frank regulatory overhaul is Title II’s orderly liquidation authority. It is this authority that is supposed to put an end to bailouts by providing regulators with a “third way” that avoids either Lehman Brothers’ unplanned bankruptcy or American International Group’s unplanned bailout.Given that many of the nation’s systemically important financial institutions are banks, it is startling to realize that depository banks are expressly excluded from the orderly liquidation authority. In these cases, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is supposed to do its normal thing under the traditional banking statutes.The problem is this, there is no “normal thing” when talking about a bank like Citibank, or the banks at the heart of Bank of America or JPMorgan Chase. If Citibank N.A. (not the parent company Citigroup) were ever to go belly up, there is no way that the F.D.I.C. could “resolve” it the way it can, say, a large regional bank. The closest thing to a “normal thing” is the failures of Continental Illinois or Washington Mutual.The former looks like the sort of bailout that Dodd-Frank was supposed to prevent, and the latter resulted in the aforementioned JPMorganChase becoming even larger than it already was.Strictly speaking, the liquidation authority should not be invoked in a case where the depository bank is the source of financial distress within a larger financial holding company. After all, the authority was created for nonbank financial institutions that were not already covered by applicable F.D.I.C. statutes.How then do we deal with the failure of a large financial institution that starts with a failure of that institution’s bank?One avenue might be through the “source of strength” doctrine. This old chestnut, now expressly authorized by Dodd-Frank, provides that holding companies should support their regulated banks. An affirmative obligation to support a tottering bank could provide the basis for putting the holding company into the orderly liquidation authority.It is then perhaps somewhat surprising that regulators have been so slow to exercise the source of strength given to them by Dodd-Frank. To date, nothing has really been done to pass rules that would develop the power, despite its potentially vital role in generating an liquidation authority proceeding.In every other context, regulators are moving to outlaw contractual links between bank holding companies and their subsidiaries. Only by doing so, it is argued, will the F.D.I.C.’s new “single point of entry” approach to the orderly liquidation authority actually work.Of course, the regulators will simply retort to that by reference to hobgoblins and academic minds.Stephen J. Lubben holds the Harvey Washington Wiley Chair in corporate governance and business ethics at Seton Hall Law School and is an expert on bankruptcy.Advertisement