AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonThe billionaire investor Daniel S. Loeb is making a bet that Yum Brands is “turning the page” on its troubles in China.Mr. Loeb told investors in Third Point, his $17.4 billion hedge fund, that he had taken a “significant stake” in Yum Brands, which has been hurt by a food scandal in China. Last year, a supplier to Yum’s KFC franchise in China was caught using rotten and expired meat into its food products. But the company, he said, is “on the road to recovery.”The discovery in China had hit KFC sales, pulling Yum into the red in the fourth quarter of last year. Although sales from its KFC arm in China continued to slide in the first quarter, the company reported a profit of $362 million. It was the second food safety incident to hit Yum. In 2012, excessive amounts of antibiotics were discovered in some of its chicken products.Mr. Loeb is betting that Yum’s troubles in China have not done irreparable damage to its reputation. The investor is also making a play for the China’s growing middle class. Yum owns the consumer franchise in China for 7,000 KFC and Pizza Hut restaurants in more than 1,000 cities, more than three times the number of McDonald’s restaurants, its closest rival, Mr. Loeb wrote in his letter.He also suggested several changes that Yum’s management could make to the business, including adding more debt or even creating “an alternative ownership structure.”Shares of Yum rose more than 4 percent in morning trading.The endorsement of Yum strikes a softer note than usual for Mr. Loeb. He has made a mark as an activist investor who writes acerbic letters to management urging them to change their business practices.In his first letter to investors this year, Mr. Loeb said the “real excitement has been overseas,” referring to opportunities created by loosening monetary policy in Europe, Japan and China. The hedge fund’s main Third Point Partners fund was up 3.4 percent, driven by gains in his positions in Actavis, Japan’s FANUC — which Mr. Loeb called the “Apple of Japan” — Dow Chemical and a bet on Argentina.Mr. Loeb also said that returns in the first quarter were dragged down by several positions, including one in Alibaba, the Chinese e-commerce giant.Advertisement