AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz Moyer and Jessica Silver-GreenbergA woman in Philadelphia was turned away from a McDonald’s when her card was declined. Another woman, in Decatur, Ga., couldn’t pay for her husband’s heart medication. And an autoworker in Detroit accepted food from colleagues because she had no access to her money.For much of the last week, scenes like those played out for hundreds of thousands of low-income Americans who use prepaid debit cards instead of banks. A technical problem had blocked account access for holders of one of the most popular prepaid cards, RushCard.RushCard, founded in 2003 by the hip-hop impresario Russell Simmons, said on Tuesday that the problem had been mostly fixed. But thousands continued to experience difficulties.The breakdown illustrates the potential perils for those without access to the banking system. For days, many RushCard users have been venting their frustration and outrage on Twitter and Facebook.The problem also highlights the growing pains for an industry that has surged in recent years. Banks, seeking to reduce their regulatory burden after the financial crisis, have shed lower-income customers. Seeing an opportunity, a number of financial card companies and lenders have rushed in to serve the so-called underbanked and unbanked.“Prepaid cards have a good, bad and ugly to them,” said Joe Valenti, director of consumer finance at the Center for American Progress. Still, he noted, “the market is making progress, and prepaid cards are evolving away from ‘gotcha’ fees to enable more people to get access to the banking system.”In 2012, the most recent year available, prepaid cards held $65 billion, more than double the amount from just three years earlier, according to a survey by the Pew Charitable Trusts.Nearly a quarter of these cardholders earn less than $15,000 a year. They are forced to turn to prepaid cards because they lack the standing to get a credit card or are unable or unwilling to open a traditional bank account.In an email statement on Tuesday, Mr. Simmons said: “We will fix these problems and continue to serve the populations I care deeply about.”The episode has now attracted the attention of regulators in Washington.“It is outrageous that consumers have not had access to their money for more than a week,” said Gail Hillebrand, associate director for consumer education and engagement at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. “We are looking into this very troubling issue. Consumers increasingly are relying on prepaid products to keep their funds, make purchases and manage their money.”RushCard said that its customers’ money was covered by Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insurance through its issuing bank, MetaBank, and that its accounts were compliant with federal regulations regarding electronic fund transfers.The company won’t say exactly how many cardholders it has, except to say they number in the “hundreds of thousands.”Still, the potential market is vast. In its most recent survey, the F.D.I.C. counted 25.4 million people in the United States in 2013 who had no bank account. Another 67.5 million had an account but also relied on nonbank financial services such as check-cashing stores or payday lenders.Jonathan Mintz, a former commissioner of New York City’s Department of Consumer Affairs, said a lack of safe banking options threatened to worsen economic inequality.“Without financial tools that are fair, all you can do is basically tread water,” said Mr. Mintz, who is now chief executive of the Cities for Financial Empowerment Fund.For T’Challa Williams in Decatur, Ga., the problems with RushCard became a matter of life and death. Her husband has heart disease, she said, and needs medication to regulate his condition.Last Wednesday morning, Ms. Williams tried to withdraw money that her father had loaded onto her card to pay for the medicine. But the money he had loaded was not there.When Ms. Williams called RushCard, she was on hold for an hour and a half, and on a second call for three hours.“I felt like I wasn’t even a person,” said Ms. Williams, who had to borrow money from a friend.There have been other kinds of complaints about prepaid cards. For example, the cards have been at the center of some instances of fraud in recent years. Last year, Green Dot, the largest seller of prepaid cards, said it would stop selling its popular MoneyPak because of how easy it was to use the product to conduct online and telephone fraud. The company said earlier this year that the elimination of MoneyPak would shrink its operating revenue by $10 million to $40 million this year.The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau began accepting consumer complaints about prepaid cards last July through its website and toll-free complaint line. As of this month, it has received 2,700 complaints.Regulations for electronic money transfers and other payments have existed for decades but some parts of the prepaid card industry still fall outside their reach.Nearly a year ago, to close those gaps, the bureau proposed federal consumer protections limiting loss of customer funds when cards are stolen or lost, easier access to account information, broader fee disclosures and credit protections. Final rules could be released early next year, with full adoption by the industry several months after that.RushCard’s problems started over the Columbus Day weekend, when it switched from one processing technology provider to another. Customers reported problems gaining access to their funds, swamping the company’s telephone service center and website.As the trouble persisted throughout last week, frustrated customers turned to Twitter and Facebook to air their grievances. Some said they were facing eviction, and others subjected the company to a barrage of insults. RushCard used its social media feeds to respond to some of the complaints.In a statement, RushCard’s chief executive, Rick Savard, said: “To those impacted, we can’t begin to express both how sorry we are for the hardships that you’ve experienced and our commitment to making this right. At this time, our system is up and running and we are processing deposits and transactions.“A small number of accounts are still in an inactive state. We have set up command centers in N.Y.C. and Cincinnati to begin outreach to those who remain affected.”For those who rely on prepaid cards to deposit their paychecks and pay their bills, the flaws amounted to far more than an inconvenience.Denise Miller, who works in social services in Philadelphia, has not been able to pay her rent. In an especially embarrassing moment, her card was declined at McDonald’s when she tried to buy breakfast.“I am so angry,” she said.Erica Phillips, a 32-year-old autoworker who lives in the Detroit area, said she first experienced a problem with her RushCard on Oct. 10, when she noticed her money had been moved from her existing account to an expired RushCard account. Her weekly paycheck is loaded on her card by direct deposit, and she said she was unable to access that money all week.“I’ve been borrowing from everyone,” she said. “People at work have given me food.”Ms. Phillips canceled her direct deposit and plans to cash her paycheck this week at a local check-cashing store.Advertisement