By MERIBAH KNIGHTMAY 2, 2015
The Rev. Jesse L. Jackson Sr. held up a copy of The Chicago Defender, the city’s storied black newspaper, its cover plastered with photos of two dozen black men killed by the police. The headline read, “Wake Up: There’s No Justice for Black Men.”He implored the audience at his Rainbow/PUSH Coalition headquarters in Chicago to buy a subscription to the paper. “The Sun-Times and Tribune appraises our worth every day,” Mr. Jackson said of Chicago’s two daily newspapers. “And they are not going to have a front like this.”This was in November, after a grand jury in Ferguson, Mo., decided not to indict the police officer Darren Wilson in the shooting of 18-year-old Michael Brown. The Defender has endured a storm of financial woes, new leadership, staff turnover and — not the least — a media industry in flux. But after the deaths of black men by police or in their custody in Ferguson, Staten Island, South Carolina, Oklahoma and now Baltimore, The Chicago Defender is seeking to seize this moment to reclaim its voice for the black community.There has been no shortage of news: In April alone, The Defender devoted two of its weekly front pages to reports on police brutality.AdvertisementStarted in 1905 by Robert Sengstacke Abbott in his landlord’s kitchen, The Chicago Defender was once a major force in the migration of a quarter-million black Americans from the South to the North. Its pages carried coverage of economic prosperity for blacks. In the South, Pullman porters threw stacks of the paper off their trains to the smugglers and newsboys who risked being lynched for selling them. Its circulation peaking at 250,000 copies, the paper was home to the bylines of Langston Hughes and Gwendolyn Brooks. A recent biography, “Eye on the Struggle: Ethel Payne, the First Lady of the Black Press,” chronicles the life of one of the paper’s most renowned correspondents.AdvertisementAt present, however, some might say The Defender’s legacy is its most valuable asset. Once a daily, the paper has pulled back to a weekly, its circulation a fraction of what it was in its heyday. Today, after increasing newsstand distribution, its readership comprises 5,000 print subscribers and roughly 16,000 copies sold on newsstands, for $1 each, or distributed free. It has 50,000 registered readers online.Last May, Cheryl Mainor, 51, a Michigan native, became the paper’s eighth publisher — its fourth in the last 12 years. Since Ms. Mainor took the helm, she says she has returned the paper to profitability and generated fresh revenue streams with new print and digital products. She plans to nearly double its circulation by the end of 2015.With the recent conversations around race and police violence, the paper has an opportunity to lend its credibility to the issues of the day, as it did with the November cover Mr. Jackson praised. But at the same time, Kai El’ Zabar, the executive editor Ms. Mainor hired in October, is looking to reflect a more empowering narrative, much in the same way The Defender once fed the Great Migration by urging blacks to cast off Jim Crow in favor of better jobs and fairer treatment in the North. “That is what we are doing now but in a different sense,” Ms. El’ Zabar said. “We need to stimulate people to move and to act and to make that change. That is what we are about.”Those are lofty goals for any local newspaper, with the industry in free fall after decades of decline. Today, ad revenue and circulation numbers for print media and local news continue to drop as advertisers flee to more lucrative markets. But black community newspapers — there are about 200 across the country — have the advantage of a built-in audience that trusts and identifies with its source.“Black newspapers are still trusted,” said Cheryl Pearson-McNeil, senior vice president for consumer engagement at Nielsen, the media measurement company. A recent survey by the company showed that 59 percent of African-Americans agreed that advertisers in black newspapers knew how to connect with African-American audiences. As a result, “blacks feel a connection to your brand,” Ms. Pearson-McNeil said.The Defender was sold 12 years ago to Real Times Media, a company based in Detroit that owns a collection of black newspapers, including The Michigan Chronicle, New Pittsburgh Courier, Atlanta Daily World and The Tri-State Defender, in Memphis. “You have an owner that is committed to your survival and, not only that, is vested in the whole notion of black newspapers,” said Ken Smikle, founder of Target Market News, a market research firm in Chicago that tracks black media and consumer trends.Still, the paper’s resources are slim. After a revamp of personnel, it has only 10 full-time employees, including one staff reporter.AdvertisementMs. Mainor said the paper’s revenue was roughly $2.3 million last year, but after cutting about $300,000 in expenses, she says the paper is profitable for the first time in some years. Though that comes with a disclaimer: “When I say we are profitable, we were of the narrowest of margins,” she said.In March, the paper made its first of three circulation jumps, by 31 percent, to 21,000. To lure more advertisers and increase circulation, Ms. Mainor is considering making the paper free.Since taking charge, Ms. El’ Zabar has put a renewed focus on local coverage. In the middle of writing weekly editorials, she is also developing a stylebook for the paper. It includes the reintroduction of an old phrase favored by Mr. Abbott: “the Race.” It will be used interchangeably with “black” or “African-American.”“We have to let them know that change really is afoot,” she said of the paper’s readers, who have in the past referred to it as the “Chicago Offender” for its sloppy editing.“I see this as at least being a shot at making sure that the paper survives,” said Monroe Anderson, a longtime Chicago journalist and The Defender’s new political columnist.In recent weeks, the paper’s cover articles reflect this shift. It targeted Illinois’s newly elected Republican governor, Bruce Rauner, outlining what black residents expect of him. In mid-February, the paper endorsed Mayor Rahm Emanuel for the municipal election over his progressive opponent Jesús Garcia. It was a much-needed lift for Mr. Emanuel, who has struggled to earn Chicago’s black vote after closing nearly 50 schools in minority neighborhoods on the city’s South and West Sides. Mr. Emanuel won re-election in an April runoff.“I see it as our responsibility that we report the news and be objective,” Ms. El’ Zabar said. “But we have to deal with it in terms of our reality, how it lands with us.”That November cover showing black men killed by police: “Those are the kinds of things we are going to keep putting in your face again and again and again,” Ms. El’ Zabar said, “until you get it right.”A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2015, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: Reinvigorating a Historic Print Voice.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.