By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVISOCT. 20, 2015
President Obama on Tuesday announced he would nominate Lisa M. Fairfax to be a commissioner to the Securities and Exchange Commission, elevating a law professor who has studied shareholder activism after progressive groups lobbied intensely against naming a Wall Street insider.The selection of Ms. Fairfax, 44, a Harvard-trained legal scholar who teaches securities law and contracts courses at the George Washington University Law School, is the latest sign of the influence of the Democratic Party’s liberal wing in shaping Mr. Obama’s selections for key financial posts.Mr. Obama will also nominate Hester Maria Peirce, 45, a former Senate aide and S.E.C. lawyer who has been a vocal critic of the Dodd-Frank financial protection law, to fill a Republican vacancy on the commission.If the nominations are confirmed by the Senate, it would make the S.E.C. the most diverse it has ever been. Four of the five commissioners will be women for the first time, and Ms. Fairfax would be only the third African-American commissioner in the history of the agency.AdvertisementSenator Sherrod Brown, Democrat of Ohio, supported Ms. Fairfax at the White House.Mr. Brown “urged the administration to choose someone for the Democratic seat who would be a strong advocate for investors and committed to enforcing the law,” said Greg Vadala, a spokesman. “Ms. Fairfax fits the bill.”AdvertisementThe selection of Ms. Fairfax comes after a coalition of investor protection groups wrote to Mr. Obama in June charging that his administration had populated the S.E.C. with “‘revolving door’ insiders with a history of moving back and forth between Wall Street firms seeking to escape accountability and the agency charged with defending the public interest,” and calling on him to tap an independent voice.Marcus Stanley, the policy director of Americans for Financial Reform, the nonprofit coalition that coordinated the letter, said his organization was withholding judgment for now on Ms. Fairfax’s nomination. But Mr. Stanley said the group was pleased that Ms. Fairfax appeared to represent a break from the administration’s practice of selecting corporate defense lawyers beholden to the industry they are supposed to be regulating.“She is not a revolving-door candidate, so that is a positive thing,” Mr. Stanley said. “These candidates often face career-based conflicts of interest and they often have internalized this very pro-industry way of looking at issues.”The same concerns forced Antonio Weiss, an investment banker nominated to a senior Treasury Department post, to withdraw from consideration in January after criticism led by Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts. But that victory was mostly symbolic; Mr. Weiss still joined Treasury as a counsel to Secretary Jacob J. Lew, a position that does not require confirmation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By the same token, some investor advocacy and consumer advocates said privately that the selection of Ms. Fairfax was only a partial win in their push for tougher enforcement of financial protections. She is not regarded in Democratic circles as a seasoned fighter for Dodd-Frank, while Ms. Peirce is seen by conservatives as a determined opponent of many of its key aspects.Ms. Fairfax also has not taken many policy positions in her academic work, they said, speaking on condition of anonymity to avoid seeming to criticize her.Ms. Peirce, a senior research fellow at George Mason and director of the financial markets working group at the university’s Mercatus Center, was senior counsel for the Republican staff of the Senate Banking Committee from 2008 to 2011. She worked at the S.E.C. from 2000 to 2008.She was editor of a book released this year called “Dodd-Frank: What It Does and Why It’s Flawed.”AdvertisementMs. Fairfax worked for the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority and wrote a book in 2011 titled “Shareholder Democracy: A Primer on Shareholder Activism and Participation.”Adam Green, the co-founder of the Progressive Change Campaign Committee, said only S.E.C. candidates willing to “challenge Wall Street power and fight hard for consumers” should be confirmed. “It’s encouraging that the White House selected Lisa Fairfax instead of a typical revolving-door Wall Street type,” Mr. Green said. Members of the Senate Banking Committee, which will consider the nominations, he added, “should ask tough questions and get solid commitments on issues such as shareholder approval of corporate political spending, bringing big banks to trial, and preventing Wall Street executives from looting their own companies at the expense of workers and investors.”A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Most Diverse S.E.C. Ever May Be Taking Shape.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.