By THE NEW YORK TIMESMAY 3, 2015
Here are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week.Comcast reported a 10 percent increase in quarterly earnings on Monday morning, driven by an increase in subscribers for high-speed Internet. The earnings report gives the company a chance to outline how it will proceed after walking away from its $45 billion attempted takeover of Time Warner Cable. The collapse of the deal, under intense regulatory scrutiny, has created an opportunity to pursue other acquisitions, and the company faces questions about whether it will expand internationally, augment its NBCUniversal entertainment offerings or move into a new business like wireless.Regulators are expected to take a more prominent role in the market for broadband Internet service, and investors are looking for clues about how Comcast will respond. —Emily SteelMcDonald’s is expected to announce its turnaround plan on Monday, with Steve Easterbrook, its new chief executive, making the strategy public in a video that will go up at investor.mcdonalds.com at 8 a.m. Eastern Daylight Time.Analysts are expecting McDonald’s to detail its plans for increasing sales and to announce that it will buy back more shares and sell the roughly 18 percent of outlets that are company owned. The fast-food chain has begun testing a simplified, less expensive version of Create Your Taste, a program that lets customers select from a menu of burger toppings. —Stephanie StromAdvertisementGiovanni Caforio is expected to take over on Tuesday as chief executive of the drug manufacturer Bristol-Myers Squibb at the company’s annual shareholders’ meeting. Mr. Caforio is the company’s chief operating officer, and he has played several parts since joining the company in 2000 as vice president and general manager of its Italy division. Mr. Caforio had a prominent role in building the company’s portfolio of immunotherapy drugs, which use the body’s immune system to fight cancer. Last week, the company reported better-than-expected earnings in part because of strong sales of two such drugs, Opdivo and Yervoy.AdvertisementBut Bristol-Myers also faces significant challenges. Last week, its best-selling drug, the antipsychotic Abilify, lost its patent protection and less expensive generic alternatives became available. —Katie ThomasVolkswagen will hold its annual shareholders’ meeting on Tuesday in Hanover, the first in more than a decade that will not be overseen by Ferdinand K. Piëch. Mr. Piëch, the Porsche family scion, resigned as chairman of the Volkswagen supervisory board last month after losing a power struggle. Berthold Huber, the deputy chairman of the supervisory board, and a former president of the union that represents Volkswagen workers, will preside in Mr. Piëch’s place.Martin Winterkorn, the Volkswagen chief executive who survived Mr. Piëch’s attempt to oust him, will be under pressure to explain to shareholders how the company will restore lagging profitability on cars carrying the Volkswagen brand. —Jack EwingThe electric-car maker Tesla Motors will report its first-quarter earnings on Wednesday after the markets close, nearly a week after unveiling plans to go beyond automobiles and enter the energy storage business. Since January, Wall Street analysts have substantially lowered their 2015 earnings forecasts for Tesla, but the company’s stock price has largely held its value.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Market watchers will be watching Tesla’s sales for the first quarter. The company said that although it had orders for the 35,000 cars it produced in 2014, it delivered fewer than 32,000 of them to customers. Tesla officials said delays meant the remaining cars would be delivered in the first quarter of this year. —Aaron M. KesslerYanis Varoufakis, the Greek finance minister, is expected to attend the European Business Summit in Brussels on Thursday to take part in a panel discussion about using digital technologies to promote economic changes that reduce unemployment and increase innovation. Mr. Varoufakis has appeared increasingly embattled in recent weeks, after eurozone finance ministers sharply criticized his confrontational style and the Greek prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, reduced his prominence in negotiations with international lenders.The Greek authorities still have not agreed to economic changes that are far-reaching enough to unlock 7.2 billion euros, nearly $8.1 billion, in bailout money needed to prevent the country from defaulting on its loans. Mr. Varoufakis is scheduled to be joined by five other panelists, including Pierre Moscovici, the European commissioner for economic and financial affairs. Mr. Moscovici has frequently warned that imposing more austerity could foment anti-European sentiment, and he is widely seen as more conciliatory toward Greece than other eurozone officials. —James KanterArcelorMittal, the world’s largest steel maker, will report quarterly earnings on Thursday. The company, which is based in Luxembourg and led by the Indian-born Lakshmi Mittal, has reported losses for the last three years, partly because of weak demand and an oversupply of steel in Europe. But it has been reducing its losses.AdvertisementAnalysts predict the first-quarter results will be weak because of pressure on steel prices in the United States and low prices for iron ore, which the company mines and sells. Europe, which appears to be undergoing an economic recovery, may turn into a bright spot for the company. —Stanley ReedThe Bureau of Labor Statistics will release monthly employment figures on Friday. After the weak jobs showing in March, when payrolls grew by an unexpectedly low 126,000, most economists are expecting a rebound, with many forecasting a gain of about 230,000 for April. The unemployment rate, now at 5.5 percent, is expected to fall to 5.4 percent.But plenty of factors could create a big surprise, in either direction. Economists looking for improvement argue that employers may have played catch-up in hiring after weather-related delays in March. Weekly initial jobless claims have declined a bit recently, suggesting more labor market strength. On the other hand, economic figures have been anemic, including a reading last week showing that the economy barely grew in the first quarter. Friday’s numbers could show whether that weakness continued or if the economy picked up some much-needed momentum in April. —Nelson D. SchwartzAn article on Monday rounding up the most important business events of the coming week misidentified the German city in which Volkswagen held its annual shareholders’ meeting on Tuesday. It is Hanover, not Berlin.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Earnings From Tesla; Volkswagen’s Annual Meeting.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.