AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — Studio movies, even exceptionally bad ones, almost always eke out an upbeat review or two. Last year, not one wide-release film received a zero percent score on RottenTomatoes.com, which aggregates reviews.So the universal critical hatred aimed at Sony’s “Paul Blart: Mall Cop 2” last month was truly something to behold. The fat-man-on-a-Segway sequel generated a perfect zero on the Tomatometer when it arrived in the United States on April 17 — of the 46 reviews published by that time, 46 were hostile. Then Simon Weaving messed it up — and suffered the consequences.Mr. Weaving, an Australian critic whose reviews are published in The Canberra Times and on ScreenWize.com, on April 22 gave “Mall Cop 2” three out of five stars, enough to qualify as a positive notice. “I genuinely came out of the cinema with a sense I’d witnessed some warm silliness,” he said in an interview last week. He said he did not realize at the time that no other critics agreed with him.The blowback was swift and severe.“You ruined the 0%!” one commenter wrote on ScreenWize. “A pox on you!” Another reader asked, “The check from Sony cleared yet?” Some commenters called him names that are not printable. “How dare you,” one reader wrote.Mr. Weaving, whose brother is Hugo Weaving, the actor known for roles in Warner Bros. movies like “The Matrix” and “The Lord of the Rings,” said he did not see the online mob coming. “I feel like I stumbled into some strange corner of pop culture,” he said, where terrible movies are celebrated as a point of pride.The vitriol eased when another Australian critic, Jim Schembri, wrote a brief review of “Mall Cop 2” that was deemed positive. (The first “Paul Blart: Mall Cop” got a 33 percent positive score in 2009.) Meanwhile, the modestly budgeted sequel, which now has a 6 percent positive score, has done well in theaters, taking in more than $75 million so far in its worldwide run.Asked to explain the genial response in the land down under, Mr. Weaving said, “Maybe Aussies have a soft spot for the fat underdog? We have plenty of them.” Advertisement