MAY 3, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.01 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.05 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $527.6 million of debt securities. Competitive.TUESDAYClemson University, S.C., $161.8 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Massachusetts School Building Authority, $300 million of debt securities. Competitive.New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $150 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementOhio, $300 million of school general obligation bonds. Competitive.Virginia Public School Authority, $67.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementWEDNESDAYMarin County, Calif., $82.8 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.THURSDAYSouth Carolina, $61.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAlaska Housing Finance Corporation, $123.5 million of state capital project bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Albuquerque, $58.8 million of improvement revenue bonds. Robert W. Baird.Alexandria, Va., Industrial Development Authority, $68.5 million of residential care facilities mortgage revenue bonds. Ziegler.American Museum of Natural History, N.Y., $97.2 million of corporate taxable bonds. Morgan Stanley.Athens-Clarke County, Ga., $209 million of water and sewerage revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Atlanta Development Authority, $220 million of stadium project revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Austin, Tex., Community College District, $101 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.California Infrastructure and Development Bank, $131 million of Colburn School variable rate revenue bonds. Bank of America.AdvertisementCentral Valley, Wash., School District, $73.9 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. D. A. Davidson.Port of Corpus Christi Authority, Tex., $115 million of revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Cumberland County, Pa., Municipal Authority, $142.8 million of Diakon Lutheran Social Ministries revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Franklin County, Kan., $63.2 million of school district general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Franklin County, Ohio, $75 million of Nationwide Children’s Hospital improvement revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Indiana Finance Authority, $348 million of lease appropriation refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Lee Memorial Health System, Fla., $277.1 million of hospital revenue and refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Los Angeles Community College District, $310 million of general obligation bonds. Goldman Sachs.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $130 million of Emerson College revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Merced, Calif., Irrigation District, $57 million of electric system refinancing revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Mesquite, Tex., Independent School District, $54.6 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. CIBC Oppenheimer.Mid-Bay Bridge Authority, Fla., $279 million of revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Mobile, Ala., $59.5 million of Spring Hill College higher education revenue bonds. William Blair.New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $50 million of Ramapo College debt securities. Bank of America.AdvertisementNew Mexico Hospital Equipment Loan Council, $222.3 million of hospital system revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.University of New Mexico, $115.5 million of taxable hospital revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.North Carolina Medical Care Commission, $50 million of Rex Healthcare facilities revenue bonds. Bank of America.Oakland, Calif., $125 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Pembroke Pines, Fla., $74.8 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Pennsylvania State University, $191.8 million of refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Philadelphia, $176.1 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo SecuritiesRound Rock, Tex., Independent School District, $59.2 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Sherwood, Ore., School District, $83.9 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Tarrant County, Tex., Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, $60 million of health resources system revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Tarrant County, Tex., Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, $52.4 million of retirement facilities revenue bonds. Ziegler.Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, N.Y., $250 million of general revenue bonds. Loop Capital Markets.AdvertisementWilliamson County, Tex., $100 million of unlimited tax road bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Williamson County, Tex., $70 million of combination tax and revenue certificates of obligation. Hutchinson, Shockey, Erley.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.