AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedFor years, car fanatics have dreamed of owning a Ferrari. Now they can own at least a piece of the company.The sports car manufacturer priced its initial public offering on Tuesday at $52 a share, the top end of an expected price range, raising more than $894 million for its corporate parent, Fiat Chrysler. The stock sale values the racecar specialist at about $9.8 billion.Ferrari begins trading on the New York Stock Exchange on Wednesday morning under — what else? — the ticker symbol RACE, at a tough time for European automakers. Weeks earlier, shares of its parent and those of other European automakers sagged for a time in the wake of the diesel emissions cheating scandal at Volkswagen.It will also triumphantly enter a stock market that has proved trying for many other market debutants.First Data, the huge credit card processor, faltered in its initial offering last week as it priced below an expected price range. The stock price of Pure Storage, a highly recommended data storage provider, slumped in its first day of trading, though its shares eventually recovered. And Albertsons, the big supermarket chain, has postponed its I.P.O.Ferrari, of course, is not a payments company or a Silicon Valley start-up or a grocery chain. It is one of the most venerated names in high-end sports cars, having drawn the affection of car aficionados for decades. (The company’s road shows for potential investors drew capacity crowds in cities like New York and London, according to reports.)Founded by the racecar driver Enzo Ferrari — known as “il Grande Vecchio,” or “the Great Old Man,” late in life — the company did not start out as a car manufacturer. Instead it was Scuderia Ferrari, a racing team that initially used Alfa Romeo cars.By 1947, Mr. Ferrari had begun producing his own sports cars, starting with the 125 S model, largely to help finance the racing team. The company soon became known both for its success on the racetrack and for the high-end autos that rolled off its factory floor in the northern Italian town of Maranello.In 1969, Fiat bought a 50 percent stake in Ferrari, bringing the bigger car manufacturer’s controlling family, the Agnellis, into the picture. After Mr. Ferrari died in 1988, Fiat’s stake grew to 90 percent. The remainder is held by Mr. Ferrari’s son, Piero.Throughout its history, Ferrari has cultivated an allure of exclusivity. Last year, the company shipped just 7,255 cars, compared with the 4.6 million cars and trucks that Fiat Chrysler moved the same year. And those 7,255 cars, Fiat contends, were part of a 34 percent rise in shipments over the last decade.That has proved a lucrative business. Ferrari earned 141 million euros in net profit, or about $160 million, for the first half of the year. That is up 10 percent from the same time a year ago — and represents about a third of Fiat Chrysler’s net profit for the period. Sales grew slightly over that same time, to 1.39 billion euros.In its prospectus,  Ferrari noted that its share of the luxury performance car market last year was 22.9 percent, down from 27 percent in 2013. But the company added that it did not focus on market share, and would continue to control availability to maintain exclusivity and premium pricing.Despite going public, Ferrari will remain tightly controlled by a small collection of investors. Fiat Chrysler sold about 10 percent of the company, while Piero Ferrari will hold onto his 10 percent stake. Fiat Chrysler plans to distribute the 80 percent of the company that it still owns to its own investors in January — leaving the Agnellis, who are the biggest shareholders in Fiat Chrysler, with about a quarter of the sports car maker.Neither the Agnellis nor Piero Ferrari plan to sell their holdings anytime soon. That gives the company some degree of insulation from other shareholders and potential unsolicited suitors.UBS and Bank of America Merrill Lynch led the offering.Advertisement