AdvertisementSupported byPolitical EconomyBy Hugo Dixon | ReutersBritish politics are failing the trust test.In the run-up to Thursday’s election, the public has lambasted leaders of the established parties for breaking promises and lack of candor. While the critique is healthy, Britain has yet to produce leaders who score high on integrity. This is needed, and not just in Britain.One of the most striking moments of the British election campaign was the “nondebate” on the BBC on April 30 involving Prime Minister David Cameron, a Conservative; Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, a Liberal Democrat; and Ed Miliband, leader of the opposition Labour party.This was a nondebate because Mr. Cameron refused a head-to-head confrontation with Mr. Miliband. While that looked cowardly, the format for the last set-piece television event of the campaign — three half-hour slots during which a skeptical audience grilled the leaders in turn — was riveting. Instead of the Punch and Judy show that would have resulted if the leaders had debated each other, they had to confront the unmediated voice of the British public.What emerged starkly was something that had already been clear from opinion polls: The electorate does not trust its politicians. At several points, members of the audience accused the leaders of lying.The main criticism Mr. Cameron faced was that he would not spell out how he planned to cut welfare spending. There were repeated suggestions that the prime minister knew exactly what he was going to do but was refusing to give specifics — the implication being that he was hiding his plan from the electorate because he thought it would lose votes.Mr. Miliband came in for a torrent of criticism for failing to admit that the previous Labour government had spent too much money. If he weren’t prepared to acknowledge past mistakes, how could his new promises to cut the deficit if he became prime minister be trusted? He continued, unwisely, to maintain that his party had not overspent.Mr. Clegg was given a rough ride for pledging before the last election not to increase university tuition fees, only to join a coalition shortly afterward that did precisely that. He was asked why the public would ever believe anything else he said. Despite apologizing, he was criticized again and again for this breach of trust.The failure of politicians to display integrity is not, of course, limited to Britain. It is a problem further afield, especially, at the moment, in the rest of Europe. In Spain, the electorate has lost faith in established parties, in part because of a string of corruption scandals. Italy long suffered from having Silvio Berlusconi, who was subsequently convicted of tax fraud, as its prime minister.Meanwhile, Alexis Tsipras, the Greek prime minister, is gradually having to face up to the fact that he made undeliverable promises before January’s election. In the next few weeks, he will probably either have to eat yet more of his words or default on the country’s debt.There is a long-established cynical view that politicians need to lie, make false promises, compromise their core principles and in other ways display lack of integrity to get into positions of power and stay there.The classic exponent of this view was Niccolo Machiavelli, who wrote 500 years ago in “The Prince” that, “Princes who have achieved great things have been those who have given their word lightly, who have known how to trick men with their cunning, and who, in the end, have overcome those abiding by honest principles.”Although Machiavelli was writing before the age of representative democracies, his basic thesis is wrong. While many politicians have indeed climbed the greasy pole by breaching the people’s trust, doing so is neither necessary nor desirable.In a democracy, elected officials are supposed to act on behalf of the public. Lack of integrity is normally a sign that they are acting on their own behalf.So it is important that the electorate vigorously holds to account politicians who make false promises, lie, compromise on core principles and fail to practice what they preach.Like a dog with a bone, it should not let up — at least until and unless the politicians apologize for what they have done and so start to restore trust.The main beneficiaries of the sullied reputations of the established European leaders have tended to be nationalistic movements such as the Scottish National Party and populist parties of either the left or the right, like the UK Independence Party, Greece’s Syriza, Spain’s Podemos and France’s National Front.Although such parties are good at spotting problems, their proposed solutions would often cause more harm than good. If demagogues gain power, politics in Europe will go from bad to worse.That said, the rise of populism is not the only new feature of the European political scene. In recent months, two European parties from what might be termed the responsible center — Spain’s Ciudadanos and Greece’s To Potami — have made some headway.Two swallows, admittedly, do not make a summer. But their appearance suggests that a new type of politics that puts trust center stage may be possible. With luck, after the roasting a television audience gave its established leaders last week, Britain can learn this, too. Hugo Dixon is editor at large of Reuters News.Advertisement