AdvertisementSupported byBy Vindu Goel and Quentin HardySAN FRANCISCO — Dave Goldberg, the chief executive of SurveyMonkey and the husband of Sheryl K. Sandberg, the chief operating officer of Facebook, died on Friday night. He was 47.His death was confirmed by SurveyMonkey, which is known for its web-based survey technology. The company did not disclose the cause. Mark Zuckerberg, chief executive of Facebook and a friend of the family, said it occurred while Mr. Goldberg was on vacation abroad with Ms. Sandberg.Mr. Goldberg’s brother, Robert, shared news of his death in a Facebook post and urged people who knew him to post memories on Mr. Goldberg’s memorial Facebook profile.“To this day, he is the leader and person by which I measure all others,” Karin Gilford, a top executive at Disney ABC Television Group who worked with Mr. Goldberg at a previous start-up and at Yahoo, wrote on his Facebook page.Mr. Goldberg, a serial Silicon Valley entrepreneur and venture capitalist, lived with Ms. Sandberg in Menlo Park, Calif. They have two children. He is also survived by his mother, Paula Goldberg.Mr. Goldberg was always quick with a wisecrack, and he kept a sense of humor about being the less famous half of one of Silicon Valley’s pre-eminent power couples. Ms. Sandberg, who achieved global fame with her book “Lean In,” about the challenges faced by women in the workplace, often said she would not have been as successful in her career without his substantial assistance at home.“We made the decision on this particular thing, that we are going to be home with our kids. I am at home with my kids from 6 to 8,” he told The Los Angeles Times in 2013. “But we’re working at night. You’ll get plenty of emails from me post-8 p.m. when my kids go to bed.”Mr. Goldberg joined SurveyMonkey in 2009 after stints at Benchmark Capital and Yahoo.At the time, the company had 14 employees. He built it into a provider of web surveys on almost every topic imaginable, be it customer service or politics, with 500 employees and 25 million surveys created. News reports said it was valued at nearly $2 billion when it raised a round of funding last year.“Online surveys have come a long way,” he said in a lunch interview last month. “We have investors use it to figure out things like the customer churn at Netflix, what Ugg sales are doing.”Mr. Goldberg was particularly proud of his company’s ability to predict election results through its surveys, noting that SurveyMonkey was sometimes more accurate than traditional pollsters.He viewed online surveys as an inexpensive way for companies to gather data about their customers and competitors.“We could tell Google Glass would be a tough sell,” he said in the April interview, discussing Google’s experimental computer mounted on eyeglass frames. “The cameras made people feel weird, and they thought the look interfered with people, like technology was getting in the way.”But one weakness of such surveys, he said, is that “people are terrible at telling you what they want.” He added, “They can say what they don’t want.”Mr. Goldberg grew up in Minneapolis and graduated from Harvard in 1989 with a degree in history and government. He joined the consulting firm Bain & Company, then moved to Capitol Records as a marketer. In 1993, he and his best friend from high school started Launch Media, a digital music magazine that was initially distributed by CD-ROM.In 2001, Yahoo bought Launch, and Mr. Goldberg became head of Yahoo Music, living in Los Angeles. Around that time, he began dating Ms. Sandberg, then an advertising executive at Google, in the Bay Area. “I lost the coin flip as to where we were going to live,” he told Business Insider in a recent interview.In 2007, he quit Yahoo and joined Benchmark Capital as an entrepreneur in residence, where he spent a couple of years before becoming chief executive of SurveyMonkey.Mike Isaac contributed reporting from New York. Reprinted from Sunday’s late editions. Advertisement