

      By DEALBOOK

MAY 5, 2015

The top 25 hedge fund managers reaped $11.62 billion in compensation in 2014, according to an annual ranking by Institutional Investor’s Alpha magazine. The pay estimates are based on the value of each manager’s stake in his firm and the fees charged. Investors in hedge funds generally pay an annual management fee of 2 percent of the total assets under management and 20 percent of any profits.
Related Article
The top 25 hedge fund managers reaped $11.62 billion in compensation in 2014, according to an annual ranking by Institutional Investor’s Alpha magazine. The pay estimates are based on the value of each manager’s stake in his firm and the fees charged. Investors in hedge funds generally pay an annual management fee of 2 percent of the total assets under management and 20 percent of any profits.Mr. Griffin started by trading convertible bonds out of his dormitory at Harvard. His firm, Citadel, posted returns of 18 percent to investors in its flagship Kensington and Wellington funds.RelatedChicago’s Odd Couple (April 3, 2015)Hedge Fund Managers Headed for Divorce (July 24, 2014)A former National Security Agency code breaker who has made billions from his hedge fund Renaissance Technologies.At Renaissance, the best performing equities fund was up 14.5 percent and its institutional futures fund gained 7.4 percent. Mr. Simons' wealth, however, is tied up in the firm’s secretive Medallion fund, which manages only employees’ money and has earned average annual returns of more than 30 percent over two decades.Mr. Dalio runs the world’s biggest hedge fund, Bridgewater Associates, with more than $170 billion in assets under management.Bridgewater started the year strong, with well-placed bets on interest rates in Europe and the United States, but momentum slowed in the second half of the year. He made 3.6 percent and 8.7 percent in his two main Pure Alpha funds.Mr. Ackman is known for making large and concentrated bets, and for being outspoken about them.His Pershing Square Capital funds gained 36 percent and 40 percent, the best returns in the 2014 ranking. RelatedOver the Top (Oct. 26, 2014)Mr. Englander's firm, Millennium, made returns of 12 percent in 2014. Based in New York, Millennium uses a platform model to invest with 170 individual managers who each use their own trading strategies. Mr. Englander does not charge a management fee. Instead, investors share the costs of running the firm.Despite rules empowering shareholders to rein in soaring pay packages, few have chosen to do so, perhaps because of a rising stock market.AdvertisementDespite rules empowering shareholders to rein in soaring pay packages, few have chosen to do so, perhaps because of a rising stock market.