

 Andrew Ross Sorkin
 

DEALBOOK
MAY 4, 2015
OMAHA — “I don’t know of any company that has a policy that says, ‘We’re going to have a lot more people than we need.’ ”That was Warren E. Buffett, chairman and chief executive of Berkshire Hathaway, responding on Saturday to a pointed shareholder question about whether he had abandoned his company’s moral compass by teaming with an investment firm known for ruthlessly cutting jobs.Mr. Buffett was speaking here over the weekend in front of more than 40,000 shareholders at the company’s annual meeting, which has become known as “Woodstock for capitalists” and which coincided with its 50th anniversary.The seats were filled with business and cultural luminaries like Bill Gates, a Berkshire director; William A. Ackman, the activist investor; Charlie Rose, the broadcaster; Elaine Wynn, the co-founder of Wynn Resorts; Vince Gilligan and Peter Gould, producers of “Breaking Bad” and “Better Call Saul”; Virginia M. Rometty, the chief executive of IBM; and Kenneth I. Chenault, the chief executive of American Express, among others. (I was among three journalists and three analysts, along with shareholders, who posed questions during the meeting.)AdvertisementSome in Mr. Buffett’s audience questioned his recent embrace of the Brazilian investment firm 3G, which Berkshire has supported by investing alongside it in deals for Burger King and the recent merger of H. J. Heinz with Kraft Foods. One shareholder expressed concern that 3G’s zero-based budgeting approach — which looks at every cost as something to consider cutting — is out of sync with Mr. Buffett’s aspiration to “balance capitalism with compassion,” as the questioner put it.AdvertisementBut that disconnect may be misplaced. Mr. Buffett’s avuncular ways often disguise another truth: He isn’t always a cuddly teddy bear. While he says he prefers a hands-off management approach, he runs a pretty lean organization.“We do have some businesses where we probably have more people than we need, and I don’t do anything about it,” he said. “But that doesn’t mean that I endorse it. I basically tolerate it.”At another point, Mr. Buffett said: “Efficiency is required over time in capitalism.”Mr. Buffett’s longtime friend and Berkshire’s vice chairman, Charlie Munger, went even further, suggesting that if businesses did not seek to be as efficient as possible, they would end up like those in the Soviet Union, declaring, “They pretend to pay us and we pretend to work.” The whole economy “didn’t work,” he said.3G Capital, the Brazilian private equity firm, is Warren Buffett’s preferred business partner in striking multibillion-dollar deals.Mr. Munger added later, “There’s no question that waves of layoffs hurt people.” But then he asked rhetorically: “What would our country be if we kept everyone on the farm?”That blunt talk surprised some, including the man who asked the pointed question, a shareholder named Frank Gifford from Timpson, Tex. “In my opinion, Berkshire has entered a new phase that involves bankrolling mercenaries,” he wrote in a blog post.Investors have long viewed Berkshire’s culture as a special form of compassionate capitalism. Part of Berkshire’s business strategy has been to be a friendly “home of choice for the owners and managers of many outstanding businesses.” As a result, Berkshire has been able to acquire family-run businesses at lower prices than they might command from other companies. Mr. Buffett once said, “We delegate almost to the point of abdication.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And there is a lot of truth to that. However, some Berkshire investors appear to be forgetting that Mr. Buffett, when pressed, has made some very difficult business decisions that involve large layoffs.Just consider NetJets, the fractional private jet company that Berkshire acquired in 1998. The business was losing more than $700 million by 2009. He sent in one of his former protégés, David L. Sokol, to run the company. Mr. Sokol fired 800 employees, furloughed nearly 500 more and reorganized the company, which quickly turned a profit — a turnaround similar to the one Mr. Sokol had overseen for Mr. Buffet at Johns Manville, a roofing company.AdvertisementThat doesn’t mean Mr. Buffett likes cost-cutting. He says he’d much prefer to be managing growing businesses.And while Berkshire is known for owning many family businesses, in truth, the biggest parts of Berkshire are now dominated by large businesses like the insurance giant Geico and the railroad company BNSF. Berkshire’s home office, as Mr. Buffett pointed out, is a model of efficiency: It has only 25 employees.Some shareholders might be surprised that Mr. Buffett can be hard-nosed, but he makes it pretty clear in his annual report when discussing what makes Berkshire such an attractive home: “The company’s people and culture will be retained (though, occasionally, management changes will be needed).”So the partnership with 3G is not a case of letting the barbarians sneak through the gate. Berkshire’s newfound partnership with 3G gives Mr. Buffett an opportunity to invest in companies that he has historically tried to avoid: troubled businesses in need of turnarounds. The businesses that 3G invests in are decidedly different from Berkshire’s normal targets. Burger King was far behind its rivals because it was terribly managed. Fixing it requires a hands-on approach.Happily for Mr. Buffett, it will be 3G, not him, getting its hands dirty.A version of this article appears in print on May 5, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Berkshire’s Teddy Bear Can Have a Hard Nose.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »