AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — The Federal Reserve said on Monday that the Justice Department was conducting a criminal investigation into the disclosure of confidential information in 2012 about a crucial meeting of the Fed committee that sets monetary policy.The Fed acknowledged the investigation in a letter to House Republicans who are pressing for information about the leak and the Fed’s internal inquiry at the time.The letter, signed by the Fed’s chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, said the Fed would provide House investigators with a confidential list of the Fed staff members who were the subjects of the internal inquiry, but it repeated the Fed’s view that congressional Republicans should wait until other inquiries are complete. The Fed’s inspector general said in March that it would reopen its investigation of the matter.Ms. Yellen said her own name was among those on the list of Fed officials who had contact with Medley Global Advisors, a firm that sells analysis and reporting to investors. Medley issued a report in October 2012 containing detailed information about the prior meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, or F.O.M.C., in September.Ms. Yellen said, however, that her meeting took place in June.“Nothing Medley Global Advisors reported in October about the events of the September 2012 F.O.M.C. meeting could have been conveyed in June, and let me assure you that, in any case, I did not convey any confidential information,” she wrote in the letter, which was posted on the Fed’s website Monday evening.Information about the Fed’s plans is valuable to investors, particularly any glimmer of insight that is not available to the broader market. The Fed accordingly imposes tight limits on the disclosure of such information outside its public statements, and some past leaks have also been the subjects of criminal investigations.A Justice Department spokesman declined to comment. The Fed in 2011 imposed significant restrictions on meetings with senior officials after Reuters reported that some analysts, particularly former Fed officials, were profiting from their access. Such leaks also are potentially illegal.The information obtained by Medley Global Advisors, a subsidiary of The Financial Times, included details about the Fed’s plans for its bond-buying program, part of its effort to stimulate an economic recovery after the recession.Ben S. Bernanke, then the Fed chairman, ordered an internal investigation of the leak to Medley and of similar disclosures to The Wall Street Journal.The leak did not come to public attention, however, until it was reported by ProPublica in December. Representative Jeb Hensarling, the Texas Republican who is chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, then began to press for more information. In March, after the Fed’s inspector general reopened its investigation, Mr. Hensarling said that a criminal investigation was underway.Advertisement