By JAD MOUAWADOCT. 20, 2015
Consumer Reports dropped its recommendation of the Tesla Model S after owners of the electric luxury sedan complained of a series of problems including squeaking noises, motors that needed to be changed and issues with the car’s automatic door handles.The change came after the consumer group reviewed reports from about 1,400 Model S owners as part of its annual survey and found they “chronicled an array of detailed and complicated maladies.” It concluded that the Model S “has too many problems to recommend.”The surprise change in rating on Tuesday sent Tesla shares down as much as 10 percent in midday trading. The stock closed down $15.07, or 6.6 percent, at $213.03 a share.The change is a significant setback for Tesla, which has earned a devoted following in part because of the glowing reviews from publications like Consumer Reports. Tesla has aggressively raised its production goals and recently introduced a second car to its lineup, a crossover called the Model X.AdvertisementBut production problems with the new car, which is built on the same platform as the Model S, recently forced Tesla to reduce its overall production target this year to 50,000 vehicles, down from 55,000. By 2020, the company has said that it hopes to build 500,000 cars a year.AdvertisementIn addition to the Model S, which sells for as much as $127,000 for the top-end model, Tesla is working on a mass-market car, a more affordable sedan called the Model 3, which it plans to deliver by the end of 2017 and with a price expected to start around $35,000.Consumer Reports has frequently raved about the Model S, and still says it is the best-performing car it has ever reviewed.The group gives the car the highest marks in a wide array of tests of drivability and efficiency. (The Model S can accelerate from 0 to 60 miles per hour in 3.5 seconds, and is “explosively quick,” the group said.)“On our test track, the car is second to none,” said Jake Fisher, Consumer Reports’ director of automotive testing. “But when we talk about reliability, we are talking about things that break. This is a new vehicle, with a new platform, and they are experiencing growing pains. Hopefully, they will learn from them.”In response to the report, Tesla said in a statement: “Close communication with our customers enables Tesla to receive input, proactively address issues and quickly fix problems. Over-the-air software updates allow Tesla to diagnose and fix most bugs without the need to come in for service. In instances when hardware needs to be fixed, we strive to make it painless.”Consumer Reports listed a range of problems cited by car owners. The main areas involved its drivetrain, power and charging equipment, body and sunroof squeaks, rattles and leaks.The driver who tested the Tesla Model S with the new autopilot feature was nervous at first, but soon learned to let the computer drive the car.The report pointed out that most of the problems fell under the company’s 50,000-mile, four-year warranty and were corrected at no cost to the car owners.AdvertisementThere were significant issues that would be costly once the car were out of warranty, however. For instance, Consumer Reports said that Tesla had made a habit of replacing the car’s electric motors within the time of the warranty.Drivers pointed out another annoyance. The car’s door handles often fail to present themselves automatically when drivers approach the car, a signature element of its design. The failure leaves drivers locked out of their cars.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This is the third year that Consumer Reports has reviewed the Model S, which went on sale in 2012. It now awards it a “worse than average” rating. It had previously awarded it an “average” rating.“Consumer Reports has generally has been very positive about the Model S and very complimentary of Tesla, but there is a simple math element based on the volume of complaints from owners that they simply can’t ignore,” said Karl Brauer, senior director of insights at Kelley Blue Book.Mr. Brauer said that problems with the door handle or the iPad-like central console had been present since the car was first introduced three years ago. But first-generation owners who were excited about the car’s performance and technology might have been more willing to overlook them.While Mr. Brauer does not expect the report to affect sales in the short term, the issue of reliability is going to be critical to Tesla’s ability to expand into the mass market, where buyers will be less willing to gloss over such issues.The report said that other high-performance cars also fell below average — like the BMW X5 and 5 Series, and the Chevrolet Corvette.Still, despite the problems and complaints, Tesla owners remain happy about their cars. According to its survey, Consumer Reports said that 97 percent of owners would buy their car again.“It appears that Tesla has been responsive to replacing faulty motors, differentials, brakes and infotainment systems, all with a minimum of fuss to owners,” the report said.But Tesla’s real problem could crop up down the road, when warranties expire or when the company begins mass-producing the Model 3, Consumer Reports said.Advertisement“It’s one thing to have a quirky, problematic car that sells 20,000 units per year to wealthy people who probably own at least one backup vehicle,” the report concluded. “It’s quite another when Tesla scales up to its 2020 projection of 200,000 U.S. Model 3 buyers, who may not have the luxury of being so forgiving.”A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Consumer Reports Stops Recommending the Tesla .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.