By MARK SCOTTMAY 4, 2015
BRUSSELS — All that Jakub Klena wants is to watch the latest episodes of the Netflix show “House of Cards.”But Mr. Klena — and many Europeans like him — cannot use the movie-streaming service in his hometown, Bratislava, Slovakia. That is because Netflix is blocked from offering online content in any of the 28 European Union nations in which it has not signed a country-by-country licensing deal.In the United States, Netflix can stream content as easily to people in Alabama as to Alaska. But Europe is still far from a unified market when it comes to digital content, e-commerce and online services. So on Wednesday, lawmakers in Brussels plan to introduce proposals aimed at creating a so-called single digital market for products and services across the European Union.The aim is to give Europeans simple and unfettered access to services like movie streaming, online shopping and cloud computing no matter where they live. Doing so could let the European Union better fulfill its promise as a unified market of 503 million people.AdvertisementBut the goal is not simply to give consumers more options. Politicians want European businesses to tap into the region’s diverse economy so they can better compete with the American technology titans that often command a prime spot in whatever European digital market they enter.AdvertisementEuropean officials hope the removal of online barriers could add tens of billions of dollars to the region’s annual gross domestic product over the next decade. Forecasts estimate that up to four million new jobs could be created as local companies use the latest tech advances to expand across the region. And all Europeans could gain better access to digital and telecommunications services that are still focused primarily within individual countries.Some of the European proposals are expected to target American companies. Changes to Europe’s complicated copyright rules could force Google and other news aggregators to pay European publishers to use their online content. The Brussels policy makers are also likely to push for legislation to regulate online messaging services like WhatsApp, which is owned by Facebook, in a fashion similar to competing offerings from the region’s own carriers.And the officials are also expected to announce new investigations into how American-owned online platforms like Uber, the ride-booking service, and Airbnb, the lodging website, operate in the region. Those inquiries might eventually lead to legislation aimed at helping European companies compete on a level playing field with their much-larger American competitors in the so-called sharing economy. Representatives of Uber and Airbnb declined to comment.Europe’s current patchwork of digital laws and restrictions “are ridiculous,” said Mr. Klena, 26, who commutes an hour each way from Bratislava to his property management job in Vienna and often resorts to pirated websites to watch Netflix shows like “Daredevil.”“I don’t want to illegally download these shows,” he said. “I have a real job and can pay for them. It’s crazy that I can’t sign up for Netflix from here.”Mr. Klena’s frustrations are just one of the daily reminders that when it comes to digital communications, Europe remains in the slow lane compared with rivals like the United States.Whether it is restrictions on watching movies online, costly cellphone roaming charges or hefty cross-border delivery fees for online purchases, Europeans often face complicated obstacles that restrict how they use the Internet and telecom services.AdvertisementThese barriers have become increasingly apparent as American tech companies like Google, Amazon and Facebook have come to dominate large portions of Europeans’ digital lives. Buoyed by their huge domestic market in the United States — mostly free of internal trade barriers and other restrictions — the Silicon Valley giants have the heft to outmuscle European competitors whose growth is often stunted by restrictive national borders.The proposals on Wednesday will be only the start of a long and politically rancorous process. But the policy overhaul, which will take years to complete — if ever — is meant to touch all aspects of digital life.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Politicians want to revamp Europe’s telecom rules to make it easier for local carriers to buy smaller rivals and invest in much-needed high-speed broadband and wireless networks.The proposals are also meant to break down obstacles that limit roughly three-quarters of e-commerce purchases to within national borders, according to European Union statistics.“Right now, Europe’s online market is really fragmented,” Andrus Ansip, the European commissioner in charge of the digital overhauls, said in an interview this year. “We have 28 countries with 28 different sets of rules. We need to tear down those barriers.”For people like Nina Hissen, a 30-year-old environmental researcher in Rome, any change to Europe’s fragmented digital market cannot come soon enough.Like many Europeans, Ms. Hissen, who is originally from Germany and spent several years living in Britain, splits her time among countries. But in contrast to people in the United States, where carriers like AT&T and Verizon Wireless offer cellphone contacts that span thousands of miles, Ms. Hissen must use different SIM cards whenever she travels because most European operators do not offer phone and data packages that cover the whole of Europe.On a recent trip to visit her boyfriend in England, Ms. Hissen was stung with costly charges after forgetting to swap SIM cards, even though she had turned off her roaming settings to avoid an expensive bill. (She said her carrier, Vodafone, charged her daily for having the phone switched on outside Italy, where she has her main contract.)“It’s difficult to keep on top of all my contracts,” Ms. Hissen said. “As a customer, I feel powerless against all these massive companies.”AdvertisementEntrepreneurs on the Continent could benefit from Europe’s digital overhaul.Nicolas Brusson, 37, and two of his friends, started BlaBlaCar, a Paris-based long-distance ride-sharing start-up that matches drivers with passengers in need of a ride, in 2006.To overcome the regulatory resistance that has confronted the likes of Uber, the start-up forbids participants from profiting from the service. Instead, the cost of each ride is divided among the driver and passengers, with BlaBlaCar taking a commission. Prices for long-distance travel are often lower than for using public transportation like buses or trains, Mr. Brusson says.Yet as BlaBlaCar has expanded beyond its French roots, Mr. Brusson said that his team found it difficult navigating European countries’ various regulations.In Britain, for example, there were clear rules to allow people to legally ride-share. In others, like Spain and Italy, regulation either did not exist or was outdated, he said, leading BlaBlaCar’s founders to spend lengthy periods of time explaining to lawmakers why their service would not harm consumers.After raising more than $100 million to expand the company’s ride-sharing service, BlaBlaCar now operates in 17 countries, mostly in Europe, with about 20 million users. But Mr. Brusson says that European policy makers still needed to do more to help local tech companies compete on a global stage.“If there’s one continent that needs the sharing economy, it’s Europe,” said Mr. Brusson, who added that about 10 percent of France’s 66 million people had signed up for his service. “It’s not likely we’re going to build more infrastructure. Maybe we should be smarter with what we’ve already got.”A version of this article appears in print on May 5, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Europe Aims to Erase Borders for Digital Products and Services.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.