AdvertisementSupported byBy Adam LiptakWASHINGTON — The Supreme Court on Monday agreed to decide whether federal regulators may encourage electricity users like schools, hospitals and shopping centers to reduce consumption at peak times in exchange for price breaks.The regulatory approach, known as “demand response,” lowers costs for consumers and lessens the risk of system failures that can cause blackouts. But it also cuts into the profits of companies that own power plants, which lose money when price spikes are avoided.Trade groups representing utilities and power suppliers challenged the regulation, saying that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission had overstepped its authority. The commission oversees wholesale transactions under the Federal Power Act, but the states regulate retail transactions.The challengers argued that the demand-response regulation operated at the retail level and so was beyond the reach of federal power. Last May, a divided three-judge panel of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia agreed.“Because FERC’s rule entails direct regulation of the retail market — a matter exclusively within state control — it exceeds the commission’s authority,” Judge Janice Rogers Brown wrote for the majority.In dissent, Judge Harry T. Edwards said that the governing statute was ambiguous and that the commission’s understanding of the scope of its authority deserved deference.“The unfortunate consequence” of the majority’s decision, he wrote, “is that a promising rule of national significance — promulgated by the agency that has been authorized by Congress to address the matters in issue — is laid aside on grounds that I think are inconsistent with the statute, at odds with applicable precedent and impossible to square with our limited scope of review.”The commission and companies that make demand-response arrangements filed petitions urging the Supreme Court to grant review.Solicitor General Donald B. Verrilli Jr., representing the commission, told the justices that the decision “threatens significant damage to the nation’s wholesale-electricity markets.”He added that the appeals court had gone astray in finding that the challenged regulation worked at the retail level.“The demand-response providers,” he wrote, “are actual and integral participants in wholesale markets themselves, and the effect of their participation on the wholesale rate is far more immediate and direct than the effect exerted by retail consumption generally.”The second petition, from the demand-service providers, said the appeals court’s decision “will directly undermine Congress’s energy policies: Prices will rise as the result of the need to dispatch unnecessary and higher-cost generation — costs that consumers will ultimately have to pay.”In response to the two petitions, the Electric Power Supply Association and other trade groups rejected what they called the petitioners’ “sky is falling assertions.” The appeals court’s decision, the response said, “does not preclude the development or continuation of demand-response programs; it merely respects federalism,” under which “regulation of the retail markets was properly left to the states.”Environmental groups expressed satisfaction with the Supreme Court’s decision to hear the two consolidated cases, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission v. Electric Power Supply Association, No. 14-840, and EnerNOC Inc. v. Electric Power Supply Association, No. 14-841.“Today’s Supreme Court action is welcome news in the effort to secure a cleaner, more reliable and affordable electric grid,” said Jill Tauber, a lawyer with Earthjustice, an environmental advocacy group. “Demand response plays a central role in our nation’s electric power system, providing tremendous environmental, consumer and reliability benefits.”As is the custom, the Supreme Court’s brief order agreeing to hear the case gave no reasons. It did note that Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. had recused himself from the case, but it did not say why.videoAdvertisement