By JACK EWINGMAY 4, 2015
FRANKFURT — One of the world’s safest investments has been behaving strangely of late.Only a couple of weeks ago, it looked as if the market interest rate on German government bonds maturing in 10 years was heading inexorably into negative territory, a once unthinkable reversal of the usual relationship between borrowers and lenders.Then, just as the yield on the 10-year bond was flirting with zero, it shot up, rising to 0.37 percent on Monday from 0.07 percent on April 20.Other German bonds that had already sunk into negative territory, including five- and seven-year debt, began paying interest again, if only a little.There was no particular news or economic data significant enough to explain such a sharp move, analysts said, and people who analyze markets for a living are still trying to figure out what happened.AdvertisementBut while the abruptness was unsettling, the rise in the yield marks a return to normalcy that provides some relief to insurance companies and pension funds that are obligated to put most of their money into bulletproof assets like German bonds, also known as bunds.AdvertisementThe positive yields will probably also be welcomed by the European Central Bank, whose economic stimulus program is largely responsible for pushing market interest rates so low.“This is the best thing that could happen to the E.C.B.,” said Holger Schmieding, chief economist at Berenberg Bank.The recovery of German yields helps to quell complaints in Germany that ultralow interest rates were undermining German savers, Mr. Schmieding said. At the same time, borrowing costs for most of the crisis countries like Spain and Italy remain low, just as the central bank intended.“This blunts the German criticism while still delivering stimulus where it’s needed,” Mr. Schmieding said. “It’s optimal.”The recovery of German interest rates will also help ease fears that the central bank was in danger of running out of bonds to buy as part of its so-called quantitative easing program. Since March, the European Central Bank has essentially been printing money and using it to buy government bonds issued by all 19 countries in the eurozone. In the bond market, more demand translates into lower yields.The bond purchases, at a rate of 60 billion euros, or about $67 billion, a month, are a way of pumping money into the eurozone economy.While the rise in German yields is probably welcomed at central bank headquarters in Frankfurt, there are some unnerving aspects.AdvertisementEven the experts were unsure why bunds reversed course. As of Monday, only German bonds maturing in two years or less were still selling at negative yields — a situation in which lenders were effectively paying borrowers to take care of their money.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Michael Heise, the chief economist at the German insurer Allianz, said that central bank stimulus along with a rise in oil prices had caused investors to revise their expectations for future inflation. If investors think inflation will rise, then they will be less willing to tolerate low interest rates on their money.Some investors, for example hedge funds, may have been betting that yields would go even lower. When the yields started to go up, Mr. Heise said, these investors may have been caught off balance. Their frantic efforts to backtrack may have accounted for the steepness of the rise.“The mainstream didn’t expect oil prices to go up,” Mr. Heise said. “This might have been the trigger.”Jörg Krämer, the chief economist of Commerzbank, said that recent economic data, like the news last week that inflation in the eurozone had risen to zero from negative territory, was not enough by itself to explain the rise in yields.But it might have provided an excuse for traders to sell bunds. Market rates fell so low that German bonds — considered a refuge from financial turmoil — started to feel risky. The haven no longer seemed so safe.“When everyone is aware yields are too low then small events may cause a correction,” Mr. Krämer said.While the European Central Bank probably welcomes slightly higher German yields, the suddenness of the rise may be causing some uneasiness. “They don’t like volatility,” Mr. Krämer said. “Volatility is uncertainty, and uncertainty is bad if you want to stimulate the economy.”Mario Draghi, the central bank president, recently acknowledged being worried about unintended side effects from the quantitative easing program.Advertisement“We are aware that very low interest rates for a very long time are a fertile terrain for financial stability imbalances,” Mr. Draghi said last month, though he added, “Having said that, we don’t see at this point in time evidence of systemically large financial stability imbalances.”One recent development is certainly unwelcome. As yields have risen, so has the value of the euro against the dollar. One reason central bank policy has worked so far is that oil prices have been exceptionally low, while ultralow interest rates in the eurozone have made it more attractive for investors to own dollars or other currencies offering a better return.Last month, the euro fell to about $1.05, its lowest since 2003. That made Italian fashion or Spanish wine cheaper in dollar terms, and has stimulated exports. But the euro was approaching $1.12 Monday, blunting the currency effect.“Quantitative easing is effectively a euro depreciation program,” said Mr. Krämer of Commerzbank. With market interest rates rising again, the program may no longer function as well.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.