AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningThe legal journey of Sergey Aleynikov, the former Goldman Sachs computer programmer, has been almost Kafkaesque. The latest — but certainly not last — step came in a verdict last week in New York State court that hit all three possible outcomes: guilty of one charge of unlawful use of secret scientific material based on computer code he took from Goldman, a hung jury on a nearly identical charge, and an acquittal for unlawful duplication of computer-related material.The case began with Mr. Aleynikov’s arrest by federal agents nearly six years ago at the Newark Liberty International Airport. Since then, it has had just about every possible twist and turn, with a federal criminal prosecution that resulted in a one-year stint in prison before the conviction was overturned, and civil litigation that has pitted Mr. Aleynikov against Goldman and the F.B.I. agents who arrested him.Like most white-collar crime cases, the facts are not in dispute. Mr. Aleynikov downloaded computer code used in Goldman’s high-frequency trading platform, which he helped design. He planned to use the code in a new job to create a competing platform. He does not deny taking the code but has argued that his actions did not break the law but only violated an internal corporate confidentiality policy.Nor is there any dispute about Mr. Aleynikov’s intent, the usual battleground in white-collar crime prosecutions. He does not contend he was mistaken in taking the code or acted in good faith by accidentally violating the law. Instead, the case has centered on whether statutes written years earlier to cover one type of theft can be used by prosecutors to address the downloading of computer code that otherwise left the trading program undisturbed so that Goldman could continue to be use it profitably.Mr. Aleynikov was first convicted in Federal District Court in Manhattan in December 2010, receiving an eight-year prison sentence. The federal appeals court overturned his conviction in February 2012, finding that his conduct did not fit under the two statutes he was charged with violating. The crucial element was that the computer code was intangible, helping Goldman provide a marketplace for securities transactions but was not itself a “product” or “good” that could be bought.Released from prison, Mr. Aleynikov looked to be free from further criminal entanglements. But then the Manhattan district attorney’s office filed criminal charges for the same conduct. This time, the charges involved making a “tangible reproduction” of scientific material and duplication of computer data that was appropriated from its owner. The usual protection afforded by the constitution against double jeopardy did not apply because of the doctrine known as “dual sovereignty,” which allows a state to pursue charges even when a defendant has been acquitted in federal court.Mr. Aleynikov opened up a new front in the case by suing Goldman in federal court in New Jersey, demanding that the firm pay his legal fees under its corporate bylaws that provide for indemnification of its “officers.” That case initially went well for Mr. Aleynikov when the district judge ordered Goldman to pay his legal fees in both the federal and state cases, resulting in the firm advancing him more than $1 million. But in September 2014, the federal appeals court in Philadelphia overturned that decision and returned the case to lower court for a trial on whether he was a Goldman officer.Even with the state criminal charges pending, Mr. Aleynikov expanded the battle. He filed a second suit in February in Delaware Chancery Court that sought to force Goldman to pay his fees. That case has been consolidated with the one in federal court in New Jersey. He also sued the F.B.I. agents who arrested him at in July 2009 and then searched his home. The evidence from the search was suppressed in the state court proceeding for violation of the Fourth Amendment, and he is seeking damages for an illegal search.The trial in New York State court on the criminal charges was hardly free from controversy. As DealBook reported, Justice Daniel P. Conviser of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, who presided over the case, expressed misgivings about whether the statute under which Mr. Aleynikov was convicted even covers his actions. The question is whether making a “tangible reproduction” of scientific material includes transferring electronic files to a flash drive.Before the jury reached its verdict, a bizarre twist nearly upended the proceeding after one juror accused another of trying to poison her. Justice Conviser ruled that those accusations were unfounded, dismissed the two jurors and permitted the remaining 10 members to decide the case.The conviction on one count of stealing scientific material was hard to understand in light of the jury’s failure to reach a verdict on a nearly identical count whose only difference was downloading the code on a different day. A jury can reach a contradictory result, and just because it couldn’t decide one count does not necessarily mean there was a problem with the other. Although a foolish consistency may be the hobgoblin of little minds, courts do not demand any such consistency from a jury.Overturning the conviction is the key to Mr. Aleynikov’s civil cases against Goldman and the F.B.I. agents. If his conviction is upheld, then it strengthens the argument that any violation of his rights did not cause damage and therefore his claims should be dismissed. If it is overturned, he can assert that he was successful in his defense, which may require Goldman to pay his legal fees, and it would help show that Fourth Amendment violations contributed to an improper prosecution in state court.The first step will be asking Justice Conviser to overturn the conviction. By letting the case go to the jury, Justice Conviser may have signaled his intention to allow a conviction to stand despite misgivings about the scope of the law. Whatever he judge decides, the losing party can be expected to appeal, which will drag the case out for months.When Mr. Aleynikov was charged by the Manhattan district attorney’s office, I used the Grateful Dead’s famous lyric about “what a long, strange trip it’s been” to describe how the case had unfolded. It has only gotten longer and stranger, with no end in sight.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2nd edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningAdvertisement