AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberA leading advertising trade association has hired two companies to look into the practices of media agencies, reflecting rising concern among advertisers over a lack of transparency in how ads are bought.The Association of National Advertisers, which includes roughly 700 companies that collectively spend more than $250 billion on marketing and advertising, has selected K2 Intelligence, a corporate investigative consulting firm, and FirmDecisions, a marketing auditor that is part of the Ebiquity consulting firm, to lead a “fact-finding effort” into questionable media-buying tactics, including rebates and arbitrage.Bob Liodice, president and chief executive of the advertisers association, said in an interview that the goal of the investigation was to “see to what degree any nontransparent behavior is taking place in the market.”K2 Intelligence and Ebiquity/FirmDecisions were chosen after a selection process involving 26 companies.The investigation comes as advertisers have become increasingly wary of how their agencies conduct business. There have been particular concerns about how media companies give rebates to agencies for buying ads, with advertisers saying that those rebates are not being passed on to them.A survey of about 150 marketers done last year by the association and the research firm Forrester showed that 46 percent of those polled were concerned about the transparency of their media buys.The issue gained more prominence this year when Jon Mandel, the former chief executive of the media agency Mediacom, told marketers at an A.N.A. conference that agency rebates were rampant.His remarks set off speculation among advertisers and put agencies on the defensive.Some executives in the ad industry point to these rebate allegations as one reason so many companies, including Unilever and Coca-Cola, put their media agencies under review this year. Estimates by agencies and analysts pegged the amount of advertising spending under review at some $30 billion.“The foundation of great client-agency relationships is trust and reliability and confidence,” Mr. Liodice said. “They’re our partners, and we don’t want to be in a situation where there is suspicion or a lack of trust.”He said he expected that the investigation would take several months and that it would most likely extend into next year. A substantial part of the investigation will involve interviewing advertisers, agency executives, consultants and researchers about their experiences and exposure to industry practices, he said.The advertisers association, whose members include companies like Procter & Gamble and Mondelez, and another industry trade group, the American Association of Advertising Agencies, known as the 4As, have been working together for months on a set of transparency principles. Those guidelines are expected to be released in the coming weeks.“We’re all for getting to transparency in the industry,” Nancy Hill, president and chief executive of the 4As, said in an interview. “That’s what the collaboration has been about. Our preference would have been to get those principles out there and make it feel like it was still a collaboration.”The A.N.A. had said this year that it wanted to conduct a study, Ms. Hill said, and her group had offered at the time to work on it with them. “For whatever reason,” she said, “They’ve decided they want to do that on their own.”Advertisement