AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter EavisWall Street chieftains, huge investment firms and top bank regulators are all sounding the same alarm.In recent months, they have been warning that the world’s bond markets, where companies and countries borrow trillions of dollars, are in danger of breaking down.Their fear is that in an event like a surprise increase in interest rates, trading could rapidly dry up, causing violent movements in bond prices and even disrupting the functioning of the market. According to this view, the destabilizing volatility in the bond market could make it harder and more expensive for companies and countries to borrow.With the Federal Reserve contemplating a rise in interest rates, turbulence in European bond prices and currency markets in flux, there is no shortage of places where the next jolt could come from.But is the bond market really as fragile as the doomsayers say? Bond prices have plummeted in the past, but recovered if the wider economy was in reasonable health. Why wouldn’t that happen again?Bankers and asset managers, after all, might be tempted to overstate their concerns, with an eye on their bottom lines. Yet the caution is also coming from prominent regulators, like Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, and the units at the International Monetary Fund and the United States Treasury Department that are tasked with scouring the globe for financial threats.A preview of what could happen, the bankers and regulators say, took place one morning in October. Then, in a matter of minutes, the yield on a benchmark Treasury note, which moves opposite its price, mysteriously plunged. The market soon recovered, but the speed and size of the move left Wall Street stunned. Regulators have yet to provide a conclusive explanation of what occurred.“If it were to happen in a stressed environment, it could have far worse consequences,” Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, warned in a letter to shareholders about recent big moves in the markets.Those voicing such fears say that recent changes in the bond market could change the way that Wall Street banks, large bond funds and trading systems would behave in a period of turbulence. Other developments have left the market vulnerable, they say. A huge rally in bond prices over the last several years, stoked by vast amounts of monetary stimulus by central banks, may have made the market vulnerable to a sharp sell-off.Also, more bonds are now concentrated in the hands of a few large fund management companies, whose combined selling could tip bond prices into a tailspin. And then there is the role of electronic trading, which has spread in certain bond markets and is thought to have played in the disruption in the Treasury market in October.Others, however, say that fears about the bond market are overstated. Among them is Barney Frank, the former Democratic representative from Massachusetts. Some bankers and regulators have said that rules deriving from his signature overhaul legislation, the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010, are hampering the smooth functioning of the bond market. Mr. Frank said that even if the new rules were affecting trading conditions, any such problems could diminish as Wall Street adapted to a new era in which firms’ bond trading desks took fewer risks.“They make more of this as a way of discrediting regulation,” he added.Indeed, the bond market has functioned remarkably well since the chaos of the financial crisis of 2008. In the United States, it has consistently provided a huge amount of credit to a vast range of companies, even when banks pulled back after the crisis.Retail investors have also profited from the bond market, notching up spectacular returns on their bond funds in recent years. And on some measures, trading conditions continue to be robust. For instance, the difference between the price at which Wall Street dealers offer to buy bonds and the price at which they offer to sell them is quite narrow. This suggests that investors are having little trouble transacting at reliable prices.Of course, the bond market, like any major securities market, could sell off steeply in the future, causing trading to dry up for a while. And if borrowers in the market are not defaulting en masse, investors are likely to rush back in.But things could be worse in a future decline, according those who are concerned. One reason they give is that a greater proportion of bonds are held at large bond funds that may find it harder to sell their positions in a falling market. In the logjam, prices may plunge further than they might in earlier crises.Still, that situation assumes in part that investors in the funds will stampede for the exits — and on the whole they did not in the last crisis.The pessimists also highlight the role of banking regulations introduced after the crisis. Many of the new rules, some of them acknowledge, have made the bond market sturdier. Wall Street dealers, for instance, use much less borrowed money to finance their trading, which reduces the likelihood that they would dump those bonds during market turbulence.Even so, the new rules, the worriers contend, have eaten away at the bond market in other ways. The regulations, they assert, have caused Wall Street dealers to slash the stockpiles of bonds that they make available to investors. As a result, they assert, the dealers will be less willing to act as “shock absorbers” in future market turbulence and buy bonds from fleeing investors.It is not clear that the dealers ever acted in this way, however. If anything, there is evidence for the opposite.Trading dried up for a time during the shakeouts in the market in 1994, 1998 and 2008, all of which occurred when there were far fewer restrictions on Wall Street dealers. In 1994, for instance, when interest rates unexpectedly rose, bond dealers slashed their holdings of bonds by nearly a third, according to figures from the Federal Reserve.“The dealers are profit motivated, so they are not going to catch a falling knife,” said Marcus Stanley, policy director at Americans for Financial Reform, a group that supports rules that rein in risk taking on Wall Street.Echoing their past behavior, the dealers reduced their inventories in the so-called taper tantrum, a sell-off that took place in 2013 after investors concluded that the Fed might “taper” its monetary stimulus earlier than they had thought. Analysts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York concluded later that regulatory constraints — like higher capital requirements — were most likely not the cause. Banks that had spare capital to take on more bonds chose not to use it, and withdrew. As a result, the Fed’s researchers said, the dealers most likely pulled back as part of a marketwide shift in which bond investors became more cautious about the outlook for bond prices.Hung Q. Tran, of the Institute of International Finance, a group that represents banks, is not convinced by the New York Fed’s findings, however. The thrust of the new regulations is to prevent dealers from extending themselves by taking on more assets, he said. As a result, Mr. Tran contended, it is to be expected that banks decide against taking on more bonds even if they have the spare capital to do so.Yet some analysts who have raised concerns about bond inventories at banks said that they did not want to give the impression that Wall Street had stepped into the gap during past bond market swoons.“This is not to claim that banks have typically or regularly acted as shock absorbers in the past,” Gaston Gelos, the division chief of the global financial stability analysis at the International Monetary Fund, said in an email. But he added, “The question is, who will be able and willing to step in if fund investors run to the exit?”Advertisement