By ALEXANDRA ALTERMAY 5, 2015
Max Brallier didn’t have very realistic career goals as a child.“I wanted to be a Jedi,” he said. That didn’t work out. But Mr. Brallier, a baby-faced 31-year-old, has found a more pragmatic way to channel his “Star Wars” fanaticism. The result is “Galactic Hot Dogs,” his new book about a boy who battles giant mutant worms and zombie space pirates with his sidekicks: a robot, a rebellious princess and a lumbering alien. The story, which Mr. Brallier described as “a goofier ‘Star Wars,’ ” is undeniably silly. His publisher is treating the project very seriously, though. Aladdin, an imprint of Simon & Schuster Children’s Publishing, bought “Galactic Hot Dogs” in a seven-figure, three-book deal. The company is printing 500,000 copies, and began promoting the book more than a year ago, through an elaborate, million-dollar print and online marketing campaign. Simon & Schuster has solid reasons to be bullish about “Galactic Hot Dogs.” The book has already taken off on Funbrain.com, a popular gaming website for children that has been an incubator for some of the biggest blockbusters in children’s book publishing. Jeff Kinney’s “Diary of a Wimpy Kid” series began as a free book on Funbrain in 2004, and now has more than 150 million copies in print globally. “Dork Diaries,” a middle-grade series by Rachel Renée Russell, experienced improved sales through a story-based interactive game on Funbrain’s sister site, Poptropica, and now has more than 20 million copies in print.AdvertisementThe comic strip “Big Nate,” by Lincoln Peirce, became the basis for a popular game on Poptropica and later became a print best seller. Other popular middle-grade series, including Stephan Pastis’s “Timmy Failure” and Brandon Mull’s best-selling fantasy series “Beyonders,” are finding audiences on Poptropica and Funbrain that are carrying over into book sales. “Galactic Hot Dogs” seems to be on a similar trajectory. More than six million children have read the book on Funbrain since the fall of 2013, when Mr. Brallier posted chapters. More than a million have played a story-based “Galactic Hot Dogs” game that went live on Poptropica two months ago. Like many books that have thrived on the site, it appeals to 8- to 12-year-olds who appreciate its hammy underdog hero, Cosmoe, and its slapsticky humor and comic-strip-style illustrations. “We’ve seen this model work before,” said Mara Anastas, vice president and publisher of the children’s imprints Simon Pulse and Aladdin Books. “The groundwork is already laid.”AdvertisementThere is no guarantee that young readers, or their parents, will be as enthusiastic about a print book as they are a free online product. Simon & Schuster, which has plowed millions into acquiring and marketing “Galactic Hot Dogs,” is making a risky bet that a healthy slice of the book’s online audience will seek it out in bookstores. In the last few years, multiplatform books with online gaming components have become crucial tools for children’s book publishers seeking to reach young readers who are migrating to digital and mobile reading. Sixty-seven percent of children between the ages of 2 and 13 read e-books, according to a report released in January by Digital Book World and PlayCollective, up from 54 percent in 2012. To the uninitiated, Funbrain and Poptropica might look like a publisher’s worst nightmare. On Poptropica, children can create cartoon avatars and play games on computers or phones — the sort of sticky, addictive online activity that parents and teachers worry is chipping away at reading time. But authors and publishers have discovered that the sites often steer children toward books. (Poptropica was created by an author, Mr. Kinney, who started the site in 2007 and is still its creative director.) Most major children’s publishers market books heavily on the sites, through straightforward advertisements, book excerpts on Funbrain or interactive games featuring their brands and characters on Poptropica.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some publishers have found that interactive games can increase print sales rather than erode them. Scholastic’s multiplatform game and book series, “39 Clues,” which started in 2008, has more than 17 million copies in print. “With these properties, we’ve proven that kids will engage on a screen with a book for a long time,” said Jess Brallier, the president of the Family Education Network, which operates the sites. “We realized we had an intellectual property launchpad.”Funbrain and Poptropica together draw around 4.7 million monthly visitors, according to the Internet analytics company comScore, though the company that operates the sites said they have around eight million visitors a month when factoring in traffic from school computers and a rising mobile audience. In the past, Funbrain has helped publishers promote their own series. With “Galactic Hot Dogs,” the company wants to replicate the process, and keep the intellectual property. Two years ago, Funbrain asked Max Brallier, Jess Brallier’s son and a freelance writer for the company since 2009, to write an original series for the site. The younger Mr. Brallier, who has published 19 children’s books and humor and trivia titles, quickly came up with the plot for “Galactic Hot Dogs.” Daniel Lazar, a literary agent at Writers House, sent out a proposal for a book in October 2013. It was an easy sell. He had an offer from Simon & Schuster the next day, and quickly closed the seven-figure deal. “Everyone already knew Funbrain, because they’ve spent a lot of money marketing their books on Funbrain,” Mr. Lazar said.Advertisement Even though more than six million readers have already seen “Galactic Hot Dogs,” Max Brallier seems anxious about its arrival in print this week. He dreads public speaking and is about to go on his first book tour, to eight cities. “I’m terrified,” he said. Mr. Brallier, a self-described bookworm, was a shy child who took refuge in books and movies. He got his first professional writing job in the seventh grade, when he wrote to the editor of his local paper in Reading, Mass., and offered to review movies for children. He was paid $10 a week to write his column. He took a job in publishing shortly after college, at Penguin, and then St. Martin’s Press, where he worked in marketing. That experience has made him keenly aware of how unusual it is to have millions invested in promoting his book. “So many books get almost zero done for them these days,” he said. “It’s really exciting, but also super scary.”A version of this article appears in print on May 6, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Fans Online and, Perhaps, at Bookstores.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.