By DYLAN LOEB McCLAINMAY 5, 2015
William A. Ackman, the founder and chief executive of Pershing Square Capital Management, and Ian Bremmer, the president of the Eurasia Group, are used to commanding center stage and charming crowds. But on Monday afternoon at the annual Sohn Investment Conference, they stood transfixed just off the main stage at Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center, watching something they had never seen before.On stage, Magnus Carlsen, the world chess champion from Norway, was wearing a blindfold and playing a timed exhibition against three people: J. Christopher Flowers, the chairman of J.C. Flowers & Company; Paul Hoffman, the chief executive of the Liberty Science Center; and Gbenga Akinnagbe, a star of the HBO series “The Wire.” Two grandmasters, Pascal Charbonneau and Anatoly Bykhovsky, made Mr. Carlsen’s moves as he called out to them, while Maurice Ashley, another grandmaster, provided occasional commentary.Each player, including Mr. Carlsen, had nine minutes to complete the games. Though Mr. Hoffman and Mr. Flowers have competed in tournaments, Mr. Carlsen had little trouble dispatching all three players.As Mr. Carlsen exited the stage, Mr. Ackman bounded up to him to shake his hand and express his admiration. “It was incredible,” he said. Watching Mr. Carlsen walk away, Mr. Ackman mused, “How does that mind work?”AdvertisementMr. Bremmer, who often delivers his speeches without notes, was also amazed. “It was mind-bogglingly impressive,” he said.AdvertisementMr. Flowers, who takes weekly chess lessons, resigned when his position became untenable. He wrote in an email, “I think I did O.K. compared with my potential. My objective was not to make any obvious blunders and to resign more or less with dignity.”This year was the 20th anniversary of the conference, which raises money to combat pediatric cancer and is named for Ira Sohn, who died of the disease. Since it started, the conference, which filled Avery Fisher Hall, has become the world’s biggest gathering of investors and hedge fund managers, noted for its litany of prominent speakers. In addition to Mr. Ackman and Mr. Bremmer, the lineup on Monday also included David Einhorn of Greenlight Capital, David Tepper of Appaloosa Management and Leon G. Cooperman of Omega Advisors, among others.Mr. Carlsen’s display was the brainchild of Douglas Hirsch, a founder and managing partner of Seneca Capital and also a co-founder of the Sohn Conference. Mr. Hirsch took up chess several years ago after his son became interested in the game, and he has become friends with several grandmasters and Mr. Carlsen.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In addition to Mr. Carlsen’s exhibition, Susan Polgar, a former women’s world champion, played 25 people simultaneously during the cocktail reception after the conference.Many attendees, who pay $5,000 for a spot, seemed just as taken with what Mr. Carlsen did as were Mr. Ackman and Mr. Bremmer.Lorenzo Smith III, a banker at JPMorgan Chase, said that although he “did not come here to watch chess,” he thought Mr. Carlsen’s performance was “amazing.” He added that he understood the idea of the exhibition. He said that, just as in chess, strategic thinking is critical in investment banking. “You have to respond to things,” he saidMr. Bremmer said he used to play when he was younger. (Indeed, when he walked out on stage, a photo of him as a child wearing a purple velour shirt sitting at a chess board flashed on the screen). He said he gave up playing chess, as well as the game Dungeons and Dragons, because “I wanted to be less of a dork.”Mr. Bremmer called Mr. Carlsen’s exhibition effective. “Giving the people the unexpected is really important,” he said, adding, “It was a masterstroke of the organizers.”As he walked out on the stage just after Mr. Carlsen had finished, Mr. Bremmer received a hearty laugh from the audience as he began, “I offered to give this speech blindfolded.”A version of this article appears in print on May 6, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Movers and Shakers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.