AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberBill Cosby has replaced Martin D. Singer, a lawyer who is prominent as a protector of Hollywood celebrities, with a new firm in two civil suits, shaking up his legal team as he continues to face battles in courtrooms across the country.Mr. Singer, who had been on Mr. Cosby’s legal team for years, has been replaced in both cases by the law firm Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan, according to a court filing and Monique Pressley, another of Mr. Cosby’s lawyers. The firm specializes in business litigation and arbitration.The changes came to light on Tuesday a little more than a week after Mr. Cosby was questioned under oath in a California case brought by Judy Huth, who says the entertainer forced her to perform a sex act on him when she was 15. Ms. Huth’s lawyer, Gloria Allred, has said she wants to question Mr. Cosby under oath a second time.Mr. Singer had represented Mr. Cosby in the Huth case and in a defamation suit filed by Janice Dickinson, a former model who has accused Mr. Cosby of drugging and raping her in 1982.“Mr. Cosby has decided to hire 700 lawyers to fight one woman,” Ms. Allred said in a statement on Tuesday, referring to the size of the law firm that has replaced Mr. Singer’s firm in the Huth case. She said she did not know why Mr. Cosby had made the change.Mr. Cosby’s team declined to elaborate but made clear that Mr. Singer would not continue as his legal adviser. “The firm Lively & Singer no longer represents Mr. Cosby,” Ms. Pressley said by email.Mr. Singer did not respond to a request for comment on Tuesday.Mr. Cosby has denied any wrongdoing and has not been criminally charged.Mr. Singer has built a reputation for aggressively defending clients, particularly when they are battling controversy.After Ms. Huth filed suit last year, Mr. Singer said in court papers that her claim was “meritless” and nothing short of “a shakedown.” He said that Ms. Huth and her former lawyer, Marc S. Strecker, had demanded money in exchange for not going public and that Ms. Huth had tried unsuccessfully to sell her allegations to a tabloid 10 years earlier.Mr. Singer also played rough with the news media. For example, he threatened to sue BuzzFeed as the site prepared to publish an article about the accusations by Ms. Dickinson.One of Mr. Singer’s statements to the news media, in which he characterized some of the accusations against Mr. Cosby as “unsubstantiated, fantastical stories,” has been cited in a number of defamation cases against Mr. Cosby.Advertisement