AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Peter Thal LarsenHSBC’s revival is overshadowed by its existential angst.Higher investment banking revenue and fewer bad loans helped bolster first-quarter results at the global bank, offering a welcome respite from restive shareholders and political uproar over Swiss tax. HSBC’s longer-term fortunes, however, depend on how it answers three big questions.The immediate conundrum is the $194 billion lender’s shape and size. Despite four years of intense surgery, costs are rising while returns are still too low. The chief executive, Stuart Gulliver, will detail the next steps on June 9. Further pruning seems inevitable; underperforming units in Mexico, Brazil, Turkey and the United States are under review, while some wholesale and commercial banking operations could also go.The medium-term riddle is location. The bank is reviewing whether to move its headquarters out of Britain. HSBC’s main gripe is the British bank levy, which could cost it around $1.5 billion this year, and would rise to almost $2 billion if the Labour party wins Britain’s general election and keeps its campaign promise to raise the tax. Every increase threatens HSBC’s promise to investors to keep raising its dividend.Relocating to Hong Kong or Shanghai would bring fresh challenges, but would allow HSBC to stop paying the levy on its non-British business. The bank would also be freed from European Union restrictions on bonuses that do not apply to Asian and American rivals. HSBC’s board is likely to decide later in the year — though any move would take years.HSBC must also decide what to do with its British business. British lenders must place their retail and commercial units in a ring-fenced subsidiary with a separate board by 2019. HSBC is unsure whether it will then be able to exert control over its wholly owned British subsidiary. If not, it might decide to sell out.HSBC shares have risen by almost a tenth in the past month as hopes abound that a shake-up would bring financial benefits. They now trade roughly in line with expected year-end book value. A sustained revival would justify a higher rating. Yet the nature of existential questions is that they tend not to have quick answers.Peter Thal Larsen is Asia editor of Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement