AdvertisementSupported byBook EntryBy Jonathan A. KneeThe economist Richard H. Thaler has written a sly and somewhat subversive history of his profession.Although billed as an account of the major developments in behavioral economics over the last half-century, the book is part memoir, part attack on a breed of economist who dominated the academy – particularly, the Chicago School that dominated economic theory at the University of Chicago – for the much of the latter part of the 20th century. And Professor Thaler is generally happy to name names when detailing the intellectual deficiencies and petty rivalries of his vocation.An academic tell-all would typically not hold much interest or even likely find a publisher. Two aspects of “Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics,” (W.W. Norton & Company) however, make it both engrossing and highly relevant.First, economists have increasingly become the go-to experts on every manner of business and public policy issue facing society. Second, rather than being a disgruntled former employee or otherwise easily marginalized whistle-blower, Mr. Thaler recently took the reins as president of the American Economic Association (and still teaches at Chicago’s graduate business program, the Booth School of Business).The economics profession that Mr. Thaler entered in the early 1970s was deeply invested in proving that it was more than a mere social science. But economic outcomes are the result of human decision-making. To achieve the same mathematical precision of hard sciences, economists made a radically simplifying assumption that people are “optimizers” whose behavior is as predictable as the speed of physical body falling through space.Early in his career, Professor Thaler created a list of observed behaviors that were obviously inconsistent with the predictions of established orthodoxy. These found names like “the endowment effect,” which leads individuals to systematically value things they already own much more than the identical item in someone else’s hands.“Misbehaving” charts Mr. Thaler’s journey to document these anomalies in the face of economists’ increasingly desperate, and sometimes comical, efforts to deny their existence or relevance. Mr. Thaler’s work built on the groundbreaking insights of the psychologists Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, whose work would earn a Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science in 2002.After so-called behavioral economics began to go mainstream, Professor Thaler turned his attention to helping solve a variety of business and, increasingly, public policy issues. As these tools have been applied to practical problems, Professor Thaler has noted that there has been “very little actual economics involved.” Instead, the resulting insights have “come primarily from psychology and the other social sciences.”To the extent that economists fought the integration of behavioral insights into economic analyses, it seems that their fears were founded. Rather than making the resulting work less rigorous, however, it simply made its economic underpinnings less relevant. Professor Thaler argues that it is actually “a slur on those other social sciences if people insist on calling any policy-related research some kind of economics.”Professor Thaler’s narrative ultimately demonstrates that by trying to set itself as somehow above other social sciences, the “rationalist” school of economics actually ended up contributing far less than it could have. The group’s intellectual denial led to not just sloppy social science, but sloppy philosophy.After all, the father of modern economics, Adam Smith, was actually a professor of moral philosophy. Smith’s masterwork, “The Wealth of Nations,” is not fully intelligible without having first reading his earlier “The Theory of Moral Sentiments.” Economists would do well to embrace both their philosophical and social science roots. No amount of number-crunching can replace the need to confront the complexity of human existence.It is not only in academics that the most difficult questions are avoided behind a mathematical smoke screen. When businesses use cost-benefit analysis, for instance, they are applying a moral philosophy known as utilitarianism, popularized by John Stuart Mill in the 19th century.Compared against alternative moral philosophies, like those of Kant or Aristotle, Mill has relatively few contemporary adherents in professional philosophical circles. But utilitarianism does have the virtue of lending itself to mathematical calculation. By giving the contentious philosophy a benign bureaucratic name like “cost-benefit analysis,” corporations hope to circumvent the need to confront the profound ethical issues implicated.Professor Thaler’s entertaining book provides an important reminder of both the challenges and opportunities that come from working across the sometimes artificial boundaries between academic disciplines.It is true that interdisciplinary collaborations often yield least-common-denominator pabulum. But sometimes, as with the work of academics like Professor Thaler who are willing to question even the most deeply held institutional convictions, it has led to genuine advances in how we view the world.The “misbehaving” of Professor Thaler’s title is supposed to refer to how human actions are inconsistent with rationalist economic theory. It could just as easily refer to his own professional misbehavior in rejecting the prevalent worldview of academic economists at the time. Although not without serious risk to any aspiring academic, hopefully, his book and his career will inspire more miscreants across a wide range of intellectual specialties.Jonathan A. Knee is professor of professional practice in business at Columbia Business School and a senior adviser at Evercore Partners.Advertisement