By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMAY 5, 2015
Bank of America has hired Chris Cormier, a specialist in helping companies in the technology, media and telecommunications sectors go public, as a managing director, the firm announced on Monday in an internal memorandum.Mr. Cormier, who will be based in New York and will start in August, joined the bank from Deutsche Bank, where he was most recently the head of technology equity capital markets for the Americas, according to the memo, which was reviewed by DealBook.He will report to J.D. Moriarty, Bank of America’s head of equity capital markets for the Americas and also a specialist in technology stock offerings.The hiring is a prominent one by Bank of America, which ranked eighth in initial public offerings worldwide last year, according to Thomson Reuters, down from fourth the prior year. Part of that slip in the rankings was the firm’s omission from the huge market debut of the Alibaba Group, an I.P.O. that bolstered the fortunes of six other banking rivals.The poaching of Mr. Cormier also represents the loss of another prominent technology banker at Deutsche Bank. Mr. Cormier assumed his current role only in January, succeeding Ted Tobiason, known as one of the rare practicing investment bankers to post to Twitter for his firm. Mr. Tobiason left Deutsche Bank for Morgan Stanley late last year.A spokesman for Bank of America confirmed the contents of the memo.The text of the memo is below:Chris Cormier appointed managing director of Americas Equity Capital MarketsA message from JD Moriarty, head of Americas Equity Capital MarketsTo: Global Capital Markets employees and GCIB Americas managing directorsI am pleased to announce that Chris Cormier will join our firm as a managing director on the Americas Equity Capital Markets team, focused on Technology, Media & Telecom (TMT), as well as Industrials. For TMT, he will partner closely with me and Matt Walsh to drive origination efforts to help propel the growth of our business. Chris will join the firm in August, be based in New York and report to me.Chris joins our firm from Deutsche Bank where he has spent 10 years most recently as a managing director and head of Americas Technology Equity Capital Markets.Please join me in welcoming Chris to the firm and in wishing him much success in his new role.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.