AdvertisementSupported byBy James KanterBRUSSELS — European officials investigating whether Apple, Amazon and other companies received sweetheart tax deals from Ireland and Luxembourg will not take action as soon as expected, the European Union competition commissioner said Tuesday.The commissioner, Margrethe Vestager, has proceeded with alacrity since taking over in November. She has already announced formal antitrust charges against Google and the Russian energy giant Gazprom, and the companies could face huge fines and orders to change their business practices.But Ms. Vestager said she was no longer on track to make a decision by late spring in the tax cases, which include an inquiry into Starbucks and a unit of the car company Fiat.There was “an ambition to do all four cases before the end of the second quarter,” Ms. Vestager said after giving testimony at the European Parliament to a committee looking into tax issues. “It is now obvious, with the problems that we’ve been having to get information, this is not possible.”Another reason for the delay was to avoid making “speed too high a priority,” Ms. Vestager said. Proceeding too rapidly could turned into criticism of how cases are managed, she added.Ms. Vestager did not a set a new deadline for action.The tax cases are different from the Google and Gazprom investigations because they are not based on antitrust regulations but on laws aimed at curbing national subsidies that would give a member state an advantage in attracting investors.Unlike in antitrust cases, companies found to have received such aid do not face fines or a finding of wrongdoing. Instead, the European Commission would impose an order on the country that granted the aid.Apple could be required to pay back huge sums to Dublin, while Amazon and Fiat could have to make payments to Luxembourg. A ruling against the Netherlands would leave the government facing an order to collect large sums from Starbucks.“There is no deadline, but we will get there, of course,” she said. “Fast is always better than slow, but it’s always best to be just.”Advertisement