By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMAY 5, 2015
In a move to bolster its real estate arm, the brokerage firm BGC Partners has struck another takeover.The firm announced on Tuesday that it had purchased Computerized Facility Integration, a consulting and technology service provider that helps real estate owners manage their assets.Financial terms were not disclosed, though the sellers will be receiving stock as part of their consideration.The acquisition is the latest by BGC as it continues to grow, in part through deal-making. In February, the firm gained control of the brokerage firm GFI Group after waging a heated battle with the CME Group.AdvertisementThis time, however, BGC did not have to put up a fight. The firm had already been working for some time with C.F.I., whose software systems help manage more than three billion square feet of real estate for global companies like Nokia Siemens.AdvertisementIn trying to win new business, C.F.I. offered its technology while BGC, through its Newmark Grubb Knight Frank unit, offered other real estate services. It’s an arrangement that has worked well in the past.“We pitched together just last week,” Howard W. Lutnick, BGC’s chief executive, said in a phone interview. “It’s a beautiful thing to watch. When the puzzle pieces fit well together, it seems seamless to the client because it is.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Lutnick provided an example of how C.F.I. works for customers, which include huge software companies, government agencies and universities: A client looking to renovate one of its offices enters details into the company’s systems, and C.F.I.’s software can show how others that undertook similar projects saved up to 25 percent off that cost.“It embeds us in three billion square feet of space in order to assist clients in reducing their occupancy costs,” he said. “In the real estate business, driving down occupancy costs is the love business.”C.F.I., which is based in Southfield, Mich., has about 140 employees and counts among its customers a number of Fortune 500 companies.Investing in technology is nothing new for BGC, which Mr. Lutnick said had been a crucial part of the firm’s growth.“We spend double what every other firm spends on technology,” he said. “It’s what we’ve always done.”A version of this article appears in print on May 6, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Real Estate Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.