By BROOKS BARNESMAY 5, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  It was supposed to be a rare quarter of weakness for Disney, with analysts fretting about higher programming costs at ESPN and a comedown from last year’s “Frozen”-fueled highs.Whoops.Reflecting the vastness of its entertainment empire, the Walt Disney Company on Tuesday reported a 10 percent increase in profit, beating analyst expectations by a wide margin. The expected declines in movie and cable network income were offset by substantial quarterly growth in theme parks, a cruise line, television production, the ABC television network, consumer products and digital media.“Disney does have the virtue of being the most diversified Big Media company,” Doug Creutz, an analyst at Cowen & Company, wrote in a research note on Tuesday.Disney reported net income for its second fiscal quarter of $2.11 billion, or $1.23 a share, an increase from $1.92 billion, or $1.08 a share, in the same period a year earlier. Analysts had expected $1.10 a share in the most recent quarter.AdvertisementRevenue totaled $12.46 billion, a 7 percent increase from $11.65 billion.Operating income at Walt Disney Parks and Resorts rose 24 percent, to $566 million, reflecting higher theme park and cruise line ticket prices. Occupancy was a robust 89 percent at the roughly two dozen Disney hotels in North America. On the downside, attendance fell at parks in California and Hong Kong. Disney also had higher construction costs at Shanghai Disneyland, which is scheduled to open next spring.AdvertisementBroadcasting delivered a 90 percent increase in operating income, to $302 million. The sale of “Daredevil” to Netflix was a big contributor, along with higher advertising sales and carriage fees at ABC.Speaking on a Tuesday conference call with analysts, Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, noted that ABC ratings were up this season. He called ABC’s development of new shows for the fall “quite strong.”“Frozen,” the 2013 film about two Nordic princesses, continues to be a toy and clothing juggernaut, with sales of related merchandise providing a 32 percent lift in operating income at Disney Consumer Products, to $362 million. “Avengers”-themed products also sold well, Disney said.Disney’s chief executive, Robert Iger, discussed on CNBC his company’s earnings and what is driving profits.Lower overall costs and the success of a mobile game called Tsum Tsum delivered an 86 percent increase in operating income at Disney Interactive, to $26 million.Disney Interactive on Tuesday separately said that a long-expected “Star Wars” version of Infinity, a combination video game and collectible toy line, would arrive in stores in the fall. (Sales of Infinity fell in the most recent quarter, Disney said in its quarterly filing.)A decline at Walt Disney Studios was not a surprise — “Big Hero 6” sold fewer tickets and DVDs than “Frozen” did a year earlier — but most analysts had expected a much sharper drop. Instead, operating income fell by 10 percent, to $427 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Costs rose at ESPN, dragging down operating income at Disney’s cable networks division by 9 percent, to $1.8 billion. Programming and production cost increases were related to college football, the start of the SEC Network and the addition of a National Football League wild card playoff game, Disney said.“We expect this to be the last quarter of elevated costs,” Michael Nathanson, an analyst at MoffettNathanson, wrote in a research note.AdvertisementAdvertising sales at ESPN climbed 18 percent in the quarter, Disney said. So far in the current quarter, ad sales at ESPN are “down a bit,” James A. Rasulo, Disney’s chief financial officer, told analysts on Tuesday, reminding them that ESPN benefited from World Cup programming a year ago.During the conference call, analysts asked Mr. Iger to comment on a dispute with Verizon over a new, slimmer FiOS cable offering that Disney and other media companies believe violates carriage agreements. “We are simply asking them to adhere to the contract,” Mr. Iger said.As for why Disney decided not to participate in a new web-based television service offered by Sony, Mr. Iger said, “Simply put, it wasn’t to our advantage financially.”In contrast, Disney did team up with Sling TV, an upstart streaming service from Dish Network, the satellite provider, because it is aimed at consumers without cable or satellite service, Mr. Iger said.“The jury is still out on a lot of this,” he added.A version of this article appears in print on May 6, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Gains Across the Disney Empire Lift Earnings 10%, Easily Topping Forecasts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.