By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 20, 2015
Construction companies built more apartment complexes in September, resulting in a temporary rise in housing starts for a real estate market that otherwise appeared to have crested during the summer.Housing starts last month rose 6.5 percent to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 1.21 million homes, the Commerce Department said on Tuesday. But a 17 percent surge in multifamily housing — which includes apartments — accounts for almost all of that.New construction and sales of existing homes surged in the first half of the year as more Americans found work and the unemployment rate dipped to a solid 5.1 percent. But tight inventories, rising prices and the absence of meaningful wage growth have capped growth as affordability has become an issue — a problem that new construction can help resolve.“Builders are stepping up to meet that demand but doing so cautiously,” said Stephen Stanley, chief economist at Amherst Pierpont Securities. “So, for beleaguered buyers who can’t find what they are looking for because of a dearth of listings, there is a bit of help on the way.”AdvertisementConstruction rose last month in the Northeast, South and West, while falling in the Midwest.Housing starts have soared 12 percent in the first nine months of 2015. But the pace of building retreated from its June apex, in part because of the expiration of tax incentives for developers in New York.AdvertisementApproved permits fell 5 percent in September to an annual rate of 1.1 million, a sign that construction will slow in the coming months.
            New private housing starts and permits authorized during the month, at a seasonally adjusted annual pace.        SEPTEMBERStartsPermits1,206,0001,103,0001.6 million1.20.80.40’14’15OCT. 20, 2015
Sales of existing homes similarly accelerated through the start of the summer, only to decline in August. The tight inventories — just 5.2 months’ supply of homes were listed for sale — have propped up prices. The median cost to buy a home increased 4.7 percent over the year, to $228,700, according to the National Association of Realtors.A greater share of the country is also choosing to rent. The percentage of Americans owning homes has dipped to 63.4 percent, the lowest level in 48 years. The influx of millennials and downsizing baby boomers into the rental market has caused monthly leases to jump 3.8 percent over the last year, according to the real estate firm Zillow.But many Americans lack the income to spend more on housing. Average hourly earnings have increased just 2.2 percent to $25.09, meaning that home values and rental costs are rising at roughly double the rate of incomes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There are signs that more Americans are renovating their homes instead of buying new properties. A new index compiled by BuildZoom — which identifies contractors for projects — found that renovations are running 2.8 percent above their 2005 level. Despite the gains of the last year, new home construction remains 57 percent below its 2005 level during the housing bubble.Still, remodeling activity has been flat during the last year as new home construction has advanced. The gains have left construction firms more optimistic.The National Association of Home Builders/Wells Fargo builder sentiment index released on Monday rose this month to 64. The last time the reading was higher was October 2005 at 68.Readings above 50 indicate more builders view sales conditions as good rather than poor.A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Data Shows Resilience in Housing in the U.S.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.