By BARRY MEIER and KATIE THOMASMAY 7, 2015
Arthur Caplan is not a medical doctor, but he has made a successful career offering his opinion to physicians, institutions and the news media about doctors and how they should act.Dr. Caplan, who holds a doctoral degree from Columbia University in the history and philosophy of science, is a professor of medical ethics at NYU Langone Medical Center, part of New York University. But Dr. Caplan, who is 65 and was raised in Framingham, Mass., is best known to peers and the public for assessing moral issues inherent to biomedical endeavors such as clinical trials, organ donations, blood banking and gene therapy.He has long been an advocate of disclosures to patients about the risks and benefits of participating in studies of new drugs and has pushed for doctors to disclose the financial benefits they receive from drug and medical-device makers.On Wednesday, Johnson & Johnson announced Dr. Caplan would help it develop a program through which desperately ill patients could get experimental drugs as a last-chance treatment.AdvertisementIn that role, he will assemble a panel of doctors, ethics experts and patient advocates to review so-called compassionate use requests from patients for unapproved drugs and decide which ones to approve.AdvertisementIt is the type of issue that raises the moral, medical and legal questions that have attracted Dr. Caplan throughout his career. He first became interested in medical ethics while a graduate student, and soon after finishing his studies, he joined the Hastings Center, a research institute in Garrison, N.Y., that focuses on bioethics, eventually becoming its associate director.He said his interest in bioethics began at age 7, when he came down with polio in what he said was one of the last major outbreaks nationwide. Although the case was not serious, the virus left him temporarily paralyzed, and his time in the hospital got him thinking about big questions, such as why doctors were not more open with children about their medical care, and “why can’t they fix everything?”He said an interest in how society should deal with medical shortages has been a theme throughout his career, beginning in the 1970s, when kidney dialysis was in short supply, and into the 1980s, when questions about who should be given an organ transplant rose to prominence. Dr. Caplan said he worked in the 1980s with Al Gore, then a senator, to help develop what became a national organ sharing network.After that, he ran a biomedical ethics program at the University of Minnesota for several years. He also spoke out about the exploitation of poor and minority patients in medical studies such as the infamous Tuskegee experiments, in which black patients infected with syphilis were left untreated — to test the progress of the disease — without their knowledge.“Informed consent is a privileged man’s protection,” Dr. Caplan said at a medical ethics symposium in 1991. “It is not going to work as well for someone who is poor and uneducated and for whom the researcher may have prejudice and contempt. It works best for those who are educated enough to know to demand it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 1994, he left Minnesota for a post at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, where he stayed for two decades. His arrival there coincided with an explosion of interest in genetics and the use of gene therapies.In 2000, after the death of a teenage patient, Jesse Gelsinger, during a gene therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania, Dr. Caplan was sued along with several researchers involved in the trial by Mr. Gelsinger’s family, who claimed he was had not been informed of its risks. Dr. Caplan, who had provided advice on the study’s ethics, was subsequently dropped from the case.Dr. Caplan has also served as an adviser to the Clinton administration and the Defense Department, and as chairman of numerous study panels formed by international organizations and professional groups.AdvertisementHe frequently basks in attention from reporters who, on a day when a big medical story breaks, instinctively telephone him, knowing that he will quickly return that call with a useful quote and appealing observation.“My sense is that he is just about willing to comment on anything if asked,” said Dr. Michael Carome, director of the health research group at Public Citizen, an advocacy group in Washington.At times, he has clashed with colleagues over ethical questions.In 2013, Dr. Carome and Dr. Caplan differed in their positions on a controversial clinical trial, in which a federal agency found that several universities had failed to properly inform families about the serious potential risks to their premature babies. Dr. Carome and his group said the universities had behaved improperly; Dr. Caplan defended the study in an article he was a co-author of in The New England Journal of Medicine.Dr. Carome said he felt Dr. Caplan had not adequately researched the issue. “He was voicing opinions and making judgments without being adequately informed about what the research involved,” Dr. Carome said. “He puts the weight of his reputation behind a topic, and people accept and believe what he says.”Dr. Caplan noted that his views on the topic appeared in a prestigious, peer-reviewed medical journal. “I mean, that’s about as good an endorsement as you’re going to get,” he said.The same interest drives his current project with Johnson & Johnson, he said. “Trying to come up with something that is at least fairer, that’s been a big issue for me.”An article on Thursday about Arthur Caplan, a bioethicist commissioned by Johnson & Johnson to help it develop a program to determine which patients should be given access to experimental drugs, referred incorrectly to the Tuskegee experiments on black patients. Patients with syphilis were left untreated to test the progress of the disease; they were not infected with syphilis as part of the experiments.A version of this article appears in print on May 7, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Eager to Opine on the Toughest Calls in Medical Ethics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.