By GREG BEATOMAY 6, 2015
A few years ago, Yaroslav Goncharov was head of the mobile department at Yandex, Russia’s largest search engine, and traveling the globe for meetings with device manufacturers, wireless carriers and other companies Yandex did business with.“When you travel, it’s amazing to see how different things are in different parts of the world,” Mr. Goncharov said. “But one thing seems quite constant everywhere. Hotel Wi-Fi is usually unbelievably bad, even at upscale hotels.”Most business travelers have at least one horror story about how slow connection speeds jeopardized their ability to, say, get access to a crucial PowerPoint deck in time for an important meeting. But the Wi-Fi that Mr. Goncharov experienced in a Shanghai luxury hotel in 2013 altered the course of his career. “I was paying $20 a day for Wi-Fi that was so slow I couldn’t complete my work,” he recalled. “I was so annoyed, I said, ‘If I ever have an opportunity to fix this problem, I will try.’ ”Shortly thereafter, he founded Hotelwifitest.com.Like more general sites such as Speedtest.net, Hotelwifitest.com allows users to check the speed of their current Internet connections. But Hotelwifitest.com does not share the results of the test only with the person who requests it. Instead, it uses this information to rank hotels by city, so travelers planning a trip somewhere can quickly assess where they will most likely be able to stream the latest episode of “Game of Thrones” without problems. The site’s users have tested hotels in more than 4,000 cities, including 259 hotels in New York.AdvertisementTo verify that users are at the hotel where they claim to be, Hotelwifitest.com performs location checks and compares the user’s network I.P. address with known I.P. addresses for that hotel. Over time, it aggregates multiple tests to calculate an “expected speed” for a given hotel. It also determines a “confidence level” regarding this calculation. A hotel whose network has been tested by many users, at different times of day, will have a higher confidence level than one with a network tested only a handful of times. Other factors determining confidence level include how recently tests were taken and the time of year they were taken.AdvertisementHotelwifitest.com uses both scores to produce an overall rating. In New York, the highest-rated hotel, the New York Hilton Midtown, recently had a relatively modest expected speed of 16.2 megabits per second, but an extremely high confidence level of 92.2 percent put it at the top.Naturally, Hotelwifitest.com does not just showcase hotels with the fastest Wi-Fi. It also reveals those with slow connections. This is how power dynamics are shifting in an age of crowdsourcing and increasingly better information: A service that hotels once could brazenly overcharge for, regardless of quality, now holds the potential for corporate shaming, even if it is given away.For business travelers and other hotel guests, though, the future is looking freer and faster than ever. “Hotels are aggressively courting millennials, and these are kids who grew up with the Internet,” said Juliana Shallcross, managing editor of the travel industry website HotelChatter.com. “They’re traveling for business now, and they need their Wi-Fi — they’re just used to it.”One reason hotel Wi-Fi varies so widely in price and performance is that the hotel industry is not quite as homogeneous as it seems. A hotel may be owned by one entity, managed by another and operating as a franchisee of a major chain like Hilton or Marriott. In addition, Wi-Fi at a given property is typically contracted out to a network provider. With so many different parties and contracts in the mix, it’s difficult for those large chains to offer a single pricing policy or consistent performance.Because of changing customer expectations, however, many of the major chains have made it a priority to standardize their Wi-Fi offerings, at least to some degree. For example, Hilton and Marriott offer free Wi-Fi to members of their loyalty programs who book directly through the hotels themselves rather than through third-party sites like Expedia.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In February, Hyatt introduced free, unconditional Wi-Fi to all guests at all its properties. Previously, it offered free Wi-Fi at its lower-rate properties and its luxury offerings, but not at those in the middle. “It just didn’t make sense to our guests that they got free Wi-Fi when they paid $100 a night or $500 a night, but not when they paid somewhere in between that,” said Kristine Rose, Hyatt’s vice president for brands.According to Ms. Rose, the free Wi-Fi connectivity that Hyatt offers allows guests to send and retrieve emails and perform other basic Internet functions. For those who need more bandwidth, options are available at additional cost.But what exactly do you get free, or when you pay? What Hotelwifitest.com does is make Wi-Fi speeds as visible — and comparable — as room rates. In New York, for example, it listed an expected speed of 1.2 Mbps for the free Wi-Fi at the Hyatt Herald Square. For the Wi-Fi that comes at additional cost at the Grand Hyatt, it listed an expected speed of 4.5 Mbps. And at the high-end Park Hyatt, where even the high-speed Wi-Fi is free, it listed an expected speed of 28.6 Mbps.AdvertisementThe ultimate result of all this highly quantified information? “Presumably, this will put pressure on hotels to offer better free service,” said Itamar Simonson, a marketing professor at Stanford who is co-author of “Absolute Value,” a 2014 book about how consumers armed with increasingly extensive knowledge about the “actual experienced quality” of a product are causing companies to focus more on actual customer experience too.The Wi-Fi arms race has already started. “Among the larger brands, there really aren’t too many hotels offering 100 percent complimentary Wi-Fi regardless of bandwidth. But we’re one of them,” said Doug Carrillo, vice president for sales and marketing at Virgin Hotels, which recently opened its first property, in Chicago. “For us, Wi-Fi isn’t a revenue stream, it’s a right. Especially if you’re a business traveler, you want to have some comfort away from home. Streaming your own content is a pretty big deal.”Hotelwifitest.com recently listed an “expected speed” of 17.3 Mbps for Virgin Hotels Chicago — enough for HD streaming and yet substantially lower than the 40 to 70 Mbps at which Mr. Carrillo said the network ran. “I’m not quite sure exactly how they go about testing it,” he said. “Nonetheless, I think it’s a great service.”In fact, Mr. Carrillo hopes all the major travel sites will start incorporating the kind of information Hotelwifitest.com provides. “That way, whether it’s free Wi-Fi or paid Wi-Fi, customers will actually know what they’re getting,” he said. “That’s very transparent.”And these days transparency is not just what hotel customers hope for. It’s what they have come to expect.A version of this article appears in print on May 7, 2015, on Page F5 of the New York edition with the headline: How Many Stars for the Wi-Fi? .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.