By JOHN HANCMAY 6, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  For the estimated 6.6 million people who visit here each year for business purposes, a good mass transit system could mean less frustration and fewer hours spent in the city’s legendary freeway jams.While the very concept of mass transit here still seems a contradiction in terms in a culture tethered to its automobiles, the city has made huge investments in recent decades to improve its once-nonexistent system. This city now has a network of nearly 200 bus lines and six rail lines, as well as an extensive regional commuter rail system.But many business travelers may not even be aware of that. “It’s an education process,” acknowledged Darren Green, senior vice president of sales for the Los Angeles Tourism & Convention Board. Mr. Green said his organization had encouraged business travelers at some of the city’s major conventions to try the two downtown subway lines by giving them free TAP cards (the Los Angeles equivalent of New York City’s MetroCard).“They were blown away,” he said.During a three-day business trip here in late February, I decided to see if I could get around by using only mass transit.Advertisement“If you’re willing to learn how the system works, you can get to just about any major destination in the county,” said Dave Sotero, a spokesman for the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority. But don’t expect to breeze through during rush hour, he said, adding: “If you have an 8 a.m. meeting across the county, good luck.”AdvertisementIn fact, I did have a morning appointment across the county on the third day of my trip. Not wishing to trust in luck, I did my homework: Before leaving New York, I spent time on the Los Angeles Metro’s online Trip Planner and the regional Metrolink website, plotting routes for my trip.Like any savvy business traveler, I had a Plan B: my buddy Mark Stewart, a lawyer who works downtown and lives in Valley Glen, a San Fernando Valley suburb. Mark pronounced himself willing to come get me (in his car, of course) if I needed help.He seemed to think I would. Like a lot of his fellow Angelenos, Mark is supportive, but dubious, of the viability of mass transit, a stance he communicated by sending me local news articles about the high incidence of commuter rail crashes.I was determined to prove him wrong, but almost as soon as I landed I ran into a snag: Because Westwood is a part of the city not served by one of the train lines, I had to take the FlyAway bus: a service provided by Los Angeles International Airport that runs from the airport to various parts of the city. After an hour on the freeway, it pulled into a parking lot behind a nondescript office building. The other passengers exited.“I need to get to the Metro Rapid bus,” I told the driver.“Try Westwood Boulevard,” she said.In the warm sunshine, I didn’t mind rolling my suitcase a couple of blocks. But when I got to Westwood, I was dumbfounded. Buses of every size and color whizzed by: big blue City of Santa Monica buses, green Culver City buses, blue and white U.C.L.A. “Bruin Bus” shuttles. A barista at a nearby Starbucks pointed me to the one I wanted: the Metro Rapid 734 bus. Sadly, it didn’t live up to its name. Even at 3 p.m. the bus was packed, there was no luggage rack and we stopped at seemingly every corner. Finally I spotted my hotel, nestled by the 405 freeway (had I driven, I thought, I would have already been there).The next morning, after I checked out of the hotel, a colleague offered to drive me to the Hammer Museum at the University of California, Los Angeles, where I was reporting a story. I accepted — and immediately felt guilty. Already, I had caved to the tyranny of the automobile.AdvertisementThat afternoon, when I was done at the Hammer, I planned to take the 534 Commuter Express bus to Mark’s office downtown on South Figueroa Street. This, I was told, was a larger and more comfortable vehicle than the standard city buses: more conducive to the business traveler. I checked the sign at the stop: Sure enough, it listed the 534. So I waited. Buses of various colors and shapes came and went. After about 45 minutes, I asked a young woman who was also waiting if she was familiar with the bus. She looked at the sign and giggled. “The 534?” she said. “I’ve never seen that here.”Dejectedly, I sat on a low stone wall at Wilshire and Westwood and called Mark. “I’ll be there in a little while,” he said. “I told you this wasn’t going to be easy.”Minutes before he arrived, the 534 pulled in. I just glared at it.Things changed on the third day of my trip. After I spent the night at Mark’s house in the Valley, he walked me — like a parent putting his child on the school bus — to the nearby Metro station. It was on the Orange Line, one of the city’s two rapid transit bus lines. These are buses that act like trains: They run on a dedicated right of way and make less-frequent stops.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Soon I was gliding through downtown, surrounded by commuters. The Orange Line terminated at North Hollywood, where we descended to the Red Line. A subway in Los Angeles: What a concept! A clean, well-appointed subway at that, with a train that arrived within minutes.Clearly, the trains (or pseudo-trains in the case of the Orange Line) were the way to go.“For a business traveler, rail provides a level of certainty that is different from a bus or shuttle bus,” said Robert Puentes, a senior fellow with the Brookings Institution who studies transportation issues. “It may not make sense for a metro area to invest billions in a rail line solely for the convenience of business travelers, but the potential is there for a place like L.A.”My destination was the last stop on the Red Line: Union Station, beautifully restored for its 75th anniversary in 2014. I had business in Newhall, on the northern fringes of Los Angeles County. Here, I would switch from Los Angeles Metro to Metrolink. This was going to be tricky: I wasn’t taking a round trip. Rather, I had figured out that I could take the Antelope Valley Line train 45 minutes from Union Station to Newhall. Coming back, I would save time by taking the same train south to the Burbank station, then switch to the Ventura line and ride one stop west to Bob Hope Airport. (Near Mark’s house, but also where I would be leaving from the next day.)When I got to the ticket window and told the woman my plan, she scowled. “You can’t do that,” she said. “You’ll have to return to Union Station and then change.”I said the map I had consulted on the Metrolink website suggested otherwise. Surely it didn’t make sense to come all the way back into town simply to go back north again? She studied a map and timetable in front of her.“You know what?” she said. “I think you may be right!”As I walked on to the comfortable, double-decker Metrolink train, I felt like I had finally arrived in a rare but perhaps soon-to-be-growing fraternity: the savvy Los Angeles mass transit business traveler.A picture caption on May 7 with an article about public transportation in Los Angeles misidentified the train shown. The photograph, shot from a platform at Union Station, showed a Metrolink train, not the Metro Gold Line. The error was only recently called to The Times’s attention.A version of this article appears in print on May 7, 2015, on Page F2 of the New York edition with the headline: Can You Rely on Mass Transit in Los Angeles?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.