AdvertisementSupported byBusiness TravelBy Christine NegroniKYOTO, Japan — Wearing a pearl gray kimono, Reiko Tomimori, 62, bows deeply while greeting guests to Ochaya Tomikiku, her teahouse in the Gion district. Then she escorts them to a room on the second floor where geishas or soon-to-be geishas, who are called maikos, entertain them. Ms. Tomimori looks conventional, but much at her teahouse is evolving, beginning with the growing number of foreign customers who visit. They may be guests of one of the more than 30 international companies here that use geishas to entertain clients. Recently, Ms. Tomimori, in a break with accustomed practice, has started to admit visitors who do not have an invitation or an escort but want to spend time in the company of geishas. A few other teahouses, or ochayas, are doing the same. “Traditionally this business is closed except to regular customers,” Ms. Tomimori said. But with Japan’s economy continuing to suffer and a decline in corporate spending depressing local attendance, she began hosting foreigners as a financial hedge. In the process she created a bilingual teahouse that is playing a small role in international business. Ms. Tomimori is fluent in English, as is the younger of her two trainees, the maiko Tomitsuyu.“Most of the customers, it is their first time to see maiko-san or geiko-san and they always look very interested in this kind of culture,” Tomitsuyu, 18, said, using the regional term geiko for geisha. (Maikos in Kyoto use a single name that they are given when they join a teahouse.)Her language skills, acquired as an exchange student in New Zealand, enable her to converse with English-speaking guests, answering questions about her life, family and training. “The female customers ask me questions about kimono and makeup,” she said.Typically, geishas act as hostesses, engaging in witty conversation and encouraging guests to mingle. They prepare and serve food, tea and other beverages and perform traditional dances and songs. Some play the shamisen, a stringed instrument. An hourlong tea ceremony for six guests with one maiko costs about $250. The geisha’s appearance is based on tradition. Dress and makeup evolve along a geisha’s career. The maikos, because they are young, often wear bright colors. Older geishas tone down the color palette of their kimono. While geishas are often thought of as sexual companions of sponsors, and in earlier times might have offered sexual experiences for a price, it is generally agreed that this practice has been abandoned. Tomitsuyu said that the suggestion of prostitution was inaccurate and troubling.Discussing how she and other trainees are paid, Tomitsuyu said that the teahouse owner was a kind of agent. Ms. Tomimori takes care of expenses like kimonos, makeup fees, lessons and hairdressers. Everything Tomitsuyu earns for five years as a maiko goes to Ms. Tomimori. Tomitsuyu receives a small allowance. Most other teahouse owners are resisting following Ms. Tomimori in welcoming foreigners without an escort and allowing geishas to speak English. Fumie Komai, the mama-san of the 100-year-old Komayah teahouse, said she had no interest in unaccompanied foreigners. Though many regular customers entertain non-Japanese business associates, she leaves it to them to translate the conversation between the guests and the geishas.“It doesn’t make sense if maiko-san is speaking English or Spanish or French,” she said. “It doesn’t look nice, it doesn’t look like tradition.” Four maikos, three apprentices training to be maikos and two geishas live on the other side of an unmarked door of Ms. Komai’s teahouse, also in the Gion district. The public area offers floor seating around low tables and a wooden cocktail bar tended by the apprentices. Recorded piano music plays American easy-listening standards in the background.Ms. Komai’s comments were translated by a customer, Ken Yokoyama, general manager of the Hyatt Regency hotel here, who is among those calling for more access to ochayas for outsiders. Like many Japanese men, Mr. Yokoyama had never seen a geisha performance until he moved to the city nine years ago and was invited to Komayah. He understood the teahouse was a secret society; only later did he discover how it could help him with his business. After Mr. Yokoyama’s visit, Ms. Komai told him he was welcome to bring guests and he started to do so. Business associates at the hotel understood the unusual nature of the experience he was providing, and he said it helped him close deals.“You have no chance to access the ochaya-san, and you never ever speak to the maiko and exchange business cards, talking to them,” he said. “So this is amazing, unique and people appreciate it.” Mr. Yokoyama sometimes invites a hotel guest or a visiting journalist, which is how I happened to be warming my feet on the floor heater below our table. Toshiemi, a 16-year-old maiko, sat nearby, swathed in silk, with an elaborate hairstyle big enough to contain a dangly metal ornament and a spray of spring flowers that fell to one side of her white painted cheek. A maiko’s hair is highly styled, and to maintain it she must sleep on a special pillow. Geishas are allowed to wear wigs. Only her lower lip bore lipstick, a sign of her junior status. She was all smiles and delicate gestures as she sat with us, seemingly amused by our conversation. Or was she pretending? After all, her job is cultivating conviviality. This is why Japanese businesses invite clients to teahouses or hire maikos and geishas, according to the city’s convention and tourism bureau. Few companies were willing to talk about that on the record. One that did is Kyocera, the multinational electronics corporation. Geishas and maikos perform at the corporate guesthouse on occasion, and clients “seem to appreciate” it, said Elly Yoshikawa, deputy manager of corporate communications, adding, “It’s considered a good way of making clients feel they are welcome and special guests.”Companies know the value of the geishas even if they cannot quantify it, Rie Doi, of the convention and tourism bureau, said. “Businesses want to say, ‘We made success by ourselves,’ but maiko and geiko also help,” Ms. Doi said. In her second-floor tearoom, Ms. Tomimori said that for the foreign guest, the experience was not just about watching the dance, or even speaking to the geishas. The women create an atmosphere where guests are made to feel special and the host magnanimous.“We don’t interfere, and we don’t talk about that meeting any other place,” Ms. Tomimori said, explaining why her clients brought their customers to Ochaya Tomikiku. “They trust us, and that kind of atmosphere affects the meeting.” Only about 250 geishas and maikos remain in this city. But even as their numbers dwindle, the geishas remain an enduring and widely recognized symbol of Japan. For several centuries they have embodied the nation’s art, music, culture and hospitality. Now it appears they are part of international commerce, as well.Advertisement