AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — The head of Goldman Sachs’s venture capital and clean-technology teams, Stuart Bernstein, plans to retire from the firm at the end of June, the bank announced in an internal memorandum on Wednesday.Mr. Bernstein, 51, who first joined Goldman in 1986, founded what is known as the Clean Technology and Renewables Group in 2010, after having spent 17 years in the bank’s equity capital markets group.The team provides advice and financing to and investments in companies in industries including solar power, electric vehicles and other renewable energy.in 2013, Mr. Bernstein also took on leadership of the venture capital coverage team, which provides a crucial link between the firm and financiers in Silicon Valley and elsewhere.He previously spent 17 years in equity capital markets at Goldman, where he helped lead hundreds of financings, according to the memo from the firm’s co-heads of investment banking, Richard J. Gnodde, David Solomon and John Waldron.Replacing Mr. Bernstein as head of clean tech is Chris Buddin, who joined the firm from Credit Suisse in 2011 and is based in San Francisco.Mr. Bernstein’s role as the head of venture capital coverage will be filled by Ken Hirsch, who will also hold onto his role as global head of investment banking services for the firm’s technology, media and telecommunications group, according to a separate memo.A spokesman for Goldman confirmed the contents of the memos.Below are the contents of the memos:May 6, 2015Stuart Bernstein to Become Advisory DirectorAfter 24 years of distinguished service, Stuart Bernstein, global head of the Venture Capital Coverage Group and the Clean Technology and Renewables (CTR) Group, has decided to retire from the firm at the end of June. We are pleased that he will become an advisory director at that time.Stuart first joined Goldman Sachs as an analyst in the Investment Banking Division in 1986 and rejoined the firm in the Equities Division in 1993. He was named managing director in 1999 and partner in 2000. Stuart spent 17 years in Equity Capital Markets where he led hundreds of financings. He is a member of the CTR Investment Committee and the Technology Investment Committee.Stuart founded the CTR Group, which has advised, financed and invested in leading companies focused on solar, electric vehicle and other next generation industries. More recently, he led our effort to strengthen coverage of the venture capital community, which is an area of growing interest and relevance across our client base. In his previous role as head of the Technology and Financial Institutions Equity Capital Markets Groups, Stuart was instrumental in sourcing, structuring and marketing numerous capital markets transactions. Throughout his career, Stuart has served as a trusted advisor to our clients and has developed important client relationships for the firm.In addition to his commercial impact, Stuart has been a culture carrier, actively involved in recruiting, mentoring and developing many of our next generation of bankers.We thank Stuart for his contributions and deep commitment to Goldman Sachs. Please join us in wishing him and his family all the best in the years ahead.Richard J. GnoddeDavid SolomonJohn Waldron—May 6, 2015Ken Hirsch to Become Head of the Venture Capital Coverage GroupFollowing the announcement of Stuart Bernstein’s retirement, we are pleased to announce that Ken Hirsch will expand his current role to become head of the Venture Capital Coverage Group.The venture capital community is a strategically important component of the division’s client franchise and is integral to our ability to serve the needs of our emerging growth clients. In his new role, Ken will ensure that we deliver the firm’s full suite of products and services to this client set and will focus on strengthening and building client relationships in an industry critical to growth and innovation in the global economy.In addition to this new role, Ken will continue to lead the firm’s relationships with a number of the most important technology companies in the world. He will also continue to serve as global head of Investment Banking Services for the Technology, Media and Telecom Group. He first joined the firm in 1989 as an analyst and returned in 1993 as an associate after attending business school. Ken was named managing director in 2003 and partner in 2006.Please join us in wishing Ken continued success in his expanded role.Richard J. GnoddeDavid SolomonJohn WaldronAdvertisement