By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINMAY 6, 2015
Steven A. Cohen’s search for a former federal prosecutor to serve as the general counsel for his Point72 Asset Management family office ended on Wednesday with the hiring of Kevin J. O’Connor, a former United States attorney for Connecticut.Mr. O’Connor, most recently vice president for global ethics and compliance at United Technologies, served as the top federal prosecutor in Connecticut from 2002 to 2008. He then served as associate attorney general until 2009.Mr. Cohen’s firm, which manages $11 billion, mostly of his own personal fortune, began looking for a general counsel during the winter and retained the executive search firm Spencer Stuart to lead the effort. Mr. Cohen had wanted the firm to hire a former federal prosecutor to send a message to the federal authorities that his firm would not tolerate the kind of aggressive behavior that resulted in his former hedge fund, SAC Capital Advisors, pleading guilty to insider trading charges.Last year, Peter Nussbaum, the longtime general counsel for SAC, announced he intended to leave Point72, which has remained highly profitable despite the insider trading plea by SAC.In a statement to Point72’s more than 800 employees, the firm said, “Kevin represents the best of the legal profession.”Besides hiring a former top prosecutor to oversee Point72’s legal affairs, Mr. Cohen has also wanted to bring in several former F.B.I. agents to bolster the firm’s compliance program. Point72 has so far had less success on that front.A picture on Thursday with a DealTalks Online report about Point72 Asset Management’s hiring of a former federal prosecutor as general counsel was published in error. The photograph showed Kevin O’Connor, a judge in Sedgwick County, Kan. — not Kevin J. O’Connor, the former United States attorney for Connecticut.A version of this article appears in print on May 7, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Point72 Hires Top Lawyer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.