
Breakingviews By                     
JOHN FOLEY

OCT. 20, 2015
First comes the gratification, then the remorse. But does the cycle familiar to Yum Brands customers also apply to its investors?The owner of KFC has decided to split off its troubled China business, leaving two separately traded companies. The logical and potentially rewarding move comes with the chance of a less savory aftertaste.Yum will split off its China unit entirely, according to a person familiar with the situation, listing it wherever it garners the most interest from investors. While that is what the activist investor Keith Meister wanted even before he was added to Yum’s board last week, it’s also a no-brainer. Yum’s own-and-operate model in China jars with its almost entirely franchise-based business elsewhere.After the split, the two parts will have very different flavors. Suppose the China division can increase its number of stores by half, to 10,000, and create $1.4 million a year in revenue from each one, as it did before food scares in China last year hurt its sales. A Reuters Breakingviews analysis suggests that the unit could be worth $27 billion on a debt-free basis, three-quarters of the whole Yum enterprise value.The more mature Western-world business, meanwhile, could be slathered in debt. Yum, the owner of the KFC and Pizza Hut brands, might be able to extract a 3 percent license fee from its expanded China affiliate, giving it $420 million a year in mostly stable income. Add that to last year’s non-Chinese earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, of $1.1 billion, assume there’s room for borrowing worth three times Ebitda, and there is scope for a one-time debt-funded payout to investors of more than $4 billion.Despite this, the $32 billion Yum stock rose just 4 percent after the split was announced on Tuesday. That may be because any separation could be at least a year away. It may also reflect the China risk that will remain with the Western business. The American unit will still depend on fees from China — increasingly so if growth plans there pan out. Yet it will not be able to control them. Yum’s spinoff is sensible, but not a magic recipe.John Foley is Reuters Breakingviews editor for Europe, the Middle East and Africa. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »