By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONMAY 6, 2015
LAS VEGAS — At the Bellagio’s high-roller Villa Privé No. 6 Tuesday night, hedge fund celebrities including Leon Cooperman and John A. Paulson sipped Krug Champagne and exchanged conversation about the government, the economy and the health care system.It was one of several private parties in the run-up to the SkyBridge Alternatives Conference, or SALT. Around 1,800 members of the hedge fund industry from across the country have arrived for the three-day conference to shake hands, close deals and talk politics.The conference, which takes place over three days in the Bellagio’s grand ballroom, has been called a sort of industry spring break. This year, it comes when many could use a pick-me-up after a disappointing 2014, when hedge funds gained an average of 3 percent, according the data firm HFR. (Mr. Paulson lost money over the last year for investors in his Paulson & Company, and Mr. Cooperman’s firm Omega Advisors was recently subpoenaed by the Securities and Exchange Commission.)This year, SALT features some of the industry’s biggest names, like Daniel S. Loeb and T. Boone Pickens, as well as the former Federal Reserve chairman Ben S. Bernanke and politicians like the former Greek prime minister George Papandreou. Entertainers like Will.i.am, Rob Reiner and OneRepublic will be on hand to sprinkle a little stardust.AdvertisementAs hedge fund managers with swelling net worths begin to pick which horse to back in the 2016 presidential election, politics is likely to be a common conversation topic at the conference this year. Karl Rove and Paul Begala, two major players behind Republican and Democratic superPACs, will share the stage to talk about the election later this week.Even before the conference started, politics was on the agenda at a preconference lunch for Morgan Stanley clients on Tuesday. In a panel discussion, the conversation quickly turned to the presidential race and specifically, Hillary Rodham Clinton, the Democratic presidential candidate.Advertisement“You can search and see the weather vane on top of her head,” Anthony Scaramucci, founder and co-managing partner of SkyBridge, said of Mrs. Clinton’s recent attempt to court the left wing of the Democratic Party.Mr. Scaramucci, who has been a Republican fund-raiser and who is supporting the presidential candidacy of Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin, added, “You can sense that from her. You will not sense that from Scott Walker.”Another theme that is likely to emerge in the conference is the Federal Reserve’s quantitative easing program, which has pushed interest rates to record lows. Last year, some panelists argued that quantitative easing — which pumped capital in the markets — has masked vulnerabilities in the economy.The first panel Tuesday morning started with a heated debate over Greece, geopolitical problems and Washington policies.Mr. Papandreou told the audience that Greece’s looming debt issues are part of a deep structural problem in the eurozone.Annual returns of:HEDGE FUNDS60% STOCKS,40% BONDS PORTFOLIO11.0%10.0%8.0%6.6%5.6%5.4%Jan. ’09throughJan. ’15 5 yearsendedJan. ’1510 yearsendedJan. ’15 FEB. 26, 2015
Mohamed El-Erian, chief economic adviser at Allianz and a former executive at Pimco, was more blunt about the financial crisis in Greece.Advertisement“We still have this notion that governments are in control,” he said, adding, “I wonder whether that is still the case?”Peter Schiff, the chief executive of Euro Pacific Capital, turned the focus to the United State economy. “The United States has a lot more in common with Greece than is commonly perceived,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Schiff, who is bearish on the United States economy, drew applause and laughter from the audience when he likened taking a long bet on the United States to being long on subprime mortgages, which helped ignite the financial crisis in 2008.He complained that policy makers in Washington were doing nothing to help create more jobs for young people.“They used to say if you don’t want to work at McDonald’s, go to college. Now they say if you want to work at McDonald’s, go to college,” he said.A few lucky hedge fund V.I.P.s will have the chance to ask Mr. Bernanke — the architect of the current Fed policy — for his advice Wednesday evening at a private dinner at Bellagio’s Tuscany Kitchen. Among those in attendance will be Mr. Cooperman, Mr. Paulson and representatives from China’s sovereign wealth fund.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.