By SARAH MAXMAY 6, 2015
When Christine and John Engler heard about a new online summer learning program called Brain Chase last spring, they decided it was worth a try. “I always look for something academic for them to do in the summer,” said Ms. Engler of her sons, Jack, 10, and Grayson, 8. “It’s usually a workbook or work sheets from the school, and a there’s always a lot of nagging.”But through Brain Chase, about to enter its second year, the Engler family of Austin, Tex., found itself swept up in an exciting learning experience that included a six-week global treasure hunt for a buried “artifact” in Spain, a free trip abroad and, ultimately, a $10,000 scholarship in cash.Each week, after the boys completed age-appropriate online challenges in math, reading and writing, they were rewarded with animated videos giving clues to the location of an object called the Globe of the Magellan.“When the kids finished their work, we all gathered around and watched the episode,” said Ms. Engler, whose family joined roughly 500 other children in the Brain Chase premiere last summer. “We watched them three or four times, pausing them to make sure we got all of the clues.”AdvertisementShortly after the 12th and final episode, the Englers guessed the location of the treasure within a two-mile radius. A week later, they went on an all-expense paid trip to Llívia, a Spanish town surrounded by France, where clues led them to a heavy wooden box buried under a cluster of rose bushes. Inside was a blue globe of the Earth displaying the continents in gold plate. “A drawer popped out if you pressed the continents in the right order,” said Ms. Engler, of the trophy now displayed on the family’s fireplace mantel. “Inside was a key to a safe deposit box.”The safe deposit box, in a local bank, contained the $10,000.The boys are signed up to do Brain Chase again this summer. But they may face more competition.With a successful pilot behind it and some added marketing muscle, Brain Chase Productions is now preparing for 10,000 participants, including 100 youngsters in Louisville, Ky., who will have free access to the program. (Typically, the cost is $199 for the first child in a family and $100 for a sibling — considered high by online standards but low relative to traditional summer programs.) The next Brain Chase, this one for a treasure called the Sunstone of Cortés, begins next month.AdvertisementWhen Heather and Allan Staker came up with the idea for an academic-powered adventure, they were not planning to start a business. Although she is a specialist in education and he in entertainment, their original intent was to keep their own children engaged in learning over the summer. By some estimates, students lose up to two months of grade-level skills during summer break.Ms. Staker, an adjunct research fellow at the Clayton Christensen Institute for Disruptive Innovation and co-author of “Blended: Using Disruptive Innovation to Improve Schools” (Wiley, 2015), said she was initially thinking of creating a curriculum on a spreadsheet and inviting children in the neighborhood to participate in her learning program.Although there seems to be no shortage of educational online programs and mobile apps, she said, what was missing was a cohesive experience in which children could learn about multiple subjects, with one login, and work toward a goal. “There are a lot of what I call ‘superfoods’ on the Internet, but parents need some comfort level that what their kids are doing is productive and safe,” she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Where Ms. Staker saw an opportunity to create a curriculum out of existing online tools, her husband saw the chance to wrap it into a storyline that would entice children to continue their studies in the summer. “I said, ‘Let’s make this an adventure that is irresistible,’ ” said Mr. Staker, whose background includes inventing a video game, producing Super Bowl commercials and working in the toy industry.The couple pooled their talents and contacts, raised $500,000 from angel investors and in 2014 introduced Brain Chase, which is aimed at second through eighth graders. The Stakers have five children ages 2 through 11.Building the platform was not easy. “It was a beast to stitch together the different providers into one seamless interface,” said Ms. Staker. In addition to the technological challenges, there were the marketing challenges of introducing an educational experience that straddles the virtual and real world.Through the program, children can log into a single dashboard on which they track their progress and complete challenges via third-party providers, including Kahn Academy, myON digital library, Rosetta Stone and Google’s Art Project. (Any fees the sites charge are included in the Brain Chase price). The time or effort required of each subject is based on age, but it works out to about an hour a day over five weeks. Children may choose to work at any level or read any type of book. If they miss days, they can make them up, but they cannot work ahead.Each week, provided they do their work, students get access to two new animated videos featuring a character named Mae Merriweather, who evokes a young, female Indiana Jones, and a cast of characters. Each video offers a dozen or more clues to the location of the treasure. Participants can make one guess within a 24-hour period, and collaboration is encouraged. “One of the coolest discoveries we made as a family was using Google Earth to zoom into places,” Ms. Engler said. “We learned a lot about the places the cartoon characters visited.”Brain Chase is firmly rooted in the virtual world, but with some real-world touches. Children receive personalized, type-set and wax-sealed letters with clues and instructions, decoder rings, maps and heavy gold compasses. “That’s all Allan’s influence,” Ms. Staker said. “I’m the nerd, and he’s the fun one.”AdvertisementAlthough the summer program is what Mr. Staker calls their “blockbuster” challenge, Brain Chase plans to roll out smaller-scale experiences for schools to use throughout the year. The company, based in Salt Lake City, raised another $1.6 million from angel investors last fall to expand its programming and marketing, including a television ad campaign that begins this week. It has just three full-time employees but works with a network of about 200 people, including animators, web developers and teachers who review participants’ weekly writing submissions. Jack Engler tested their diligence when he submitted a partial writing sample and promptly heard back from a Brain Chase teacher reminding him to finish his work.Companies that manage to truly captivate their audiences and educate them have the potential to win over parents – and investors. “I call it Hollywood meets Harvard, and it’s one of the mega-trends we are looking at in the education space,” said Michael Moe, co-founder and chief investment officer of GSV Capital, a Woodside, Calif., venture capital firm. The key, he said, is handling both elements well. So far, most attempts at so called “edutainment” have fallen flat.The next Brain Chase begins June 22 and runs through July 24. “But it doesn’t end,” said Mr. Staker, “until the treasure is found.”A version of this article appears in print on May 7, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Hunting for a Hidden Treasure and Summer Lessons With Brain Chase.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.