AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — Janet Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, said Wednesday that stock prices were “quite high,” stronger language than she had used previously.Ms. Yellen reiterated the Fed’s view that risks to financial stability remained modest, despite years of near-zero interest rates, in part because there had not been a marked increase in the use of borrowed money, or leverage, to fund investments.But she cautioned that the volatility of financial markets could increase when the Fed begins to raise its benchmark interest rate. She noted that the Fed has held that rate near zero for “an unthinkable six plus years,” beginning in December 2008.Ms. Yellen’s remarks, made at a policy conference where she appeared with Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, sounded a more wary note than her assessment of financial market conditions earlier this year. In February, Ms. Yellen described stock prices as “somewhat higher than their historical average levels.” In March, she described valuations as “on the high side.”Ms. Yellen and Ms. Lagarde both avoided comment on the most immediate policy questions they were confronting: for the Fed, the duration of its stimulus campaign, and for the I.M.F., the standoff between Greece and its creditors.The two women spoke at a policy conference distinguished by the fact that the 18 scheduled speakers are women, including academics, prominent policy makers and financial market participants. The “Finance and Society” conference, organized by the Institute for New Economic Thinking, was put together in part to highlight the rise of women to powerful positions once held almost exclusively by men. But those attending emphasized that its reach was intended to be broad and focused on issues of wide concern.Opening the conference on Tuesday night, Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, delivered a forceful call for more restrictions on the financial industry.“Just like male speakers don’t make it a male conference, this is not a woman’s conference,” Signe Krogstrup, deputy head of analysis at the Swiss National Bank, said Wednesday morning. “We’re not going to be discussing gender or diversity or the role of women in finance. We’re here to discuss the role of finance in society.”Ms. Yellen’s prepared remarks focused on regulation and reflected the Fed’s post-crisis wariness about the financial industry. She noted that banks and other financial firms provided important services to society, but “despite these benefits, as we have seen, actions by financial institutions have the potential to inflict harm on society.”Ms. Yellen said that the Fed and other regulators were making “significant progress” in reducing incentives for financial market participants to take excessive risks.Ms. Lagarde struck a somewhat more skeptical note. “There is still work to be done to address distorted incentives in the financial system,” she said.She added that regulation alone could not solve the problem.It was necessary and important, Ms. Lagarde said, that finance industry participants should choose “to do the right thing even when nobody is watching.”“I believe that more women leaders would also help,” she added. “What would have happened if it hadn’t been Lehman Brothers but Lehman Sisters?”Advertisement