By ANDREW POLLACKMAY 6, 2015
Alexion Pharmaceuticals became one of the most valuable companies in the biotechnology industry on the strength of a single drug that treats two extremely rare diseases. Its secret: charging about $500,000 a year for the drug for each patient and scouring the planet for every potential patient. Now, the company hopes to repeat this process with a new drug.Alexion said on Wednesday that it would pay about $8.4 billion to acquire Synageva BioPharma, another company specializing in rare diseases with one drug expected to come to market this year.“Synageva is an ideal strategic and operational fit for Alexion as we strengthen our global leadership in what we know well and do well,” David Hallal, chief executive of Alexion, told analysts in a conference call on Wednesday.Alexion valued its offer of cash and stock at $230 a share. That is 140 percent over Synageva’s closing price on Tuesday, a premium that analysts said was higher than usual for biotech deals.AdvertisementThe transaction is the latest in a flurry of acquisitions in the pharmaceutical industry as companies seek to bolster their product pipelines. It also reflects industry interest in drugs for rare diseases, once neglected because manufacturers thought they could not turn a profit.AdvertisementThese so-called orphan drugs are now among the most attractive in the industry because companies can charge hundreds of thousands of dollars a year to treat rare diseases, making a blockbuster drug possible with only a few thousand patients.Developers of rare-disease drugs can also qualify for special tax breaks and protection from competition under federal law and can often win regulatory approval with smaller clinical trials.So far, insurers have not paid that much attention to the prices of these drugs because so few patients use them, so the huge costs haven’t greatly affected their budgets. But that is starting to change as more of these drugs come to market.Analysts who follow Alexion said the deal made strategic sense because it would diversify Alexion beyond its one product. But some analysts questioned the high price of the deal and that Alexion will have to issue new shares, diluting the holdings of existing shareholders.The premium “is rather steep and highlights the scarcity value of orphan drug assets,” Yaron Werber, an analyst at Citigroup, wrote in a note on Wednesday. He lowered his estimates for Alexion’s earnings per share for the next couple of years.Alexion’s stock fell 8 percent on Wednesday to close at $155.01. At that price, its offer for Synageva is worth only $217 a share, compared with the $230 cited in the companies’ announcement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Biotechnology has had other recent big deals, notably AbbVie’s pending $21 billion deal for Pharmacyclics. Some investors say they think the industry is experiencing a bubble. In the rare-disease area, Shire acquired NPS Pharmaceuticals for $5.2 billion, and Teva bought Auspex Pharmaceuticals for $3.2 billion.Alexion’s only marketed drug is Soliris, which is used to treat two rare blood disorders: paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. Sales have grown steadily to $2.2 billion last year, helping Alexion increase its market value to around $33 billion, one of the biggest in biotech.AdvertisementSynageva’s lead product candidate, Kanuma, is designed to treat lysosomal acid lipase deficiency, a genetic disease in which people do not produce enough of a certain enzyme. Infants with the disease often die within months. It can also cause liver damage and other problems in children and adults. Synageva estimates that at least 3,000 adults and children have the disease in the “major reimbursable markets,” like North America, Europe, Japan and South America.Mr. Hallal said Alexion could turn Kanuma — known generically as sebelipase alfa — into a billion-dollar drug by following much the same approach it used for Soliris — raising awareness among doctors so that more patients receive the diagnosis.Alexion executives said the company could achieve cost savings of at least $150 million by 2017. The sales force selling Kanuma will also be able to sell Strensiq, another rare-disease drug that Alexion hopes to bring to market this year. They said the deal would raise earnings in 2018.Alexion, based in Cheshire, Conn., will acquire all the shares of Synageva, based in Lexington, Mass., through an exchange offer, followed by a second-step merger, with each share receiving $115 in cash and 0.6581 shares of Alexion stock.A version of this article appears in print on May 7, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Alexion, Maker of a Rare-Disease Drug, Buys Another.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.