AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — The Walt Disney Company’s top theme park marketer will take over its fast-growing consumer products division, an appointment that fills an important vacancy and brings a woman into the entertainment conglomerate’s most senior ranks.Disney said late Thursday that Leslie Ferraro would become president of Disney Consumer Products, effective immediately. Ms. Ferraro joined the company’s theme park business 16 years ago, most recently serving as executive vice president for global marketing, sales and travel operations.Ms. Ferraro has almost no toy experience. Before joining Disney, she worked in marketing jobs at companies like Johnson & Johnson.But she will inherit a business that has recently undergone a successful restructuring, which may make knowing the specifics of merchandising less critical; a strong group of lieutenants is already in place.Thomas O. Staggs, Disney’s chief operating officer, said in a statement that Ms. Ferraro was known in the theme park division for “inspiring her teams.”Mr. Staggs, who until recently ran Disney’s parks operation, and Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, each emphasized her understanding of Disney characters.“She brings a global perspective and deep knowledge of the company and its brands,” Mr. Iger said. Disney Consumer Products has been without a leader since late February, when its head, Robert Chapek, moved over to run theme parks.Ms. Ferraro will become the only woman to lead one of Disney’s five stand-alone divisions. Walt Disney Studios, Walt Disney Parks and Resorts, Disney Media Networks and Disney Interactive are all run by men.Disney Consumer Products, the world’s largest licenser of merchandise, has had a surge of success because of items related to “Frozen,” Marvel superheroes and “Star Wars.” Operating income totaled $988 million for the last six months, a 40 percent increase from the same period a year before. The division includes a chain of mall-based stores and a large book publishing operation.Advertisement