By RACHEL ABRAMSMAY 7, 2015
Blue Bell Creameries, the popular regional ice cream chain that recalled all of its products last month, knew that listeria was present in one of its factories as early as 2013, according to documents released by the Food and Drug Administration on Thursday.Still, Blue Bell failed to adequately improve its cleaning and manufacturing practices, according to an F.D.A. report.Blue Bell acknowledged in a statement that testing from 2013 showed that listeria was present in its plant in Broken Arrow, Okla., and that its cleaning methods were insufficient at the time.“As is standard procedure for any such positive results, the company would immediately clean the surfaces and swab until the tests were negative,” according to the statement Blue Bell provided in an email.Advertisement“We thought our cleaning process took care of any problems, but in hindsight, it was not adequate, which is why we are currently conducting such a comprehensive re-evaluation of all our operations.”AdvertisementBlue Bell is still reeling from the companywide recall of all its products last month, which was accompanied by a shutdown of its factories and a cessation of production of all of its ice cream products. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has linked Blue Bell’s contaminated ice cream to 10 illnesses, including three deaths in Kansas. The other cases of listeria dated back as early as 2011, according to the agency.In the newly released documents, federal health inspectors said they found evidence of the dangerous food-borne pathogen on the floors and a number of other nonfood surfaces in the kitchen and processing room of the Broken Arrow plant in 2013. The agency findings were reported earlier on Thursday by The Houston Chronicle.The documents show that just two months ago, the company had still “failed to demonstrate” that it had changed its cleaning and sanitizing practices to prevent future contaminations, the F.D.A. report said.“The plant is not constructed in such a manner as to prevent drip and condensate from contaminating food, food-contact surfaces and food-packaging materials,” the F.D.A. report said.Blue Bell, the country’s third-largest ice cream brand and a Southwestern favorite, has been unable to pinpoint the source of the listeria, despite weeks of tests.Listeria is a tricky, persistent bug. It can lurk in many places, like in raw milk and the soil on the bottom of a shoe. And it can linger in a factory for years, hiding in cool, moist areas.“It can hide in the nooks and crannies of machinery, underneath a slime layer, say, and it can be hard to get rid of,” said Dr. Rob Tauxe, deputy director of the C.D.C.’s division of food-borne, waterborne and environmental diseases. Blue Bell’s 3,800 employees are being paid their full salaries, according to Joe Robertson, a spokesman for Blue Bell.AdvertisementBlue Bell’s is the worst case in the latest set of listeria contaminations.Jeni’s Splendid Ice Creams, a regional ice cream maker based in Ohio, recalled all of its products in April after listeria was detected in its ice cream. While no illnesses had been reported, the results spurred the company to close its plant in Columbus.The moves have reduced the paychecks of hundreds of Jeni’s employees. For as much as a week, 73 production workers received just half of their normal pay, according to John Lowe, Jeni’s chief executive. Those employees resumed earning their typical wages this week, Mr. Lowe said, as the company begins to train them on new safety procedures.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Jeni’s 20 retail locations remain closed, leaving more than 300 employees earning just a quarter of their normal pay.In an interview, Mr. Lowe said that some employees picked up work with Jeni’s partners, like Jorgensen Farms, which grows mint near Jeni’s plant in Columbus.Unlike Blue Bell, Jeni’s says it believes it has found the root of its listeria problems in a machine that loads ice cream into pint-size containers.That machine, and all the others, will continue to be disassembled and cleaned every evening. But going forward, Mr. Lowe said, they will also be tested for listeria every morning.In the meantime, the company has discarded 265 tons of ice cream, putting most of it into a machine that can process it for use in fertilizer.Mr. Lowe estimated that over all, dealing with the listeria contamination would cost the privately held company $2.5 million to $3.5 million. The company’s annual revenue is about $25 million, he said.Just two years ago, tracing Blue Bell’s ice cream to sick patients would have been more difficult for the C.D.C. than it is now. Its older detection methods employed by the agency’s network of laboratories, PulseNet, would identify a strain of listeria through its DNA. If that strain were comparable to say, a book, PulseNet might only have been able to match it to similar chapters and page numbers in patients.AdvertisementA new program introduced in late 2013 allows the C.D.C. to map the entire genome of the strain of listeria, or to continue with the book example, can identify every single word.“This is sort of the magic of molecular fingerprinting,” said Dr. Neil Fishman, the associate chief medical officer for the University of Pennsylvania health system. A few years ago, he added, “If there was listeria in South Carolina and listeria in Kansas, it would have been very difficult, if not impossible, to connect the two.”Although no new cases of listeria have been linked to Blue Bell, Dr. Tauxe cautioned that listeria could stay alive when frozen, although it would not grow. While Blue Bell and Jeni’s have alerted consumers about the recall, contaminated ice cream could still be lurking in their freezers.“The only question I have is whether there’s reason to believe there was enough there to get anyone sick,” Mr. Lowe said. Jeni’s is making a number of changes before its factory reopens. Because soil can contain listeria, the company will now process fruit off-site. And Jeni’s plans to hire an outside company that specializes in cleaning dairy facilities to handle its machinery every evening, Mr. Lowe said.Blue Bell has discontinued a line of single-serve ice cream, which prompted the initial wave of recalls in March. The machinery used to make those products will also be discontinued, Mr. Robertson said.In December, Snoqualmie Gourmet Ice Cream, a high-end ice cream maker in Snohomish, Wash., withdrew all of its frozen desserts from stores after health officials linked two listeria cases at a hospital to tubs of its ice cream. The company overhauled its manufacturing practices and was cleared to begin shipping ice cream again 60 days later.A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Blue Bell Knew About Listeria Issues, F.D.A. Says .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.