By REUTERSMAY 7, 2015
CBS, owner of the most-watched TV network in the United States, reported a better-than-expected quarterly profit as revenue from its affiliates and subscription fees rose. But revenue fell about 2 percent as the company telecast one N.F.L. playoff game fewer in the first quarter compared with last year.CBS, with shows like “NCIS” and “The Big Bang Theory,” said the rise in revenue from affiliates and subscription fees offset a decline in content licensing and distribution revenue.Apart from its broadcast network, CBS owns the cable channels Showtime and CBS Sports Network, radio stations, and the Simon & Schuster publishing house. It also has a subscription streaming service, CBS All Access. CBS’s total entertainment revenue fell 1.7 percent to $2.26 billion in the quarter that ended March 31.The company’s net income from continuing operations fell to $394 million, from $462 million a year earlier. Diluted earnings per share rose to 78 cents, from 77, as the weighted average number of common shares outstanding declined.AdvertisementAnalysts on average had expected the company to earn 75 cents a share. Revenue of $3.50 billion beat the average analyst forecast of $3.44 billion, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Also Thursday, Sumner Redstone, the 91-year-old executive chairman of CBS and Viacom, said that the decision on who would succeed him at both media companies had not been made and that he was still in charge. This week there were news media reports that Mr. Redstone had decided to make his daughter, Shari Redstone, chairwoman after he dies.Advertisement“Despite press reports to the contrary, decisions have not yet been made,” he said in a statement.Mr. Redstone controls about 80 percent of the voting shares in CBS and Viacom through a holding company, National Amusements.CBS shares, which closed at $61.22 on the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday, were up 1 percent in extended trading.A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Profits at CBS Outperform Expectations, but N.F.L. Schedule Causes Revenue Drop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.