AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben Sisario and Emily SteelSpotify made its name in digital media by appealing to people’s ears. Now it is going after their eyes, too.The company has recently had discussions with an array of media companies, including major television networks, online video producers and magazine publishers, to bring short video clips to Spotify as soon as this month, according to people with knowledge of the talks. These clips would be easily accessible on Spotify’s mobile platform and, along with the millions of songs the service streams, serve as additional sources of entertainment to keep its viewers engaged for longer periods of time — behavior that could help Spotify sell more advertising, according to the people, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Among the television companies that Spotify has approached are NBCUniversal, Fox and Viacom, the owner of MTV and Comedy Central. Spotify has also approached the other major networks, according to multiple television executives. It has also talked to potential partners as diverse as the media company Vice and Condé Nast, the publisher of magazines like Vogue and The New Yorker, according to executives with knowledge of the talks.Spotify has offered some of these partners millions of dollars in guarantees, along with the potential for more shared revenue, to provide short clips like late-night television comedy skits that can be watched in all-you-can eat form and arranged into playlists, according to these people, who added that the financial terms of the deals were still being worked out.One strategy for Spotify is audience retention. According to a media executive briefed on its plans, the music service knows that people leave its platform to view clips on YouTube, so having more video on its own platform would keep users around. Spotify already has video ads.While Spotify is pursuing video aggressively, its discussions with potential media partners are said to be at an early stage, and it was unclear whether the company had completed any deals. Spotify declined to comment, and representatives of the other companies either declined to comment or did not respond to inquiries.The news that Spotify was planning a move into video was first reported on Thursday by The Wall Street Journal. By adding video, Spotify would expand its portfolio of content and move into the growing ranks of digital media companies challenging YouTube’s dominance. Among those other players are Vessel, a new site that sells early glimpses of new videos for $3 a month, and Snapchat, which offers a daily diet of short videos from the likes of Vice, CNN and Warner Music.The move to video could bring other advantages for Spotify, including making a splash ahead of Apple, which is expected to unveil its plans for a new streaming music service next month. Spotify is also in the middle of tense licensing renegotiations with record companies, and the addition of video could lessen the service’s dependence on the labels, however slightly.Spotify has been raising significant amounts of new investment money in advance of what is widely expected to be an initial public offering of stock at some point soon. Last month it emerged that Spotify was close to raising $400 million in investments, which would value the company at more than $8 billion.Mike Isaac contributed reporting.Advertisement