By LANDON THOMAS Jr.MAY 7, 2015
From his earliest days as a 20-something chief executive, Jonathan L. Steinberg had a weekly lunch with his father, Saul, the corporate raider whose brazen tactics and lavish displays of wealth came to define Wall Street in the 1980s.Have the courage of your convictions and be sure that you can shoulder pain, the late Mr. Steinberg, whose own financial decline attracted wide scrutiny, would tell his son.It was good counsel, because the younger Steinberg would come to know pain too, not least in 2001 when his business media enterprise imploded just as his father’s insurance conglomerate went bust.But because he stuck to his guns, the tiny stock indexing division that Mr. Steinberg pulled from the ruins of his old firm — now called WisdomTree Investments — has become one of the fastest-growing fund companies around.AdvertisementIn the first quarter of this year, WisdomTree, which oversees $60 billion, took in more cash than any other asset management company save for the fund giants Vanguard and BlackRock.AdvertisementThere are second acts on Wall Street, but they are by no means the norm, not least in an industry where memories are long and the damage from the loss of money and reputation can last forever.Which is what makes Mr. Steinberg’s rebirth — nascent as it may be — worth noting, for he is shouldering the burden of not just his own history but his father’s as well.In that regard, it should have been a triumphant moment for Mr. Steinberg when he presented the best results the company has had to analysts at his quarterly earnings call this month.Yes, it was a great quarter, they agreed. But wasn’t the company relying too much on a few hot funds?“We are not going to change our business model,” Mr. Steinberg replied, his voice taking on a slight edge.WisdomTree conceives of and brings to market exchange-traded funds, or E.T.F.s, investment vehicles that trade like ordinary stocks while tracking a specially created index of equities that highlight, for example, earnings and dividends as opposed to a company’s overall size.It is a radical concept that Mr. Steinberg, known as Jono, believes will change the way people invest by combining the best aspects of active and index funds.AdvertisementLet’s say you wanted to invest in Europe’s recovery, for example. Instead of worrying whether the mutual fund you pick will deliver as advertised, you could invest in a WisdomTree E.T.F. that tracks the Continent’s top exporters — at a fraction of the cost.When you add a currency hedge to the mix, the results are arresting.The $13.5 billion that WisdomTree attracted in the last quarter surpassed the amounts that two traditional mutual fund groups, Fidelity and T. Rowe Price, brought in combined.Still, when it comes to a Steinberg promoting his company, Wall Street has tended to be skeptical. In 1968, when the elder Mr. Steinberg, then just 29 years old, used the highflying stock of his computer leasing company to take over Reliance, an established insurance company in Philadelphia, there were doubters.Their numbers increased over the years after his attempt to take over Chemical Bank failed and Reliance floundered in debt. Mr. Steinberg suffered a serious stroke in 1995 and became less involved in the business. He died in 2012.There was, however, another aspect to the man: a restless ambition that pushed hard against the conventional practices of the day — Mr. Steinberg was an early user of junk bonds, for example — that has taken root in his son.“I think Jono has a lot of Saul’s good qualities and many better qualities on top of that,” said Arthur Levitt Jr., the former head of the Securities and Exchange Commission and a former board member at WisdomTree who also knew Mr. Steinberg’s father from his early investment banking days. “He is indomitable in terms of his determination and his unwillingness to accept no for an answer.”There are other similarities.Growing up in Brooklyn, the father obsessed about the stock market. His son did the same — albeit while growing up in a 34-room triplex at 740 Park Avenue.For a time, they were even outshone by their glamorous wives. Gayfryd Steinberg, Saul’s third wife, engineered some of the splashier fetes of that era; Maria Bartiromo, who married Jono in 1999, would become the public face of financial television.AdvertisementMr. Steinberg also boasts a similarly full head of hair.In some ways though, he is a different man altogether. There is none of the outsize charisma and appetite that distinguished his father. And over the years, Mr. Steinberg has been a rare presence at the society benefits and balls that the elder Mr. Steinberg favored.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To some extent, this reflects his rockier path to success. His father breezed through the Wharton School and had become a Wall Street boy wonder by the age of 30, but Mr. Steinberg struggled with a reading difficulty and left Wharton after his junior year.And the trials and tribulations of the stock-picking publication he set up in 1988 — backed in large part by his father — drew the close attention of the business press, up until he had to sell it in 2001.So it is no surprise then that Mr. Steinberg, who is 50, treats an interview as if it were an earnings call with analysts. Carefully controlled, his answers are laden with data points and financial jargon and he reveals little or nothing about his personal life.Maybe that is because his professional and personal lives can blur together — dating back to the age of 13 when he invested his bar mitzvah money in the stock market. He and Ms. Bartiromo are workaholics and, as they have no children, outside distractions are fewer.“I always saw myself running a publicly traded financial services company,” he said. “I am the product of my father — doing exactly what I expected to be doing.”A few days before the first-quarter earnings report, Mr. Steinberg had one of his regular lunches — at the Four Seasons in Manhattan — with Michael H. Steinhardt, the retired hedge fund pioneer who took a big stake in WisdomTree in 2004 and remains its chairman and largest shareholder.Over a career of home run investments, Mr. Steinhardt’s WisdomTree bet has been his most profitable, and with the stock just off its high, the two men could not help but wallow a bit in the moment.“Jono has gone from zero to $60 billion in less than 10 years,” said the 74-year-old Mr. Steinhardt. “That is almost too good.”There was a time though, Mr. Steinberg noted, when it seemed entirely possible that his dream of transforming his failed media company into an E.T.F. powerhouse would remain just that.AdvertisementAt the time, E.T.F.s were an emerging investment concept; moreover, Mr. Steinberg’s plan to create his own indexes based on different investment themes represented the furthest frontier of E.T.F. innovation, now known in the mutual fund industry as smart beta.Money was short, investors (some wary of the Steinberg name) were not returning his calls and his stock was trading at 3 cents — as opposed to $20 today.On an impulse, Mr. Steinberg reached across the table and gave Mr. Steinhardt a man hug.“It was frigging hard,” he said with a big grin. “But I was able to persuade this one.”After a few years of slow, steady growth, WisdomTree began to cash in on the post-2008 boom in asset prices, especially with its export-oriented funds in Europe and Japan.These two E.T.F.s alone, which were hedged against a weak yen and euro, have taken in an eye-popping $35 billion in the last two years.All of a sudden, WisdomTree and its 100 or so employees had become the fifth-largest E.T.F. sponsor, prompting envy among their competitors.For example, in BlackRock’s San Francisco office, where the company’s booming E.T.F. unit is based, executives, many of them industry pioneers, have been scooping up WisdomTree stock for their personal investment accounts.AdvertisementAs well they should, says Mr. Steinberg. After all, he has spent the last 15 years of his life explaining why investing in focused E.T.F.s is a better deal for the investor.Now, when the analysts and industry experts come to him with their doubts, this is what he says:Wake up!Mr. Steinberg bellowed the words, startling a reporter and two public relations staff members in a conference room at WisdomTree’s offices.For such a disciplined man, it was a surprising moment of catharsis. A statement, perhaps, that after all these years, this Steinberg has nothing left to prove.An earlier version of a picture caption in this article misstated the type of business WisdomTree Investments is. It is an exchange-traded fund, not a mutual fund.A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Like Father, Not Like Son.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.