AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie ThomasDrugmakers have long argued they should have the right to talk to doctors about unapproved uses for their products, as long as they are being truthful. And in some cases, courts have agreed. But the federal government still frowns on the practice and, in recent years, has fined drug companies billions of dollars for talking to doctors about so-called off-label uses for their medications.On Thursday, Amarin Pharma took the unusual step of suing the Food and Drug Administration, arguing that it has a constitutional right to share certain information about its product with doctors, even though the agency did not permit the company to do so. Lawyers for the company said that they believed their case was the first time a manufacturer had pre-emptively sued the agency over the free-speech issue, before it had been accused of any wrongdoing. Other companies have sued the agency only after they have gotten into trouble. “If you tell the truth — if you’re not misleading — then the First Amendment protects you when you provide this sort of information,” said Floyd Abrams, a noted First Amendment lawyer who is representing Amarin in the case, which was filed in United States District Court in New York. Amarin has its corporate headquarters in Dublin. But others said that doing so sidesteps the authority of the F.D.A., which is responsible for making sure that drugs are safe and effective. “The First Amendment right is not an absolute right. It has limits. And it’s always been subject to a balancing test,” said Dr. Michael Carome, director of the health research group at Public Citizen, an advocacy group in Washington. “If this lawsuit were to succeed, it would be devastating for drug safety and undermine the drug approval process.”At issue in the lawsuit is the F.D.A.’s stance on Amarin’s only product, Vascepa, which is a prescription omega-3 fatty acid that is derived from fish. In 2012, the F.D.A. approved Vascepa for use in patients with extremely high levels of triglycerides, a kind of fat in the blood that has been linked to heart disease. But when the company sought to expand the drug’s reach to a wider population of people with severe levels, the agency turned it down. The company has said the F.D.A. denied its request because, although a clinical trial showed the drug reduced triglycerides, it had not been proved to reduce the risk of heart disease.Lawyers for Amarin say the company is not proposing to market Vascepa to a wider population of patients, merely to share with doctors the results of a 2011 company-sponsored clinical trial that showed the drug lowered triglycerides in patients with “persistently high” levels. It also wants to make statements about its product that it says match what manufacturers of fish-oil supplements — which are not regulated as stringently — are permitted to say: that “supportive but not conclusive research” shows Vascepa may reduce the risk of coronary heart disease.Joel Kurtzberg, another lawyer for Amarin, said the company knew that doctors, who are permitted to prescribe off-label, were already giving Vascepa to a wider pool of patients. “It’s legal, it is done, it is commonplace,” he said. “Those doctors who are already prescribing off-label need more information, not less, about what their treatment options are.”A spokeswoman for the F.D.A., Sandy Walsh, said the agency does not comment on pending litigation.Amarin is not the first drug company to challenge the F.D.A.’s rules on free-speech grounds. In 2012, a federal appeals court threw out the conviction of a sales representative who had promoted a drug for unapproved uses, saying the government had violated his freedom of speech. In that case, the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan ruled in a 2-1 decision that the information shared had to be truthful and could not be misleading.The F.D.A. never appealed the decision, and since then the drug industry has sought to use other methods to persuade the agency to clarify its position on the sharing of truthful information, such as results from clinical trials or peer-reviewed articles in medical journals. The agency is considering two draft “guidances” to industry that could permit companies to share a broader array of information about their products.“I think a lot of the themes that emerged in litigation are also found in these nonlitigation approaches,” said Kellie B. Combs, counsel at Ropes & Gray, who has advised a coalition of pharmaceutical companies that is lobbying the F.D.A. for more leeway in sharing information.Andrea Fischer, a spokeswoman for the F.D.A., said the agency is planning to issue more comprehensive guidance to industry on what types of information can be shared, and to hold a public meeting on the topic, although no date has been set. “F.D.A.’s objective is to revise its policies to best protect and promote the public health,” she said.Ms. Combs said it would be difficult to predict the impact of the Amarin lawsuit if it were to succeed, because a court could rule narrowly or more broadly depending on the facts and legal arguments in the case.She and others said the F.D.A. and the Justice Department, however, do not seem to have slowed their enforcement of off-label practices.John R. Fleder, a director at the law firm Hyman, Phelps & McNamara who represented the F.D.A. while working at the Justice Department, now represents pharmaceutical companies. He said the government had “massaged” its tactics since the 2012 ruling, focusing on activities that it claims are false and misleading. However, “I can tell you firsthand that the government investigations of off-label cases continue at a pretty brisk pace,” he said.Advertisement