AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter Baker and Julie Hirschfeld DavisWASHINGTON — During years of debate about the costs and benefits of trade, few businesses came to symbolize the dark side of international commerce more than Nike, the multibillion-dollar apparel giant with armies of low-paid factory workers in Asia stitching together Air Jordans.So it came as a shock to labor activists, and a surprise even to some in his own administration, that President Obama chose to make his stand in the current fight for trade negotiating power at Nike headquarters in Oregon, ground zero in the American war over free trade.At the heart of the president’s planned visit to the company’s home near Beaverton on Friday morning is the larger clash over America’s economic future in the world. Once seen by many as the embodiment of all that was wrong with globalization, Nike maintains that it has reformed its practices and become a showcase of the advantages of opening global markets.Mr. Obama in effect will try to persuade the country — and his own balky Democratic Party, in particular — that the tides of history have turned on trade and that old nostrums need to be updated. As he negotiates a 12-nation Pacific free-trade pact that would be the largest in more than two decades, the president wants to transform Nike from an argument against lowering trade barriers into an argument for it.The White House has hinted that it will have an announcement to make on Friday that will serve that goal, perhaps a prediction or commitment by Nike concerning the jobs it will be able to create in the United States if the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement is ultimately approved.“It will become much clearer to all of you why this is a useful illustration of the significant economic benefits,” Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, told reporters this week, “economic benefits for the American people and for middle-class families, associated with finalizing and implementing the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement.”But liberals and labor activists remain unconvinced. Several hundred protesters, some with signs like “No Fast Track to Hell,” greeted Mr. Obama at a fundraiser in Portland on Thursday night and others plan to protest outside Nike’s headquarters on Friday.“Nike epitomizes why disastrous, unfettered free-trade policies during the past four decades have failed American workers, eroded our manufacturing base and increased income and wealth inequality in this country,” Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, an independent running for the Democratic presidential nomination, said in a letter to Mr. Obama this week.Lori Wallach, director of Public Citizen’s Global Trade Watch and a fierce opponent of the emerging Pacific trade accord, wrote in a memo to reporters that “I gasped when I heard that President Obama selected Nike” as the site for a trade speech.“Nike is the perfect setting,” she said in a subsequent interview. “It is what many people think their future would be under T.P.P. Nike epitomizes the threat T.P.P. poses to the next wave of high-end, high-value manufacturing jobs.”Nike argued that it had learned from its mistakes and moved beyond the practices that drew so much criticism in the 1990s. Further trade liberalization, it added, would be good for American business and workers.“Our past lessons have fundamentally changed the way we do business,” the company said in an email message on Thursday in advance of the president’s arrival. “We’ve made significant improvements and driven positive change for workers in contract factories that make Nike products.”The company said that partnerships with government, unions and nonprofits would lead to systemic change in the industry, and it welcomed worker protections that Mr. Obama promises will be included in the Pacific pact.“Nike fully supports the inclusion of strong labor provisions because we believe that will drive higher industry standards and create economic growth that benefits everyone,” it said.Nike has been close at times with the Obama administration. Mark Parker, its chief executive, appeared with Michelle Obama in 2013 to announce that the company was committing $50 million over five years to promote physical fitness in collaboration with her “Let’s Move” initiative.The president’s trip to Oregon is part of a high-stakes, high-profile push to win what is called fast-track authority from Congress to negotiate trade deals and submit them to lawmakers for up-or-down votes without amendments. Every president for the last four decades has had such authority at some point while in office, but Mr. Obama finds his chances of securing it threatened mainly by fellow Democrats wary of the impact of greater foreign trade on domestic workers.The Pacific Northwest is important territory for Mr. Obama to pick up votes, given that Democrats in the Midwestern industrial states are almost all resolutely opposed. Senator Ron Wyden, a Democrat from Oregon, has been a crucial voice favoring trade authority, although he will not appear with the president because of scheduling conflicts, his office said. White House advisers said Mr. Obama’s visit would telegraph wavering Democrats that he would provide political cover if they stood with him.“He’s showing all those other folks that you’re going to get cover; you’re going to get the support that you need from me,” said one person involved in the pro-trade effort who insisted on anonymity to discuss conversations with the White House. “There is nothing like Air Force One coming into town. That sends a very powerful message right now if you feel shaky on this at home.”But Representative Peter A. DeFazio, an Oregon Democrat, said Mr. Obama picked a poor example for his argument.“We always welcome the president to Oregon,” he said in a conference call on Wednesday. “But it’s unfortunate in this case that he’s coming to promote policies that will be to the detriment of the vast majority of the people of Oregon.” While he said he respected Nike, “I just disagree with us continuing to facilitate 60-cent-an-hour labor in Vietnam.”Through much of the 1990s, Nike was an emblem for opponents of greater trade liberalization because it was a pioneer in moving production overseas to countries like Vietnam and Bangladesh where wages are low, work standards lax and enforcement spotty at best. At one point, Phil Knight, a co-founder of the company and its chairman, even acknowledged that in the public mind its products had “become synonymous with slave wages, forced overtime and arbitrary abuse.”Since then, the company has worked to raise its standards and improve its reputation. It boasts of being the first company to publicly disclose the names and locations of all the overseas factories it contracts with. It created a new factory performance measurement index that it says elevates labor and environmental standards to equal importance with such measures as quality, cost and delivery.With $27.8 billion in annual revenue last year and some of the world’s most famous athletes pitching its products, Nike employs 26,000 workers in the United States and recently created 2,000 new, high-wage positions in Oregon. But its contract factories employ one million workers overseas, about a third of them in Vietnam, who make a fraction of what they would earn in the United States.Jeff Ballinger, founder of Press for Change, a group fighting sweatshop economics, said the company had not changed its stripes, citing the case of an Indonesian worker fired in the 1990s who has never been fully compensated. “Her story, and hundreds like it, makes a mockery of the ‘Nike’s new leaf’ narrative,” he said.Scott Nova, executive director of the Worker Rights Consortium, a watchdog group financed by universities concerned about the labor standards of the sports apparel companies they do business with, said Nike had made important changes but they should not be overstated.“It would not be correct to say that nothing has improved,” he said, “but labor rights progress in Nike’s supply chain has been modest, at best. There has been far more continuity than change.”Jonathan Weisman contributed reporting.OpinionThomas L. FriedmanAdvertisement