By DAVID JOLLYMAY 7, 2015
PARIS — Along with jet planes and fast trains, nuclear power has been a showpiece of French technology, carefully nurtured by the government of a country eager to stand among the world’s industrial leaders but lacking in fossil-fuel resources.“After World War II, it wasn’t really clear what it meant to be both French and modern,” said Gabrielle Hecht, a history professor at the University of Michigan, who has written extensively on the country’s experience with atomic power.France has a proud history in nuclear physics, she said, one that dates from Henri Becquerel, the physicist who discovered radioactivity in 1896. In the postwar days, fission-generated electricity appeared to be the wave of the future.“So one of the first things the new government did was to invest in nuclear power,” she said. It continued ramping up output until, by the 1970s, the state was going all-out with a strategy of meeting almost all of its electricity needs from atomic power.AdvertisementBy the time Areva was created in 2001 through a consolidation of the state-controlled industry, France had enough power plants to meet most of its own needs. Along with the national power utility Électricité de France, its older and more experienced peer, the new company was tasked with selling French expertise abroad.AdvertisementAreva’s first chief executive was Anne Lauvergeon, a physicist and product of the country’s most elite educational institutions, who was widely known by the nickname Atomic Anne and was charged with pushing the next-generation European pressurized reactor technology, or EPR, that the French nuclear establishment had decided to back.Former President Nicolas Sarkozy, while in office from 2007 to 2012, regularly brought Ms. Lauvergeon along on his state visits.“Exporting nuclear technology was a major part of French foreign policy,” Professor Hecht said.The first signs of trouble for the EPR strategy cropped up in Finland, where Areva and its partner, Siemens, had won the job of building the Olkiluoto 3 power plant. Areva had built more than 100 reactors, but it had never before played the leading role on a project of this magnitude, a role for which analysts now say it was unsuited.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Construction on the plant began in 2005 with a 2009 target date to begin operations. The earliest is it now expected to go into service is 2018 — at a cost that could be three times the 3 billion euros, or $3.8 billion, originally estimated.Another stumble came in 2009, when France failed to land an estimated $20 billion deal to supply four EPR reactors to Abu Dhabi. That job was won by a South Korean group led by Korea Electric Power, which offered a simpler, less expensive technology; the first of those reactors is scheduled to begin operating in 2017.Ms. Lauvergeon presided over the EPR contracts that Areva did win — and that are now running behind schedule and over budget. She left in 2011, after the Sarkozy government declined to renew her appointment after accusations were made that Areva had badly overpaid for UraMin, a Canadian uranium-mining company, for which Areva later took a write-down of almost €1.9 billion. The matter is still under investigation by French financial prosecutors.Ms. Lauvergeon declined to comment. But her spokesman pointed to a recent interview she gave to the business newspaper Les Echos as representing her position. In the interview, Ms. Lauvergeon acknowledged some responsibility for the company’s problems, but said that the state’s management of the industry was also part of the story. She told the interviewer that she had been unfairly tarred with responsibility for the EPR, and that she had actually championed a different technology, the Atmea reactor made in a joint venture with Mitsubishi Heavy Industries.And she defended the purchase of UraMin, saying that the high price appeared justified in 2007, at the height of the credit bubble, and that it continued to look like a reasonable deal, borne out by the company’s subsequent discovery of uranium deposits.In any case, after the Abu Dhabi setback, the French government realized that the industry was on the wrong path. A government study made a number of recommendations including closer integration of the various French nuclear companies and a reworking of the EPR design.AdvertisementBut it is only now, after the company’s loss last year of €4.8 billion made ignoring the problem impossible, that the government seems prepared to take the drastic step of reorganizing its showcase industry.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.