AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel AbramsLumber Liquidators has suspended sales of Chinese laminate flooring after facing accusations that the products contained dangerous levels of formaldehyde.Concerns have grown that Lumber Liquidators’ Chinese suppliers falsely marked some laminate flooring products as compliant with California’s safety standards. The company also said onThursday that it had hired Louis J. Freeh, the former director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to help review its compliance policies.The concerns stem from a report on the CBS program “60 Minutes” in March, which said that the company’s Chinese suppliers had deliberately mislabeled products as compliant with California’s rules. The report said some products contained levels of formaldehyde, a known human carcinogen, that in some cases were more than 13 times the state’s limits.The retailer has said that its products are safe as used in homes, but its stock has sunk roughly 50 percent this year.Lumber Liquidators has been supplying worried consumers with indoor air quality test kits. On Thursday, the company said that 11,000 kits had been returned, and 3,400 had been analyzed. More than 97 percent of those results were within the guidelines set by the World Health Organization. While the air quality kits can measure overall formaldehyde levels in the air, they cannot pinpoint its source.No federal standard exists for formaldehyde in wood products, although the Environmental Protection Agency is close to issuing a final rule.“Despite the initial positive air quality testing results we have received, we believe it is the right decision to suspend the sale of these products,” said Robert M. Lynch, Lumber Liquidators’ president and chief executive.The retailer said it had formed a team of people to investigate its Chinese laminate and would halt sales of the flooring until that review was complete.“We will work diligently to meet the needs of our customers and to ensure their satisfaction,” Mr. Lynch added.The group is working with Freeh Group International Solutions, Mr. Freeh’s risk management firm.The costs of supplying indoor air quality tests, legal fees and expenses reached $15 million within a month of the CBS report, the company said last month when it released its first-quarter earnings. Sales fell 12.8 percent in March after the “60 Minutes” report, and the retailer faces lawsuits from customers and an investigation by the Consumer Product Safety Commission into whether its laminate products are safe. Lumber Liquidators posted a loss of $7.8 million, or 29 cents a share, in the first quarter.Advertisement