AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsThomas R. Shepard Jr., who as the last publisher of Look magazine oversaw its sudden and rapid descent from record advertising revenue and circulation to its demise, died on April 29 in Sarasota, Fla. He was 96. The cause was pneumonia, said his son, Rocky. Mr. Shepard, a salesman with missionary zeal, was named publisher in 1965, during the heyday of mass general-circulation magazines driven by newsstand sales, lavish photographic spreads and alluring articles. That was before television began vying for advertising revenue and eyeballs, and crippling postal rate increases obliterated profit margins. Collier’s had already folded in 1957, but by the late 1960s Look, Life and The Saturday Evening Post were still slugging it out. Look and The Post were biweeklies then. Look, published by Cowles Communications, was typically considered an also-ran to Life, which Henry Luce bought in 1936 and transformed into an all-photographic newsmagazine that would eclipse its rivals for four decades. Look passed The Post in 1961 and briefly edged into first place ahead of Life a few years later, with a circulation of 8.5 million copies. In 1967, Look bought the serialization rights to “The Death of a President,” William Manchester’s minute-by-minute account of John F. Kennedy’s assassination, for $665,000, an investment that propelled newsstand sales for four issues from 500,000 to two million and overall net paid circulation from 7.5 million to 9.2 million. Mr. Shepard boasted to advertisers that average readership hit 53 million, which would have been a record audience for either a magazine or a television program at the time.Thomas Rockwell Shepard was born in Manhattan on Aug. 22, 1918, the son of Thomas Sr., a salesman, and the former Marie Maze Dickinson, the registrar of Upsala College in East Orange, N.J. He grew up in East Orange and graduated from Amherst College, where he met a student from Smith College, Nancy Kruidenier, whom he would marry. In addition to his son and his wife, he is survived by three daughters, Sue Jaques, Molly Dickinson Shepard and Amy Knight; nine grandchildren; and 12 great-grandchildren. After college, Mr. Shepard graduated from an executive training program and became a traveling salesman for Vicks VapoRub in the South. The day after the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, he volunteered for the Navy. He served in the Pacific and was promoted to lieutenant commander. After the war, Gardner Cowles Jr., his wife’s uncle and the founder of Look, persuaded him to join the magazine’s sales training program.As publisher, Mr. Shepard shed Look’s rural circulation to focus on wealthier metropolitan areas and publicly declared a cease-fire in its circulation war with Life. Neither strategy worked. Look closed with the issue dated Oct. 19, 1971. At the time, Mr. Cowles said, “The future for Life is very, very good.” But Look’s rival ceased publication 14 months later. After Look closed, Mr. Shepard, who had homes in Greenwich, Conn., and Sarasota, became president of the Outdoor Advertising Association of America. He wrote several books, including “Making the Sale: The Art of Salesmanship,” which he published himself last year. Mr. Shepard was an ardent Republican, going so far as to tell the Rotary Club of New York in 1971 that the most dangerous enemies of marketing and advertising were “self-anointed consumerists and overnight ecologists and student revolutionists and bra-burning women’s lib advocates and gun-toting black militants and hard-core anarchists and weekend socialists and anti-tobacco fanatics and assorted other activists — all united on one basic platform.”But Ms. Jaques, his daughter, said that while he never formally switched his enrollment, he concluded after the presidency of George W. Bush that his party had shifted too far to the right. She quoted him as saying, “This is not my Republican Party.” Advertisement