AdvertisementSupported byBy Jad MouawadMaurice Flanagan, a founding manager of Emirates, the airline that put Dubai on the global map, died on Thursday at his home in London. He was 86. Emirates announced his death but did not specify the cause. The story of how Emirates became one of the world’s top carriers is intimately linked to Dubai’s own ambitions to become an international tourist destination and a commercial hub for the Middle East. Mr. Flanagan was there from the start. As an executive with British Airways and its forerunner, the British Overseas Airways Corporation, he worked around the world, from Britain to Bombay, for many years. He moved to Dubai in 1978 to run the Dubai National Air Travel Agency, which handled ticketing and ground operations at the country’s airport. Within a few years he was asked by Dubai’s crown prince, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, to develop a blueprint for starting an airline from scratch. Dubai’s location between East and West makes it an ideal transit point for international passenger connections. Mr. Flanagan was part of a small team, including the airline’s current president, Tim Clark, that worked in secret over a few months to put together a business plan. Sheikh Mohammed gave the new airline seed capital of $10 million and a mandate to operate a commercially profitable business. Sheikh Mohammed turned down suggestions to call the carrier Air Dubai and instead named it Emirates. The inaugural flight, with an Airbus A300 leased from Pakistan International Airlines, took off for Karachi, Pakistan, on Oct. 25, 1985. Mr. Flanagan was the company’s managing director until July 2003. He remained involved in its affairs, as executive vice chairman, until he retired in 2013. Today Emirates has 84,000 employees and more than 230 wide-body airplanes, and carries more than 45 million passengers a year. On Thursday it reported its 27th consecutive yearly profit and revenue of $26 billion. The airline’s success has spawned rivals, like Etihad Airlines in Abu Dhabi and Qatar Airways. Its seemingly unstoppable growth has also rattled rivals in Europe and the United States that now seek to restrict flights from the mega-carriers of the Middle East. “Flanagan was one of the last of a generation of British executive expatriates who helped build the institutions that made Dubai’s success,” Jim Krane, a senior fellow at Rice University’s Baker Institute for Public Policy, said in an interview. “He was the linchpin of the gulf carrier revolution that shook the global air transport market.” These expatriates were attracted to the opportunities of the newly created United Arab Emirates, which gained its independence from Britain in 1971. Emirates has become central to the success of Dubai, which received 13 million foreign visitors last year and is on track to reach 20 million by the next decade. Dubai Airport has overtaken Heathrow in London as the world’s largest international airport, with more than 70 million international passengers last year. Maurice Flanagan was born in Lancashire, England, on Nov. 17, 1928, and studied history and French at Liverpool University. He joined the Royal Air Force as a navigator in 1951 and went to work for B.O.A.C., the state-owned airline, in 1953. After a succession of jobs overseas, he returned to London in 1965 to work as a route planner. He moved on to senior management positions with the airline, renamed British Airways, in 1974. When he moved to Dubai, it was very different from the land of fantasy and commerce it has since become. It had no gleaming towers or shopping malls. It had few hotels and nothing to draw tourists. The biggest problem was that Dubai lacked its own airline and relied on others for access to the world. The city had an open-skies policy — anyone could fly there — but air service was essentially dependent on foreign carriers, which used it as a refueling stop between East and West. Otherwise, the local carrier was Gulf Air, a consortium owned by the governments of Bahrain, Oman, Qatar and Abu Dhabi, the capital city of the United Arab Emirates. In 1984, Gulf Air was locked in a dispute with Pakistan, a major source of cheap labor to the Persian Gulf countries, hoping to increase flights there. Pakistan refused, seeking to protect its own national airline. Gulf Air pressed Dubai to restrict flights by Pakistan International Airlines, but Sheikh Mohammed refused to amend the city’s open-skies policy, so Gulf Air reduced its weekly flights to Dubai to 39 from 84. The whole incident underscored Dubai’s reliance on air travel and its isolation. Sheik Mohammed turned to Mr. Flanagan, who, according to an account in Mr. Krane’s book “City of Gold: Dubai and the Dream of Capitalism,” said three options were available. Dubai could do nothing, give in to Gulf Air or set up an airline. Sheikh Mohammed’s mandate, Mr. Krane wrote, was simple: Make Dubai look good and Emirates profitable. And do not expect more money from the government. Emirates used Dubai’s geographic position to its advantage and benefited from the full support of the ruling family, which built a world-class airport and invested heavily in ground infrastructure. The airline is now the largest operator of Boeing 777s as well as Airbus A380s. Mr. Flanagan was made a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 2010 by Queen Elizabeth, who cited his services to British aviation and exports. He is survived by his wife, Audrey; his son, Julian; and his daughters, Siobhan and Claire.Advertisement