AdvertisementSupported byBy Melissa Eddy and Jack EwingBRAUNSCHWEIG, Germany — German prosecutors looking into possible criminal fraud in the Volkswagen emissions scandal backtracked from earlier statements and said on Thursday that there was no formal investigation of Martin Winterkorn, who was chief executive of the automaker until his resignation a week ago.The statement on Thursday by state prosecutors in Braunschweig, Germany, a city close to Volkswagen’s headquarters in Wolfsburg, contradicted a news release the prosecutors issued on Monday, when they indicated that Mr. Winterkorn was a focus of the investigation. The prosecutors said they “regretted” the impression conveyed by the earlier statement.The caution by prosecutors in targeting Mr. Winterkorn, along with a separate statement by members of the Volkswagen supervisory board on Thursday, signaled that it is likely to be several months at least before it is clear who was responsible for the use of the software in diesel-powered cars that was meant to cheat on emissions tests.“A formal investigation into Prof. Dr. Winterkorn is not currently being carried out,” said Birgit Seel, spokeswoman for the state prosecutor in Braunschweig, in the state of Lower Saxony.“The prosecutors in Braunschweig regret any such impression and irritation that may have arisen from the press statement,” she said.The executive committee of Volkswagen’s supervisory board, which includes representatives of workers and major shareholders, said on Thursday that it would take several months “at least” for its own inquiry to provide answers about who was responsible. The board, which oversees Volkswagen management, has hired Jones Day, a United States law firm with offices in Germany, to conduct an internal inquiry.However, a member of the executive committee, Stephan Weil, said the company should disclose information as it becomes available. “I expect that this will be the case in coming weeks,” said Mr. Weil, prime minister of the state of Lower Saxony, which owns a 20 percent stake in Volkswagen.Defying calls for outside oversight, the executive committee also moved forward with plans to name Hans Dieter Pötsch, the chief financial officer of Volkswagen, chairman of the supervisory board. Mr. Pötsch worked closely with Mr. Winterkorn and has been at Volkswagen since 2003. His appointment, which must be ratified by the full 20-person supervisory board, would continue a pattern of naming insiders to crucial positions at the company.Frank Witter, chief executive of Volkswagen Financial Services, which provides loans to car buyers, will be nominated to replace Mr. Pötsch as chief financial officer, the executive committee said.Critics have said that even if top managers at Volkswagen did not know about the software, they carry blame for creating an organization where such behavior could take place.“It is clear that Volkswagen has a governance problem,” Paul J. J. Welfens, president of the European Institute for International Economic Relations at the University of Wuppertal, said in a statement on Thursday.The prosecutor’s office has received 10 complaints from individuals about VW’s reported deception and a further notice from Volkswagen itself. Although some people have filed complaints against Mr. Winterkorn specifically, prosecutors said on Thursday that there was not enough evidence to make him a suspect in a criminal investigation into the events that led to Volkswagen’s installing  deceptive software in 11 million cars.In Germany, any person can file a criminal complaint against any other person, and the authorities are required to weigh whether there are grounds to begin legal proceedings. But a formal investigation begins only if prosecutors determine that there is probable cause that an individual has committed a crime.That is not the case with Mr. Winterkorn, prosecutors said.While the former chief executive has not been ruled out as one of those possibly responsible for wrongdoing, the authorities at this point are not focusing on him specifically.The focus of the investigation is whether the sale of cars intended to manipulate emissions test results constituted fraud. Mr. Winterkorn has said that he had no knowledge of software that was intended to fool emissions tests.Investigators are still working to determine exactly what may have led to the installation of the software and who might have been responsible for it.Prosecutors in Ingolstadt, base of Volkswagen’s Audi unit, have also begun a preliminary inquiry. Günter Mayerhöfer, a prosecutor in Ingolstadt, said the office began the inquiry on its own initiative and in response to citizen complaints. He said it was too early to name suspects.Prosecutors in Braunschweig refused to give any details on how many investigators were involved in the case, which American environmental officials uncovered when a VW was tested for compliance with emissions regulations. The VW software recognized when a car was being scrutinized for emissions and turned on functions that reduced the output of nitrogen oxides, pollutants linked to lung ailments.If prosecutors find enough evidence to bring charges against an individual, it could become the biggest such criminal trial this central German region has experienced.Under German law, only an individual, not a company, can be held responsible for fraud, which carries a sentence of six months to 10 years. Even if charges are brought against an individual, a trial could be avoided by settling with the state and paying a fine.Melissa Eddy reported from Braunschweig, Germany, and Jack Ewing from Frankfurt. Graham Bowley contributed reporting from Braunschweig.Advertisement