By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONMAY 8, 2015
LAS VEGAS — When John P. Carlin, the head of the Justice Department’s national security division, appealed on Friday to the hedge fund industry to share more information with the government, it was a tough sell.“I encourage you to come in and talk to the F.B.I. and prosecutors,” Mr. Carlin told an audience of financial advisers and hedge fund managers at the SkyBridge Alternatives Conference. But, he quickly assured the audience, “You will not leave the office with handcuffs.”After years of close regulatory scrutiny after the financial crisis — and indictments and prosecutions of insider trading — there is no shortage of hedge fund managers who complain that the financial industry has become a punching bag for government regulators.Mr. Carlin and his department want the industry to engage in a dialogue with the government to help prevent the proliferation of what he called cyberweapons of mass destruction.Advertisement“What they are stealing is what you have,” Mr. Carlin said of online criminals the department has monitored. “They are stealing economic information. They are stealing your negotiating strategies, and they are stealing your algorithms.”AdvertisementEmboldened by a series of recent government measures to focus more on such crimes, the Justice Department has been sounding the warning bell across the country. Speaking at conferences like SALT and in private meetings with the heads of companies in sectors like the entertainment industry, utilities and finance, Mr. Carlin’s team has been urging the prompt reporting of online attacks.It has met with large institutional investors and warned them to think twice before investing in a hedge fund that doesn’t have the proper security systems set up against such attacks, Mr. Carlin added.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last month, President Obama gave the government new power to impose financial sanctions on overseas hackers who seek to benefit from stolen corporate information. Speaking at the time, Mr. Obama said that online threats posed “one of the most serious economic and national security challenges to the United States.”On Friday, Mr. Carlin raised the specter of a new Cold War era, pointing to nations like China, North Korea and Russia as states that sponsor online attacks, both for commercial gain and to disrupt United States national security.“You are being targeted by the same spies as those in the Cold War,” he said, recalling the recent attack on Sony Pictures, which United States officials have attributed to North Korea.During a closed-door session moderated by a KPMG executive and attended by a small group of hedge fund managers, advisers and general counsels on Thursday afternoon, some expressed hesitation about coming forward to the government with information and questioned whether that would open the door to other scrutiny, according to two people who were at the meeting.On Friday, Mr. Carlin spoke after Marc D. Powers, a former Securities and Exchange Commission investigator who is now a private sector lawyer, told the audience what to do when investigators come knocking at their doors.“The S.E.C. is not your friend,” Mr. Powers said.It was a tough act to follow.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.