AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioAs streaming music has spread around the world, Spotify’s financial picture has remained much the same year after year: rapid revenue growth, with steady losses.That pattern continued in 2014, as Spotify reported $1.3 billion in revenue, up 45 percent from the previous year. At the same time, the company reported net losses of $197 million, up from a loss of about $68 million in 2013, according to documents filed in Luxembourg, where Spotify’s holding company is registered, and made public on Friday.As an explanation for its loss, the company’s documents cited investments in “product development, international expansion and general increase in personnel.” At the end of 2014 it had 1,354 employees, up from 958 at the end of 2013.Spotify, which is available in 58 countries, offers access to some 30 million songs with a two-tiered model: Users can listen to music with advertising free, or they can subscribe for about $10 a month and bypass advertising.With 15 million paying users and 45 million free users at the end of 2014, Spotify is by far the most popular service of its kind. According to its latest accounts, subscriptions make up 91 percent of the company’s revenue, with the rest coming from ads.The value of Spotify’s free tier has become a much-debated subject in the music industry. Last year Taylor Swift removed her music from the service, in an apparent dispute over its availability through Spotify’s free version.Over the last several months, top executives at the major record companies have sharply criticized the wide availability of free music. That issue now hangs heavily over Spotify’s talks with the labels to renew its music licensing deals, music executives say.Spotify has long countered that its free level is vital to attract new users, who can then be lured into paying for more features. Last fall, Daniel Ek, Spotify’s chief executive and one of its founders, said that the company had paid $2 billion in music royalties since the service started in 2008.Among Spotify’s major competitors are Deezer, Rhapsody and Google Play. Apple, which last year paid $3 billion for Beats, is expected to introduce a streaming service as soon as next month.To stand out, Spotify is said to have begun negotiations with TV networks and other partners to provide short video clips. The company has not commented on those plans. Media executives who were briefed on the plans and who spoke on the condition of anonymity said Spotify may introduce its video services at a news conference on May 20.Spotify, which is privately held, has been the subject of regular speculation about an initial public offering or acquisition by a technology giant. Last month Spotify was said to be close to raising $400 million in investment money, at a valuation of more than $8 billion.Advertisement