
Another View By                     
DAVID ZARING

MAY 8, 2015
David Zaring is associate professor of legal studies at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.Should the Federal Reserve Bank of New York lose its automatic place on the Federal Open Market Committee, the committee that sets monetary policy for the government?A proposal that it do so has met with sympathy across the political spectrum. Liberals don’t like big banks, and they think the New York Fed is too close to them. Community bankers feel the same way, and Congress listens to them. And libertarians don’t like the Fed itself, and think that this sort of punishment could rein in the agency and remind it that Congress is watching.So the prospects for an amendment to the Fed’s governing statute to reduce the role of the New York Fed are real. Is it a good idea? I have my doubts about any legislation that threatens the central bank’s independence, but would evaluate it by looking to three of my pet axioms of financial regulation.AdvertisementThe first is that procedural reorganizations almost never matter – an axiom that counsels indifference about the change. The second is that the New York Fed has always been special – an axiom that cuts the other way. And the third, given that Congress comprises legislators who need to be re-elected, is to consider the short-term as well as the long-term functions of the change.AdvertisementWhen I apply these axioms, I conclude that the New York Fed should not lose its vote. The short-term benefits are unclear, making the change look like a symbolic effort to shift the long-term focus of the Fed away from Wall Street. But Wall Street is important, and deserves its focus. There’s no reason to believe that the New York Fed will do a better or different job on Wall Street if it loses its automatic vote.Procedural reorganizations happen in financial change, and they often underwhelm. Dodd-Frank, for example, handled the problem of the next financial crisis by creating a supercommittee of agencies to plan for it — the Financial Stability Oversight Committee. It is a committee with a few powers – the power to designate very large financial institutions as systemically important and a limited power to review the work of its member agencies, for example – but not an effort to upend the way we do financial regulation in America.Nor would removing the automatic place the New York Fed has on the F.O.M.C. change too much. The New York Fed president could still attend every committee meeting – all regional Fed presidents do that. Moreover, dissents on the F.O.M.C. are more rare than dissents in the Supreme Court, or even in a financial regulator like the Securities and Exchange Commission. So the New York Fed’s voice would remain, and its vote almost always has plenty of company.My second principle turns on the specialness of the New York Fed. Until the Great Depression, the New York Fed was the agency that took the lead on monetary policy; the other regional reserve banks functionally did not, and the Fed’s board of governors in Washington was structured to have little control over its member banks. Then and now, the New York bank housed the Fed’s open market operations desk, which put into effect the directions of the F.O.M.C. and churned out the profits that fund the Fed, and that keep it out of the congressional budget process.At the beginning of the financial crisis, Timothy F. Geitner was the head of the New York Fed, and no one doubts his importance in crafting the government’s response to that crisis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In this sense, the New York Fed matters. Its traditionally central role in monetary policy and banking supervision would make a removal of its automatic place on the F.O.M.C. symbolically powerful.My first two principles cut against each other. I generally find procedural reorganizations to be inconsequential, but a procedural reorganization that explicitly removes voting power from a powerful component of the Fed looks different.Are there short-term consequences posed by the removal of the Fed’s automatic vote? Congress cares about immediate impacts, which might be a good reason for it to act.AdvertisementBut I see little indication that the proposal would change near-term monetary policy one way or the other. The president of the New York Fed is serving as vice chairman of the F.O.M.C., and there is no indication that his views on monetary policy differ from those of the chairman.Congress would instead be expressing a mood. It would be suggesting, even if modestly, that the component of the Fed closest to Wall Street should play less of a role in setting monetary policy and organizing bank supervision. That might impel the Fed into some sort of regulatory action to forestall the limitation and prove that it is tough, but it is unlikely to do something drastic to the large banks.The consequences of this change are more likely to be realized in the long term. Members of the F.O.M.C. might eventually treat input from the New York Fed like that of any other regional bank, given that it would vote at the same rate as the rest of them.But I doubt it. F.O.M.C. members will not forget that the New York Fed regulates the biggest banks, and stays in touch with those banks through its open market operations, which requires trades with those banks. It is close to Wall Street, but it is unclear to me how a regulator would make sure that Wall Street is not close to crisis without plenty of contact.There is something to be said for letting Congress express dissatisfaction with an agency on occasion. But in this case, the sanction would be unlikely to work, and at most might distract a regulator who should probably be paying more attention to Wall Street’s financial stability, not less.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »