
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

MAY 8, 2015
Another financial crisis is inevitable, the only question is what will ignite it.Will it be what Jeffrey Gundlach, the founder of the $75 billion fixed-income hedge fund DoubleLine Capital, worried about this week at the Sohn Investment Conference, namely that the Federal Reserve’s continuing and successful five-year campaign to drive down short-term interest rates has forced yield-hungry investors to misprice risk in a never-ending quest for higher returns? Or will it be something else that Mr. Gundlach mentioned, the explosion of “cov-lite” leveraged loans — those without protective covenants — issued by big banks, suggesting a rapid deterioration in credit underwriting standards?My candidate for the most unperceived threat is the rapidly escalating use in mergers and acquisitions of insurance that offers both buyers and sellers protection against unexpected or hidden liabilities after deals close. This “reps and warranties insurance” is one of the hottest financial products of the year. It has created a gold mine of premiums for insurers and given deal makers the ability to get deals done more quickly with less to worry about something going awry after closing because that liability rests with the insurance company. Or so the theory goes; getting insurance companies to pay up has always been a challenge.In an April 29 note to its clients, the international law firm Haynes and Boone reported a drastic increase in the use of the insurance over the last few years, coinciding with the surge in M.&A. activity. It’s the talk of Wall Street. George H. Wang, a lawyer at the firm, wrote that although the insurance has been around since the 1990s, its cost has dropped sharply and its use has increased accordingly. Mr. Wang observed that insurance policies with aggregate limits of $10 billion were issued in 2012, $15 billion in 2013 “and the estimates for 2014, while not yet in, are expected to show another substantial increase.”“Indeed, there have been reports in the trade press indicating a fourfold increase in coverages written in the last two years,” he said.AdvertisementHe cited several reasons for the increased use of the insurance: the growing number of private company, midmarket deals where protections for buyers are fewer and the unknowns greater; the desire of private equity firms to limit the proceeds held back or put in escrow after the sale of portfolio companies; the search among buyers for a competitive advantage in a contested auction; and an appetite to mitigate risks in cross-border transactions where buyers and sellers may have different customs and interpretations about what constitutes a breach of a representation or warranty.AdvertisementJohn C. Coffee Jr., a professor and expert in securities law at Columbia Law School, cited another factor: the increasing fear of bankers, lawyers and boards that they will be held accountable for their bad advice or decisions. Two recent opinions handed down by Leo E. Strine Jr. and J. Travis Laster of Delaware Chancery Court have imposed liability on investment banks and boards for deals that turned sour or that were rife with conflicts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Delaware decisions involved the Royal Bank of Canada’s advisory role in the sale of Rural/Metro, an ambulance company, to the buyout firm Warburg Pincus and Goldman Sachs’s role in advising the El Paso Corporation on its sale to Kinder Morgan even though Goldman had a big stake in Kinder Morgan. Chancellor Strine described Goldman’s thought process for participating in such a conflict-ridden assignment as “furtive” and “troubling” while Chancellor Laster questioned whether Royal Bank had “abetted” the Rural/Metro board’s “breach of duty” to shareholders by helping it sell the company on the cheap. Both banks were fined.Professor Coffee wrote in an email that the context for the rising use of the insurance is important. “Historically the risk of monetary liability was low in M.&A. deals and the role of reps and warranties was to enable one side not to close if it decided after due diligence that it was buying a pig in a poke,” he wrote. “More recently large judgments have been imposed, including against investment banks, particularly in private equity ‘going private’ transactions.”“On balance I think people are being more careful” as a result of the threat of fines, he continued, but he also worries that in M.&A. deals “if one side is fully insured there is a moral hazard problem.”The concern with the explosion of reps and warranties policies is that lawyers and their clients will negotiate post-closing deal representations and warranties less assiduously, knowing that they can buy $100 million of protection for pennies on the dollar. Instead of negotiating hard, as used to happen, “they’ll just say to each other, ‘Let’s go have a beer,’” worries one litigation partner at a big New York law firm. In other words, buyers and sellers are simply tossing risks to a willing insurer, paying the premium and then closing the deal. What’s more, some buyers are showing up at a contested auction with an insurance policy already in hand and using it as a competitive advantage over an uninsured rival.It’s great for buyers and sellers, the bankers and lawyers getting paid to do deals and the insurance companies raking in the premiums for issuing the policies. Until it’s not. I seem to remember, not so long ago too, when Joseph Cassano, at AIG Financial Products, made a similar argument about insuring risk in the mortgage market. We all know how that bet turned out.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »