By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMAY 8, 2015
Spurred by an activist investor, shareholders of Tempur Sealy International voted on Friday to overhaul the mattress maker’s board, including by stripping the company’s chief executive of a director seat.Shareholders voted against the re-election of the chief executive, Mark A. Sarvary, as well as those of Tempur Sealy’s chairman, P. Andrews McLane, and the chairman of the board’s corporate governance committee, Christopher A. Masto, according to initial results from the company’s annual meeting.Tempur Sealy acknowledged in a statement that the three men had failed to win re-election and would offer to resign. But the board’s corporate governance committee will decide whether to accept those resignations.Shares of Tempur Sealy were up more than 3 percent in afternoon trading.All three directors had been the targets of H Partners, which emerged in February as an outspoken critic of the mattress manufacturer’s financial performance. The investment firm, which claims to own about 10 percent of Tempur Sealy’s stock, has argued that the company has underperformed both rivals and the broader stock markets.AdvertisementThe stunning vote on Friday illustrates the continued prominence and success of activist investors who demand shake-ups of what they say are underperforming companies. Such corporate critics have won considerable victories at targets including Darden Restaurants, where the hedge fund Starboard Value succeeded in ousting the entire board, and Sotheby’s, which ceded three board seats to the billionaire Daniel S. Loeb.AdvertisementAlthough H Partners began its activist campaign too late to nominate board directors of its own, the firm pressed hard to win the removal of Mr. Sarvary, Mr. McLane and Mr. Masto from the board.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tempur Sealy argued in response that its opponent had no experience in the mattress industry and no alternative plan.“The impact of removing key members of the board and management team extends beyond interrupting sound strategic oversight and strong execution by these individuals,” the company wrote in a recent letter to its investors. “Tempur Sealy needs — and has — steady and experienced leadership at the helm to navigate this critical time in the execution of the company’s strategy.”But H Partners’ campaign gained steam when all four prominent proxy advisory firms, which guide shareholders on how to vote in corporate governance matters, sided with the hedge fund in its fight.“We thank Tempur Sealy’s shareholders for supporting our campaign for leadership change,” Usman Nabi, a senior partner at H Partners, said in a statement on Friday. “We look forward to working constructively with a reinvigorated board to create value for all shareholders.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.