AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Neil UnmackMonsanto is heaping pressure on Syngenta.A $45 billion takeover proposal from Monsanto, the world’s biggest provider of seeds to farmers, to Syngenta, the top seller of crop-protection chemicals, was quickly rejected as too cheap and too risky. The target has a point on the difficulties, but it needs to lay out just how it will create more standalone value.At 449 Swiss francs, or $489, a share, the cash-and-stock deal offers a decent 35 percent premium to the last share price. That equates to an impressive 26.5 times forward earnings, according to Thomson Reuters Starmine data, and comfortably tops analysts’ average price target of 357 francs.This is also a stock that has breached 400 francs only for a brief period in early 2013. Syngenta, based in Switzerland, has since floundered. The shares have lost nearly 20 percent. Cheaper commodities have led farmers to cut back on expensive chemicals, while integrating its crop and seed businesses, and growing the latter, has proved costly. Syngenta’s gross margin has fallen more than 5 percentage points since 2008, UBS analysts say.It’s also not obvious that Monsanto could afford to pay much more. The premium already equates to about 10 billion francs. Taxed and capitalized, synergies of perhaps $750 million a year might be worth roughly half that, a Breakingviews calculation suggests.That’s not to say this would be easy. Antitrust scrutiny is inevitable and could lead to forced sales in areas like corn in the United States. Liberum analysts reckon that American regulators could panic at seeing two agricultural market leaders combined. And Monsanto is courting political controversy, because of the deal’s likely tax benefits and because Syngenta is one of Switzerland’s most prized blue chips.Integration could also be painful – which could also hit Syngenta investors, who will be paid 55 percent in stock. For example, Syngenta spent four years meshing together its crop and seed units. Ripping them apart could disrupt sales and dent synergies.Still, this looks attractive. Syngenta already plans to cut costs and raise margins by 2018, and it should benefit long-term from population growth. But it needs to do more to explain how it can create more value on its own.Neil Unmack is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement