By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMAY 8, 2015
Fried chicken is in and “modern-day roadside” burgers are out — at least on Wall Street.Investors flocked to shares of Bojangles’ in the company’s market debut on Friday while appearing to desert Shake Shack, the last fast-food darling to go public this year.As of midmorning, Bojangles’s stock was trading at $24.17, up 27 percent from its initial public offering price, which was already at the top of a heightened range.At that level, the purveyor of fried chicken and biscuits, which trades on the Nasdaq stock market under the ticker symbol BOJA, was valued at $867.7 million.In some ways, the enthusiasm for a nearly 40-year-old restaurant operator is unsurprising. Dining chains have been welcomed by the public markets over at least the last two years, at least on the first day of trading.AdvertisementThough Bojangles’ shares features like drive-through windows with traditional but embattled chains like McDonald’s, the company argues that the quality of its Homestyle Chicken Tenders and its Bo-Tato Rounds is closer to so-called fast-casual chains like Shake Shack and Zoe’s Kitchen.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That emphasis, the company contends, has been reflected in its financial results. The chain earned $26.1 million last year, up 7 percent compared with results in 2013 and up nearly sixfold from 2012.AdvertisementThe strong demand for shares of Bojangles’ has generated a tidy gain for the company’s main selling shareholder, the investment firm Advent International. The private equity shop stands to make at least $112 million from the I.P.O., and potentially more if the underwriters sell more stock through what’s known as a greenshoe to accommodate demand.Investors eagerly snapped up Bojangles’, but they ran away from Shake Shack for the third-consecutive day. Shares of the company, which went public to much fanfare this year — its stock more than doubled in its I.P.O. in January — dropped 6 percent on Friday morning, to $62.01. That decline came on top of a nearly 16 percent slide in the company’s shares on Wednesday and Thursday.Despite the slide, Shake Shack has retained its buoyant valuation with a market capitalization of about $2.25 billion. Its stock price remains nearly triple its I.P.O. price.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.