AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan SobleTOKYO — Takata, the Japanese auto supplier embroiled in a crisis over dangerously faulty airbags, said on Friday that it had put the worst of the financial damage behind it, even as it faces lawsuits and mounting pressure from United States regulators.Takata told its investors it expected to return to profit in its current fiscal year, which began in April, after a single year of losses because of the steep cost of recalls.Takata faces a growing number of legal challenges over the defective airbags, whose inflaters can burst when deployed, sending shards of metal flying toward a vehicle’s occupants. Six deaths and more than 100 injuries have been linked to the problem.The company acknowledged on Friday that its forecast for a return to profit was subject to considerable uncertainty as a result.“We recognize that there are risks related to future recalls and lawsuits,” said Yoichiro Nomura, the company’s chief financial officer. In March, three plaintiffs in Canada filed a suit seeking 2.4 billion Canadian dollars, or about $2 billion. Regarding its impact, Mr. Nomura said, “There is no way to rationally assess the ultimate financial scale, so we could not include it in our forecasts.”Impatient with Takata, American auto safety regulators are fining the company up to $14,000 a day to get it to cooperate more actively with investigators. Last month, the head of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Mark R. Rosekind, said Takata was still dragging its feet on recalls. He promised unspecified new action to get the company to move faster.More vehicles, including old models, have been recalled in the United States in 2014 than ever before. Explore the size and scope of the recalls, and find out if your car has been affected.“The endgame is pretty clear,” Mr. Rosekind said. “If all these airbags aren’t safe, then we need to make them safe.”While the defect problem remains far from resolved, Takata nonetheless said it believed that it had absorbed most of the financial impact.It reported a net loss of 29.5 billion yen, or $247 million, for the fiscal year that ended in March. It also suspended year-end dividend payments to investors.But for the current year, Takata said it expected to earn a profit of 20 billion yen.Tadashi Ono, an analyst at Japan Credit Rating Agency, said Takata was being aided by robust global car sales and the growing production that goes with it, and by a weak yen, which magnifies the value of revenue it earns outside Japan.The New York Times has exposed missteps and delays by automakers and federal safety regulators in responding to deadly defects in automobiles during what became a record year for recalls.But he cautioned that the lawsuits could undermine Takata’s rosy forecast, as could disputes with automakers over who should bear the cost of recalling millions of affected vehicles. Ten carmakers have been affected by the airbag issue.“Takata’s argument is that it’s up to carmakers to pay for recalls, but that’s not a settled issue,” he said. “It’s another risk factor.”Takata’s sales have grown throughout the crisis, although the rate of growth has fallen. Last year, revenue increased 15 percent, the company said, to 642 billion yen. It forecast additional growth of 9 percent this year.“There hasn’t been an immediate impact on our business” from the recall crisis, Mr. Nomura said. “But there will be some impact on airbag orders going forward.”Advertisement