AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsTwelve years before Al Roker started as a weather anchor for a CBS affiliate in Syracuse, Dianne White Clatto made broadcasting history in St. Louis. In 1962, according to industry colleagues, she became the first full-time black television weathercaster in the country. Ms. Clatto, who died at 76 on Monday at a retirement center in St. Louis, broke into television by way of radio. She was a manager for Avon, the cosmetics company, and hosted a live radio show when Russ David, a bandleader with whom she sang in an impromptu performance on the air, referred her to an executive of KSD-TV in St. Louis. She was hired as a $75-a-week “weathergirl” in 1962. “What am I supposed to do?” she recalled asking her new bosses, in an interview with the Weather Channel. “They said to me, ‘This is called television.’ They said to me, ‘When those two red lights come on, start talking.’ And I said, ‘About what?’ And they said, ‘Preferably something about the weather.’ ” Dianne Elizabeth Johnson was born in St. Louis on Dec. 28, 1938, the daughter of Milton and Nettie Johnson and a descendant of a Civil War general’s slave mistress. She was among the first black students to enroll at the University of Missouri at Columbia. She was also the first black model for a St. Louis department store, Stix, Baer & Fuller, and, not long after leaving the university in 1959, was hired as a radio host. Stations in St. Louis and Memphis broadcast her program. When she was auditioning at KSD for the job of weathergirl on the 10 p.m. news, one of her several competitors was Mary Frann, another St. Louis native, who later played Bob Newhart’s wife on his hit 1980s sitcom, “Newhart.” Ms. Clatto was soon training with the National Weather Service, the Weather Corporation of America and the KSD weathercaster Howard DeMere, but she held on to her job with Avon until she filled the television slot seven days a week and her salary doubled. (KSD is now KSDK.)After 12 years, when weathergirls went out of fashion — primarily in favor of meteorologists, most of whom were men — she began reporting news and features. Fired in 1986, she sued the station, charging it with age discrimination, and later settled. In 1988, she was charged with larceny after a bank incorrectly credited her account with $111,000. She pleaded guilty, saying she mistook the credit for the proceeds of the settlement of her lawsuit. The court required her to pay $50,000 in restitution, but she insisted on returning the full amount. She later worked as an assistant to Mayor Francis G. Slay of St. Louis and was the host of local radio and cable television programs. Ms. Clatto’s first two marriages ended in divorce. Her third husband, John Clatto, died in 1997. She is survived by her son, John, who confirmed her death, and two grandchildren. No cause of death was given.Establishing whether Ms. Clatto was actually the nation’s first full-time black weathercaster is problematic. “I have checked with numerous sources, and they all agree: She was the first black female weathercaster on television in the United States,” said Bob Butler, a reporter with KCBS Radio in San Francisco and the president of the National Association of Black Journalists. An article in the Sept. 4, 1963, issue of Variety headlined “St. Louis’s KSD-TV Sepia Weather Gal” said she would be “the first of her race to be booked as regular on-the-air talent in some years at a local commercial TV station here.”Jet magazine unequivocally credits Trudy Haynes, a New York native, as the nation’s first black weathercaster and television reporter. She joined WXYZ in Detroit in September 1963. But Ms. Haynes said in an interview that if Ms. Clatto began in 1962, then she would have indeed been the first. The reference guide “Contemporary Black Biography” describes June Bacon-Bercey as the first black female television meteorologist in the country, in Buffalo in 1970. (That was the same year that John Amos began playing Gordy Howard, the black weatherman on “The Mary Tyler Moore Show.”)“Weather on the Air: A History of Broadcast Meteorology,” by Robert Henson, says only that Steve Baskerville became the first black weathercaster on network television, for the “CBS Morning News,” in 1984. And in 1996, Mr. Roker began working as the regular weekday weather anchor on the “Today” show. Ms. Clatto was unquestionably a hometown pioneer who, she told The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, “felt the weight of the world on my shoulders” as a role model during her early years of broadcasting.“She had a very strong personality, and coming along in a time when she came along, I think you had to be pretty tough-minded and tough-willed,” her son said. She never relented. She wrote her own obituary, paid for her funeral in advance, declined a memorial service and donated her body to Washington University School of Medicine. Advertisement