
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
MAY 7, 2015
There was plenty of fanfare last August when Bank of America agreed to a record $16.7 billion settlement with the Justice Department over dubious mortgage practices. Prosecutors crowed about the deal, which required the bank to provide $7 billion of consumer relief — including such things as loan modifications — over the ensuing four years.But now that the settlement has faded from the public eye, questions are arising about whether the promised assistance is actually getting to the right people and whether the bank will be allowed to claim credit for consumer relief that far exceeds its actual value.The details are complex but worth delving into, given the importance of the issue. In the settlement, Bank of America is required to make a wide array of loans more affordable for borrowers. The bank was expected to forgive or reduce the amounts owed on the first and second mortgages it held. In exchange, the bank would receive credit for these reductions in dollar amounts outlined in the settlement.Bank of America, in pursuing its goals, has told a number of borrowers that it intends to “forgive” some loans that have been discharged in borrowers’ bankruptcies. But that debt has already been forgiven.AdvertisementPatti Coleman, a Florida borrower, received a letter from Bank of America this year. In it, the bank told Ms. Coleman it was pleased to approve her “for a full principal forgiveness” of $54,732 in a home equity line of credit. Citing the Justice Department settlement as the impetus for the letter, the bank said she would “no longer owe” that amount.AdvertisementBut Ms. Coleman has not owed this money since she filed for personal bankruptcy in 2010. “In my Chapter 7 filing, the debt was extinguished,” she said in an interview on Tuesday. “They can’t come back to me and try to collect.”The letter to Ms. Coleman does note that if her debt has been discharged under bankruptcy law, she is not personally liable for it. But given that the amount would probably be automatically counted unless she called the bank to opt out suggests that there will be many cases in which Bank of America ends up claiming credit for such loan forgiveness actions under the Justice Department deal.Richard Simon, a Bank of America spokesman, contended that the bank’s offer to Ms. Coleman was valuable because it would give her clear title to the property by eliminating the lien the bank still holds on it. “The vast majority of customers benefit when their second lien is extinguished,” he said.When asked if Bank of America would be submitting the $54,732 that Ms. Coleman no longer owes on her home equity loan for credit under the settlement, Mr. Simon said that he could not comment on a specific client. But he said that in situations like hers, crediting would be limited to a maximum of 40 percent of the total amount extinguished.But John Rao, a lawyer at the National Consumer Law Center in Boston, said receiving credit for 40 percent of this type of debt was excessive. "The likelihood that the bank could recover anything on the vast majority of these second mortgages is virtually nothing,” he said.The letters from Bank of America may be emerging now because the bank receives extra credit under the settlement — more than one dollar for every dollar of loans forgiven — if it provides certain types of relief by Aug. 31.Chip Parker, a lawyer at Parker & DuFresne in Jacksonville, Fla., said seven of his clients had received such letters from the bank, offering a total of $731,000 in forgiveness on loans involving bankruptcies. And when he asked consumer bankruptcy lawyers attending an April meeting in Chicago how many had clients who received these letters, Mr. Parker said over 100 raised their hands.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Releasing a debt that has already been discharged is not in the spirit of the settlement,” Mr. Parker said. “My concern is that the bank will use these cases to avoid having to give true principal reductions to people who need it.”AdvertisementMr. Parker said he was also concerned that Bank of America might overstate the consumer relief it was providing in cases where borrowers were repaying their unsecured debts in a court-approved bankruptcy plan. Under these arrangements, home equity lines of credit are combined with a consumer’s other unsecured obligations, like credit card debt. Then, a multiyear payment plan is drawn up, based on the consumer’s disposable income.Because troubled borrowers often have many unsecured debts, such cases would typically generate far less for Bank of America, often as little as 10 percent of the outstanding value on a second lien. Still, Mr. Parker said, the bank may try to submit the entire amount for credit.“These settlements always look better on paper,” he said.Eric D. Green, a retired Boston University law professor, is the independent monitor charged with overseeing Bank of America’s performance under the settlement. He is responsible for validating the bank’s claims for credit under the consumer assistance part of the agreement.In an interview Tuesday, Mr. Green, who has served as a court-appointed mediator and special master in hundreds of cases, said the bank had not yet submitted claims for credit under the settlement.“We are working out the definitions and methodology of checking the credits the bank seeks,” Mr. Green said. Loans that have been discharged in bankruptcy will not be acceptable for credit, he said.Asked about Ms. Coleman’s case, Mr. Green surmised that it was an honest mistake. “Believe me, it is quite possible in the bank’s system of records that when they made that offer they were not aware of the bankruptcy,” Mr. Green said.Yet Mr. Simon, the bank spokesman, did not indicate that the bank erred with Ms. Coleman. “The offer is consistent with the requirements of the settlement,” he said.Mr. Green’s office will file periodic reports on the bank’s progress in these efforts. His first report came out in February; another is expected in late July.The potential that Bank of America may submit questionable credits under the settlement points to a flaw in its design, Mr. Rao, the consumer law advocate, said. It should not require the monitor to ferret out the incorrect ones case by case.Advertisement“The easier way to deal with this would have been not to give banks credit for anything that’s being treated in a bankruptcy,” Mr. Rao said. “That way, the banks would have been compelled to separate all the bankruptcy debt upfront.”A version of this article appears in print on May 10, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Credit Sought Where Credit Is Not Due.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »