

      By KELLY COUTURIER

MAY 11, 2015

As one of the most popular and dominant reality shows to appear on television, “American Idol” has made a habit of creating stars. Among them, some have managed to ride their “Idol” fame to bigger singing and acting careers, while others have struggled to make a name for themselves beyond the show.The first winner of “American Idol,” Ms. Clarkson has had three albums reach No. 1 on Billboard’s album chart, including her latest, “Piece by Piece,” which was released in March.The R&B, pop and gospel singer beat out Clay Aiken to win the contest in the show’s second season. He has released six albums, including “Unconditional Love” last year. He also appeared on NBC’s "The Biggest Loser" in 2013. A runner-up on “Idol,” Mr. Aiken also came in as runner-up in the 2014 midterm congressional elections in North Carolina, where he ran unsuccessfully for a House seat. His campaign has been turned into a four-hour documentary series, called “The Runner-Up,” which began airing last month on the Esquire Network.The winner of the third season, Ms. Barrino played herself in a Lifetime movie about her rise from teenage mother to “American Idol.” More recently she starred in “After Midnight” on Broadway. The singer is currently on tour in the United States.
Ms. Hudson’s performance on “Idol” was impressive enough to help her make the leap to film and television. She won an Academy Award in 2007 for her performance in “Dreamgirls.”  She has recently been seen in the hit TV show “Empire,” and will join the cast of a revival production of “The Color Purple” coming to Broadway this fall.The Oklahoma college student took the top prize in the fourth season of “Idol,” and has gone on to become one of the top country music singers of the last decade. She has sold more than 15 million albums and more than 33 million song downloads in the United States, and has won seven Grammys.Ms. McPhee’s self-titled record opened in 2007 at No. 2 on the Billboard album chart. But a year later she was dropped by her label, RCA, and her second release, “Unbroken,” opened at No. 27 with 15,000 sales. Recently, she has starred in “Scorpion,” a show on CBS that features a group of awkward geniuses who use technology to battle wrongdoers.Chris Daughtry’s  appearance on “American Idol” propelled him to stardom with a band that bears his surname. He has sold more than 7 million albums, and more than 15 million song downloads, according to Nielsen.Ms. Sparks won the contest when she was 17, and she capitalized on the acclaim by selling more than a million copies of her self-titled debut album. But her sophomore release in 2009 was far less successful, and she made a jump to the big screen in 2012, starring alongside Whitney Houston in the remake of the 1976 film “Sparkle.” A contender on the show’s eighth season, Mr. Lambert has most recently been seen touring with the band  Queen, taking Freddie Mercury’s spot as lead vocalist, in front of the guitarist Brian May and the drummer Roger Taylor.When it comes to how well “American Idol” winners and finalists will ultimately fare in the music marketplace, stardom is far from a sure thing.AdvertisementWhen it comes to how well “American Idol” winners and finalists will ultimately fare in the music marketplace, stardom is far from a sure thing.