AdvertisementSupported byBy Steve LohrFrank DiPascali Jr., a top lieutenant to Bernard L. Madoff, who helped carry out one of the biggest frauds in Wall Street history, died on Thursday. He was 58.The cause was lung cancer, said his lawyer, Marc L. Mukasey, who declined to say where Mr. DiPascali had died.Mr. DiPascali had been out on bail, awaiting a sentencing hearing in September. After pleading guilty in 2009 to 10 felony counts, including conspiracy and tax evasion, Mr. DiPascali faced a prison term of up to 125 years, a sentence he hoped to have significantly reduced because of his extensive cooperation with federal prosecutors. In a letter to the court in 2010, prosecutors said Mr. DiPascali had “already provided substantial assistance to the government in its investigation.”Mr. DiPascali, Mr. Mukasey said in a brief statement on Sunday, had been “grateful to have been able to make some amends by helping the government these past few years.”In his court testimony in August 2009, when he pleaded guilty, Mr. DiPascali described himself as a “kid from Queens” who landed a job with a rising young financial whiz, Mr. Madoff. That opportunity came by way of a neighbor. He grew up next door to Mr. Madoff’s personal secretary, Annette Bongiorno. She provided the introduction, and Mr. DiPascali joined Mr. Madoff’s firm in 1975, after he graduated from Archbishop Molloy High School in Queens.Mr. DiPascali rose steadily in the firm to eventually become its chief financial officer. Along the way, he became close to Mr. Madoff, whom Mr. DiPascali described as “a mentor to me and a lot more.” His allegiance to his mentor, he suggested, led him astray. “I was loyal to him,” Mr. DiPascali said. “I ended up being loyal to a terrible, terrible fault.”In his court testimony, he said that for at least 20 years he had helped Mr. Madoff carry out a vast financial fraud that prosecutors estimated at $65 billion, including the fictitious profits claimed over the years. The Ponzi scheme, Mr. DiPascali testified, involved using historical stock data from the Internet to create fake trade records and sending bogus account statements, among other tactics.“I knew it was criminal, and I did it anyway,” Mr. DiPascali told the court.That day, he also expressed his remorse. “I apologize to every victim of this catastrophe and to my family and to the government,” Mr. DiPascali said. “I am very, very sorry.” As part of a bail agreement in 2010, Mr. DiPascali and his family agreed to give up nearly all of their assets, worth millions, including their house in Bridgewater, N.J. His wife, Joanne, was allowed to keep $178,000. Mr. DiPascali, according to court testimony, had four children — Gregory, Frank, Michael and Dorothy.Advertisement