By ANDREW POLLACKMAY 10, 2015
Years ago, curing AIDS was considered so out of the question that some scientists dared not even mention the possibility.But in the latest sign that attitudes are changing, the British pharmaceutical giant GlaxoSmithKline is teaming up with the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill to start a research institute and a company aimed at curing H.I.V. infection and AIDS.In an agreement set to be announced on Monday, GlaxoSmithKline will contribute $4 million annually over five years to the research center, set up on the North Carolina campus. It will also move a small number of its own scientists to Chapel Hill.The company and the university will each own half of the new company, Qura Therapeutics, which will have the rights to commercialize any discoveries. The effort will be separate from ViiV Healthcare, the company owned by Glaxo, Pfizer and Shionogi that develops and sells drugs that control, but do not cure, H.I.V.AdvertisementThe arrangement is part of a trend in which pharmaceutical companies are working directly with university researchers. Novartis and the University of Pennsylvania, for instance, are building a research center on the Philadelphia campus to work on ways to genetically alter a patient’s immune cells to battle cancer.AdvertisementBut while the University of Pennsylvania partnership is already producing striking remissions in some cancer patients, the attempt to cure H.I.V. is expected to take far longer and may fall short. The $20 million being contributed is a small sum for a company like Glaxo, which spent close to $5 billion on research and development last year.“We really feel like we are in the very beginning discovery phase,” said Dr. David Margolis, a professor of medicine at the University of North Carolina who will lead the university’s effort. “I can’t see something popping up that is going to be broadly successful in the next five to 10 years.”What makes a cure so difficult is that H.I.V. hides in a dormant state in certain cells of the body and can spring back to life if a patient stops taking antiviral drugs.One man, Timothy Ray Brown, the so-called Berlin patient, has been considered cured by a bone-marrow transplant from a donor with a genetic mutation that makes immune system cells resistant to H.I.V. infection. That approach is considered impractical to apply on a wide scale but has given the field hope.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The North Carolina researchers will focus on an approach known as shock and kill, which involves using drugs to wake up the latent virus, so that infected cells become visible to the immune system. Then, it is hoped therapies can be developed to direct the immune system to kill the infected cells.Dr. Margolis has been experimenting with vorinostat, a cancer drug, which can reverse the latency.But he said it was not clear if the effect was strong enough to alert the immune system to the presence of the infected cells.Academic collaborations are already working on H.I.V. cures, and some companies are entering the field as well.Gilead Sciences, the leading supplier of drugs to treat H.I.V., has begun a small study in H.I.V. patients of GS-9620, a drug that stimulates the immune system and showed signs of reversing viral latency in monkeys.AdvertisementSangamo BioSciences is testing an approach that genetically alters patients’ immune cells so they become resistant to H.I.V. infection.Zhi Hong, who heads infectious disease therapy research at Glaxo, said the new research collaboration might be opened to researchers elsewhere, perhaps even to other companies, given the great challenges involved.“Many of us believe if you leave one virus behind, it will compromise your cure,” he said. But he said the example of the Berlin patient showed that “our probability of success is at least greater than zero percent.”A version of this article appears in print on May 11, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Drugmaker and University Ally to Seek Cure for AIDS.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.