By JOHN KOBLINMAY 10, 2015
As the major television networks prepare to showcase their lineups for the fall season in pursuit of advertisers, each has successes it will trumpet, new shows it hopes will generate excitement and weak spots it needs to address. Here is some of what to expect from this week’s upfront presentations in Manhattan.WHAT’S WORKING The network’s stable of hits, from “The Big Bang Theory” to “Criminal Minds,” continue to hold their own. The rookie shows “Scorpion” and “NCIS: New Orleans” were both strong from the start, and the addition of “Thursday Night Football” provided a ratings boon for two months in the fall.WHAT’S NOT WORKING Several of CBS’s standby procedurals shows, like “Elementary” and “Hawaii Five-0,” are losing momentum. The dramas “Battle Creek” and “Stalker” both fizzled. And with “Two and a Half Men” off the air and “The Big Bang Theory” entering its ninth season, attempts to restock the comedy cupboard with shows like “The Millers” and “The McCarthys” failed.WHAT WILL HAPPEN AT THE UPFRONTS CBS is entering the comic-book genre game by picking up “Supergirl,” which is produced by Greg Berlanti, one of TV’s hottest showrunners. The network is also adding a medical drama, “Code Black,” that it has high hopes for, and — surprise — another spinoff from one of its franchises, this one from “Criminal Minds.” The network will also pick up a Jane Lynch comedy, “Angel From Hell.”WHAT’S WORKING The hip-hop soap opera “Empire” was the story of the year in television. The drama from Lee Daniels and Danny Strong was a ratings hit from beginning to end, with an eye-popping 10 consecutive weeks of viewership growth. Even rival executives cheered its success, giving them hope that bona fide hits on network television were still possible. Elsewhere, Fox’s Sunday-night animated block, from “The Simpsons” to “Bob’s Burgers,” still draws in viewers. “Gotham” gave the network entry into the comic-book genre, and Will Forte’s comedy “The Last Man on Earth” has shown ratings promise.AdvertisementWHAT’S NOT WORKING Once a strength, reality shows are now a weak spot. “Utopia” — where people were moved to a remote part of California and tasked with building a new society — was an expensive disaster for the network and canceled after just two months. The celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay is usually a sure thing, but the ratings for “Hell’s Kitchen” are relatively soft. A slew of dramas and comedies fizzled: “Glee” quietly went off the air, “The Mindy Project” was canceled, “New Girl” is struggling and the dramas “Backstrom” and “Red Band Society” both did poorly.AdvertisementWHAT WILL HAPPEN AT THE UPFRONTS Fox is turning back to Ryan Murphy with a new show, “Scream Queens,” starring Emma Roberts and Jamie Lee Curtis. And as it did with “Sleepy Hollow” and “Gotham,” Fox is picking up shows that were inspired by movies and books, including “Minority Report,” based on the movie with Tom Cruise, and “Lucifer,” based on a DC comic. The network is also bringing back “The X-Files” as a limited series, with production starting this summer.WHAT’S WORKING Quite a bit. ABC’s bet on shows with diverse casts paid off. “Black-ish,” “Fresh Off the Boat” and Shonda Rhimes’s “How to Get Away With Murder” all had strong first years. Ms. Rhimes’s empire, which includes “Grey’s Anatomy” and “Scandal,” continues to deliver for the network, and the shows have given ABC a strong foothold on Thursday nights. Dependable shows like “The Bachelor,” “Shark Tank” and “Modern Family” continue to motor along.WHAT’S NOT WORKING Despite Marvel’s success on the big screen, comic-book shows were not the slam dunk that ABC was hoping for. The ratings for “Marvel’s Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.” fell in the 18-to-49-year-old demographic that excites advertisers, and “Marvel’s Agent Carter” performed sluggishly.WHAT WILL HAPPEN AT THE UPFRONTS ABC’s centerpiece will be its prime-time revival of “The Muppet Show,” a reboot that it promises will yield a “more adult” program. Ms. Rhimes is adding a fourth show, the legal thriller “The Catch.” ABC will also offer a lot more serialized storytelling with the F.B.I. drama “Quantico,” the political thriller “The Family” and the crime drama “Wicked City.”WHAT’S WORKING “Sunday Night Football” is still the No. 1 rated show on TV, and “The Voice” continues to plug along. The network is seeing solid returns from the NBC stalwart Dick Wolf (“Law & Order”) and his Chicago franchise, “Chicago Fire” and “Chicago P.D.”WHAT’S NOT WORKING NBC’s ratings continue to slide and many of its new shows performed poorly. The network has been hurt by its inability to produce any half-hour comedies of note. And several dramas flopped, including “Allegiance,” “Constantine” and “The Slap.” Other rookie shows that failed and have been canceled include “About a Boy,” “Marry Me,” “One Big Happy” and Katherine Heigl’s “State of Affairs.”WHAT WILL HAPPEN AT THE UPFRONTSNeil Patrick Harris wants to be known as his generation’s Ed Sullivan, and his variety show will come to the fall schedule this year. The network is also resurrecting “Heroes” with “Heroes Reborn.” NBC is picking up a show from Mr. Berlanti, called “Blindspot.” The network is ordering another show from Mr. Wolf, “Chicago Med,” and bringing back the Craig T. Nelson show “Coach,” which originally ran on ABC in the 1990s. Jennifer Lopez and Eva Longoria will star in two straight-to-series pickups, “Shades of Blue” and “Telenovela,” respectively.A version of this article appears in print on May 11, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Broadcast TV’s Big 4 Review Their Wins and Losses and Plan Their Pitches for the Coming Fall Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.