AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.01 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.08 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $527.6 million of debt securities. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAlaska Municipal Bond Bank, $88.2 million of general obligation and refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Austin, Tex., Electric Utility System, $404 million of revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Brunswick County, N.C., $67.3 million of enterprise systems revenue and refinancing bonds. Robert W. Baird. California Statewide Communities Development Authority, $52.7 million of revenue bonds. Ziegler. Charity Health System Obligated Group, N.Y., $122.3 million of taxable bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Charlotte, N.C., $84.8 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America. Chippewa Valley, Mich., Schools, $296.3 million of refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Connecticut, $500 million of general obligation bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Crowley Independent School District, Tex., $59 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. BOSC. El Paso County, Colo., $110 million of Colorado College project taxable debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities. Escondido, Calif., $64 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Franklin County, Ohio, $65.9 million of general obligation limited tax refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Fremont Union High School District, Calif., $150.9 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley. Grays Harbor County, Wash., Public Utility District, $66.7 million of electric revenue and refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Grossmont Union High School District, Calif., $70 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Harris County, Tex., Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, $193.9 million of hospital revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Illinois Finance Authority, $120.3 million of Northwestern University revenue bonds. Bank of America. Indio, Calif., Water Authority, $56.5 million of water revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. Las Vegas Valley Water District, Nev., $388.1 million of general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. Louisiana Public Facilities Authority, $94.4 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Mid Bay Bridge Authority, Fla., $279 million of revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Montgomery County, Pa., $147.8 million of pollution control revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Montgomery County Industrial Development Authority, Pa., $217.7 million of Exelon Generation pollution control revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. New Jersey Higher Education Student Assistance Authority, $180 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America. New York Dormitory Authority, $127.6 million of school district revenue bonds. Jefferies.Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, $495.6 million of turnpike revenue bonds. Loop Capital Markets. Plano, Tex., $77.3 million of general obligation refinancing and improvement bonds. Raymond James.Poway, Calif., Unified School District, $63.6 million of special tax refinancing revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Sacramento City Unified School District, $65 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District, Ariz., $833 million of electric system revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.San Antonio, Tex., Independent School District, $307.4 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Frost Bank. Tempe, Ariz., $88.9 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Tulsa, Okla., Municipal Airport Trust, $105.9 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital. Tustin, Calif., Unified School District, $83.8 million of special tax refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray. Vermont Municipal Bond Bank, $94.4 million of refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Virginia Resources Authority, $98.6 million of infrastructure and state moral obligation revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities. Washington State Housing Finance Commission, $69.9 million of taxable homeownership program refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets. West Ada Joint School District, Idaho, $96 million of debt securities. Piper Jaffray. Advertisement