AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — Few television companies will have a better story to tell advertisers during this week’s “upfront” presentations than Cartoon Network. According to Nielsen, ratings have climbed 16 percent over last year among children 2 to 11 even as its rival Nickelodeon has fallen 31 percent.“Our numbers are strong and getting stronger,” Christina Miller, president and general manager of Cartoon Network, said in an interview.But wait — wasn’t Nielsen supposed to be doing a terrible job measuring consumption of children’s television? Multiple media companies have been insisting that advertisers discount Nielsen, arguing that the measuring service is not adequately capturing the surge of viewing, particularly among children, on nontraditional platforms like tablets and smartphones.As ever, what networks think of Nielsen seems to depend on the direction of their ratings. Up: Nielsen numbers do not lie. Down: Nielsen needs to go. It is a dynamic that will be on vivid display this week in New York, when networks compete for roughly $20 billion in upfront ad spending for the 2015-16 season. Ratings will be sliced, diced, ignored, trumpeted and everything in between.When Cartoon Network goes before advertisers on Wednesday as part of an effort by its corporate parent, Turner Broadcasting, to secure the season’s ad sales, the children’s channel will not join the beat-up-on-Nielsen bandwagon. At least this year, Nielsen is Cartoon Network’s friend.That has not always been the case of late. Cartoon Network, available in 98 million homes in the United States and 194 overseas markets, has been a perennial force among boys 6 to 11, but that is about it. Nickelodeon, even in a diminished state, has remained the No. 1 children’s network over all. Disney Channel, which only sells limited sponsorships, has commanded the attention of girls 6 to 14.The upfronts shine a spotlight on the highly anticipated fall television season. How well do you know your television trivia, current and past?Ratings at Cartoon Network plunged a few years ago as Disney introduced a new advertising-supported cable channel aimed at boys, Disney XD, and Turner focused more intently on Adult Swim, the highly profitable operation that takes over Cartoon Network’s channel space starting at 8 p.m. Cartoon Network also blamed the sale of reruns to Netflix for lower ratings.But a turnaround — as evidenced by Nielsen data — may now be at hand.“They have tried to change their programming strategy to be a little more gender-agnostic, while not losing the tonality of who they are,” said Darcy Bowe, a vice president at Starcom USA, a firm that tells advertisers like Kellogg’s and Kraft where to spend advertising dollars. Ms. Bowe added of Cartoon Network, “We’re pleased with the growth we have seen.”Cartoon Network, home to animated hits like “Teen Titans Go!” and “The Amazing World of Gumball,” about a cat and his adopted goldfish brother, underwent a management shake-up last year. Ms. Miller came to the network from Turner Sports and NBA Digital. At the same time, a new program development strategy by Rob Sorcher, who took over as chief content officer in 2013, began to pay off.“In the past, there were some longer gaps of time between new series and how long it took for us to get fresh episodes on the air,” Ms. Miller said. She bluntly summed up her mandate for Cartoon Network: “With CNN, we’re one of two global brands at Turner. Act that way.”For his part, Mr. Sorcher pointed to a new short-form animation training program and an effort to embrace show creators who are younger and female. Women are behind eight of the 11 shorts in production at the moment, he said.“Rather than having the process be about talking and meetings and notes, we try to make it about drawing and doing and getting executives out of the way,” Mr. Sorcher said. “If I pay attention to the quality then everything else will follow — the viewers, the hits, the money, everything.”Mr. Sorcher was Cartoon Network’s first general manager, leaving in 1999 for various television jobs that took him to AMC, where he worked on “Breaking Bad” and “Mad Men.” It was under Mr. Sorcher that Cartoon Network first found original hits like “The Powerpuff Girls,” about three sugarcoated superheroes.As it seeks to attract more girls, Cartoon Network is bringing back Blossom, Bubbles and Buttercup: A new version of “The Powerpuff Girls” will arrive next year. (The original series ended its run of original episodes in 2005.) Additionally, the network this month unveiled its first original online series, “Mighty Magiswords,” about a brother-and-sister warrior team.Advertisement