By THE NEW YORK TIMESMAY 10, 2015
Here are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week.The Bank of England at noon on Monday will announce its decision on interest rates from the May 7-8 Monetary Policy Committee meeting. The bank is widely expected to keep the rate unchanged at 0.5 percent, where it has been since March 2009. With growth slowing in the first quarter — in part because of the uncertainty of the May 7 election — and inflation at zero percent, there is less pressure to raise rates. At the committee’s last meeting in April, the vote to keep rates at 0.5 percent was unanimous.On Wednesday, Mark Carney, the governor of the central bank, will give a speech outlining the bank’s inflation outlook. In February, Mr. Carney predicted inflation would fall below zero before rebounding, the result of falling energy and food prices. Analysts will look for changes in productivity, a crucial element in the bank’s decision of when to raise rates, and are not expecting an increase in rates until early to mid-2016. —Jenny Anderson A flurry of retailers, including Macy’s, Nordstrom and Kohl’s, report first-quarter earnings this week, and investors will be looking closely at how much the bleak winter and post-holiday fatigue may have weighed on their sales and bottom lines. Macy’s executives could also expand on recently announced plans to open four pilot off-price stores this fall in New York, a foray that is set to pit the department store against discount spinoffs from Nordstrom and Saks Fifth Avenue, as well as the discounters TJX, Burlington and Ross Stores. Macy’s announces earnings on Wednesday, and Nordstrom and Kohl’s on Thursday. —Hiroko TabuchiA monthslong battle between DuPont and the billionaire Nelson Peltz is scheduled to reach a climax on Wednesday, as shareholders in the industrial conglomerate vote on the company’s board. Mr. Peltz, who is seeking four seats, has argued that the two-century-old manufacturer has underperformed financially and needs a shake-up. The company has contended otherwise and accused the activist investor of offering no good alternative.AdvertisementThe two sides have broached settlement offers in the past, only to be spurned. It’s unclear whether the combatants will settle before the meeting. —Michael J. de la MercedAdvertisementPorsche Automobil Holding, which owns a controlling stake in the German carmaker Volkswagen, will hold its annual shareholder meeting in Stuttgart on Wednesday. The meeting will attract more attention than usual because of the chance that Ferdinand Piëch, a member of the family that controls Porsche Holding, will use the forum to try to reassert influence over Volkswagen.Mr. Piëch was ousted as chairman of the carmaker last month, but remains a member of the supervisory board of Porsche Holding along with other descendants of Ferdinand Porsche, founder of the sports car company that bears the family name. —Jack EwingThe Lloyds Banking Group will host its annual meeting in Edinburgh on Thursday after returning to profitability last year and as it prepares, later this month, to pay its first dividend since it received a government bailout during the financial crisis. As Lloyds’s prospects have improved, the British government has steadily reduced its stake in the lender and now owns about 20.95 percent of Lloyds.George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, also vowed in the run-up to the general election in Britain this year to sell a portion of the government’s Lloyds stake to retail investors, possibly this year. The government delayed plans in the fall to sell to retail investors in the face of turmoil in the markets. —Chad BrayA version of this article appears in print on May 11, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Retailers’ Results, Board Vote at DuPont and Shareholder Meetings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.