AdvertisementSupported byGlobal ManagerBy Sonia Kolesnikov-Jessop Jean-Briac Perrette  is president of Discovery Networks International, based in London.  Q. How much management or leadership experience did you get growing up?  A. In high school I played soccer, basketball and lacrosse, and I was the captain of the soccer and basketball teams. That’s probably the truest experience of leadership I got at a young age. At that age, you were chosen to lead by the coaches. Q. Why do you think you were picked?  A. There is an intangible element of leadership, I guess, being level-headed and fairly unemotional, taking a more rational approach and having good relationships with the majority of my team. I was described early on by one of my teachers as a “rock people would lean on.” I was fair and trustworthy, but also ultimately I was a good performer. You have to have someone that people can look up to, not just for the values, but also for performance. Q. What did you learn from this early experience?  A. That people are motivated by different things. Some were motivated by winning, some hated losing, and some wanted the game to be over so they could go do something else. The same is true in a work environment, which means ultimately you need to adopt a tailored approach. When people talk about leadership style, yes, there is an overarching style, but you need to understand how motivation works. A “kick in the arse” style that works with one person may be absolutely the wrong approach with somebody else. I’m always trying to understand what motivates different people and how I can help them achieve their goals. Q. Early on in your career, you joined the General Electric rotational leadership program, which helps train the company’s next generation of leaders. What did you learn from that?  A. The first big lesson was learning how to influence and implement change. The program involved traveling 100 percent of the time, and at the age of 24, I loved that idea. I gave up my apartment in London and lived out of hotels for four years. We would rotate projects every four months, each covering a new aspect of change management. Unlike a consultant, the expectation was to not only give advice, but also to implement it. To make an impact in just four months is daunting.The first lesson I learned was about achieving buy-in and understanding how to sell recommendations — for instance, using data to influence change. Secondly, in those four years, we worked both informally on projects as a team as well as formally from a leadership standpoint, always working with the C.E.O. in each of the assigned groups. This resulted in continual exposure to very varied management styles, helping us to learn quickly what to do — and what not to do — from a leadership perspective.The third lesson was believing very firmly in feedback and the 360 program. This is a process where you get feedback from everyone on your team — managers, peers and subordinates. We were regularly evaluated by our teams and the business in an open conference room setting. We learned self-awareness. It was valuable to understand and accept what you are good at — and what you’re not good at — from having members of your team openly critique you, a minimum of six times a year over four years. That was priceless.  Q. Fast-forward 15 years. How do you implement these lessons today?  A. In the early stages of a career, you’re turning stuff on and off: “I shouldn’t have done that, never do that again,” or “I should have definitely done more of that.” So you’re refining with a chisel and a hammer. Later in your career, hopefully you’ve figured out the big definition of the sculpture and from that point, you start to actually finesse. I’m constantly trying to improve myself and my team. It is important to not let feedback become a formality that people dread rather than something that actually helps somebody. So in performance reviews, I’m a big believer in focusing on two or three skill sets — not on the business objectives, but on the personal objectives, like written communication, or the need to synthesize information better, or provide better use of data to support your answers. It is important to give people true feedback and be very honest. And you do it in a nonjudgmental way that people can appreciate. Q. Do you give that feedback differently according to culture?  A. Yes and no. Discovery has a unique corporate culture: It’s purpose-driven, and a big believer in team versus ego, which is fairly unique for media companies. No matter if you’re meeting someone running an office in China, Japan or Brazil, there is an element of consistency to the values of the person and the way they lead their teams. Yes, the Japanese will be a little bit different from the French or Brazilians, but they are all more interested in the “Did we win?” rather than the “Did I win?”  Q. You mentioned learning what not to do.  A. Sometimes people share what they know versus what is needed to know. For instance, I have witnessed in executive presentations that there is a desire to demonstrate all of the things that the speaker knows. But it is important to remember that you’re in a meeting to make a decision, to drive an action. So the point is, do not give us all the information, but give us the relevant information in context and let’s make a decision. Q. And the flip side: What should you do?  A. Keep it simple. Start by looking at what’s required to make the decision, then work backwards to what you need to get that answer. Companies live and die, ultimately, by the speed in which they act. The simpler you can make it, the faster the decision can be made, and the sooner the result can be evaluated.Advertisement