AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — Alexandre Lamfalussy, a Hungarian-born economist and banker considered a founding father of the euro, died on Saturday in Ottignies, Belgium. He was 86.His son Christophe confirmed his death but did not provide the cause.Mr. Lamfalussy was the founding president of the European Monetary Institute, which later became the European Central Bank and which now oversees the eurozone monetary system.As president of the institute, Mr. Lamfalussy assembled the core of the multinational staff that started the common currency, and he gave the euro much of its intellectual underpinnings. He helped devise the rules on debt and spending that govern membership in the eurozone and was even involved in designing the bank notes.“Alexandre Lamfalussy’s name will always be inextricably connected with the single currency and the European Central Bank,” the central bank said in a statement on Monday. “He guided the immense and unprecedented preparatory work for the establishment of the E.C.B. in July 1998 and the launch of the single currency in January 1999.”Ivo Maes, a senior adviser at the National Bank of Belgium, described Mr. Lamfalussy as a member of a generation determined not to repeat the experience of World War II. He was a “very convinced European,” said Professor Maes, who teaches at the University of Louvain and has written extensively about Mr. Lamfalussy’s work.Mr. Lamfalussy rarely appeared in public in recent years because of poor health and said little about the crisis that has enveloped the eurozone since 2010. But in his last public appearance, at an economic conference in February 2014, he criticized contemporary political leaders as not being as committed to the euro as those who created it in the 1990s.“I think they are unlikely to have so strong a vested interest in the successful continuation of a project that was initiated by their predecessors,” Mr. Lamfalussy said, according to a transcript of his remarks.Mr. Lamfalussy was born on April 26, 1929, in Kapuvar, a village in Hungary near the border with Austria. He spent his childhood in Lenti, in the southwestern part of the country, where his father was a forestry engineer for a large landowner.In 1949, dismayed at increasing repression under the postwar Communist government, Mr. Lamfalussy and three friends crossed the border into Austria, taking advantage of a heavy snowfall that had prompted border guards to suspend patrols.With the help of Benedictine monks, Mr. Lamfalussy and his friends made their way to Belgium, where he studied economics at the University of Louvain. He later earned a doctorate from Nuffield College at Oxford and taught at Yale University in 1961-62.While studying for his doctorate, Mr. Lamfalussy began work as an economist for the Banque de Bruxelles, a commercial bank in Belgium that has since been absorbed by ING Group. He rose to become chairman of the executive board but resigned in 1975 after taking responsibility for a large loss in foreign exchange trading.The debacle helped instill in Mr. Lamfalussy a mistrust of financial markets and made him an advocate of vigorous oversight of banks.In 1976, Mr. Lamfalussy, who had continued to teach, became an economist at the Bank for International Settlements, or B.I.S., a clearinghouse for central banks, in Basel, Switzerland. He was its general manager from 1985 to 1993, when he was named president of the European Monetary Institute and put in charge of completing the euro project.The new currency met huge skepticism at first. In memoirs dictated to his son Christophe, Professor Maes and Sabine Peters, Mr. Lamfalussy recalled speaking to financial professionals in New York in 1994. What few people were in the audience, he said, “were looking at me and thinking, ‘Poor guy, what has he got himself into?’ ”In 1998, on the eve of the euro’s introduction, Mr. Lamfalussy turned down an offer to become the first president of the European Central Bank, saying that at almost 70 he was too old. But he remained active in bank regulation issues and, in 2004, publicly advocated giving the central bank supervisory authority over eurozone commercial lenders.A decade later, after a crisis had exposed the weaknesses of Europe’s fragmented banking system, political leaders adopted his suggestion. In addition to his son Christophe, Mr. Lamfalussy is survived by his wife, Anne-Marie Cochard; three other children, Isabelle, Laurence and Jérôme; 12 grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren.In recent years Mr. Lamfalussy faulted German and French leaders for violating limits on debt and spending. He said they had set a precedent for Greece to wildly exceed the limits and touch off the eurozone crisis.In his memoirs, Mr. Lamfalussy advocated giving the European Central Bank more powers and entertained the idea of Greece leaving the euro. But he remained a believer in the currency union.“I think that the violent destruction of the system would have such disastrous consequences for the world,” he said, “that it is unthinkable that serious and intelligent people would not do everything to prevent it.”Advertisement