AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningLawyers are often accused of elevating procedure over substance, emphasizing the need to follow the rules over reaching the proper outcome in a case. In dealing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the focus lately has been arguing about where an action is filed, on the theory that picking the forum can be half the battle.The issue is straightforward enough: Should charges of securities fraud and other violations be conducted in a federal district court or before an administrative law judge employed by the commission? For cases that have not been settled, defendants generally prefer to litigate in federal court because of the rights afforded there, including broad discovery procedures and an independent federal judge and jury to decide the case. The adoption of the Dodd-Frank Act in 2010 allows the S.E.C. to seek most remedies in the administrative forum, which involves a much more expedited proceeding that generally limits discovery by the parties to the evidence gathered during an investigation.The S.E.C. has almost unfettered discretion to choose where a case will be litigated, much to the chagrin of defense lawyers who complain that an administrative adjudication deprives their clients of valuable rights. In response to those complaints, the agency’s enforcement division, which is responsible for recommending to the five commissioners where to file a case, issued guidance last week about which forum it will chose when a case will be contested.Unfortunately, the considerations outlined by the S.E.C. provide scant concrete information about which forum will decide the case. Indeed, the guidance may cause even greater consternation among defense lawyers who see the agency sending the toughest cases to its own judges to develop the law as it prefers rather than using federal district judges, who may be less amenable to its arguments.One consideration described by the S.E.C. is whether a particular remedy is available only in federal court or in an administrative hearing. For example, an emergency freezing of assets can be issued only by a federal court, while barring a broker from the securities industry can be ordered only by an administrative law judge. Similarly, a claim of a failure to supervise is limited to an administrative proceeding, while one based on controlling person liability must be filed in federal court. In effect, the S.E.C. has said that if circumstances force it to pick a particular forum, then it will do so – a point so obvious as to be almost unnecessary to explain.Similarly, cases against brokers and investment advisers, along with their employees, have traditionally been pursued in administrative proceedings. Because certain remedies can be pursued only in that forum, it is the preferred means to litigate a case, even when there are claims of fraud, rather than going to a federal court first and then filing a separate administrative complaint.Another consideration is the “cost-, resource- and time-effectiveness of litigation in each forum.” The benefit of an administrative proceeding is a quicker resolution because the S.E.C.’s rules generally mandate an initial decision within no more than 300 days of filing, far quicker than federal court cases that can take years to resolve.The S.E.C. appears to view administrative proceedings as roughly equivalent of federal court actions, pointing to the discovery procedures provided in both, even if those available in the administrative context are more limited. Defense lawyers take a different view, however, arguing that discovery is a means to build the defense case and expose weaknesses in the S.E.C.’s evidence, something that is much more difficult to do when the administrative forum is chosen.Perhaps the greatest complaint on this front is the unavailability of a federal judge to decide the law as an initial matter and a jury to determine whether there was a violation. The S.E.C.’s guidance makes no mention of the absence of a jury, or that the first level of appeal are the five commissioners who approved the filing of the charges in the first place before it ever reaches a federal court.The persistent complaint lodged by defendants has been that administrative proceedings give the S.E.C. too much of a “home court” advantage. A recent Wall Street Journal study found that the S.E.C. won in 90 percent of its cases before administrative judges from October 2010 to March 2015, compared with 69 percent of the cases filed in federal court during that period.Whether that demonstrates a major advantage in the administrative forum is open to question because the S.E.C. has in the past tended to pursue smaller cases with narrow issues before administrative judges, especially those involving individual brokers and investment advisers, so the likelihood of success may have been much higher. Nevertheless, the difference feeds the perception – whether true or not – that the S.E.C. picks the forum where it has a better chance of winning if it can.The S.E.C.’s final consideration in choosing the forum may well add to the belief that it wants to control the process. When there are “unsettled and complex legal issues” in a matter, then it will consider whether “obtaining a commission decision on such issues, subject to appellate review in the federal courts, may facilitate development of the law.”For defense lawyers, this consideration means the S.E.C. wants to decide the scope of the law first rather than a federal district judge with no ties to the agency. The initial analysis can take on added weight under the Supreme Court’s decision in Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, in which the Supreme Court said that interpretations of ambiguous laws by an administrative agency like the S.E.C. should be “given controlling weight unless they are arbitrary, capricious, or manifestly contrary to the statute.”Last November, Justice Antonin Scalia of the Supreme Court questioned whether the S.E.C.’s interpretation of the securities laws is owed such deference when a violation can result in a criminal prosecution in addition to civil charges for a violation. He noted that “legislatures, not executive officers, define crimes.”But the S.E.C.’s option to file its case in an administrative forum gives it the chance to shape the law before it reaches a federal appeals court, and argue that the judges should defer to its expertise in deciding what constitutes a violation.Defendants accused of securities violations in administrative proceedings have tried to cut off the S.E.C.’s access to that forum by arguing that the use of administrative judges hired by the agency and the absence of rights to discovery and a jury violate the Constitution. Federal district courts, however, have rejected those claims on the ground that any challenge must first be decided by an administrative judge and the S.E.C. commissioners before it can be considered by a federal appeals court.That string of failures has not stopped others from pursuing such claims. Lynn Tilton, who once described herself as the “turnaround queen” and appeared in a reality television show pilot, “The Diva of Distressed,” will go before a federal district judge in New York on May 11, seeking to stop the S.E.C. from pursuing administrative charges that she and her firm improperly valued the assets of – not surprisingly – distressed companies.Defense lawyers will undoubtedly continue to complain about the use of the administrative forum, but until a federal court steps in to curtail the practice, there is little that can be done to challenge the S.E.C.’s choice. The considerations provided by the enforcement division about when it will recommend proceeding before an administrative judge rather than in federal court shed little light on how the decision will be made.The clearest situation may be when the S.E.C. wants to see the law develop in a particular direction, which means more close cases may go the route of an administrative proceeding to limit the role played by federal judges.Advertisement