AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelComcast announced on Monday that it had hired Michael J. Cavanagh as its chief financial officer, choosing a prominent Wall Street executive to help the company move forward after the collapse of its proposed $45 billion merger with Time Warner Cable.Mr. Cavanagh most recently worked as co-president and co-chief operating officer of the Carlyle Group, a global asset management firm in New York. He will join Comcast early this summer and be based at its Philadelphia headquarters.He succeeds Michael J. Angelakis, who had been Comcast’s chief financial officer since 2008. In March, Comcast announced that Mr. Angelakis was leaving his post to start a Comcast-backed company with $4 billion in financing to make strategic investments in the United States and abroad. Mr. Angelakis will be a senior adviser to Comcast and help in the transition.Brian L. Roberts, Comcast’s chief executive, described Mr. Cavanagh as a “world-class executive with significant experience leading and overseeing large companies with multiple, complex businesses.”Mr. Cavanagh is a prominent and influential figure on Wall Street. He comes to Comcast after just one year at Carlyle, one of the giants of the private equity industry. As co-president there he became one of the potential successors to the investment firm’s founders.Before joining Carlyle, Mr. Cavanagh worked for almost 10 years as part of the operating committee of JPMorgan Chase. He worked for about six years as JPMorgan’s chief financial officer during the financial crisis. Additionally, as a top lieutenant to Jamie Dimon, the chief executive, he helped steer the bank through some of its toughest challenges, including an investigation into the huge “London whale” trading loss.“Comcast is an exceptional company that is well positioned to win in the rapidly evolving media and technology industries,” Mr. Cavanagh said in a statement. “The opportunity to work closely with Brian and one of the best management teams I’ve come across in any industry was something I could not pass up.”Before JPMorgan Chase, Mr. Cavanagh was an executive at Bank One and Citigroup.Mr. Cavanagh holds a bachelor’s degree from Yale and a J.D. from the University of Chicago. He also is on the board of Yum Brands and is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations.Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting.Advertisement