AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la Merced and Chad BrayFor years, the business of servicing commercial real estate properties was dominated by just two firms.Now DTZ, with its $2 billion takeover of Cushman & Wakefield, is betting that it can break into the top ranks, a plan that has been in the works for some time.If completed, the transaction would create a much stronger competitor to the two giants of commercial real estate services, the CBRE Group and Jones Lang LaSalle. The newly combined company, which would take the better-known Cushman & Wakefield name, would have more than 43,000 employees across more than 50 countries.“The companies have remarkably complementary skills and reach in different geographies — whether in New York, London or Shanghai, this will be a formidable combination,” Brett White, the executive chairman of DTZ, said in a statement. “While breadth and depth are important to serve clients, it’s not just about size. It’s also about local expertise and deep customer service, which are strong traits of Cushman & Wakefield and DTZ, and ultimately what will differentiate us going forward.”These are heady times globally in the commercial real estate business, which has generated plenty of work for the companies that service those properties. But successfully challenging CBRE and Jones Lang LaSalle will require a competitor to possess meaningful offerings across a variety of areas, from brokerage services to facilities management.DTZ and its backers, including the American private equity firm TPG Capital and the Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan, have hoped to become that rival. The plan already had a major architect in Mr. White, the former chief executive of CBRE and one of the men behind that company’s rise to the top of the commercial real estate world.But even before the TPG group acquired control of DTZ last year, it had already set its sights on combining that firm with Cushman & Wakefield, according to a person briefed on the matter.The two are of similar size — DTZ reporting $2.9 billion in annual revenue and 260 offices in 50 countries, Cushman posting $2.1 billion in revenue last year and 259 offices in 60 countries — though Cushman, nearly a century old, has the more recognizable name.Together, the two will have annual revenue that comes close to that of Jones Lang LaSalle. The combined company will have a roughly even mix of revenue from brokerage fees, which depend on the vicissitudes of the real estate market, and services that generate more predictable and steady fees.A combination of Cushman and DTZ has been on many people’s minds for some time: DTZ’s former owner had tried unsuccessfully to merge the business with Cushman in the past, the person briefed on the matter said.Circumstances had changed by last year, after the Italian investment firm Exor first began exploring a sale of its controlling stake in Cushman & Wakefield. Exor, which is controlled by the Agnelli family of Italy, had taken a majority stake in the real estate company in March 2007.Under the terms of Monday’s deal agreement, Mr. White of DTZ will become chairman and chief executive of the combined company, while Tod Lickerman, the chief executive of DTZ, will become president. Cushman’s North America chief executive, John Santora, will hold the titles of chief operating officer and chief integration officer.After completion of the merger, Carlo Barel di Sant’Albano, the international chief executive of Cushman & Wakefield, will take a senior global leadership role at the combined company. Edward C. Forst, Cushman’s chief executive, is expected to leave the company.The transaction is expected to close in the fourth quarter and is subject to regulatory approval.Advertisement