AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard SandomirBill Simmons was unseen and unmentioned during ESPN’s upfront presentation to advertisers on Tuesday — as if he had never existed.Yet his presence hovered over a 75-minute event that included announcements about the addition of live morning hours for “SportsCenter,” a third volume of the “30 for 30” documentary series and the relocation of ESPN’s popular “Mike & Mike” radio team of Mike Golic and Mike Greenberg from ESPN headquarters in Bristol, Conn., to a Times Square studio above “Good Morning America.”Mr. Simmons was absent from the show about the sports media giant’s future because he was, in effect, fired last Friday by John Skipper, ESPN’s president. Mr. Skipper abruptly announced that he was not going to renew Mr. Simmons’s contract, which ends on Sept. 30, severing a 14-year relationship with the popular columnist, podcaster and editor in chief of the Grantland website.As the crowd cleared out of the upfront at the Minskoff Theater in Manhattan, Mr. Skipper was surrounded by reporters asking him about Mr. Simmons and very little about what ESPN had just told the advertisers.“We got fabulous value from Bill Simmons,” he said. “If any of you guys know another Bill Simmons, please let me know.”He reiterated that the breakup was not about money. Mr. Simmons was seeking a substantial increase in his annual salary, which was estimated to be $5 million.“It’s about what he wants to do, what value that creates, what we want to do together and deciding whether there was going to be a match,” he said. “We decided ultimately there wouldn’t be.”Mr. Simmons came to ESPN as a columnist in 2001 and became an increasingly powerful presence as a podcaster, a creator and executive producer of “30 for 30,” as well as the head of Grantland, a digital blend of sports, entertainment and culture coverage. The site attracted six million unique visitors in March, up from four million a year earlier, according to comScore.Over all, ESPN’s sites had 80.5 million visitors last March, more than any sports media company. Turner Sports was next with 62.6 million.Mr. Simmons has not commented since Mr. Skipper chose to move on without him, prompting speculation about his next step. Despite his silence, his divorce from ESPN remains a subject of great interest.“Every now and then, I’m reminded of how much attention this kind of thing gets,” Mr. Skipper said. “You think you’re in a bubble to some extent. When we put on a N.B.A. playoff game we know the world is watching. Sometimes, this other stuff feels sort of inside. But Bill broke through. He’s got, what, 3.7 million Twitter followers? He’s the most widely read columnist-analyst of the last 15 years.”Mr. Simmons’s only posts on Twitter since Friday have been three videos from the New England Patriots’ Super Bowl victory last February.Without Mr. Simmons, who appeared at an ESPN upfront in 2012 to discuss the first year of Grantland, the stage was filled with other ESPN personalities and some athletes.Where “The Lion King” usually roams, Mr. Golic and Mr. Greenberg kibitzed with the cast of “Good Morning America.” The comedian Frank Caliendo impersonated Jon Gruden, the “Monday Night Football” analyst, with Mr. Gruden standing beside him. The Miami Heat guard Dwyane Wade discussed the N.B.A. playoffs. And the anchor Kenny Mayne gave a humorous commentary on the growth of audience data.ESPN offered a small surprise with its announcements that its National Football League wild-card playoff game would be simulcast on ABC and that its annual ESPY awards show would move from ESPN to ABC. Much of the programming that used to be carried under the banner of ABC Sports (“Monday Night Football” and college bowl games, to name just two) has long since migrated to ESPN and elsewhere.Mr. Skipper said that the moves were not part of a planned reinvigoration of sports on the ABC broadcast network, which carries N.B.A. regular season and playoff games.“This doesn’t portend some dramatic shift in our emphasis,” he said, adding that he wanted to drive more audience to the playoff game, “and we felt the ESPYs could use a shot in the arm.”Despite its size, power and profits, ESPN faces challenges, including programming costs and the transformation of viewing habits that are eating away at the traditional bundle of hundreds of channels consumers buy from pay-television operators. ESPN sued Verizon last month, saying the telecommunications company breached its contract with the network when it unveiled a new cable package that took channels usually available on basic cable — like ESPN, USA and Comedy Central — and separated them into specific categories like sports, entertainment and children’s programs that consumers could choose from.And rising costs at ESPN reduced operating income at Disney’s cable networks division by 9 percent in the company’s second quarter. Higher programming and production costs were connected to college football, including the introduction of the SEC Network and the addition of the N.F.L. wild-card playoff game.“We planned for this,” Mr. Skipper said about the higher costs. “It’s not an issue.”Advertisement