AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — Ferdinand K. Piëch may have been banished from Volkswagen, the carmaker he dominated for more than two decades, but on Wednesday he will have one more chance to be the center of attention — if he chooses.Shareholders of Porsche Automobil Holding, the family company that controls a majority in Volkswagen, will conduct their annual meeting in Stuttgart on Wednesday. Mr. Piëch, a member of the Porsche family, was ousted as chairman of Volkswagen last month, but remains a member of the supervisory board of the holding company.It was unclear whether Mr. Piëch would attend the shareholders meeting, or whether he would try to use the forum to reassert some control over Volkswagen, which he had overseen as chief executive and later chairman of the supervisory board since 1993.Descendants of Ferdinand Porsche, including Mr. Piëch, a grandson, own 100 percent of the voting shares in Porsche Automobil Holding, which in turn owns slightly more than 50 percent of the voting shares of Volkswagen. Porsche, the sports car maker based in Stuttgart, has been a division of Volkswagen since 2012, after a convoluted takeover battle.Mr. Piëch has threatened to sell his stake of slightly less than 14 percent in the holding company, which could open it up to outside investors and potentially raise a fuss, not only in the Porsche family but at Volkswagen.All but 12 percent of Volkswagen voting shares are owned by the Porsche family, the German state of Lower Saxony, and the sovereign wealth fund of Qatar. Outside investors could gain a stronger voice in Porsche, and by extension Volkswagen, if Mr. Piëch decided to exit.Other members of the Porsche family would have right of first refusal if Mr. Piëch decided to sell, according to a person with knowledge of the family agreement. But it is not clear whether they would have the will or resources to buy the stake, which would cost them an estimated 1.5 billion euros, or $1.7 billion.Porsche managers and supervisory board members may or may not raise these issues on Wednesday. The shareholders meeting could consist mostly of legal formalities. Members of the extended Porsche family, most of whom live in and around Salzburg, Austria, may prefer to keep their quarrels private.While Mr. Piëch can still make trouble, it is unlikely he can ever regain even a fraction of the influence he once had over Volkswagen.“His days are over, in my opinion,” said Stefan-Günter Bauknecht, head of global equity research at Deutsche Asset & Wealth Management in Frankfurt.Mr. Piëch’s departure will bring an end to the empire-building that marked his tenure, including the acquisition of two truck makers as well as Lamborghini sports cars and Bentley luxury cars. Instead, Mr. Bauknecht said, Volkswagen will focus on cutting costs and improving coordination among the different auto brands, which also include Audi luxury cars and Skoda economy cars.“This is for me the best thing,” Mr. Bauknecht said.Although the Porsche family owns all of the voting shares in the holding company, there are also nonvoting preferred shares whose owners have a right to speak at the meeting and are expected to attend in large numbers.Wolfgang Porsche, the chairman of the holding company supervisory board and a cousin of Mr. Piëch, will preside at the meeting. Martin Winterkorn, who is chief executive of Volkswagen and of Porsche Automobil Holding, will deliver a speech on the state of the business.Mr. Piëch’s long career at Volkswagen was undone when he tried to push out Mr. Winterkorn, his onetime protégé. Mr. Winterkorn prevailed after winning backing from Mr. Porsche, the state of Lower Saxony and Volkswagen’s powerful worker representatives.Mr. Piëch, 78, and his wife, Ursula, resigned their seats on the Volkswagen supervisory board on April 25.Advertisement