By JOHN KOBLINMAY 12, 2015
There was talk of rejuvenation at the upfront presentations for NBC and Fox upfront on Monday. Both networks introduced an army of new dramas and comedies after several freshmen shows failed for both networks this last season.That was not the case with ABC on Tuesday. Before its afternoon upfront presentation, ABC announced that many of its first-year shows from last year — including those with diverse casts like “Fresh Off the Boat,” “Black-ish” and “How to Get Away With Murder” — would be coming back. Other popular shows like “Scandal,” “Modern Family” and “Grey’s Anatomy” will fill out its relatively stable lineup.“We’ve obviously kept much of our schedule intact,” said Paul Lee, the president of ABC Entertainment.Mr. Lee noted that three nights on the network’s schedule would remain the same: Monday, Wednesday and Thursday.AdvertisementThursday night is still the producer Shonda Rhimes’s domain. The entire lineup consists of her shows — “Grey’s Anatomy,” “Scandal” and “How to Get Away With Murder.” ABC will pick up a fourth Rhimes show: “The Catch,” a legal thriller that will join the lineup in midseason and take over the 10 p.m. slot from “How to Get Away With Murder.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The marquee introduction to ABC’s schedule is the return of “The Muppets,” which will air at 8 p.m. on Tuesdays and serve as a lead-in to “Fresh Off the Boat.”AdvertisementMr. Lee seems to be betting big on it, and said that “if the original ‘Muppets’ was making fun of all the variety shows at the time” this would be mocking the documentary style of many of today’s shows.“This is not your grandmother’s ‘Muppets,’ the old ‘Muppets,’” he said.Even the network’s veterans got a vote of confidence. When asked if “Grey’s Anatomy,” which recently killed off the character portrayed by one of its stars, Patrick Dempsey, and “Castle,” which has run for seven seasons, would be winding down, Mr. Lee gave no indication that he wanted to shake up his steady lineup anytime soon.“I’d like to see them run for many, many years to come,” Mr. Lee said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.