By RAVI SOMAIYAOCT. 1, 2015
Josh Tyrangiel, the editor of Bloomberg Businessweek and a rising star at the news organization, said on Thursday that he was stepping down. He becomes the latest prominent staff member to leave the company in recent months as it is reshaped under the leadership of its founder, Michael Bloomberg.Ellen Pollock, currently deputy editor at the magazine, will take over. She will be the first female editor of the magazine since it was established in 1929, the company said in an announcement.Mr. Tyrangiel, 43, said in a brief telephone interview that despite recent reports of turmoil and tension within Bloomberg, the decision to leave had been his and was amicable. His last day will be Friday.“I’ve been doing business news for six years and I do sometimes yearn to be on broader stories,” he said. He has something new lined up, he said, but is not ready to announce it yet. “I’ve always loved documentaries, visual news,” he said. “It’s an itch I want to scratch.”AdvertisementMr. Tyrangiel, who as one of the architects of Bloomberg’s media expansion had his hands on nearly every area of the company’s media operations, is leaving at a pivotal time. A new editor, John Micklethwait, formerly of The Economist, has been reshaping it, and narrowing its focus.AdvertisementIn a long memo recently, Mr. Micklethwait laid out his priorities — which seemed to point away from earlier efforts, some undertaken by Mr. Tyrangiel, to become a broader news organization and toward a focus on finance and power.That focus, current and former employees have said, is in line with the philosophy of Mr. Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York, who had expressed skepticism about the daringly designed and web-focused endeavors that were begun in his absence.He has been concerned that the company’s lucrative core business, financial information terminals, should not be eroded by the media efforts. Revenue from terminal subscriptions was $9 billion in 2014, 85 percent of the company’s total revenue.In a statement, Mr. Bloomberg said that Mr. Tyrangiel had had a profound impact. “I’m sad to see him go, but our media properties are in a great place and I’m grateful for his contributions,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Tyrangiel’s departure follows that of Joshua Topolsky, who led the company’s web operations; he left in July after clashes with Mr. Bloomberg. In late August, Mr. Bloomberg announced he was moving his chief of television, Claudia Milne, to special projects and replacing her with Al Mayers.The next week, as Mr. Micklethwait distributed his memo, Bloomberg also laid off as many as 90 employees from offices in New York, Washington and other places around the world.In an interview Thursday, Ms. Pollock, 60, said that though she wanted the magazine to keep evolving, she loved what she and Mr. Tyrangiel had built, and there were no plans for a redesign.Asked about Mr. Micklethwait’s memo and whether it would affect the direction of the journalism she oversees, she said: “I read that memo, and you read that memo. My Businessweek is going to be a gutsy, journalistic Businessweek that is going to stay true to what we have been doing.”AdvertisementShe said that she felt she had the “support and backup of John Micklethwait, and we’re not deviating from what we value and what we want to do.”Ms. Pollock has been with Businessweek since 2007. She was previously at The Wall Street Journal for 18 years, where she rose to become a senior editor.Though she will most likely end up participating in other projects, she said, she will be less of a presence across the organization than Mr. Tyrangiel was. “I’m really going to focus on the magazine,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Editor of Bloomberg Businessweek Becomes the Latest to Leave .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.