

      By EMILY STEEL

UPDATED September 8, 2015

An exploding number of options are available to viewers who want to ditch their traditional TV subscriptions but not forsake their television-watching habits. With a broadband subscription and a streaming device, people have more freedom to pay for what they want to watch and decide how they want to watch it. Here are some prominent services offering live TV, à la carte networks and other on-demand streaming options.
Related Article
An exploding number of options are available to viewers who want to drop their traditional TV subscriptions but not forsake their television-watching habits. With a broadband subscription and a streaming device, people have more freedom to pay for what they want to watch and decide how they want to watch it. Here are some prominent services offering live TV, à la carte networks and other on-demand streaming options in the United States.OFFERING: All Showtime original programming is available on demand and a live feed of the network’s East and West Coast feeds is included. Other distribution partners are expected. The service is available on Apple and Roku players and Roku TV models, as well as via Hulu and Sony’s PlayStation Vue. OFFERING: All HBO original programming is available, live and on demand. Also available via Cablevision. 
*HBO Now will also be available through Google Play, as well as Cablevision, at a price that has yet to be determined. OFFERING: Live TV available in 14 United States cities, including New York and Los Angeles. Available everywhere in the United States are 6,500 on-demand episodes for current and past season of shows, including “The Good Wife,” “CSI: Miami,” “MacGyver” and “I Love Lucy.”WHAT YOU DON’T GET: Some sports content is blocked, including National Football League games. OFFERING: The service, which doesn’t have advertising, is targeted at preschoolers and includes series such as “Blue’s Clues,” “Little Bear” and “Ni Hao, Kai-ian.” Noggin is available on iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch devices.WHAT YOU DON’T GET: Current Nickelodeon shows.OFFERING: The advertising-free digital comedy channel from NBCUniversal targets an audience of “comedy super fans” with weekly programming including more than 20 exclusive original series in its first year. It also includes NBC late night shows and classics, such as “30 Rock” and “The Office.” The new service starts in January. CHANNELS: About 20 channels are available in the core package, including ESPN, TBS, the Disney Channel, AMC and TNT. Additional add-on packs are available for sports, lifestyle, children’s programming and news for an extra $5 a month each.SPECIAL FEATURES: Sling TV offers live and on-demand viewing across an array of devices. Some networks offer a replay feature that lets viewers watch shows televised in the last three days.WHAT YOU DON’T GET: Broadcast networks like ABC, CBS, NBC, Fox and PBS are not included. Viewers cannot watch Sling TV on more than one device at a time.CHANNELS: More than 50 channels are available in the starter package, which includes broadcast networks like CBS, Fox and NBC. Included cable networks will be USA, TBS, Fox News, Discovery, TNT, FX, Nickelodeon, Comedy Central and MTV. Other tiers, for an additional $10 or $20, will offer regional sports channels and entertainment networks. SPECIAL FEATURES: Vue provides live and on-demand viewing, the ability to save favorite shows for automatic recording, the availability of the last three days of popular programming and the ability to personalize features. WHAT YOU DON’T GET: Disney-owned networks, including ABC and ESPN, are not available. Vue is available only to owners of PlayStation 3 and 4 devices in New York, Chicago and Philadelphia. CHANNELS: About a dozen broadcast networks and the premium cable network HBO and Streampix, Comcast’s movie offering, are included. In the future, the service could include the option to substitute other premium cable networks for HBO and to add packages of children’s, sports, lifestyle and movie programming for an extra $5 to $10 a month. SPECIAL FEATURES: Comcast’s stream offers live and on-demand viewing across computers and mobile device. Subscribers also have access to cloud DVR storage. WHAT YOU DON’T GET: The service does not include any cable networks beyond HBO. It will not be available for streaming to television sets. The service is only available to people who live in areas where Comcast is the cable provider.OFFERING: Thousands of movies and television episodes are included, including original series like “House of Cards,” “Orange Is the New Black” and “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt.”CHANNELS: Apple is in talks to include the broadcast networks ABC, CBS and FOX, along with a lineup of cable networks like ESPN and Discovery Channel. The total number of networks and exact offerings have yet to be determined.SPECIAL FEATURES: The service has been pitched to TV executives as “better than the best-of-class cable products,” with on-demand functionality and the ability to stream live and on-demand television to iPhones, iPads and Apple TV set-top boxes.WHAT YOU DON’T GET: Comcast and its NBCUniversal entertainment group have not been involved in the latest round of discussions with Apple. Their channels include NBC, USA, Bravo and Syfy.*Apple’s service has not been completed yet. OFFERING: Thousands of movies and television episodes are available, including original series like “Transparent,” “Alpha House” and “Bosch,” as well as titles that do not appear on Netflix.At no additional cost, subscribers in the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany and Austria can download movies and TV episodes to iPhones, iPads and Android phones and tablets for viewing without an Internet connection. *Subscription is part of a broader subscription service that includes free two-day shipping on purchases of goods.OFFERING: Current and past TV shows from major broadcasters and cable networks are available, including “Seinfeld” and “Fargo,” as well as an expanding roster of original series like East Los High,” “The Awesomes,” Amy Poehler’s “Difficult People,” and the next season of “The Mindy Project.” Hulu also has a deal with the cable network Epix to stream films including “Hunger Games: Catching Fire,” “Transformers: Age of Extinction,” and “Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.” OFFERING: A mix of live events, prime-time television and original web series are available for free to all users, regardless of whether or not they are Verizon customers. This ad-supported offering, designed to be watched via a mobile app, includes popular shows from Comedy Central, Food Network, ESPN, NFL Network and Discovery along with online series from AwesomenessTV, Vice, Tastemade and Machinima. WHAT YOU DON’T GET: The inventory of entire networks is not available. The service will include unlimited on-demand access to the channel’s original series as well as hundreds of hours of movies and sports programming.HBO Now, which will offer all of HBO’s original programming, will make its debut in early April, coinciding with the start of the new season of “Game of Thrones.”AdvertisementThe service will include unlimited on-demand access to the channel’s original series as well as hundreds of hours of movies and sports programming.HBO Now, which will offer all of HBO’s original programming, will make its debut in early April, coinciding with the start of the new season of “Game of Thrones.”