AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedWhen it comes to big-ticket transactions, boutique investment banks are still claiming their fair share.Verizon’s $4.4 billion takeover of AOL is notable for many things, but among them are the fact that smaller deal shops were the sole advisers on the transaction. Credit goes to LionTree Advisors and Guggenheim Partners for Verizon and Allen & Company for AOL.Independent advisers have been around for decades, but in recent years, they have gained even more prominence as they have popped up in some of the biggest deals. Lazard led AT&T’s $49 billion takeover of DirecTV last year. Centerview Partners strategized on General Electric’s planned sale of its giant finance arm as well as 21st Century Fox’s now-abandoned bid for Time Warner.Last year, such firms placed highly in the closely scrutinized rankings of deal advisers: Lazard was in the seventh spot, according to Thomson Reuters, while Centerview took No. 12 and Allen & Company was No. 17.(In the first quarter of this year, Guggenheim was the only one of the advisers on the Verizon deal to crack Thomson Reuters’ league tables of top deal shops, ranking 17th in announced transactions.)AOL, the one-time king of media, is a shadow of its former self. Its deal for Time Warner is regarded as the high-water mark of the dot-com bubble.None of the firms in the big transaction are a stranger to the world of telecommunications and media, an industry rife with M.&A. deals. LionTree, led by the industry veteran Aryeh Bourkoff, is an adviser to John C. Malone and to Charter Communications, which is still pursuing a deal for Time Warner Cable.Guggenheim, led by the former Bear Stearns chief executive Alan D. Schwartz, aided Verizon in its $130 billion repurchase of the stake in its huge wireless business owned by Vodafone of Britain.Allen & Company has been a longtime adviser to AOL, regularly hosting its chief executive, Tim Armstrong, at the bank’s annual media mogul gathering in Sun Valley, Idaho.It was at that annual confab that the seeds of the deal with Verizon were planted, Mr. Armstrong said in interviews on Tuesday.Though one common knock against boutique firms is that, with no huge lending arms, they cannot lead the megadeals that require enormous amounts of financing.But Tuesday’s transaction should be no problem, because Verizon is paying for AOL entirely with cash on hand.Advertisement