AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robert CyranVerizon’s dumb pipes become no smarter by running AOL through them.Seeking refuge from a vicious wireless war, the telecommunications carrier is buying AOL, the custodian of The Huffington Post and old Internet dial-up customers, for $4.4 billion. AOL’s video ad tech business may be the ostensible prize, but it faces many threats. This is just another silly deal involving a company best known for its involvement in a catastrophic one.Under its chief executive, Tim Armstrong, AOL has been siphoning profit from its dying subscription service into new ventures. The results have been erratic. Its local journalism endeavor, Patch, for example, was spun off after years of hefty investment and losses. The division that holds its dial-up web access, virus protection and other services generated $127 million in operating profit in the first quarter, but AOL as a whole reported just $104 million.AOL, the one-time king of media, is a shadow of its former self. Its deal for Time Warner is regarded as the high-water mark of the dot-com bubble.The one possibly promising piece for Verizon is AOL’s automated, auction-based advertising, to help marketers focus on consumers increasingly switching from traditional TV to online video. It grew 80 percent in the first three months of the year.What’s more, Verizon could plug the information it reaps from its customers and devices, including location, into AOL’s algorithms. That theoretically would make the service even more appealing to advertisers. And Verizon can spin off or sell other various bits of AOL, including HuffPo and TechCrunch, to help cover the cost of the acquisition.The ad tech industry, however, is competitive and a bit mysterious. The division housing AOL’s is unprofitable and the losses have been widening. That means Verizon probably will have to sink more money into the business to keep up with Google, Facebook and many smaller upstarts. There are also concerns about how the systems work and fraud.Although the outlay is small for Verizon, it’s also hard to see how AOL will make much of a difference. Even if successful, programmatic advertising would generate only about $700 million of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, in 2017, according to Macquarie, or a 1.5 percent increase for Verizon. That hardly seems a reward worthy of the operational and distraction risks, which makes it more likely that under Verizon, AOL – whose Time Warner acquisition was one of the worst – will only add to its long and sad M.&.A. history.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement