AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan WeismanWASHINGTON — Senate Democrats on Tuesday blocked consideration of giving President Obama power to accelerate a broad trade accord with Asia, a rebuke that the president helped bring on himself.After more than six years battling Republicans on everything from his signature health care legislation to simply keeping the government open, Mr. Obama is at odds with his own party as he seeks a legislative capstone to his presidency. But Tuesday’s setback also highlighted a problem that has vexed Mr. Obama for most of his tenure in office: his difficulties with Congress. This time he is criticizing Democrats whose votes he now needs.The president “has made this more personal than he needed to,” said Senator Sherrod Brown, Democrat of Ohio, after the 52-45 vote. Mr. Obama has said Democrats have been spreading disinformation about the Pacific trade accord and the authority he is seeking, singling out Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts for her role in opposing the accord. Only one Democrat, Senator Tom Carper of Delaware, joined Republicans to support debating and voting on legislation that would give Mr. Obama authority to pursue the most sweeping trade accord since the North American Free Trade Agreement more than 20 years ago, and the procedural vote fell eight short of the 60 needed. “Ultimately, it’s up to the president,” said Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the Senate’s No. 2 Republican. “Does the president of the United States have enough clout with members of his own political party?”The White House press secretary, Josh Earnest, tried to play down Tuesday’s vote as a “procedural snafu.”The vote is not necessarily the final word. According to Democratic leadership aides, Senators Harry Reid of Nevada, the Democratic leader, and Chuck Schumer of New York, the No. 3 Democrat, have proposed a compromise to Republican leaders: First, hold a separate vote on legislation aimed at discouraging so-called currency manipulation by American trading partners, which could be vetoed by the president. Then, wrap the fast-track authority he is seeking with a more encompassing bill, including assistance for displaced workers, extension of an African trade accord and other trade enforcement measures.That offer could be the path forward, given that at least eight Democrats who normally embrace trade deals voted no on Tuesday.The compromise proposed by Mr. Reid and Mr. Schumer could help the president because the currency provisions demanded by Democrats are strongly opposed by Japan and Malaysia, two of the 12 nations trying to complete the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and could be significant enough to stop the larger accord.There are other serious policy challenges to the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which, if completed, would affect about 40 percent of United States exports and imports; bring together developing economies like Peru and Vietnam with superpowers like the United States and Japan; and serve as a Pacific counterweight to an increasingly assertive China.Critics of the trade deal say that it would do little to help ordinary American workers while mostly serving as a vehicle to advance the agendas of multinational corporations at home and abroad. In Congress, Republicans were sharply critical of Democrat efforts to add layers of complexity to the bill.“It creates a whole new monster set of arguments and debates that we don’t need,” Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah, the main author of the trade bill, said of the currency language.“I offered to have them bring up a bill later, do everything I can to give that a fair hearing because I have concerns sometimes, too,” Senator Hatch said. “But on this bill we just can’t have it on there.”Beyond the currency issue, a provision attached to the trade promotion authority bill to block trade preferences to countries involved in human trafficking would effectively exclude Malaysia, which is on the State Department’s list of worst offenders. Another provision to crack down on child labor could stop American candy makers from importing cocoa from Africa.While the Obama administration’s greatest concern was with the Democrats, challenges also could come from the right. Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky and a presidential candidate, said he would vote against giving Mr. Obama fast-track authority.Democrats have united around demands that trade promotion authority — which would allow the White House to present the trade deal for a straight up-or-down vote, without amendments — be paired with a series of other measures, not only to crack down on currency manipulation, but also to assist workers displaced by globalization, tighten child labor law and fortify the government’s response to unfair trade practices. White House officials have said the Pacific trade accord cannot be completed without that authority.After the vote, the president summoned to the White House 10 Senate Democrats whom he believes he can ultimately win over, including Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon who was a co-author of the bill he helped filibuster, and Mr. Carper, his lone Democrat supporter on Tuesday’s vote.Republicans were equally adamant that accelerated authority not be saddled with many of those demands. “This is not a game. This is about trying to accomplish something important for the country that happens to be the president’s No. 1 domestic priority,” Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and majority leader, said.At the heart of Democrats’ demands is a measure that would force the government to respond when trading partners artificially depress the value of their currency to make their exports cheaper and United States exports more expensive.But if Democrats successfully force Mr. McConnell to include that currency measure in the trade promotion bill, the international negotiations could collapse, administration officials say. Democrats, for instance, accuse Japan of depressing the value of the yen to increase its exports. The Japanese say they have been doing almost exactly what the Federal Reserve has done to help lift economic growth in the United States through the printing of money. Any move by United States trade negotiators to block such maneuvers could imperil the Pacific accord.“I’m strongly against it,” said Penny Pritzker, the commerce secretary.Republican leaders were pleased with the turn of events. Senator John Thune of South Dakota, the Senate Republican conference chairman, said Democrats were “throwing their own president under the bus.”Advertisement