By DAVID JOLLY and JAMES KANTERMAY 12, 2015
PARIS — General Electric’s $13.5 billion planned acquisition of Alstom’s energy business has hit a major snag, in the face of European Commission concerns that the deal would hurt competition in the market for heavy-duty gas turbines.The commission, the executive arm of the European Union, has asked G.E. for more information on the proposed deal. It is a sign that antitrust officials may be prepared to block the acquisition unless the American industrial giant offers remedies, possibly the disposal of assets in markets where the combined companies’ dominance might stifle competition.“We always knew there would be regulatory hurdles,” Steve Bolze, the chief executive of the G.E. Power & Water unit, who is overseeing the deal for the French unit, said in an interview. “But we think the Alstom alliance is still good for G.E. and for Europe.”“We believe in the merits of this deal,” he added. “But we are willing to explore remedies to get it done. Any remedies will have to preserve the deal economics and our strategic value.”AdvertisementMr. Bolze said he still expected the deal to close in the second half of this year. In the meantime, the uncertainty is hurting Alstom, he said, as some customers wait to see the outcome of the commission talks before booking orders.AdvertisementAlstom declined to comment on Tuesday, referring questions to G.E.The Alstom merger, if completed, would be a key part of the strategy by G.E.’s chairman and chief executive, Jeffrey R. Immelt, to unwind the financial services part of his company and focus on its industrial businesses.G.E. is already the world’s No. 1 maker of heavy-duty gas turbines, which electric utilities and big industrial companies use for generating electricity. The Alstom deal would absorb one of G.E.’s main rivals in that field, leaving just Siemens and Mitsubishi Hitachi Power Systems among the big players.In February, the commission opened an in-depth investigation into the antitrust aspects of the deal. Margrethe Vestager, Europe’s competition commissioner, who has also recently taken on Google, Amazon and others, expressed concern at that time that a merged G.E.-Alstom’s dominance in heavy-duty gas turbines might lead to higher prices for power sector customers and reduce choice and innovation.General Electric has been trying to convince the commission that the European market — which represents just 5 percent of world demand for heavy-duty gas turbines — is more competitive than officials believe. G.E. argues that the commission may not be adequately accounting for the strength of Mitsubishi Hitachi and rising Chinese competitors.Commission officials said on Tuesday that G.E. had already complied with the request for additional information. The officials said they had resumed their review, with a provisional deadline of Aug. 21 for a final decision on whether to approve the deal. Originally, G.E. had hoped to receive that verdict by July 8.In the United States, the Justice Department is also conducting an antitrust review of the G.E.-Alstom deal. “We believe we have a clear path forward” with the American authorities, G.E. said in a statement on Tuesday, “and we continue to target regulatory approval in the various jurisdictions in the second half of the year.”Under the deal, announced last summer, G.E. would get most of Alstom’s energy business, which includes power generation and distribution, and leave the French company’s rail unit, which makes TGV trains and metros, to stand alone as a transportation company.AdvertisementLast year, Mr. Immelt worked patiently to obtain French government approval for the deal with Alstom — the biggest acquisition in the American company’s history — after the news leaked that the two companies were in talks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After initial resistance from the Socialist government of President François Hollande, which included a highly politicized negotiation conducted in the news media, Mr. Immelt won the Élysée Palace’s full backing.In now dealing with the European Commission’s antitrust office, Mr. Immelt has not forgotten the harsh experience of his predecessor, Jack Welch. In 2001, Mr. Welch failed to win approval for a proposed $42 billion takeover of Honeywell International after objections were raised by Mario Monti, the European antitrust commissioner at the time.Mr. Immelt was worried enough last week that he met with Ms. Vestager in Brussels, where he also gave an address at the American Chamber of Commerce highlighting Europe’s economic potential. In that address, Mr. Immelt said young Europeans were “awesome” and “amazing,” but he emphasized that Europe needed investment to gain competitiveness and beat unemployment.Speaking to reporters later, Mr. Immelt said his meeting with Ms. Vestager was “very constructive” and he described her as “a good leader.” G.E., he said, was engaged in “a process” with Brussels, and would “take the process where it goes.”If G.E. is unable to convince Ms. Vestager of the merits of its case, the next step could be a so-called statement of objections, as soon as next month — formal charges that would outline the commission’s specific antitrust concerns. G.E. and Alstom could avoid that step by offering remedies sooner, perhaps proposing to sell parts of the gas turbine business in Europe.Even if the commission does issue charges, G.E. and Alstom could still win clearance for the deal if it offered measures that satisfied the antitrust officials.The chance to acquire the European gas turbine business was the main reason for G.E.’s interest in Alstom, although the French company’s client base, maintenance contracts and project management expertise are also highly valued.And because the European business is relatively small in the global scheme of things, and it might be possible for the companies to divest themselves of some parts of it while still maintaining the economic logic behind the deal.AdvertisementMr. Bolze declined to comment on the nature of any possible remedies.Mr. Immelt, in his comments last week, said it was too early to discuss sell-offs of businesses to win approval for the deal. But he added that “the commission has to do what it thinks best, and G.E. also has to do what it thinks best, but I think those things will intersect.”He said that G.E. engineers in countries like France and Italy could “love” the company and still feel they are “rooting for the home team.”Asked about the European Commission’s rejection of the Honeywell merger more than 14 years ago, Mr. Immelt appeared unfazed. “That feels like it was a million years ago,” he said. “We’re a different company in a different time.”David Jolly reported from Paris, and James Kanter from Brussels. Steve Lohr contributed reporting from New York.A version of this article appears in print on May 13, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Questions on G.E.-Alstom.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.