AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily Steel and Sydney EmberA new generation of Math Men is taking over the Mad Men of Madison Avenue.Armed with data and technology created by actual rocket scientists, this new breed of advertising executives is introducing automated systems for the buying and selling of ads in real time. Fading away are the industry’s old-school wining and dining sales tactics as a new model emerges where algorithms rule.Verizon Communications made a bold bet on that future this week with its $4.4 billion all-cash deal for the Internet company AOL. Over the last several years, AOL has invested heavily in technologies to create a one-stop shop for marketers seeking to buy digitals ads across television, the web and mobile.Verizon could add more firepower to those efforts by ramping up investments in technology, introducing even more data on consumers to the mix and creating new mobile and video outlets where those ads can appear.The ultimate goal for these systems is to deliver on the much-hyped but long-awaited holy grail of digital marketing: targeting the right ad to the right person at the right time.“It really is the next-generation media company that we’re creating,” said Bob Lord, AOL’s president.“This deal is about getting advertising and content to people where they want to consume it.”With Verizon, AOL would gain access to a wealth of data on consumers that it could use to personalize and target marketing messages. For example, AOL could identify a segment of 18- to 20-year-old women living in Manhattan. Advertisers could then use AOL’s ad products to serve those consumers tailor-made ads for local clothing stores or restaurants that would appear when they streamed television shows, or scanned web content on their phones.Mr. Lord laid out a vision that involved, on a cold day in San Francisco, providing people there with a coupon for a hot drink. Similarly, the combined force of Verizon and AOL could offer people in Miami on a particularly hot day a coupon for a cold drink.Ad executives said that AOL’s merger with Verizon could shake up the broader competitive lineup in the ad tech market. Google long has dominated that arena, but other media and tech companies are trying to gain ground. Facebook has increased its investments. Media conglomerates like Comcast and 21st Century Fox, meanwhile, have jumped into the business, snapping up ad tech companies of their own.AOL has much to prove. The company was an early investor in advertising technologies about a decade ago, but fell behind its digital rivals and now is trying to catch up.Some ad executives said they were skeptical as to whether a company the size of Verizon would prioritize the advertising business of a much smaller company like AOL.“It is hard to see huge quantums arising from a business the size of Verizon,” said Rob Norman, chief digital officer of WPP’s GroupM, the world’s largest buyer of online advertising with more than $5 billion in billings. “I don’t see this transaction as being particularly significant.”Indeed, AOL controlled less than 1 percent of the $145 billion worldwide digital ad market last year, according to the research firm eMarketer. In comparison, Google and Facebook together controlled about 40 percent of the worldwide digital ad market and roughly 55 percent of the $42.6 billion worldwide mobile ad market in 2014.“AOL just doesn’t have what the rest of those guys have yet,” said Sarah Hofstetter, the chief executive of the digital agency 360i.Google, for instance, has developed new ways to buy, display and track ads on mobile devices. It recently introduced a picture-minded ad format for automakers that targets people at the moment they are considering buying a car.While AOL may have a long way to go, the company has steadily invested in its ad tech business in recent years. One highlight was its $405 million purchase of Adap.tv, a specialist in video advertising, in 2013.Just last month, AOL introduced an advertising technology platform called One, which it said would help advertisers spend money on ad campaigns more effectively. AOL said the data-driven product lets advertisers see how consumers are reacting to their ads across devices, from smartphones to TV, so they can adjust their spending strategy accordingly.The goal is to streamline the disparate technology systems that marketers now use to plan and buy ads. Advertisers often needed to work with one company to buy online ads, another company to buy mobile ads and yet another company to buy data to help personalize and target those ads.That has resulted in the so-called technology tax. Ad executives estimate that for every dollar spent on digital ads, as much as 75 percent is spent on the technology used to deliver the ad rather than the advertising space. It is the opposite ratio when marketers buy spots on traditional television.“The ad tech space has been so confusing for many, many years to the marketers,” Mr. Lord said. “We are on a mission to simplify that whole ecosystem.”Some ad executives have said that those complications have held back a shift in ad spending from traditional to digital media. Marketing executives point to several challenges, including a fear that the reliance on data will hurt creativity, a proliferation of online ad fraud as well as concerns over privacy issues. Media companies, meanwhile, have hesitated to sell their ads through automated systems, worrying that they could deflate the value of their commercial space.To be sure, automated, technologically driven ad buying is only one piece of the complicated marketing puzzle, and industry experts expect traditional face-to-face sales tactics to continue playing a role.So-called programmatic digital spending — transactions made using technology and data — remains a small portion of total ad budgets. It will reach $27.8 billion globally this year and $53.3 billion by 2018, according to Magna Global, the research and ad-buying division of the Interpublic Group. In comparison, the total global ad market this year surpasses $500 billion.Advertisement