By FRAN HAWTHORNEMAY 13, 2015
Michael Sears has been sailing for 60 years, since he was 5 years old, and has owned boats for half that time. Today he has a 36-foot Beneteau First 36s7 sloop and a smaller Sunfish racing dinghy.Over the last decade, however, Mr. Sears, a retired bond trader turned novelist who lives on Long Island, has gradually trimmed his sails. Five years ago he bought an electric winch to help raise and lower the sails on the sloop. After a lifetime of sailing solo, he now tries to take his wife, two grown sons or members of his yacht club along.“I’m not comfortable raising sails and handling everything on my own,” he said.Yet Mr. Sears has no intention of docking his ships soon. He cruises around Long Island Sound for a couple of hours once or twice every week from May to October and takes overnight trips to Oyster Bay or to Norwalk, Conn., two or three times a year.“It ties me to a couple thousand years of people doing this,” he said. “The boat and the sails and the wind: Life gets very simple.”AdvertisementWhen landlubbers think about boating, they may envision Jim Hawkins, the cabin boy in “Treasure Island,” played by Jackie Cooper in the 1934 film version, scrambling up the mast of the Hispaniola. But at today’s marinas, a more accurate image might be Squire Trelawney, the middle-age country gentleman played by Nigel Bruce who owns the ship.AdvertisementAccording to industry specialists, at least two-fifths of the owners of recreational boats in the United States and more than half the members of many boat clubs are over age 50.“There really is no age limit,” said D. Scott Croft, 51, vice president of public affairs for the Boat Owners Association of the United States, which is akin to AAA for boats, and who described himself as “between boats.” “There really isn’t a workout involved to go boating,” he said.Still, aging mariners cannot completely fool the calendar. “Boaters may not have the strength to do things they did 10 years ago,” said Christopher Lucas, 54, a software developer and the commodore, or president, of the Hempstead Harbour Club on Long Island. “They may not be as sure-footed on a boat that’s moving up and down and sideways. If they go for a swim, hauling themselves back on board may not be as easy.” He has a 30-foot sailboat.Boat owners adapt over time, perhaps installing mechanical gadgets like Mr. Sears’s winch, taking shorter trips, avoiding rough weather or even switching to craft that are easier to handle.While many boat owners, like Mr. Sears, grew up in boating families, specialists say that almost-retirement age is not too late to start. “Over 50, there are people who always thought they’d like to,” said Neil J. Gallagher, 59, a professor of marine engineering and naval architecture at Webb Institute on Long Island and commodore of the Glen Cove Yacht Club, who owns a 35-foot C&C sailboat.Those over-50 people may say, “If I’m going to do it, I’d better do it now,” he said.In some ways, Mr. Gallagher and other specialists say, people older than 50 are better positioned for boat ownership than younger people. They may be retired or have grown children and, as a result, have more free time. They also have had decades to save what many specialists estimate is the $8,000 to $40,000 typically needed to buy a used boat (used boats constitute most of the market).In addition, they would need, say, $6,000 a year for maintenance, including normal upkeep, winter storage at a boatyard, insurance and membership in a midlevel but not luxury club with docking privileges, not including fuel. (For new boats, the most popular models typically run $12,000 to $130,000.)AdvertisementThen there is the maturity factor. “When you’re older, you become a more responsible boater,” said Charles Walsh, 53, general manager of the Sea Cliff Yacht Club on Long Island, meaning less likely to speed or sail under the influence of alcohol.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Joseph Baird, 59, a social worker from Brooklyn, had to give away his first boat in the mid-1980s and daydreamed of getting another. “It didn’t seem in the cards,” he said, until 11 years ago. At that point, “the house was more or less renovated,” and his sons, then 8 and 10, were “a little more independent.”He bought a 1969 26-foot Grampian sailboat, and now he and his wife take a couple of friends and a picnic dinner onto Long Island Sound once or twice a week.“Some older boaters have been saving and planning to go off to farther horizons for extended periods of time, to the Caribbean or South America,” said Sally Helme, publisher of the Bonnier Corporation magazines Sailing World and Cruising World — perhaps on a new $300,000, 50-foot sailboat with air-conditioning, a television and Internet access. Although there are no statistics on how many people live year-round on their boats, Mr. Gallagher said that at the Glen Cove club, “maybe 5 to 10 percent over the years have gone on trips of a month or longer.”Moreover, technology has minimized the physical challenges for older boaters. An electric-power windlass can bring up the anchor, while motorized bow and stern thrusters help maneuver a vessel into port.Other fixes are low-technology. Owners can buy a small ladder for climbing out of the water. And if they run the control lines from the sails straight to the cockpit, they will not have to step on the cabin roof to raise or lower the sails.Because his night vision has weakened, Mr. Baird sometimes needs a half-dozen tries to grab the thin, fiberglass pickup buoy that marks his boat’s mooring. For emergencies, Mr. Gallagher and other specialists said, boats generally carry VHF radios for calling rescue services with high-speed craft or even helicopters, like municipal fire departments, county police and the Coast Guard.Though they could hire a boatyard, Mr. Baird and Mr. Gallagher do the grueling maintenance work themselves, spending two to five weekends each year on chores like sanding and checking the rigging. “Doing it yourself is strenuous,” Mr. Gallagher warned. When their boats get too hard to handle, older owners can trade them for easier models, although there is some debate as to whether that means larger or smaller. Boats 35 feet and longer are typically more stable, but it takes more strength to lower their sails in rough weather.Sailors can switch to powerboats and leave the sail hauling behind. “There’s nothing terribly physical about operating a powerboat,” said Thomas Dammrich, president of the National Marine Manufacturers Association, a trade group. “It’s like driving a car.”AdvertisementAn even bigger step is to abandon sole ownership and join a boat club or other sharing program. One example is TUI Marine, based in Clearwater, Fla., which sells boats to one set of clients, then leases back the craft for at least 40 weeks a year to rent to other customers. TUI is also responsible for maintenance.More than half of the 1,500 boat owners in this program are older than 55, the company said.Most boaters figure that someday they will have to tie up their craft for good, but they wave that “someday” off until their 80s or so. “It’s the same point when people ask, ‘Should I really be driving now?’ ” Mr. Lucas said. “When you think about vision problems and mobility issues.”For Lawrence Ward, 89, of Locust Valley, N.Y., a retired engineering professor, that point has arrived. After nearly eight decades on the water, he will try to sell the 40-year-old, 27-foot Pearson Commander sailboat that he inherited from his father.“I have to be practical,” he said. “I’m not using the boat that much anymore.”A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2015, on Page F3 of the New York edition with the headline: Deciding When to Trim Sails to Stay on Water .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.