By JOHN F. WASIKMAY 13, 2015
For years, the trope in retirement planning was to reduce the stock holdings in your portfolio and add bonds as you neared or entered retirement. That advice is being challenged.It goes against the grain to suggest that a successful retirement portfolio might need more stocks. Doesn’t that mean more market risk? It does, but weighed against inflation and bond-market risk, it could mean the difference in having enough money in one’s 80s or 90s or older.The key to this relatively new thinking is that stocks can deliver better inflation-adjusted returns than bonds most of the time and they may offer sustainable retirement financing over several decades. If you know how much risk you can take, you need to keep this growth-oriented “glide path” in mind to cover your future needs.According to Wade Pfau, professor of retirement income at the American College in Bryn Mawr, Pa., who wrote a recent paper with Michael Kitces of the Pinnacle Advisory Group, a private wealth management firm in Columbia, Md., a “rising glide path” that leans toward a greater percentage of stocks in a retirement portfolio “is often the best shot at making your money last.”AdvertisementMr. Pfau and Mr. Kitces ran simulations using various mixes of stocks and bonds over time. Since stock valuations go up and down every year, in some years they may be a better buy than in others.Advertisement“With U.S. historical data,” the authors report in their paper, “it is difficult to beat a strategy which maintains a consistently high allocation to stocks to the extent that a retiree’s risk tolerance allows for this, and subject to the caveat that high stock allocations cannot always be expected to do as well in the future.”In other words, if you understand the risk trade-off — and can stomach the year-to-year volatility — keeping or adding stocks in your portfolio may make sense.While bolstering the stock mix in your retirement portfolio looks good on paper, Mr. Pfau admits “it’s not for everyone.” Many are skittish about taking on more risk when they are trying to preserve capital. And it would really blister your retirement kitty if we had another 2008.In moving to a more dynamic form of investing, you also run the risk of timing the market. Managers can — and do — often guess wrong on the best times to buy. And most investors tend to buy stocks on the upswing and not when they are bargains.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It’s worth asking how much you will need in your nest egg to maintain a certain standard of living. What will your cash flow needs be, given out-of-pocket medical expenses, long-term care and discretionary expenses?At the very least, your adviser should be able to run some simulations based on the amount of money you have, your projected retirement withdrawals, how much you will spend and various portfolio mixes and rates of return. Of course, that’s a lot for anyone to digest.Fortunately, most planners have software that can generate multiple “what if” situations. They can show you the benefits of adding or scaling back on stocks. In any case, if you are chary about stock investing, you need to understand how diversifying with stocks and a variety of other assets can improve returns over time.Craig Israelsen, a developer of 7Twelveportfolio.com and principal with Target Date Analytics, has found that a “moderately aggressive” portfolio employing 12 different types of investments not only can outperform an all-stock portfolio, but beats all-cash and traditional “60 percent/40 percent” stock-bond portfolios.AdvertisementIn a study of different portfolios covering 1998 through 2014, Mr. Israelsen’s 12-asset mix returned an annualized 7.6 percent, compared with 6.4 percent for all stocks and 6.5 percent for the 60/40 combination.A certified financial planner, chartered financial analyst, registered investment adviser or qualified retirement planner should be able to give you a “present value” calculation. This figure shows the value today of an amount of money in the future given a certain rate of return.The way this math works is that the higher the rate of return on your portfolio — which also elevates market risk — the less money you’ll need today to fund your retirement. That’s where stocks come in, which historically have had higher annual returns than bonds or cash.No matter how you size up your retirement financing needs, one thing is certain: You’ll need to open your mind to different possibilities on how various investments perform over time. “To me,” Mr. Israelsen notes, “there are two major financial issues pertaining to retirement planning: adequate savings rate and an adequately diversified portfolio. It’s kind of like medicine. What is needed by one 59-year-old may not be appropriate for another 59-year-old.”A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2015, on Page F4 of the New York edition with the headline: Why Stocks Belong in a Retirement Portfolio.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.