AdvertisementSupported byRetirement Special SectionBy Conrad De AenlleYour retirement portfolio may be bigger than you realize. At least it would be if all your resources — your salary and home and not just the 401(k) plan at work — were enlisted to accumulate enough wealth to satisfy your needs and wants in old age, some financial advisers say.Factoring other assets and income streams into a financial plan can provide greater ease and flexibility in meeting goals, these advisers say. Such an approach may be especially useful now because the low income that many assets pay is causing savers to make their portfolios work harder than they should when sensible adjustments, like spending less and contributing more, would accomplish the same objective.“By controlling spending today, it will mean needing less in retirement,” said Ross Levin, president of Accredited Investors in Edina, Minn. Instead, “we’re seeing clients trying to create an income stream from their portfolios by stretching for investments that have more risk.”Saving more need not be an ordeal, Mr. Levin said. Cutting costs to save more and increase retirement contributions is one obvious tactic, but merely declining to loosen your belt, rather than tighten it, can have the desired impact.“When raises come in, saving the additional portion of your salary and getting used to living on what you earn now allows you to put more away,” he said.Even with no change in contributions, a holistic approach can help reduce portfolio risk and improve returns by showing where tweaks can be made to provide the best mix of holdings, according to a study by Morningstar Investment Management. It may help, for instance, to coordinate what you own with where you work, even if you don’t own stock in your employer.Following the logic set out in the study, someone who works for a company whose share price is inclined to move independently of the broad stock market, for instance a utility, may do better with a higher allocation to stocks in his or her retirement portfolio; that employee would probably have more job security. By contrast, an employee at a company whose stock moves in closer alignment with the market, say in a technology field, may want to keep a lighter exposure to stocks. If the economy were to falter, so would the stock market, and that employee would be more likely to be out of a job. “Most investors tend to focus entirely on the risk and return characteristics of investments, such as cash, bonds and stocks, when building portfolios, ignoring the interconnectedness of their portfolios with other assets they effectively own,” the authors, David Blanchett and Philip Straehl, wrote. Edward Deicke, a financial adviser at JHS Capital Advisors in Plainview, N.Y., finds a few instances in which a retirement portfolio’s holdings should be adjusted based on its owner’s job, but only a few.“To some, the idea has merit — if you work for Apple, you certainly have a bet on the Nasdaq — but I don’t think it affects that many people,” he said.The ones who it might affect are older workers with large stock portfolios and jobs that would be hard to replace. They might want to reduce exposure to their industry. But while he generally discourages tinkering with industry allocations, Mr. Deicke advises clients not to buy stock in their employers.“A lot of plans offer an ability to buy company stock,” he said. “We tell people never to do that because you’re tying your human value to your 401(k). You already have an interest in the company.” As people get older, their portfolios are gaining in value, knock on wood, and so are significant assets like their homes. A way to unlock that value is through a reverse mortgage; a lender makes monthly payments to a homeowner, rather than the other way around, and the money must be repaid when the home is sold or otherwise vacated. The payments to the owner are tax-free because they are proceeds from a loan, not a sale.But Walter Gondeck Jr., a partner in Deerfield, Ill., for HighTower, a nationwide financial advice firm, warned borrowers to avoid such mortgages where fees exceed 1 percent of the amount financed.A more straightforward way to wring cash out of a home that has substantial equity is to sell it in or near retirement and move into something smaller and cheaper. The money generated from the sale can produce income, and if your new home is in the right place, you can save in other ways. With no job tying you down, advisers say, you might consider a cheaper part of the country.Not that being tied to a job is necessarily a bad thing. Working part time into retirement means your portfolio won’t have to work overtime, Mr. Levin said. “One of the things that people don’t realize is that if they’re making $10,000 a year in part-time work, it’s like having an extra $250,000,” he said, reasoning that $10,000 is the 4 percent that might otherwise need to be withdrawn annually from a $250,000 retirement account, following a financial planning rule of thumb. “There are things that people like to do for a little bit of money that can go a long way for them.”Advertisement