By JACK EWINGMAY 13, 2015
STUTTGART, Germany — Anyone hoping that the Porsche shareholders’ meeting on Wednesday would turn into an episode of “Family Feud: Billionaire Edition,” would have been disappointed. The Porsche clan’s most controversial member, Ferdinand Piëch, did not show up.But the absence of Mr. Piëch, a towering figure in the postwar German auto industry until his abrupt ouster last month as chairman of Volkswagen, also raised questions about the future of Porsche Automobil Holding. The family-owned company, which no longer has direct control over the manufacturing of Porsche sports cars, has little other function than to collect dividends from its majority stake in Volkswagen.Mr. Piëch remains a member of the supervisory board of Porsche Automobil Holding even after resigning under pressure as chairman of Volkswagen last month following a power struggle. On Wednesday, he was the elephant that was not in the room. When he did not appear at the shareholders’ meeting, his seat on the podium in a Stuttgart concert hall, along with a sign bearing his name, was discreetly removed.Mr. Piëch evidently decided not to appear onstage with some of his antagonists. They included his cousin Wolfgang Porsche, chairman of the holding company’s supervisory board, who presided at the shareholders’ meeting, and Martin Winterkorn, chief executive of both Volkswagen and Porsche Automobil Holding.AdvertisementOther members of the Porsche Automobil Holding supervisory board, which includes several other Porsche relatives, avoided saying anything on Wednesday about Mr. Piëch or the recent power struggle. So did Mr. Winterkorn, who is not a member of the family.AdvertisementMr. Piëch’s two-decade reign over Volkswagen ended after his attempt to force out Mr. Winterkorn. It was a rare tactical miscalculation. Wolfgang Porsche and other major shareholders of Volkswagen, including the German state of Lower Saxony, backed Mr. Winterkorn, and Mr. Piëch was forced to resign as chairman of Volkswagen’s supervisory board.With Mr. Piëch choosing to stay away, the only excitement at the meeting came from the preferred shareholders’ exercising their right to address management. They included a man in a camouflage-print hunting shirt and baseball cap, as well as a student in a hooded sweatshirt. There was also a man upset that it had cost him 1,000 euros, or about $1,130, more to pick up his new Porsche Macan sport utility vehicle at the factory than it would have at a dealer.Some other shareholders who spoke at the meeting sounded as if they missed Mr. Piëch already, despite his record of sowing discord in Volkswagen and within the Porsche family.“His service to the company was incalculable,” said Daniel Jenderek, a representative of a German shareholders’ advocacy group called DSW.Porsche Automobil Holding’s shares, largely a proxy for Volkswagen, have fallen almost 9 percent since Mr. Piëch resigned on April 25.Mr. Jenderek asked what the family-controlled company would do with its profits, which in the first quarter rose 20 percent to €870 million. The money is divided among members of the Porsche family who own all the holding company’s voting shares, as well as outside investors who own preferred shares that are widely held but carry no voting rights.The preferred shares collected a dividend of €2.01 in 2014, unchanged from a year earlier.“It must be the nicest job in the world to sit on a pot of gold and just decide how to spend it,” Mr. Jenderek said. But he added: “It’s not so easy. Is there a rethinking of the business model?”AdvertisementBesides overseeing Volkswagen as chief executive and, later, as chairman for more than two decades, Mr. Piëch was the most visible member of the Porsche family. With a reputation for being demanding and autocratic, he overshadowed and — until last month — often outmaneuvered his more avuncular cousin Wolfgang Porsche.Now that he has given up the chairmanship of Volkswagen, Mr. Piëch has threatened to sell his share of slightly less than 14 percent of the holding company. That would break the Porsche family’s monopoly on the voting shares and expose it to influence from outside investors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It could also bring another big change to the Porsche family: harmony.Mr. Piëch has been at the center of disputes within the family that date to at least the 1960s and are inextricably entwined with the postwar history of the German automobile industry.A grandson of Ferdinand Porsche, designer of the car later known as the Volkswagen Beetle, Mr. Piëch was one of several family members who worked for Porsche in its early years as a sports car maker. He was in charge of the company’s racing program.But the cousins argued so much that in the 1970s they were barred from the sports car company by Ferdinand Porsche, known as Ferry. Ferry Porsche, who built up the sports car business, was the son of the Beetle designer and the uncle of Mr. Piëch.Mr. Piëch went to Volkswagen’s Audi unit, where he oversaw design of the Quattro four-wheel-drive passenger cars that brought the brand to prominence. Mr. Piëch’s success in molding Audi into a luxury brand on a par with BMW and Mercedes-Benz positioned him to become chief executive of Volkswagen in 1993.Though they were not formally merged until 2012, Volkswagen and Porsche have also long behaved like corporate siblings: They are close but sometimes bicker. Early Porsche sports cars depended heavily on Volkswagen parts and had air-cooled engines very similar to the ones found in Beetles, albeit in souped-up form. The companies collaborated on the development of vehicles like the four-wheel-drive Porsche Cayenne.Certain steps in the production of other models, including the Cayenne, still take place in the same buildings as Volkswagen products.Even as he oversaw Volkswagen over the course of more than two decades, Mr. Piëch exerted influence over Porsche the sports car maker, often openly in conflict with his cousins. When one Porsche chief executive fell out of favor, Mr. Piëch publicly undermined him by deliberately mispronouncing his name at a shareholders’ meeting. It was an example of how Mr. Piëch sometimes tried to unilaterally push out managers in whom he had lost confidence.AdvertisementIn 2008, that same Porsche chief executive, Wendelin Wiedeking, announced a brash attempt to take over Volkswagen. A convoluted and sometimes bizarre takeover battle followed. In effect, the sports car maker controlled by the Porsche family was trying to take over a company run by the best known member of the family — Mr. Piëch.After becoming chairman of the Volkswagen supervisory board in 2002, Mr. Piëch was no longer formally in charge of day-to-day operations but remained a dominant figure. He fiercely resisted the takeover and emerged victorious after the financial crisis hit and Porsche’s financing fell apart.Instead, Volkswagen acquired Porsche, which today operates as a division of Volkswagen. But while members of the extended Porsche family lost direct control of sports car manufacturing, Porsche Automobil Holding wound up with a majority stake in Volkswagen that is valued today at €33 billion.Except for a stake in Inrix, a United States company that makes technology for monitoring road traffic, Porsche Automobil Holding has no other business but its Volkswagen stake, and it is still defending against lawsuits that grew out of the aborted takeover battle.Mr. Winterkorn, in a speech to shareholders on Wednesday, promised that the holding company would make further investments, but offered no specifics. “Substance and profitability come before speed,” he said.Given Mr. Piëch’s reputation as a corporate infighter of the first order, no one is ready to completely exclude some kind of comeback. But his absence on Wednesday suggested that other members of the Porsche family may have to decide how to spend their money without him.A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Volkswagen Chairman Skips Investors’ Meeting.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.