AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinCBS will cancel one of its longest-running and popular shows, “CSI,” next season after a two-hour series finale in late September.The network made the announcement on Wednesday at a press briefing ahead of its upfront presentation for advertisers later in the day.“It’s easy to take it for granted and it’s easy to forget, but it was one of the strongest, longest-running dramas in TV history and very important to us as a network,” said Kelly Kahl, CBS’s vice president for prime time. “It was one of the shows that really helped reverse our fortunes and point us in a very positive direction.”One of the show’s biggest stars, Ted Danson, will move to a spinoff show, “CSI: Cyber,” where he will star alongside a recent Academy Award winner, Patricia Arquette.“CSI” helped make CBS one of the top-rated networks over the last 15 years and spawned several spinoffs, including “CSI: Cyber,” “CSI: NY” and “CSI: Miami.” Between the second season of “CSI” in 2001 and its sixth season in 2006, it averaged more than 23 million viewers an episode, according to Nielsen. This season, it is averaging a little more than 11 million viewers, a series low, and its rating among the crucial 18-to-49-year-old demographic is 2.1, also a series low.“CSI” will join another stalwart from the last decade in retirement: Fox announced on Monday that “American Idol” would be finished next year.Leslie R. Moonves, chief executive of CBS Corporation, opened the press briefing on Wednesday by saying, “I’m probably the oldest guy still doing the upfronts, but here I am.”Without skipping a beat, he then quickly went on to defend the network from a label it can’t shake, that CBS is the “old-fogy network,” as he put it.“Gee, CBS has all these old-timer shows,” Mr. Moonves said. “Yes, we’re going to retire a couple of shows, but this is a very young schedule, so our future is fairly well assured in terms of quality.”At its formal upfront presentation Wednesday afternoon, CBS played up its new late-night lineup. Stephen Colbert, who is replacing David Letterman, entertained advertisers and introduced Mr. Moonves from the Carnegie Hall stage. (The two are becoming fast friends; they also appeared in a taped segment together, both with long dark beards, humorously suggesting that they just couldn’t stop watching CBS programming.) The network’s other late-night host, James Corden, appeared as well.“The Big Bang Theory,” heading into its ninth season, remains the No. 1 comedy on television, and “Criminal Minds” continues to hold its own for CBS. But some of its shows, like “Elementary” or “Hawaii Five-O,” have lost momentum.Two new hit shows, “NCIS: New Orleans” and “Scorpion,” will return to the lineup, and will air at 9 p.m., “NCIS” on Monday and “Scorpion” on Tuesday. “Survivor,” a 15-year stalwart of the network, will continue to anchor the network’s 8 p.m. hour on Wednesday. “The miracle show, the marathon show, it just keeps going,” Mr. Kahl said.CBS is introducing a new drama for its fall lineup, “Limitless,” and new comedies, “Life in Pieces,” and “Angel From Hell.” “Angel” stars Jane Lynch, formerly of “Glee.”The network will also broadcast a guaranteed ratings hit, “Thursday Night Football,” through late October. When its football schedule ends, CBS will move “The Big Bang Theory” and “Life in Pieces” to Thursday night from Monday night.The network is entering the superhero realm with a show it has high hopes for, “Supergirl,” which will go into that Monday night slot. It will be the first time since 1949 that CBS will not have a comedy leading its prime-time schedule on Mondays, Mr. Kahl said.“We are often criticized for clinging to the past,” he said. “Here, we’re moving forward and we’re putting the best shows in the schedule and I don’t think we have to be beholden to a 65-year-old schedule.”Advertisement