AdvertisementSupported byBy David JollyWhat a comedown.Not too many years ago, Finland was seen as a “Nordic tiger” with a world-leading technology company, the cellphone maker Nokia. And ever since the financial crisis and Europe’s sovereign debt problems shined a harsh light on eurozone government finances, Finnish leaders have strongly supported the German chancellor in insisting on strong budget discipline as the medicine for the weaker members of the 19-nation currency bloc.Now it is Finland that looks weak. Its economy contracted 0.1 percent in the first quarter of 2015,  official data showed on Wednesday. That was its second consecutive quarterly decline, meeting the common definition of a recession.Factors include the effects of Western economic sanctions against Russia, which is Finland’s third-largest trading partner after Germany and Sweden. There is also the decline of Nokia as a global force in smartphones.Even Italy and Spain, countries that a few years ago appeared to be in danger of being forced out of the eurozone, performed better in the quarter. Among eurozone members, only Finland and troubled Greece are currently in recession, and economists now disparage the competitiveness of the Finnish labor force.Adding insult to injury, the European Commission said on Wednesday that it would decide within two weeks whether to bring an “excessive deficit procedure,” a type of administrative review that could result in a fine, because Finland’s finances were out of line with European rules.Finland in October lost its top-notch triple-A debt rating from Standard & Poor’s, which cited the risk of “protracted stagnation” for the downgrade. S&P now rates it AA+. Moody’s Investors’ Service and Fitch Ratings, though, still rate the country as triple-A.Finland’s current malaise is hardly a disaster for the eurozone. The country contributes only 1.9 percent of the bloc’s economy. Its problems are in some sense its own.Eero Lehto, an economist with the Labour Institute for Economic Research in Helsinki, said that Finland was being held back by a variety of factors that might not long endure. Exports to Russia “collapsed” after sanctions imposed by the West over Russian intervention in Ukraine, he said, even as fewer Russian tourists found it possible to visit Finland because of the sharp fall in the value of the ruble.The economy of the country of 5.4 million people has also been hurt by slumping demand for its forestry products, including paper, as digital communications have grown, Mr. Lehto noted.Then there is Nokia. The company, once the world’s biggest cellphone maker, was responsible for as much as one-fourth of Finland’s economic growth in the decade leading up to the global financial crisis. But the national tech champion failed to adapt to the smartphone revolution and was ultimately clobbered by Apple and Samsung.Mr. Lehto said the decline of Nokia’s cellphone business, which was sold to Microsoft in 2014, had cost many thousands of well-paying jobs, just as the formerly immense profit that the company had been spreading through the economy dried up, requiring a painful period of adjustment.“But I think it’s turning around now,” he added, pointing to the former Nokia employees who were finding new jobs in the country’s technology sector. “It’s sort of a process of creative destruction.”Advertisement