By JENNY ANDERSONMAY 13, 2015
LONDON — Navinder Singh Sarao, the British trader accused of helping cause the stock market “flash crash” in 2010, will appear in the High Court in London next week to appeal the terms of his bail. Mr. Sarao, 36, has been in jail since he was arrested on April 21.He faces 22 charges in the United States, including wire fraud, commodities manipulation and commodities fraud over his role in the “flash crash,” when stocks plunged in just minutes and then quickly recovered, causing panic among professional and retail investors alike.The trader is fighting extradition to the United States. His bail was set at 5.05 million pounds, which he has been unable to meet. As a result, he comes to court every Wednesday, dressed in various track suits, to discuss the terms of his release.At his first bail hearing, his lawyer said he was a man of means with access to more than £5 million in trading and betting accounts, though they said one of those accounts included a £4.7 million loan.AdvertisementHis lawyers quickly learned that his worldwide assets were frozen, making it impossible to raise the £5 million he owed (his parents and brothers are required to put up another £50,000). They appealed the bail decision on the basis that he had no access to funds and asked that his release be conditional on only the £50,000.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.District Judge Elizabeth Roscoe refused that request, and his team will appeal that decision on May 20 in the High Court. It emerged on Wednesday that Mr. Sarao has been granted legal aid.United States authorities say that that he made $40 million with his trading, which he allegedly conducted out of a simple row house near Heathrow Airport, where he lives with his parents.AdvertisementLast week, he said that he had “done nothing wrong” and “I am just good at my job.”A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Bail Appeal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.