By HIROKO TABUCHIMAY 13, 2015
Bad weather, port congestion and lower spending by tourists because of a stronger dollar all weighed on Macy’s first-quarter earnings, as profit and sales fell short of expectations.Macy’s, the department store chain that also operates Bloomingdale’s, said earnings for the 13-week period that ended May 2 were 56 cents a share, compared with 60 cents a share in the first quarter of 2014. Sales for the period fell 0.7 percent from last year to $6.2 billion, Macy’s said in a statement.“We fell short because of a confluence of factors,” said Terry J. Lundgren, Macy’s chairman and chief executive. “Delayed merchandise shipments from the West Coast port slowdown and severe winter weather early in the quarter restrained business levels. Moreover, sales were negatively affected by lower levels of spending by international tourists visiting major U.S. cities with flagship Macy’s and Bloomingdale’s stores, including New York City, Chicago, Las Vegas and San Francisco.”Shares of Macy’s, which is based in Cincinnati, ended down $1.60, or about 2.5 percent, at $63.73.To try to bolster sales, Macy’s will open four off-price stores in the New York area this year, joining an increasingly crowded field of discounters, including T. J. Maxx, Ross Stores, Burlington Stores and Nordstrom Rack.AdvertisementMacy’s off-price stores, called Macy’s Backstage, will sell clearance products from the chain’s full-price stores, and specially sourced goods priced 20 to 80 percent lower than comparable merchandise at Macy’s stores, the company said early this month. Though discounters’ sales have generally grown faster than those of full-price retailers, some analysts worry that Macy’s Backstage outlets could cannibalize sales from its mainstay department stores.Macy’s has also sought to broaden its customer base with a stronger foothold in beauty. It acquired the beauty and spa chain Bluemercury for $210 million this year, and has said it plans to bring some Bluemercury boutiques and products to its department store locations.AdvertisementAlso reporting earnings Wednesday, J.C. Penney, in the midst of a turnaround, said its losses in the first-quarter fell by about half to $167 million, thanks to an uptick in sales and lower costs. It raised its forecast for the year, saying it now expects sales at stores open more than a year to grow 4 to 5 percent, from an earlier projection of 3 to 5 percent.A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Macy’s Posts Decline in Profit and Sales, Citing Weather and Congestion at Ports .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.