AdvertisementSupported byBy Jenny AndersonLONDON — The Bank of England expects British consumer prices, which have been stuck at a zero-percent inflation rate for two months, to pick up by the end of the year, as the economy gathers steam.The central bank on Wednesday did trim its economic growth forecast for the year to 2.5 percent, from its earlier estimate of 2.9 percent. But the revision reflects the low growth in the first quarter — 0.3 percent — which was short of the bank’s estimate of 0.6 percent.The inflation rate will rise to 0.6 percent by the end of 2015, the bank predicted on Wednesday. The central bank’s policy target is an annual inflation rate of 2 percent, which is deemed a healthy sign of economic growth.As the economy picks up, the Bank of England is expected to begin raising its benchmark interest rate, which has been fixed at 0.5 percent since March 2009. Investors expect that rate to rise to 0.9 percent in 2016 and to 1.3 percent in 2017.The numbers released by the Bank of England on Wednesday came after an unusually long period of silence from the central bank, which like other public institutions was required to remain silent in the lead-up to the general election, which was held on May 7.In his first public statement since the Conservative Party secured a parliamentary majority in the election, Mark J. Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, sent a letter on Wednesday to the chancellor of the Exchequer, Britain’s treasury secretary. Such letters are required whenever the central bank misses its inflation target.Mr. Carney wrote that the causes for the absence of inflation were the same as he had outlined in February: falling commodity prices, namely food and oil prices, and weak wage growth.The price in pounds of crude oil was 44 percent lower in March than in the middle of 2014, for example, and food prices fell 3 percent in the first quarter.As those forces start to abate, the bank said, inflation would most likely start rising.Mr. Carney said the British economy was strong. “The economy is growing, unemployment is falling and earnings growth has improved since the middle of last year,” he wrote.The impact of lower energy and food prices will help consumers, he said: Real disposable income is expected to rise more in 2015 than in any year since 2007.But wage growth continues to be a concern, and remains significantly lower than the 4 percent to 4.5 percent annual growth observed before the financial crisis.Official data released on Wednesday showed that total pay, including bonuses, rose 1.9 percent in the January-to-March period from the same period a year earlier.In February, the central bank had estimated that wages would rise 3.5 percent in 2015. On Wednesday, it lowered that outlook to 2.5 percent.Mr. Carney wrote that the bank had also lowered its outlook for productivity. While it expects growth, it will be below the levels seen before the crisis.“Productivity is fundamental,” he wrote. “It is the determinant of higher living standards.”Advertisement