By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMAY 13, 2015
A stalwart of corporate America scored a victory against shareholder activism on Wednesday as DuPont defeated a corporate governance challenge by the billionaire Nelson Peltz.With shareholders in the chemical maker re-electing all of its existing directors, DuPont dealt Mr. Peltz his first loss since opening his firm, Trian Fund Management, a decade ago.More important, the 213-year-old company, maker of Kevlar and Teflon, won a closely contested battle with an activist at a time when investors have increasingly backed campaigns to shake up companies and their boards.Such campaigns have tilted toward activist shareholders in recent years. The hedge fund Starboard Value, for example, was able to oust the entire board of Darden Restaurants, the owner of Olive Garden. Successes like that have prompted more and more companies to settle in hopes of avoiding public, messy brawls.AdvertisementBut DuPont and its chief executive, Ellen J. Kullman, chose a riskier strategy: They stood their ground and fought against Mr. Peltz, one of the most highly regarded corporate dissidents around, whose reputation has won him board seats without necessarily waging public fights.Advertisement“We are pleased with the outcome of the vote and especially appreciate the strong expressions of support from so many of our shareholders for our strategic transformation and the continued execution of our plan,” Ms. Kullman said in a statement.Yet DuPont will now be under close scrutiny from investors. Shares of the company fell 6.8 percent on Wednesday, to $69.33. The big California public pension fund known as Calstrs said it was “disappointed” in the results.Trian began its public fight against DuPont in January, when it formally sought four seats on the company’s board. The move was significant in a number of ways: Mr. Peltz had waged just one proxy fight at Trian, against H.J. Heinz, and DuPont was the biggest American company ever to face a boardroom challenge from an activist.At the heart of Mr. Peltz’s campaign was an argument that the company had not done enough to cut costs and had repeatedly missed financial performance targets. His investment firm pointed to what it called missteps like the sale of a paint coatings unit that its new owner subsequently listed on the stock market at a significantly higher valuation than what it had paid.Ms. Kullman argued in turn that the conglomerate had outperformed typical indicators like the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index. She also contended that DuPont had taken a number of steps to bolster shareholders’ returns, including through stock dividends and buybacks, though Trian has claimed credit for prodding some of those moves.So bitter was the fight that each side repeatedly spurned settlement offers from the other and instead assailed the other’s credibility in public. DuPont claimed that Mr. Peltz was driven at times by pettiness, rejecting proposed compromises because he would not personally get a board seat. (Trian has said that it initially sought a board seat for another senior executive at the firm, but was rejected.)It is unclear whether Wednesday’s election — which people briefed on the preliminary vote results described as roughly 52 percent of the shares in favor of DuPont — augurs any change in the world of shareholder activism. Even those close to the company acknowledge that it benefited from roughly 30 percent of its shares being held by individual investors, an unusually high percentage for a class that historically backs management teams.Ellen Kullman, chief executive of DuPont, prevailed in a bitter corporate governance fight with the investor Nelson Peltz.But DuPont and Ms. Kullman also won over the company’s three biggest shareholders, the mutual fund giants BlackRock, Vanguard and State Street, whose collective stake is nearly 17 percent. Trian had been betting on winning over at least one of those firms to secure victory.AdvertisementAs recently as late last week, the election looked to be too close to call, according to people briefed on the votes. Much of the base of institutional shareholders, including Calstrs, had supported Mr. Peltz’s efforts.Giving Trian additional hope was the backing of three big proxy advisory firms, whose recommendations historically have swayed many institutional shareholders. The results raise some questions about the continued influence of these proxy advisers, whom both companies and activists assiduously court in their fights.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet as the final votes came in — State Street earlier this week, Vanguard on Tuesday — the tide appeared to have turned in the company’s favor. Both DuPont and Trian stayed up late on Tuesday night to count results.By about midnight, it had become clear that DuPont had prevailed.“Trian’s involvement in DuPont over the past two years has created substantial value for all stockholders,” Trian said in a statement. “We are proud of the quality of our analysis and the role we have played as a positive change agent at DuPont.”Trian’s plans now remain unclear. In an interview with Bloomberg Television, Mr. Peltz noted that the next chance to nominate board candidates was only about six months away.“We will take a watchful eye,” he said. “It’s a long road, and we’ll see where the company goes from here.”A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: DuPont Wins Showdown With Activist.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.