By HIROKO TABUCHI and JONATHAN SOBLEMAY 13, 2015
For months, the problem of defective airbags made by the Japanese supplier Takata has festered in the auto industry as recalls have mounted and automakers have searched for the reason that the airbags can explode violently, sending pieces of metal into the cabin.On Wednesday, Toyota and Nissan sharply escalated the recalls, adding 6.5 million vehicles worldwide to the 25 million already deemed to contain potentially dangerous components. At least six deaths and more than 100 injuries have been linked to the defect.Toyota said tests carried out on vehicles with Takata-made airbags, including some recovered from junkyards, had shown that the steel inflaters, the parts that contain the propellant and can burst apart, were sometimes not airtight. In those cases, the propellant can become destabilized, raising the risk of rupture. Among the tests Toyota conducted were CT scans, like those used in hospitals to see inside the human body, to check the components’ integrity.“Certain types of airbag inflaters were found to have a potential for moisture intrusion over time,” the company said in a statement.AdvertisementStill, Toyota said the relationship between moisture and the risk of rupture was “still very much unknown.”AdvertisementToyota is among an alliance of automakers — brought together last year as the airbag recalls mushroomed — that has been conducting its own independent tests on the airbags.One source of concern has been the airbags’ propellant, ammonium nitrate, a cheap but powerful explosive that engineers say can destabilize if contaminated with moisture. Despite its unstable properties, Takata chose to use ammonium nitrate in its airbag inflaters because of cost concerns, former engineers have said.Takata has said that simple manufacturing blunders led some batches of its ammonium nitrate to become contaminated with moisture. But testimony of former engineers, as well as patents filed by Takata, show that the company grappled with ammonium nitrate’s fundamental properties for more than a decade.Another concern has been the inflater itself, and whether it corrodes over time, allowing moisture to reach the explosive, or propellant, that it encases.George R. Neff, the developer of a system that uses trace radiation to test whether components are airtight, said in an interview that he worked with Takata to check inflater prototypes for leaks in the early 2000s.Speaking publicly for the first time, Mr. Neff, president of IsoVac Engineering, a defense contractor, said he told Takata at the time that a helium-based method its engineers used to detect leaks was inadequate. Its inflaters could stop being airtight within several years, and some of their prototypes were already leaking, Mr. Neff said he warned.“We found a lot of leakers,” Mr. Neff said. “I told them that I thought their leak-test methods were crude,” he said. “In a period of a year or two years or certainly five years, those devices could reach 100 percent equilibrium with the environment around them.”Carlos Ghosn, the chairman and chief executive of Nissan Motor, said the decision to recall 1.56 million cars was “part of the solution” to tackle the trouble over Takata’s defective air bags.Takata decided not to buy his system of radiation-based testing, sticking to its helium leak-testing method, Mr. Neff said.Advertisement“My opinion was asked by the Takata management,” he said. “I gave them my opinion, and they asked me to leave the meeting.”Takata said it had no comment on current or former leak tests on its inflaters. In the past, it has said that any problems with the airbags were a result of manufacturing errors, not design flaws.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Karl Rink, an airbag industry consultant who has worked with Takata, and a former engineer at Autoliv, a Swedish-American airbag manufacturer, said he agreed with Mr. Neff that helium-based testing was inadequate and prone to errors. Mr. Rink said he had long raised concerns at industry and academic conferences that airbag makers were not properly testing their inflaters for leaks.He said the issue was of particular concern to Takata because the ammonium nitrate it uses in its inflaters is so moisture-sensitive.“Based on my experience with leak-testing airbag inflaters, I have little confidence that their components will be airtight,” said Mr. Rink, a former professor of mechanical engineering at the University of Idaho. “I think they all should be recalled.”About five million of the vehicles recalled on Wednesday were Toyotas. Of that total, 637,000 are in the United States and 1.36 million are in Japan. Thirty-five models were affected, the company said, including top sellers like the Corolla. Nissan’s recall covered 1.56 million vehicles.Toyota and Nissan said they were not aware of any injuries stemming from faulty airbags in the vehicles recalled on Wednesday, which were manufactured between 2003 and 2007. They described the recalls as “investigative” and “preventive.”Although previous Takata recalls were tied to high humidity in the United States, the moves by Toyota and Nissan on Wednesday did not appear focused on specific areas. Toyota said climate did not factor into its decision.AdvertisementAutomakers around the world and Takata have struggled to provide fixes for the vast number of affected vehicles. Last month, the administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Mark R. Rosekind, said Takata was moving too slowly and his agency was reviewing options to speed up the recalls.The regulator is fining the company up to $14,000 a day in an effort to speed its response. Takata has said it is committed to cooperating with the safety agency.Takaki Nakanishi, an auto analyst and chief executive of Nakanishi Research Institute, said the scale of the latest recall was surprising.“It seemed like the worst was over,” Mr. Nakanishi said, “but this raises the prospect that there are still many more vehicles out there that will ultimately be recalled.”A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Automakers Expand Airbag Recalls .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.