By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMAY 14, 2015
Bank of America Merrill Lynch has set up a group to help companies raise money through private fund-raising, the investment bank announced in an internal memorandum on Thursday.To lead its new group, the firm named Sachin Aggarwal and Warren Fixmer, according to the memo, which was reviewed by DealBook.The creation of what Bank of America calls its “Strategic & Private Capital Solutions Group” is the latest move by a bank to capitalize on helping start-ups raise money without holding an initial public offering.Companies like Airbnb and Snapchat have taken advantage of eagerness from investors for fast-growing start-ups to raise hundreds of millions of dollars without listing their shares on public stock markets.AdvertisementBank of America is following in the footsteps of competitors like Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs in adding a focus on private fund-raising. Earlier this week, JPMorgan Chase said that it had hired an executive from Barclays to lead a similar push.AdvertisementMr. Aggarwal and Mr. Fixmer will report to J. D. Moriarty, the firm’s head of equity capital markets for the Americas.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A spokesman for Bank of America confirmed the contents of the memo.Below is the full text of the memo:May 14, 2015Americas Equity Capital Markets announces formation of Strategic & Private Capital Solutions GroupA message from JD Moriarty, head of Americas Equity Capital MarketsTo: Global Capital Markets employees and GCIB Americas managing directorsI am pleased to announce the formation of a dedicated team within the Americas Equity Capital Markets group to help our clients source private capital alternatives. Sachin Aggarwal and Warren Fixmer have been appointed co-heads of the Strategic & Private Capital Solutions Group. They will partner together to leverage our world class distribution platform and help our issuer clients access sources of private capital.Both Sachin and Warren possess deep expertise in the execution of equity and equity-linked securities, public and private, and will continue in their respective Syndicate and Origination roles in addition to their newly expanded positions.Please join me in congratulating Sachin and Warren on their new roles and in wishing them continued success.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.