AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonThe Blackstone Group is taking a minority stake in Magnetar Capital, the $13.6 billion hedge fund run by the former Citadel trader Alec Litowitz.It is the latest deal for the hedge fund arm of Blackstone, a unit run by J. Tomilson Hill. Blackstone, based in New York, has been building up a portfolio of minority stakes in hedge funds and has raised more than $3 billion to do so.Magnetar said the deal would help it expand. It added that it would retain full control of the business. It did not disclose the financial terms of the deal.“Blackstone’s investment provides a catalyst that will help us achieve the firm’s strategic objectives, which include continuing to attract and retain key talent, increasing our investment in our funds and deepening our relationship with a leader in the alternative asset management sector,” Mr. Litowitz said in a statement.It is the latest in a series of recent deals in which investment firms have bought equity stakes in the hedge fund business. Last month, the family office of the Google chairman Eric E. Schmidt bought a 20 percent stake in the hedge fund D. E. Shaw. In March, the private equity unit of the Neuberger Berman Group bought a 20 percent stake in the activist hedge fund Jana Partners.Magnetar will be the third hedge fund in which Blackstone has bought a minority stake. It also owns stakes in the Senator Investment Group and Solus Alternative Asset Management. Blackstone has bought stakes of 15 to 25 percent in each deal.Blackstone’s hedge fund unit, called Blackstone Alternative Asset Management, has $66 billion of assets under management. It plans to eventually list the portfolio of hedge fund stakes through a public offering and allow individual investors to buy into it, according to two people with knowledge of the firm’s thinking who spoke on the condition of anonymity.“We have been invested in Magnetar funds since early in the firm’s history, and have great respect for the organization and its people,” Mr. Hill said in a statement on Thursday.Magnetar, which is based in Evanston, Ill., was founded by Mr. Litowitz and Ross Laser in 2005. It invests in fixed income, energy and corporate events like activist campaigns in which investors seek to change a company by buying a stake in the company and pushing for change. It gained attention after successfully betting against the housing market going into the financial crisis.Advertisement