By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDOCT. 21, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO — Kohlberg Kravis Roberts may have become famous for its huge leveraged buyouts, including its $33 billion takeover of the hospital operator HCA.But as the investment firm continues to push into smaller growth-equity deals, it is taking part in a $50 million investment in a decidedly smaller health care company.KKR planned to announce on Thursday that it has led the investment in Cohera Medical, a Pittsburgh-based start-up focused on creating adhesives that can replace surgical sutures. The financing comes as Cohera prepares to begin selling its main product, TissuGlu, in the United States for “tummy tuck” procedures.As part of the investment, Ali J. Satvat, a director at K.K.R. who led the transaction, will join Cohera’s board.AdvertisementThe growth-equity financing is the latest by K.K.R. as it delves into smaller deals involving fast-rising privately held companies. Other private equity firms have moved into the business, hoping to collect higher returns from relatively smaller investments.AdvertisementHere, the firm is betting on Cohera, which was founded nearly 10 years ago to focus on surgical adhesives that can be used inside the human body. TissuGlu, its primary offering, was approved by the Food and Drug Administration last year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That was when the company — which raised more than $78 million before the current round — began considering garnering more money. A number of people had suggested that it consider K.K.R., though Cohera’s chief executive, Patrick Daly, was a little confused by the suggestion.“Like most folks, I thought, ‘But that’s a private equity firm,’” Mr. Daly said in a telephone interview.Still, he met with Mr. Satvat and the K.K.R. team and began to forge a relationship.According to Mr. Daly, Cohera will begin sales of TissuGlu in 10 cities initially, from New York through the Southeast and Texas.Cohera also has a second adhesive, Sylys, that is in clinical trials. The product is meant to be used to help avoid leaking in the bowels during gastrointestinal operations.Mr. Satvat called the potential for Cohera’s products enormous.“It all comes down to the number of flap procedures,” he said. “We don’t think we see a real limit.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.