By ANDREW E. KRAMERMAY 14, 2015
MOSCOW — The Russian economy is sliding into a recession. Consumers are retreating. Corporate profits are suffering.But the ruble is having a strangely successful year. Since January, the ruble has been the best performer of any currency, up 21 percent.The ruble has risen so robustly that the central bank on Thursday reversed a long-running policy of propping it up. Under a new plan, the central bank will buy foreign currencies to replenish its reserves, a move that will effectively weaken the ruble.It represents a stark turnabout.Last year, the central bank spent billions defending the currency, which sank to a post-Soviet low as Russia was hit with the dual blow of sanctions over the Ukraine crisis and the weakness in oil prices. The ruble was the second-worst-performing currency in 2014, just behind the Ukrainian hryvnia.AdvertisementThe underlying economic prospects for the country have not changed. Russia is headed into a deep recession, and Western trade and financial sanctions are still biting into consumer confidence. But the markets, at least, are finding a glimmer of hope.Advertisement“Certainly sentiment has improved for Russia,” said Boris Erenburg, a portfolio manager with the Spinnaker Capital Group in London. “A lot of things have been working so far this year.”Oil prices have bounced off their lows. Russia’s economy is heavily dependent on energy exports, and the fate of the ruble has historically followed the price of a barrel.Tensions, too, are easing over the Ukraine crisis, even if sanctions have not. The threat that the crisis will blow up into a major war in Europe seems to be diminishing.Even a diplomatic thaw now looks possible. Secretary of State John Kerry met with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia this week.It also helps that the United States dollar is weakening on worries that the American economy is losing momentum. As the dollar’s rally has faded, currencies around the world have surged. The euro, which early this year was flirting with parity to the dollar, reached a three-month high on Thursday.“It’s a broader dollar move that we’re seeing in the light of the disappointing data out of the U.S.,” said Phyllis Papadavid, a senior foreign exchange strategist at BNP Paribas in London. “This isn’t a euro move.”Given the confluence of events, investors have been broadly more optimistic about the opportunities in Russia.AdvertisementThe benchmark Russia index, the Micex, is up more than 20 percent this year, although it has given up some of its gains in recent weeks. Yields on Russian bonds have been falling over the last few months, reflecting increased demand from investors.On Thursday, the ruble hit 50 against the dollar. At its lowest point last year, it traded briefly around 80.“Everyone is saying it has been developing surprisingly better than expected,” Vladimir Miklashevsky, an economist at Danske Bank, said of the ruble’s rise. “You have a better equation for your profits.”So far this year, Danske Bank’s two Russian stock funds are the best in the bank’s portfolio, taking into account the appreciation of the ruble. The bank’s broad stock fund is up 47 percent year to date, and the small capitalization fund is up 45 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Russia’s central bank’s new plan, though, may put a crimp in the currency. The central bank said it intended to buy $100 million to $200 million a day on Russia’s currency market.In doing so, Russia will restock its foreign currency reserves. Since the start of the Ukraine crisis in January 2014, those reserves have dropped by $143 billion, as the central bank tried to prop up the ruble.While not the central bank’s stated goal, the move will also limit the ruble’s rise. It has good reason to do so.An overly strong currency hurts exports and could tip the budget into a deficit. Revenue from its biggest export, oil, is taxed in rubles, while the commodity is priced in dollars.Weakening the currency, said Mr. Miklashevsky, ensures that the government will have sufficient revenue to avoid cuts to pensions and the military this year. If the ruble were allowed to appreciate, both outlays might have been reduced in ruble terms.AdvertisementYaroslav Lissovolik, chief economist for Russia at Deutsche Bank, said the weak ruble policy was also intended to prop up domestic industry and agriculture in these geopolitically uncertain times, albeit at the cost of leaving inflation high.“There’s still the hope a weaker ruble will still deliver import substitution” — a switch to buying domestic products from some imports — he said. “The weaker ruble creates these conditions for an easy life for local enterprises, so they don’t have to engage in active restructuring and actively try to increase productivity and efficiency.”The ruble’s value — and helping to stabilize those industries — is especially critical at this economic juncture.The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development predicts that Russia’s economy will contract 4.5 percent this year. The World Bank predicts a 3.5 percent drop.In short, Russia is facing a recession. Although the Russian government predicts that the economy will return to growth in 2016, both groups expect the downturn to continue next year.“We’re not at the bottom of the crisis,” Mr. Miklashevsky said of the central bank’s shift on Thursday. High inflation and interest rates, only now made worse by the bank’s intervention, are still “murder for the real economy.”An article last Friday about Russia’s changing policy on support of the ruble referred incorrectly to the chief economist for Russia at Deutsche Bank, who commented on the policy. The economist, Yaroslav Lissovolik, is a man.The Common Sense column, by James B. Stewart, which normally appears on this page, was published on Thursday.David Jolly contributed reporting from Paris.A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Shift by Russia Aims to Cool Ruble .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.