AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew Goldstein and David GellesThe federal government’s system for filing securities documents may not be as secure as many on Wall Street assume, considering what appears to have been a fake bid on Thursday for Avon Products.The bid, which was reported on the Securities and Exchange Commission’s online database, points to a hole in the plumbing of the United States’ securities market.Around 11:30 a.m., a firm calling itself PTG Capital Partners disclosed in a regulatory filing that it had offered to buy Avon for $18.75 a share.The filing, from what was supposedly a British investment firm, caused an immediate sensation after news wire services flashed headlines of the offer to their trading customers. Shares of Avon, which had opened the day’s trading at $6.71, jumped by more than $1.At first, it appeared that a long-awaited deal for the cosmetics company had finally arrived; Avon has been under pressure to sell itself for years. After resisting a $10.7 billion bid from a rival, Coty, in 2012, Avon was again rumored to be a target in January. The likely buyer was named as TPG Capital, the private equity giant. In 25 minutes on Thursday, some $91 million worth of Avon shares changed hands, Bloomberg calculated.The commotion in the shares started to settle down around noon after it was determined that neither PTG Capital nor the firm’s supposed lawyer in the United States existed at the locations given in the regulatory filing. Avon issued a statement saying that it had not received an offer and could not confirm that PTG even existed.For all intents and purposes, it turned out to be the buyout bid that wasn’t. Even so, shares of Avon closed nearly 6 percent higher on the day, at $7.07.Securities regulators will want to learn who was behind the filing and determine whether it was an attempt to manipulate the market, said a person briefed on the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Before the filing by PTG Capital, there was no smoking gun in the options market related to Avon shares, said Henry Schwartz, president of Trade Alert, an options analysis firm. An unusual surge in options trading can be a tipoff that some traders believe market-moving news is about to become public.Whether or not market manipulation was a goal, the incident raises questions about the security of the S.E.C.’s Edgar database. Edgar is used by both publicly traded companies and money managers to make official regulatory filings.“Investors and traders assume that Edgar is accurate because it is associated with the S.E.C.,” said Erik Gordon, a professor at the University of Michigan Ross School of Business. “The S.E.C. will have to reconsider what lengths it should go to in order to provide a high level of assurance that filings are real.”The agency provides a unique identification number and password to every company and investment firm that uses the system to submit online filings. To obtain approval to submit a filing to the database, a prospective filer must complete a notarized form that asks for things like the name of the business, a tax identification number, address, phone number and email address.But is not clear what the S.E.C. does to verify the information provided.“Under the federal securities laws, filers are responsible for the truthfulness of their filings, and they are subject to enforcement actions when they are false or misleading,” the S.E.C. said in an emailed statement.The agency added that it received about 4,000 filings to the Edgar system each day and made them automatically available to the public.The statement did not address what vetting the S.E.C. does of applicants. The regulatory agency does not do much verification of applications other than making sure the form is filled out properly and notarized, the person briefed on the matter said.More troubling is the fact this may not be the first time the Edgar database has been used to carry out a hoax.Another supposed British investment firm — this one calling itself PST Capital Partners — submitted a buyout proposal for Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory in 2012. The offer also was made in a filing that appeared on the Edgar database.Just as with the Avon bid, the proposal to buy Rocky Mountain Chocolate proved to be a fabrication. In that case, the Colorado-based company said in a statement that it did not believe the offer to be credible because the address provided for the firm in London was a mailbox service. The address for PST Capital’s law firm was a mailbox service in California.The S.E.C. declined to comment on the 2012 incident.There are similarities between the Avon and Rocky Mountain Chocolate bids. Both filings used language from the websites of two big private equity firms on their websites. The S.E.C. database lists the place of incorporation for both PTG Capital and PST Capital as the British Indian Ocean Territory, an archipelago of more than 2,000 small islands.In the Avon situation, the PTG Capital name is similar to that of TPG Capital. Most of the description of PTG in the S.E.C. filing is lifted from TPG’s website.In fact, the filing even refers to “TPG’s approach,” apparently in an inadvertent slip. Another passage is lifted from the “expertise” section of TPG’s website. Other parts of the filing appear to be lifted from Wikipedia.The offer from PST Capital mimicked some of the language that buyout firm GTCR uses on its website. The 2012 letter said it pioneered “The Leaders Strategy,” a phrase GTCR uses in its online description.A representative for GTCR was not available for comment. TPG said it had nothing to do with the Avon filing and declined to comment further.By day’s end, the voice mail attached to the phone number for PTG Capital, which appeared in the regulatory filing, was no longer accepting messages.Chad Bray and Ben Protess contributed reporting.Advertisement