By JACK EWING and NIKI KITSANTONISMAY 14, 2015
FRANKFURT —  Yanis Varoufakis, the Greek finance minister, on Thursday once again demonstrated his flair for inflaming the debate about his country’s economic future.He made statements at an Athens conference that were interpreted — falsely, he later insisted — as a threat not to pay billions of euros that Greece owes to the European Central Bank.But Mr. Varoufakis did not backpedal from separate comments he made to the Greek Parliament on Thursday, saying that the “soul” of the central bank’s president, Mario Draghi, was “filled with fear” at the thought of giving Greece a break on its debts, because of the potential reaction among hard-liners in Germany.Mr. Varoufakis’s remarks are unlikely to endear him to the central bank at a time when Greece needs its help to avoid economic collapse. The central bank’s Governing Council is already weary of what some of its members regard as irresponsible behavior by Mr. Varoufakis and other members of Greece’s leftist government.AdvertisementFar from giving Greece a break, the Governing Council is expected to tighten the screws next Wednesday by placing further restrictions on emergency cash the central bank provides to keep the Greek banking system from collapsing.Whatever Mr. Varoufakis meant to say on Thursday, Greece will continue to scramble to make debt payments in coming months as it tries to avoid a default and a potential forced march from the euro currency union.AdvertisementSpeaking at a conference on Thursday sponsored by The Economist, Mr. Varoufakis proposed a convoluted scheme that would effectively allow the government to borrow 6.7 billion euros, or about $7.6 billion, that it needs this summer to repay bonds held by the European Central Bank.Mr. Varoufakis reacted angrily later after various news media reported that he had threatened to push payments to the central bank far into the future.“This type of ‘journalism’ must, at long last, be isolated and shamed by the vast majority of journalists striving to properly inform the public,” the Greek Finance Ministry said in a statement.The Finance Ministry, though, did not disavow Mr. Varoufakis’s “filled with fear” comment about Mr. Draghi, who he said was cowed by hard-liners at the German central bank, the Bundesbank. Germany is the eurozone country to which Greece owes the most.The European Central Bank declined on Thursday to comment on Mr. Varoufakis’s remarks.Mr. Varoufakis has often provoked people like Mr. Draghi whose help Greece needs to remain in the eurozone. To mollify irritated eurozone leaders, Alexis Tsipras, the Greek prime minister, has scaled back Mr. Varoufakis’s participation in negotiating sessions. But he has not muzzled Mr. Varoufakis.
            The country will be facing several large debt repayments in the coming months.        Scheduled 2015Greek debt repayments4billion eurosEuropeanCentral BankInternationalMonetaryFund3210MJJASONDMAY 10, 2015
In the past, the central bank has refused to consider forgiving Greek debt, which it acquired in 2010 as part of a program intended to stabilize bond markets. The central bank would probably regard any debt forgiveness as a violation of a rule that prohibits it from financing eurozone governments.AdvertisementWhat Mr. Varoufakis actually suggested on Thursday, according to the Greek Finance Ministry, was that bonds it must pay back to the central bank — over all, Greece owes it at least €20 billion — be paid by a eurozone emergency fund called the European Stability Mechanism. That fund was established to aid Greece and other financially troubled eurozone countries. Greece would then issue new debt that it would owe to the stability mechanism, Mr. Varoufakis said, according to the ministry.While Greece can hardly afford to take on any more debt than it already has, the bond swap Mr. Varoufakis proposed would at least avoid the appearance that the country cannot make debt repayments that are coming due.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Greece has been going through financial contortions to avoid defaulting on its debts and setting off a chain of events that could force the country to abandon the euro. An example came on Tuesday, when the government managed to make a €750 million payment due to the International Monetary Fund.The money came from a special reserve that the I.M.F. requires all of its member nations to maintain. In other words, Greece used I.M.F. money to pay the I.M.F.Now, Mr. Varoufakis is proposing to borrow from the eurozone to repay the eurozone’s central bank.Jack Ewing reported from Frankfurt, and Niki Kitsantonis from Athens.A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Greece’s Outspoken Finance Minister Says the E.C.B.’s Chief Fears Germany.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.