By REUTERSMAY 14, 2015
The United States is facing its worst outbreak on record of avian influenza. Three deadly strains have hit North American poultry flocks since December, and the spread of infection has been picking up speed in the last month.So far, more 33 million birds have been or are expected to be killed. Three states – Wisconsin, Minnesota and Iowa – have declared a state of emergency.Poultry exports, which totaled more than $6 billion last year, have been hit as buyers, including China and Mexico, impose bans on American supplies.Here is a timeline of the spread of the viruses, according to the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, part of the United States Agriculture Department; the Food Inspection Agency of Canada; and responses from the industry and trade partners.AdvertisementDec. 2, 2014 Canadian authorities quarantine two turkey and chicken farms in British Columbia after an H5 type of avian influenza is detected there, later confirmed to be the H5N2 strain.AdvertisementDec. 3 South Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan and Japan impose restrictions on poultry and poultry products from British Columbia.Dec. 8 The United States suspends imports of birds and hatching eggs, poultry meat, eggs, egg products and animal byproducts from British Columbia.Dec. 19 The outbreak’s first case in the United States is confirmed when an H5N8 avian influenza strain is found in a mixed poultry flock in Douglas County, Ore.Dec. 20 South Korea, a top buyer of United States poultry, halts imports of American poultry and poultry products.Jan. 3, 2015 The first case of the highly contagious H5N2 avian influenza strain is confirmed in a backyard flock of 140 mixed birds in Benton County, Wash.Jan. 6 Mexico, the largest market for United States poultry at $1.2 billion in 2014, bans imports from states with confirmed cases.Jan. 7 Canada, the No. 2 market for United States poultry, bans imports from affected areas.Jan. 8 China bans imports of United States poultry, poultry products and eggs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jan. 23 H5N8 appears for the first time in a commercial turkey flock of 134,400 birds in California.Feb. 2 Canadian authorities find the H5N1 virus in a backyard poultry flock in British Columbia.AdvertisementFeb. 12 The first commercial chicken flock is hit with H5N8. The flock, in Kings County, Calif., had 112,900 birds.March 4 The first instance of highly pathogenic avian influenza, or H.P.A.I., along the Mississippi migratory flyway is confirmed in a commercial flock of 26,310 turkeys in Minnesota, the top turkey-producing state. The flyway runs from the Gulf of Mexico to the northern Midwest along the Mississippi River valley. The virus is thought to be traveling with wild birds as they migrate north.April 6 Canada confirms an H5 strain of H.P.A.I. on a turkey farm in Ontario. A day later, Japan and Taiwan impose restrictions on poultry and products from the region.April 11 The H5N2 strain is confirmed for the first time in a commercial chicken operation, affecting 200,000 egg-laying hens in Jefferson County, Wis.April 20 The biggest flock hit so far: H5N2 is confirmed in 3.8 million egg-laying hens in Osceola County, Iowa. Mexico expands its import ban to include live birds and eggs from Iowa, the top egg-producer in the United States.April 20 Wisconsin declares a state of emergency.April 23 Minnesota declares a state of emergency.April 29 Saudi Arabia, the world’s second-largest importer of chicken broiler meat, bans imports of poultry meat and egg products from Ontario.April 29 A chicken broiler breeding farm in Kossuth County, Iowa, initially tests positive for H5 bird flu, believed to be the first case at a broiler breeding farm.May 1 The United States Agriculture Department confirms bird flu in nine more commercial flocks, including a flock of 5.7 million egg-laying hens in Buena Vista County, Iowa, the largest finding to date. Nationwide, more than 21.6 million birds in 114 mostly commercial operations are affected, the worst outbreak in United States history.May 1 Iowa declares a state of emergency.May 5 United States authorities approve $330 million in emergency funds to fight the spread of bird flu.AdvertisementMay 11 The Agriculture Department confirms H5N8 avian flu in a backyard poultry flock in Indiana.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.