By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINMAY 15, 2015
Bryan J. Merryman, the chief financial officer of the Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory, says it is far too easy for a potential stock manipulator to gain access to a federal securities database and submit a false takeover bid for a company.In a case that parallels a situation involving Avon Products this week, Rocky Mountain, a small retailer of chocolate candies and other confectionery products that is based in Colorado, was the target of what proved to be fake buyout offer from a previously unknown investment firm that claimed to be located in London. Mr. Merryman said his company, a relatively small business by market value, spent too much time and money investigating the case in December 2012.“It was ludicrous,” Mr. Merryman said. “We had to respond to it and investigate it, get our attorneys involved, even though we knew this was fraudulent.”He said the fake bid might never have occurred if the Securities and Exchange Commission had stronger safeguards to check the backgrounds of investment firms and individuals who are permitted to send filings to the agency’s Edgar database.Advertisement“All you have to do is submit a form,” Mr. Merryman said.The issue of just how much vetting the S.E.C. does of applicants who seek permission to submit filings to the Edgar system is in the spotlight after what was apparently a fraudulent takeover bid for Avon Products. The bid to buy Avon was submitted Thursday morning by another previously unknown British investment firm over the Edgar online system.AdvertisementThe S.E.C. issued a statement Thursday evening that said, “Filers are responsible for the truthfulness of their filings, and they are subject to enforcement actions when they are false or misleading.” Regulators say they will investigate the matter.But the S.E.C. did not clarify what checks are made on investment firms and individuals who apply for access codes to Edgar. Several people with knowledge of the Edgar application process said the S.E.C. did not conduct much vetting beyond confirming that the application was complete and had been notarized.Notaries public, who are issued licenses in the states where they operate, typically charge fees of $10 or less to put a stamp on a document and vouch for the authenticity of a signature.The idea of relying on a notary public to verify the identity of a signer of a public filing may seem like something from the era of the television show “Mad Men.” But in 2004, when the S.E.C. adopted the requirement, it was seen as something of a leap forward by regulators.Before 2004, Edgar access applications were submitted to the S.E.C. on paper, generally by mail. The S.E.C. rule change permitted applicants to file online for Edgar access codes as long as the signature on the application was verified by a notary.The requirement was not popular at the time. Most of the two dozen comment letters on the rule change raised objections.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sullivan & Cromwell, a New York law firm that represents many of Wall Street’s biggest financial firms, said in its comment letter that the notary requirement would create an “administrative burden” and was unnecessary “in light of the penalties already provided for under the federal securities law for false or misleading statements.”In adopting the rule, the S.E.C. said it had considered the objections but concluded that “human intervention in the current nonautomated process helps to assure authenticity.”AdvertisementThe rule change took place well before the advent of high-speed algorithmic trading. Often, traders seek every edge to react to headlines about regulatory filings, many of which are quickly disseminated by wire services like Reuters and Bloomberg with little reporting. It is why some like Mr. Merryman now suggest that the S.E.C. needs to do more to discourage false filers from getting access to Edgar.Officials with the S.E.C. say they believe there is a trade-off if they do anything that might extend the application process and potentially slow the release of information, said a person briefed on the matter who spoke on condition of anonymity. This person also noted that there appear to be only a handful of situations involving false filings.Mr. Merryman said that to the best of his knowledge, the S.E.C. never investigated the fake bid involving his company, although the company did respond to a letter from the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, the securities industry’s primary self-regulatory organization. He said Rocky Mountain Chocolate’s own investigation traced an email that had sent a copy of the takeover letter to a website from Bulgaria.In the Rocky Mountain Chocolate case, the false takeover offer came from a firm calling itself PST Capital Partners. The supposed bid for Avon came from a firm called PTG Capital Partners.The S.E.C. database lists the place of incorporation for both PTG Capital and PST Capital as the British Indian Ocean Territory, an archipelago of more than 2,000 small islands. A telephone number for PST is no longer in operation, and the phone number for PTG is no longer accepting messages.Thomas Sporkin, a lawyer with BuckleySandler who spent nearly two decades as an S.E.C. enforcement lawyer, said regulators had limited resources to review Edgar applications. He said there was “only so much you can do” to ensure that people did not abuse the system. In its statement on Thursday, the S.E.C. noted that there are about 4,000 filings a day to the Edgar system and more than 300,000 permitted users.Still, Mr. Merryman said something needed to be done. “For us, it was a big waste of time and money,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on May 16, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Colorado Chocolate Retailer Recalls False Buyout Bid Similar to One at Avon .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.