AdvertisementSupported byIn DebtBy Stephen J. LubbenBy virtue of the “absolute priority rule” – which I will concede, I have recently argued is poorly named and oversold – shareholders are at the bottom of the heap in a corporate bankruptcy. They get paid only when everyone else has been paid.It is therefore a bit surprising that shareholders of bankrupt companies have popped up in a couple of important ways in recent weeks.First, in a recent opinion, Judge Christopher S. Sontchi of the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Delaware ruled that shareholders retain their right to call a shareholders meeting to elect a new board in a bankruptcy case.Under Delaware law, a corporation is supposed to hold an annual meeting – you guessed it – every year, but there is not really any consequence for failing to do so if nobody complains.As a result, companies in bankruptcy routinely skip the annual meeting, for fear of providing a forum for disgruntled shareholders to yell at management. Because shareholders are routinely “out of the money” in Chapter 11 cases, and as shareholders in the United States tend to be a dispersed lot, there is often little likelihood that they will complain too much about the lack of a meeting.Which brings us to the other development in this regard: a new article, “Grassroots Shareholder Activism in Large Commercial Bankruptcies,” written by Diane Lourdes Dick at Seattle University School of Law.In the article, Professor Dick traces the real challenges shareholders face in getting an equity committee appointed or being taken seriously in general. Her case study is Kodak – a case in which, I should note, I briefly advised some distressed debt investors before the company’s bankruptcy filing.The case may be somewhat unique. Kodak, like General Motors before it, is one of a handful of remaining American companies that are apt to have truly loyal individual shareholders. Berkshire Hathaway might fall in the same camp, but it looks unlikely to come anywhere near Chapter 11.Professor Dick suggests that shareholders are too easily shut out in modern Chapter 11 cases. Interestingly, she never really examines Judge Sontchi’s issue: the tools of normal corporate governance. Of course, in or out of bankruptcy, those are not terribly attractive or useful to shareholders anyway.That shows how tricky an issue this actually is. On the one hand, big Chapter 11 cases are already kind of a zoo, especially given the growth of credit defuault swaps and whatnot.It is hard to tell whether a complaining shareholder is raising a legitimate point, on simply bitter over an investment gone wrong. And the average shareholder has little at stake, relative to the costs they will impose by holding up a reorganization.One of the major advantages that Chapter 11 has over its foreign counterparts is that it is relatively easy to cancel old shares and thus facilitate a debt for equity swap.All that stands on one side.On the other side is the general sense of unfairness that results from a Chapter 11 process that might well, in some number of cases, run over small shareholders who are legitimately entitled to some recovery.Professor Dick raises that issue, and it is certainly worthy of further consideration. Judge Sontchi reminds us that the normal governance rules generally apply, however ineffective they might be.Taken together, perhaps there is an emerging new consideration of shareholders in corporate bankruptcy?Advertisement