
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

OCT. 21, 2015
Who controls Viacom, the giant media company that owns MTV and Paramount? It’s a question swirling around the company.Having ridden the waves of “Jersey Shore” at MTV and Jon Stewart at Comedy Central, Viacom has since experienced declining profits and viewers.To make things worse, Nickelodeon, the children’s TV powerhouse at Viacom, has also recorded an inexplicable drop, though it has recovered somewhat in recent months.While the fears of cord cutting, declining viewership and sinking ad revenues have hit media stocks more generally, Viacom has been particularly buffeted by the viewer falloff.AdvertisementA spokesman for Viacom, commenting on these performance issues, said, “Viacom shareholders have benefited from record earnings per share for eight consecutive years, a compounded growth rate of 13 percent.” He added that Viacom shares “have been the best performing in our industry, up 29 percent” since late August after a sharp decline beforehand.AdvertisementIn prior years, Viacom’s troubles might have brought swift retribution from shareholders and directors. A fired C.E.O. would certainly have been the beginning of the consequences.Yet Viacom is different. It has dual-class stock, which gives control to Sumner Redstone, its 92-year-old chairman. Mr. Redstone was the one who parlayed a small movie chain into two media powerhouses — CBS and Viacom.He is known for his iron will: He survived a 1979 fire at the Copley Plaza hotel in Boston by hanging out of the balcony while fire burned his hands. His strong will has a downside, and Mr. Redstone is also known for his cantankerous personality, having butted heads with almost anyone who crosses his path, including his son, nephew and brother, who have all separately sued him.Mr. Redstone is also very generous with the executives of Viacom and CBS, the other public company he controls through a trust. Both Philippe P. Dauman, chief of Viacom, and Leslie Moonves, head of CBS, were among the highest-paid executives in the world in recent years. Mr. Redstone also paid himself $13 million at Viacom alone last year, down from $20 million the year before.The money comes with a price, and Mr. Redstone over the years has been quick to fire people, letting go of a former Viacom C.E.O., Tom Freston, only one month after saying he was happy with his performance.Perhaps most important, as part of that control, Mr. Redstone has refused to name his successor. He is instead known for his succession plan, which he has summed up as, “I’m not going to die.”This succession strategy rarely ends well.It is a strategy that is also increasingly under scrutiny as rumors swirl that Mr. Redstone’s health is not the best. He has had a live-in girlfriend, Sydney Holland, who is said to have come and gone but exerted great control over his life. And he was missing from the most recent Viacom and CBS shareholder meetings. It was enough to spur an article in Vanity Fair about the succession written by William D. Cohan. After all, gossip about the future of one of the world’s biggest media conglomerates is juicy, to say the least.AdvertisementI could write an entire column about Mr. Redstone’s health and the uncertainty about it. When is it the responsibility of the company to disclose information about its executives’ health, particularly when it is so fundamental to the company?But for the moment, let’s stay focused on the control issue.Mr. Redstone rules Viacom through high vote shares that give him a 79.5 percent vote but only 10 percent of the economic interest. (He has similar ownership of CBS.) These shares are owned by Mr. Redstone’s vehicle, National Amusements, which is owned 80 percent by the Sumner M. Redstone National Amusements trust. The terms of the trust are not public and have been guarded, but it was set up upon Mr. Redstone’s divorce from Phyllis Redstone, the mother of his two children, Brent and Shari Redstone. It is a generation-skipping trust, which means taxes upon Sumner Redstone’s death can be deferred and the trust benefits his grandchildren.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The trust is headed by seven members, including Shari Redstone and one of Mr. Redstone’s grandchildren. The other five members include Mr. Dauman of Viacom, and Mr. Redstone’s personal lawyer.There have been some reports that Shari Redstone will become chairman of the trust upon Mr. Redstone’s death, but that is unclear. It will be a vote of four of these seven people who will decide the fate of CBS and Viacom.Mr. Dauman, the embattled chief of Viacom, is at the center of this. He has earned Mr. Redstone’s praise and love and is not only a trustee of the trust but the executor of Mr. Redstone’s will. He has been referred to as the “the son Sumner wishes he had.”And so, this is where Viacom is today. It is controlled by a person of untold wealth who has positioned a loved one as C.E.O. The board has a majority of independent directors under the standards of the New York Stock Exchange, but in the midst of this it is hard to see the Viacom board acting independently. It includes many of Mr. Redstone’s friends and family and, of course, Mr. Dauman.And that is even before the issue of who controls Viacom after Mr. Redstone’s death. Maybe it will all go smoothly, and the trustees will arrange an orderly transition. Mr. Dauman can leave the company if not appointed chairman of the board upon Mr. Redstone’s demise (Mr. Moonves has the same arrangement at CBS). The wild card is whether Shari Redstone wants to fully assume the battle.This is the problem with dual class stock that lasts forever. Viacom, as well as CBS, is now at the mercy of machinations from a trust that holds only 10 percent of the actual economic ownership. And it is a structure that lends itself to perpetuating Viacom’s current chief and his high pay in office.Of course, that the uncertainty comes at a time when Viacom needs to be laser focused on adjusting to a shifting marketplace is not great for shareholders.AdvertisementStill, Viacom is not alone, and many companies have dual-class stock (including The New York Times). Facebook, for example, has dual-class stock that can also be passed on to Mark Zuckerberg’s heirs. Groupon’s dual-class stock sunsets after five years, giving a break to shareholders.A spokesman for Viacom reiterated the point that many companies have this stock and stated that “Viacom’s governance structure is well known to shareholders and has been in place since our inception.”This type of stock may seem fine at the beginning when the founder is engaged. But after decades it may not be so great.It also permits founders to sell down their stakes and take their own privileges with the company. Could it be time to put a sunset provision in these shares, in order to ensure that what shareholders buy in the beginning remains true?It’s here where I think of that line from the movie “Airplane”: “They bought their tickets, they knew what they were getting into. I say, let ’em crash.” It would all be true, if it weren’t for the fact that Viacom is a $20 billion company with tens of thousands of employees, all waiting to know what happens next.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter. A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: As Viacom Struggles, Questions About Current and Future Control.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »