Interview by PATRICIA R. OLSENMAY 16, 2015
A changing landscapeThe IBM Latin America headquarters has two floors of a building in a newer, primarily commercial area in the southern part of São Paulo. I’m on the 21st floor. When I arrived a year and a half ago, I’d see a number of favelas, or slums, over the river that runs near our building. I need only glance out my window to be reminded of the transformation that’s occurring. The favelas are being replaced with low-income apartment buildings. It’s been gratifying to watch.Full transparency My office has a glass door and glass wall along a corridor, which allows for total approachability. If I’m talking to someone and a colleague or team member wants to discuss an urgent matter, they simply stand outside and stare through the glass. It’s a simple way to get my attention.Luck on her side I’ve been with IBM my entire career, 27 years. Before this assignment, I worked in Armonk, N.Y.; China; Mexico; and France. The bamboo plant in my office is from São Paulo, but it’s a tradition I’ve followed since working in China. My Chinese colleagues believed that bamboo brings luck, and I haven’t felt like testing that belief by not having a plant nearby.Group dynamicsBrazilians are very social. Most of our employees take a break at lunch and eat in groups. If I can join the team, usually we go to our favorite restaurant in the basement, Paulinhos, which offers a buffet with salad, fruit, black beans and rice, and a churrascaria, where they grill meat and fish. I may snack on banana candies, a puréed banana that’s chewy and actually a very healthy snack.Sweetening the dayI keep candy in the basket on my desk to make it attractive for my team members to visit. Recently I visited our team in Argentina, and I brought back some Havanna alfajores, soft cookies with caramel inside.AdvertisementLanguage practiceEnglish is not my first language. I was born in Venezuela and raised there, as well as in Portugal and the U.S. I try to speak English most of the time in the office. It’s a great opportunity for the nonnative English speakers on my team to speak it, which is important if they want to advance in our global company.AdvertisementWearable art The scarf draped across my chair, by the Mexican fashion house Pineda Covalín, is a reminder of the years I worked in Mexico. I like how the company channels the rich and vibrant colors and symbols of Mexican culture into wearable works of art.More MexicoWhen I worked in New York, I attended a Museum of Modern Art retrospective on the Mexican painter Diego Rivera, whom I came to fully appreciate on my Mexico assignment. It featured a copy of Fortune magazine from 1932 with a Rivera lithograph on the cover related to a feature on Russia. My husband tracked down a copy of the magazine and had the cover framed.Recalling Chinese friendsWhen I worked in China from 2006 to 2008 as part of IBM’s Chinese leadership team, we posed for a photo at the Great Wall. I also mentored several female Chinese colleagues during those years. In front of the photo are a couple of chops — seals used with a red paste to sign legal documents and so forth — that I received from one woman as a gift.Recharging I practice Bikram yoga on the weekend to wind down from the workweek. I’ve been doing it since my time in China. It takes an hour and a half and requires concentration. You also move every part of your body, which is invigorating since I sit so much in the office all week.Interview conducted by Patricia R. Olsen.Comments have been edited and condensed.A version of this article appears in print on May 17, 2015, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Sweet Spot for Global Traditions .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.