AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerJohn A. Thain, who will retire as chief executive of the CIT Group in March, has had plenty of ups and downs in his career on Wall Street. After guiding CIT’s transformation into more of a commercial bank, he will apparently be stepping down on a high note.Here is a brief timeline of the Wall Street career of Mr. Thain, a former high school wrestler from Illinois:1979 A graduate of M.I.T., Mr. Thain joined Goldman Sachs in 1979 after getting his M.B.A. from Harvard. He worked his way up the ranks, becoming chief financial officer in 1994.1999-2003 Mr. Thain became president of Goldman Sachs and was often seen as a potential heir apparent to the chief executive at the time, Henry M. Paulson Jr. Mr. Thain left Goldman in January 2004 to become head of the New York Stock Exchange.March 2006 Two years into his job as chief executive of the New York Stock Exchange, Mr. Thain led the formerly clubby, specialist-driven Big Board through an initial public offering of its own. During his time at the N.Y.S.E., he pushed it fully into the electronic-trading era.December 2007 He became chief executive of Merrill Lynch, which was facing mounting woes related to its exposure to mortgage-backed and other bad securities.September 2008 As the last chairman and chief executive of “Mother Merrill,” Mr. Thain struck an agreement to sell Merrill Lynch to Bank of America for $50 billion in stock. The surprise deal was forged during a dizzying two days of negotiations on the same weekend that ended in the collapse of Lehman Brothers.January 2009 He was fired from the newly merged Bank of America Merrill Lynch after an unexpectedly large fourth-quarter loss at Merrill— $15 billion. At the time he was under fire for large bonuses paid right before the late-2008 merger closed, even as Bank of America took federal assistance in the height of the financial crisis. Then there was the little matter of a $1 million-plus office renovation.February 2010 He was hired as chief executive of CIT.Advertisement