AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantQ. Were you in leadership roles or doing entrepreneurial things when you were younger?A. Certainly in high school. I was class president when I was a junior. In my senior year, I joined the Board of Education as the student representative. I also played sports and was captain of the softball and basketball teams.Tell me about your parents. How have they influenced you?My dad is an ex-Navy guy who went to work in business. I watched my father be resilient as well as being able to adapt as an African-American man in corporate America. I saw both his successes and his frustrations.My mom combined her artistic interests — she worked in a jewelry store — and did a fair amount of advising young people throughout her life. And my mother would always say to me, “If you don’t like your situation, change it.” She was pretty strong in that regard. I think she picked up some of that from her own mother, who had to pick and sell dandelion greens to pay for college.Were there any other favorite family expressions that would get repeated around the dinner table?“To whom much is given, much is required.” And “Mediocrity is not a good place to be.” We had many childhood conversations around the dinner table about mediocrity. They would say, “You need to work harder than most people do, given your race and gender.” What are some early lessons you learned about being a manager? One was learning how to prioritize. You simply can’t do everything. There were times I would walk into a new job, and my eyes would be huge and I would feel like a kid in a candy shop. I’d think, “Let’s just get after it,” instead of, “O.K., let’s pause. What’s the most important thing to really get after?” Being able to say “No” or “Not now” were important lessons for me.Another lesson stemmed from the fact that I had been used to thinking, “I can get through the brick wall. I can make this happen.” I was very self-reliant, and I figured that if I could do it, so could the team.So I overworked some teams early on, and that led to an early lesson around asking for help. It’s O.K. not to have all the answers and not to be able to do everything and to put your hand up and say, “I need help.” I was so surprised by how people really wanted to help. They loved being invited into the process.I’ve learned to be transparent, and to share my thoughts so that other people could follow them. I learned an important lesson from a colleague when I was C.E.O. at another company, who said: “Lori, this is a little bit like being on the train and you’re in the front of the train and we’re in the dark. You can see the light at the end of the tunnel. But there are people who are toiling in the back, and they’re throwing coal in the engine, and they’re working the cars, and that’s all they know. You should be at the front of the train, but your job is to shorten the distance between you and the back of the train so that we can all see what you see at the front.” Tell me more about your leadership style now.I expect my leaders to listen. I expect them to ask questions. I expect them to understand what’s going on. I am somewhat infamous for saying, “So how’s it going?” And they’ll say, “Great.” Then I’ll say, “How do you know?” It’s one thing when people start telling you anecdotes and it’s another thing when they can say, “Well, because we track this and we measure that.” We make sure we’re analytical in our approaches.How do you hire?I want to know that people have done their due diligence on the company, and that they have a passion for wanting to work at our company. I want them to care enough to have done their research to make sure that there’s also a good cultural fit.So I’ll ask, “What kind of cultures do you like to work in? Where do you excel? How do you excel? If you find yourself in situations where they’re not going the way you want them to, what do you do?” How people conduct themselves when they face challenges is really important. I also look for resilience and perseverance. Most of my background has been working in big companies, and you have to find a way to navigate and negotiate to an end result. It could be a winding path. So I make sure that people feel like they know how to do that, and do it in a way that is respectful of the system. And then if they’re in a leadership position, I want to know how they lead people. So I will ask questions about difficult leadership situations and how they managed people through them. I’ll also want to understand how they make their own hiring and firing decisions.What advice do you give to new college graduates?I typically tell them that your first job usually doesn’t matter that much, so find something that you really want to do. And even if it’s not what you really want to do, learn whatever you can from the experience. Take the time now to experiment and take risks and do different things, because that exploration will serve you well.Also, find a company that has a good fit for what’s important to you and your values. That fit is really important, and I’ll usually share my own stories about how the companies I’ve chosen to work with were really good fits for me. Don’t just put up with a bad culture, a bad situation or a bad manager. That said, you need to find ways to go over and under and around problems. But you also have to know when to say when.You can follow Adam Bryant on Twitter at @nytcorneroffice.This interview has been edited and condensed.Advertisement