AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra AlterSabaa Tahir’s debut novel, “An Ember in the Ashes,” was greeted with such breathless accolades before its April release that it seemed unlikely it could live up to the hype.The hype appears justified. The novel shot to the No. 2 spot on The New York Times young adult best-seller list. The story takes place in an ancient fantasy world where a girl goes under cover as a slave and stealthily joins the resistance movement against a martial empire. It has drawn comparisons to several of the biggest publishing blockbusters of the last decade, including “The Hunger Games,” “Harry Potter” and George R. R. Martin’s high fantasy series, “A Song of Ice and Fire.” Paramount Pictures optioned the film rights in a seven-figure deal, according to Publishers Marketplace.Unsurprisingly, readers immediately began demanding another installment. “I am hoping and praying that there will be a sequel,” one reviewer wrote on Amazon. “Hear that Penguin? We want a sequel!” Another online reviewer said, “This better not be a stand-alone novel as the author claims.”Razorbill, a young adult imprint at Penguin, seems to have gotten the message. The publisher will announce on Monday that it has acquired a sequel, which is scheduled for publication in 2016. “All of us at Penguin are very happy to promise Sabaa’s fans a second book,” Ben Schrank, the president and publisher of Razorbill, said in a statement. The advance for the sequel was reported to be in the mid-six figures. The next book will pick up the story of the heroine Laia, the undercover rebel who is fighting to protect her family, and Elias, a reluctant soldier for the empire, as they travel north to free Laia’s brother from prison and try to evade the empire’s armies.Ms. Tahir, a former international editor for The Washington Post, said that the setting and plot were inspired in part by real stories of children around the world who are pressed into being soldiers. “I love my characters like family, and cannot wait to share more of their story with readers,” Ms. Tahir said in the statement.Advertisement