AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The six-month rate was 0.08 percent, and the four-week rate was 0.01 percent. The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $527.6 million of debt securities. Competitive.Johnson County School District No. 232, Kan., $56 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYMaury County, Tenn., $81.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Virginia Public Building Authority, $368.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYNassau County, N.Y., $168.9 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Santa Clara County, Calif., Financing Authority, $103.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Seattle, $339.1 million of water system revenue bonds. Competitive.Springfield, Mo., Public Utilities, $515.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKArlington, Tex., Higher Education Finance Corporation, $54.2 million of revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Austin, Tex., Community College District, $175 million of limited tax bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Boston Water and Sewer Commission, $83 million of general revenue and refinancing bonds. Bank of America. Chicago, $172.8 million of general obligation bonds. Ramirez. Chicago, $181.9 million of general obligation bonds. Siebert Brandford ShankChino, Calif., Public Financing Authority, $50 million of refinancing revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Citizens Property Insurance Corporation, Fla., $750 million of debt securities. Bank of America.Connecticut, $481.6 million of general obligation bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Cowlitz County, Wash., Public Utility District, $82 million of electric distribution system revenue and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. Forney, Tex., Independent School District $91.4 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. William Blair. Fort Mill, S.C., $60 million of school facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Frisco, Tex., Independent School District, $146 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. FirstSouthwest. Garland, Tex., Independent School District, $206 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Gavilan, Calif., Community College District, $50 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray. Georgia Higher Education Facilities Authority, $84 million of refinancing revenue bonds. Bank of America. Houston, $125 million of combined utility system revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Indio, Calif., Water Authority, $55.5 million of water revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. Long Beach, Calif., $111.6 million of marina revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Los Angeles, $223.6 million of wastewater system revenue bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Luzerne County, Pa., $126 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. Marin, Calif., Community College District, $60 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Miami-Dade County, Fla., $481.8 million of water and sewer system revenue refinancing bonds. Jefferies.Mooresville, N.C., $65.9 million of refinancing limited obligation bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.New York City Municipal Water Finance Authority, $435 million of water and sewerage system revenue bonds. Barclays Capital. North Carolina, $252 million of grant anticipation revenue vehicle bonds. Bank of America. Philadelphia Authority for Industrial Development, $50.5 million of health care facility revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, $500 million of consolidated bonds. Barclays Capital.Riverside County, Calif., Public Financing Authority, $325 million of lease revenue bonds. Bank of America. Wisconsin Public Finance Authority, $123 million of Renown Regional Medical Center, Nevada, revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Advertisement