AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiSAN FRANCISCO — For years, Stefan Larsson was Gap’s worst nightmare, as he led H&M’s dizzying expansion in the United States with a combination of designer chic and rock-bottom prices.Three years ago, Gap Inc. hired him, and gave him its most challenging brand, Old Navy.Since his arrival, Mr. Larsson has led a striking turnaround at the low-cost label, transforming Old Navy from a butt of jokes to its parent company’s crown jewel. Last year, Old Navy took in almost $6 billion in sales in the United States — almost as much in sales as the Gap and Banana Republic brands put together — and made up 40 percent of the company’s global revenue. Earnings due this week are expected to underscore Old Navy as Gap’s biggest driver of growth as its other big labels are struggling.Still, Old Navy faces a challenge in sustaining that strong growth in a world of cheap fashion that increasingly seems a race to the bottom.Mr. Larsson is unfazed. “I saw an unpolished diamond in Old Navy,” Mr. Larsson said in a recent interview — his first since taking the helm at the brand — in a corner of a bustling staff cafeteria at Old Navy’s San Francisco headquarters. “Everything starts and ends with product.”Old Navy’s success so far under Mr. Larsson has been built on a level of attention to design that sellers of low-end, family-oriented clothes — including the old Old Navy — had not put into their wares. (Mr. Larsson calls that view of fashion the “clothes by the pound” approach and says it ignores the aspirations of low-income shoppers.)The label’s newfound strength also points to a fundamental shift in the way people shop for clothes, as well as a new frugality for all but the wealthiest of shoppers in the United States. Matching a $10 T-shirt with a designer bag has become much more common, as shoppers grow more selective about what they will splurge on. And even as consumers benefit from lower gas prices and a stronger job market, cautious households — especially those with children — have preferred to invest in fundamentals like their cars or homes rather than their wardrobes.All that has been a boon to Old Navy. Sales at established stores jumped 11 percent in the fourth quarter, by far the fastest rate shown by a mass apparel brand in the critical holiday season.“Old Navy’s approach used to be selling commodities,” said Betty Chen, a retail analyst at Mizuho Securities USA. But the more stylish clothes and marketing that Mr. Larsson has brought to the brand have had “a strong halo effect,” Ms. Chen said, that has bolstered the brand’s image. “And price points are so much lower than Gap or Lululemon.”Conceived by Gap in the early 1990s as a response to efforts by rivals to undercut Gap on price, the marked-down version of itself was wildly successful at first. Shoppers were drawn by Old Navy’s promise to combine the style and quality of Gap clothing with the low prices and big selection of a Home Depot. The whimsical layout of the stores, with concrete floors and display cases fashioned from stripped-down school lockers, was a hit in the working-class neighborhoods where they opened. Within four years, sales at Old Navy reached $1 billion, the fastest rate at the time for any retailer. (Even Google took longer to reach that milestone.) Gap opened Old Navy stores at a breakneck pace.That expansion started to go awry in about 2000, right around the time that H&M, the Swedish fast-fashion juggernaut, opened its first store in the United States, in Manhattan. Its strappy dresses and sharp jackets were not only cheap, but also were straight off the fashion runways. Old Navy’s laid-back hoodies and campy ads started to feel uninspired by comparison. A partnership in 2007 with the celebrity designer Todd Oldham flopped. The recession took a huge bite out of retail spending, even at the low-end Old Navy. Its sales fell by more than $1 billion from 2006 to 2008. Morale hit a low.Brought in to rescue a brand in distress, Mr. Larsson set to work assembling a heavyweight team. He hired Ivan Wicksteed, former global creative director of Coca-Cola and the architect of brand makeovers at Converse and Cole Haan, as chief marketing officer. One of the first changes Mr. Wicksteed made was to liven up the company’s drab headquarters in San Francisco with pop photography and upbeat music.“It looked like a doctor’s office,” Mr. Wicksteed said. “You have to start with ground zero. You have to start with the employees. If you can’t get your own people to want to get on board and change direction, then you’ll never persuade your own customers to do it.”Another important recruit, Jill Stanton, the former head of apparel at Nike, has transformed Old Navy’s approach to design. Previously, its merchants would buy clothes from higher-end retailers like Saks Fifth Avenue or Abercrombie & Fitch and pick pieces to adapt, often clumsily, for Old Navy stores.“We were taking a product that was in the marketplace and we were bringing it to market maybe a year later,” Ms. Stanton said. “And our designers were designing for somebody else. So you used to get design teams say: ‘Well, I’m not sure if I’d wear that, but it’s O.K. for Old Navy.’ ”Ms. Stanton instead pushed to build Old Navy’s own design muscle, leaning on Gap’s supply chain to allow designers to quickly test various prints, shapes and sizes in small runs in stores before increasing the production of styles that were with a hit with shoppers. It shifted its collection from everyday or basic items to others that were on-trend and in season. Instead of hiring designers whose experience was in the low-price market, Old Navy hired top talent: an accessories and bag designer from Coach, athletic wear designers from Nike and Reebok, the men’s apparel director from North Face. (“They don’t start with cheap,” Ms. Stanton said.) Old Navy’s new ads, starring two comedy favorites, Amy Poehler and Julia Louis-Dreyfus, have gone viral.One of Old Navy’s biggest triumphs has been its pixie pants. Two years ago, just as Mr. Larsson’s team was getting the label’s new look off the ground, a designer on Old Navy’s women’s team noticed that blogs and runways were filling up with casual, slim-fitting pants. The design team “obsessed over every detail” — the fit, the cut just above the ankle — and quickly tested different prints and colors in stores. The pants were a hit.“We uniquely designed that pant, and then we put it to market and we tested it and we sold 2.4 million pairs last year,” Mr. Larsson said. “It’s one of the biggest revenue-generating styles that we have.”Mr. Larsson is on the hunt for his next big product.“If you were at Apple, nobody would say, ‘Let’s relaunch the iPhone 6.’ People would laugh, and say that’s crazy. But that’s what happens in the fashion industry,” he said. “If you keep competing with generic products, and a higher and higher discount, you’re going to lose. If Apple doesn’t continuously refresh its products and make them current, they’re dead. And that would happen here as well.”A new area that Old Navy has thrown itself into is active wear, for the first time investing heavily in performance fabrics, like breathable textiles. With sportswear, Old Navy is tapping into a trend that has swept through fashion, as sneakers and yoga pants take the place of jeans and pumps. But where a pair of yoga pants from Lululemon might cost almost $100, the same amount would outfit an entire family in performance wear at Old Navy, Ms. Stanton said.There are big challenges ahead for the company. For one, it starts to be compared against a year of strong sales, making further growth particularly difficult. In the first quarter of the year, same-store sales growth at Old Navy slowed to 3 percent, though it remained the fastest-growing Gap label.Rising wages overseas, as well as heightened scrutiny over working conditions at Gap’s foreign suppliers, also raise concerns over Old Navy’s low-price business model.Some analysts also wonder whether the recent jobs growth or savings from gas prices will prompt some shoppers to graduate from Old Navy, rising up the luxury ladder. Mr. Larsson says he does not think so. Snobbishness in fashion is on its way out, he says, especially among younger generations.“The industry is traditionally built on the ladder, but I don’t know if people aspire to that anymore,” he said. “Times are changing, and prestige is being looked at differently.” Young shoppers, especially, will always want to save — “then they want to travel, experience things,” he said.“Sometimes when I shop at high-end brands, I get this look when I walk in, like people working there are screening me and asking: Are you good enough to be our customer?” Mr. Larsson said. “I hate it. And Old Navy is as an antidote to that.”Advertisement