AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesA wave of retailers will report first-quarter earnings this week, including Home Depot, Walmart and TJX on Tuesday; Target, Lowe’s and Staples on Wednesday; and Best Buy, Gap, Ross Stores and Dollar Tree on Thursday. Analysts are paying particular attention to how well these stores weathered the post-holiday lull and wintry weather early this year. They will also be looking for effects of rising labor costs as a tightening job market forces retailers — some of the country’s largest employers — to start increasing wages for their lowest-paid workers. —Hiroko TabuchiGovernment data, due out on Wednesday, is likely to show that Japan’s economy continued its slow climb out of recession in the first quarter. The nation’s gross domestic product grew, according to economists surveyed by news agencies, at an annualized rate of 1.5 percent in the three months through March. That would be the second consecutive quarter of modest growth after a surprise downturn in the middle of last year.Although welcome, the expansion would not be large enough to erase doubts about the effectiveness of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s two-year economic stimulus campaign, known as Abenomics. Exports are expanding moderately as a result of a weak yen, but spending by Japanese consumers — the biggest share of economic activity — has disappointed. And consumer prices are stalling again, putting Japan at risk of falling back into the deflationary trap in which it has been stuck for much of the last two decades. —Jonathan SobleThe annual shareholder meetings that Wall Street banks will hold this week are not expected to have the fireworks and fighting that have animated similar meetings in recent years. JPMorgan Chase, which holds its meeting in Detroit on Tuesday — the same day as Morgan Stanley’s annual meeting — will take a potentially divisive vote on the pay packages offered to the bank’s top executives.Some top corporate governance firms have recommended that shareholders reject the bank’s recently announced pay packages, in part because the bank’s chief executive, Jamie Dimon, is receiving much of his pay in cash that is not tied to the bank’s future performance. JPMorgan, though, has previously beaten back efforts by corporate governance firms to alter its pay practices and executive structure.Goldman Sachs will gather with its shareholders on Thursday in San Francisco. —Nathaniel PopperThe Governing Council of the European Central Bank will meet in Frankfurt on Wednesday. While no decisions on monetary policy are expected and no news conference is planned, members could decide to impose further restrictions on aid to Greek banks. As the Greek government struggles to make coming payments on its debt, the central bank has signaled that it is concerned about losing the more than 110 billion euros it has lent to ailing Greek lenders. Further limits on the flow of emergency cash to Greek banks would add to the pressure on Athens to give ground in negotiations with other eurozone leaders on a new aid package. —Jack EwingThe statement the Federal Reserve issued after its April policy meeting expressed little concern about the sluggish pace of economic growth in the early months of 2015. Most analysts still expect the Fed to start raising its benchmark interest rate in September. A more detailed account of the April meeting, which the Fed will publish on Wednesday, could reinforce those expectations if the tone remains sanguine. —Binyamin AppelbaumLawmakers in Brussels will vote on Wednesday to approve copyright reforms aimed at giving people in the 28 countries in the European Union greater access to digital content like online movies. The legislation forms part of a bigger push to overhaul Europe’s copyright rules that may force Google and other tech companies to pay for online material displayed on their websites that is owned by the region’s publishers and newspapers. —Mark ScottAfter a victory lap lasting several weeks, David Letterman will hang it up on Wednesday after 33 years on the air as a late-night host. He’s going out with a bang. Mr. Letterman’s “Late Show” guests on Monday night will include a longtime guest, the actor Tom Hanks, and Eddie Vedder of Pearl Jam. On Tuesday, Mr. Letterman will offer a double whammy: the actor Bill Murray, who was the first guest on both Mr. Letterman’s NBC and CBS shows, and Bob Dylan. For the finale on Wednesday, the show has not revealed any guests but is promising “surprises, memorable highlights and the show’s final Top 10 list.” —John KoblinWhen Meg Whitman, chief executive of Hewlett-Packard, announces the company’s earnings on Thursday, investors will look for a progress report on her plan to split the company in two: one that focuses on computing technologies like servers and another that sells products like personal computers and printers. The breakup is set to happen at the end of October. Ms. Whitman has struggled to find a way to improve the company’s growth as computing has shifted to mobile devices and the cloud. —Brian X. ChenThe Labor Department will release its April consumer price data on Friday morning, and analysts predict that prices will have risen only barely, if at all. One reason for the slow pace is that food costs are little changed. Analysts will watch closely for any signals that the Fed could use to guide its coming interest-rate decisions. —Dionne SearceyAdvertisement