By MICHAEL CIEPLYMAY 17, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  Most movie studio chiefs get a year or two to find their balance after taking the job. Tom Rothman is enjoying no such grace period.Mr. Rothman was appointed chairman of the Sony Pictures Entertainment motion picture group in February, after Amy Pascal resigned under pressure after an embarrassing email hacking scandal. He now finds himself running Sony’s entire movie operation, a rapid expansion of responsibility from his previous post as head of the company’s TriStar Productions, where he was charged with creating an ambitious brand that emphasized big names, master filmmakers and low budgets.Mr. Rothman’s acumen as a picture picker will be on full display this year, as Sony releases the first three of six films he has approved since joining TriStar in 2013. His success or failure will determine whether Sony can finally move beyond the lingering effects of the hackers’ attack, which has continued to air its internal dealings and dirty laundry, and turn its focus to reorienting to a changing movie market.All of this is happening as Mr. Rothman is integrating TriStar into a strategy to rebuild Sony around brands that include the Screen Gems genre unit, the Sony Pictures Classics art film operation, the independently financed Studio 8, and an enduring major label, Columbia Pictures, which will increasingly focus on blockbusters.AdvertisementBoth Mr. Rothman, who was once a co-chairman at Fox, and Michael Lynton, the chief executive of Sony Pictures Entertainment, declined to discuss that effort, with a spokeswoman noting that it was still at an early stage.AdvertisementThe first TriStar movies with Mr. Rothman’s imprint include Jonathan Demme’s “Ricki and the Flash,” in which Meryl Streep plays an aging rocker, set for release on Aug. 7, and Nicholas Hytner’s “The Lady in the Van,” a cross-generational dramedy starring James Corden and Maggie Smith, which will come out in early December.Most eyes, however, will be trained on October’s “The Walk,” which stars Joseph Gordon-Levitt and tells the story of Philippe Petit’s famed tightrope walk between the World Trade Center towers in 1974.A special-effects-laden passion project directed by Robert Zemeckis, “The Walk” originated with Mr. Zemeckis’s ImageMovers company at Walt Disney years ago. It was subsequently turned down by many in Hollywood, including Mr. Rothman when he was still at Fox.In developing the film, Mr. Zemeckis created what several viewers described as a two-hour “animatic” version: It was something between a primitive animation and an elaborate moving storyboard.On seeing it several years ago, Mr. Rothman, according to a person briefed on his response, was fascinated, and he had already worked happily with Mr. Zemeckis on “Cast Away” and “What Lies Beneath.” But he was also intimidated by the demands of a reality-based story that would depend on computer effects to recreate the World Trade Center buildings.The enthusiastic reception for “Gravity,” with its similar blend of reality and effects, at the Toronto International Film Festival in 2013 changed Mr. Rothman’s mind. By then at TriStar, he brought “The Walk” to Sony under a deal that will keep its cost below a $50 million cap envisioned for any TriStar project.The project was helped along by Imax, which, as with “Gravity,” signed on to show a large-screen, 3-D version.Advertisement“I already told him I want to do the movie; we’re in,” Greg Foster, the chief executive of Imax Entertainment, recalled telling Mr. Rothman of Mr. Zemeckis and his film, which he had seen in the animatic version.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The reception “The Walk” receives will gauge whether Mr. Rothman and Mr. Lynton are correct in betting that older viewers, whose per capita ticket-buying edged up on a declining youth market last year, can be drawn to films that are sufficiently bold in casting, as with Ms. Streep’s electric guitar-playing turn in “Ricki and the Flash,” or in execution, as with Ang Lee’s “Billy Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk.” The latter film, a military story based on a critically acclaimed book and set for release next year, is being shot in 3-D at an ultrahigh 120 frames a second, with the goal of creating a radically immersive viewing experience.Mr. Rothman, according to people briefed on his dealings, retains a financial interest in the films he approved at TriStar, but he will not hold a stake in future TriStar projects and he will not take a producing credit on any of the films. His slate also includes “Money Monster,” directed by Jodie Foster and with George Clooney and Julia Roberts in starring roles, and “Baby Driver,” directed by Edgar Wright, with Ansel Elgort in the lead — and with the potential of a younger audience.Whether a revamped array of film labels will revitalize Sony is a core question. Historically, the mere name of a film studio tends to draw viewers only when it has a sharply defined reputation, like Walt Disney with its family films or Pixar with its computer-animation movies.“If you can create a brand personality as distinct as that, I think there’s some value in it,” said Dennis Rice, a film marketer who has worked at Disney and at Miramax Films with its Dimension unit, now part of the Weinstein Company, known for commercially oriented genre films like the comic-horror “Scream” series and the “Spy Kids” family action films.Still, he noted, branding can help focus a studio internally on its own aims and market niches — something Mr. Rothman and Mr. Lynton clearly intend.Studio 8, backed by funds from China’s Fosun International, will thus have an eye on projects that can play well both at home and in Asian markets. That company has two dozen employees, about 20 projects in development, and a shared stake with TriStar in Mr. Lee’s film, which stars Vin Diesel and Kristen Stewart.Sanford Panitch, who worked with Mr. Rothman at Fox, last month joined Sony as president of an international film and television operation whose focus on foreign co-productions could add to Sony’s growing list of brands.Whether a new chief will be hired for the unit is yet to be settled. According to people briefed on the matter, Mr. Rothman recently failed in an attempt, first reported by The Hollywood Reporter, to lure Elizabeth Gabler to TriStar from her post in charge of Fox 2000, a similarly distinct brand at 20th Century Fox.AdvertisementThe challenge for Sony’s various units will be to carve out identities without piling up staff and overhead expense. In the past, cost became an issue at TriStar, which evolved from an independent company formed by Columbia Pictures, HBO and CBS in 1982 to become a full-blown sister studio to Columbia under Sony’s ownership.In TriStar’s heyday under Mike Medavoy, who ran it for Sony in the 1990s, the unit was known for sophisticated, star-driven films like “Bugsy,” “Philadelphia” and “Sleepless in Seattle.” But TriStar was ultimately stripped of its major studio status under a low-cost strategy that found it focused, among other things, on smaller, faith-based productions like the coming “War Room,” a holdover from the pre-Rothman era.While TriStar has begun edging back toward a broad adult audience under Mr. Rothman, it will most likely remain a small operation. It has only about 10 employees, and Sony’s overall motion picture group continues to market and distribute the unit’s movies. Those will have to be as striking as TriStar’s winged horse logo — or as Mr. Zemeckis’s dizzying walk in the clouds — if the studio is to become identified as a surefire crowd pleaser.Otherwise, Mr. Rice said, “I just don’t think the consumer cares.”A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Studio Chief Leads Effort To Rebuild Sony Films.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.