AdvertisementSupported byPolitical EconomyBy Hugo Dixon | ReutersReforming the European Union is more than renegotiating Britain’s relationship with it. That may sound like a statement of the obvious. But the debate in Britain over whether the country should stay in the Union has virtually equated the two, largely because David Cameron, the newly re-elected prime minister, has promised to renegotiate Britain’s relationship with the European Union before holding a referendum on whether to stay in.In fact, reform is much more than this set-piece renegotiation — even if viewed purely from a British perspective. For a start, there are reforms that have already taken place. Then there are reforms that are in the pipeline and benefit Britain but are not part of the renegotiation because they are to the advantage of the whole European Union.There are two dangers with equating reform with renegotiation.First, the upcoming renegotiation may not achieve much. If Mr. Cameron comes back from Brussels with a paltry haul of concessions, anti-Europeans may find it easy to paint his renegotiation as a failure, helping them win over the electorate in the coming referendum.Second, talk of renegotiation is unlikely to win allies in the rest of the European Union. It sounds as if they are being asked to give Britain a special deal — and that is hard to sell to their own electorates. The more Mr. Cameron talks about renegotiation, the less reform he may end up with — which again may make it harder for him to win the plebiscite.All this is doubly important given that the government seems to be coming around to the idea that it won’t be possible to reopen the European Union treaties before the referendum. If there isn’t going to be a quick new treaty — which is unlikely given that few other European Union countries are keen on the idea — there won’t be a chance for big changes in Britain’s relationship with the bloc.By the same token, there is no need to delay the referendum until 2017, Mr. Cameron’s original plan. Momentum is now building to hold the vote in 2016, with even Mark J. Carney, the normally apolitical Bank of England governor, implying he backs such a move on the grounds that it would limit economic uncertainty.Mr. Cameron has given a rough sketch of what he wants from his renegotiation: the ability to control migration from the European Union by reforming welfare benefits; the return of unspecified powers from Brussels; the ability of national parliaments to work together to block European Union legislation; and an end Britain’s commitment to “ever closer union” in Europe.Some of these changes can be achieved without a new treaty. With others, Mr. Cameron may have to settle for a postdated check — a commitment by the other European Union leaders that they will make the necessary changes when the treaties are next reopened.Several of Mr. Cameron’s demands could and should be sold as beneficial to other European Union nations, too. Letting national parliaments block unwanted legislation could be seen as addressing the Union’s notorious democratic deficit. Reforming welfare so that people have the freedom to move around the European Union to work, study or retire, but not to claim benefits, appeals elsewhere. Getting Brussels to meddle less in matters best left to nation-states could also win allies.But even though such changes may be useful, they could look rather thin come the British referendum. So it is also important to focus on what has already happened and what is in the pipeline.One important recent reform is how the European Commission, under Jean-Claude Juncker, is managing itself. It has a slimmed-down agenda, focusing on high priorities rather than the previous scattergun approach. Its mission includes an onslaught on red tape, long a bugbear of British governments.Other reforms include the first-ever real-terms cut in the European Union budget — something Mr. Cameron achieved with allies. He also secured a double-voting system that means the eurozone countries cannot caucus together to force through banking rules against the wishes of countries that don’t use the euro currency.The European Commission already has three initiatives under way that should help: creating a capital markets union to spur the use of nonbank finance; developing a digital single market to ease Internet-based commerce; and building an energy union to knit together the bloc’s fragmented energy markets.Then there is the prospect of trade deals with other parts of the world, which would again be beneficial to Britain. Top of the list is the one being negotiated with the United States.Put all this together with what Mr. Cameron manages to secure from his renegotiation and the change would look substantial and attractive. This is how he should sell reform in his referendum.Hugo Dixon is editor at large of Reuters News.Advertisement