By STEPHEN CASTLEOCT. 21, 2015
LONDON — On the same day that an important business group announced its full-throated support for continued British membership in the European Union, the governor of the Bank of England gave a positive, if more cautious, assessment.Speaking on Wednesday at Oxford University, the central bank’s chief, Mark Carney, stressed that he was not giving an overall verdict on membership but remarking on its implications for the bank. The question of staying in the union will be determined by a referendum before the end of 2017.“Overall European Union membership has increased the openness of the U.K. economy, facilitating dynamism but also creating some monetary and financial stability challenges for the Bank of England to manage,” he said. “Thus far, we have been able to meet these challenges.”Mr. Carney said that after the euro crisis, Britain’s openness had made it vulnerable to shocks and that the union should have “clear principles to safeguard the interests of non-euro member states,” like Britain.AdvertisementAside from his status as a central bank governor, Mr. Carney may prove to be an influential player in the debate partly because, as a Canadian, he is a relative newcomer to Britain’s agonized internal debate about its place in Europe.AdvertisementOpinion polls tend to show Britain evenly divided on membership of the European Union, and a study this week by Natcen, a social research institute, said that younger and better-educated voters tended to be more opposed to British withdrawal.Those campaigning for Britain to stay in the European Union pin many of their hopes on an economic case. On Wednesday, Britain’s main business lobbying group, the Confederation of British Industry, laid out its case for staying in the single market and for being able to influence the rules and standards that apply in that bloc.“Alternative arrangements to full membership either have serious downsides or are surrounded by huge uncertainty,” the group said.It conceded that some of its members “recognize that there are disadvantages to E.U. membership,” and called for the regulatory burden on smaller businesses to be lightened, as well as for measures to increase competitiveness in Europe.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But it said that membership in the bloc remained in the national interest. “For business, the benefits of full membership outweigh the disadvantages, but the European Union must work better,” the confederation’s director general, John Cridland, said.Vote Leave, one of the groups campaigning for a withdrawal, rejected that point of view. “We want to end the supremacy of European Union law and regain the ability to make our own trade deals,” it said in a statement. “There is only one way to choose our future, and that is to Vote Leave in the European Union referendum.”Both sides have started publicity campaigns in recent weeks, and while big business appears more favorable to the “in” campaign, there are also some significant figures in the business world who want Britain out.They say that Britain could forge advantageous trade deals outside the bloc and free itself of ties to sluggish European economies.AdvertisementPrime Minister David Cameron says he intends to renegotiate important aspects of Britain’s membership before the referendum. If those changes are approved, he would use them to persuade Britons to stay in.Under pressure from several European allies, including France, Mr. Cameron has promised to give more information next month on the types of changes he wants. But on Tuesday, Britain’s minister for Europe, David Lidington, suggested this would not amount to a detailed list.Progress in these negotiations will determine the timing of the referendum, Mr. Lidington said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.