By DANIELLE IVORYMAY 18, 2015
In a rare, sweeping move against an automaker, the nation’s top auto safety agency said on Monday that it was trying to determine whether Fiat Chrysler had failed to promptly fix safety defects in millions of recalled vehicles or properly notify owners.The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said that it would conduct a hearing, scheduled for July 2, to examine 20 separate recalls issued by the automaker covering more than 10 million vehicles. That total far exceeds the recall of 1.56 million Jeep sport utility vehicles that have been a source of increasing friction between Fiat Chrysler and the agency.“We are looking at a pattern,” Mark R. Rosekind, administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, said in a call with reporters. “We’ve been tracking each of these recalls.”The agency said it had received reports of a series of problems. Consumers have complained about a lack of notification about recalls, it said. When owners were informed, the agency said, they could be told that parts were not available.AdvertisementAnd sometimes, owners had trouble making service appointments or received the wrong information about the recalled vehicles, the agency said. In at least one case, the agency received reports of fires occurring in vehicles that had already been fixed.AdvertisementRegulators demanded that Fiat Chrysler turn over a trove of documents related to the cars under recall, including all notices sent to dealers, complaints, field reports and reports of fires, crashes, injuries and deaths, among other documents.Eric Mayne, a spokesman for Fiat Chrysler, defended the company’s response and said that the average completion rate on its recalls “exceeds the industry average.” He added that all of its recalls in the United States were done in consultation with regulators and that the company would fully cooperate with the agency.A central point of contention between Fiat Chrysler and regulators has been Jeeps whose gas tanks, mounted at the back, can explode in a rear-end collision.In a deal struck in 2013, Chrysler agreed to install trailer hitches on those 1.56 million Jeep Liberty sport utility vehicles and Jeep Grand Cherokees to provide added protection. At the time, regulators had linked 56 deaths to the problem.But the pace of repairs, even by Fiat Chrysler’s own account, has been slow. In a letter to dealers last month, Fiat Chrysler said that only a small number of the Jeeps had been repaired.At the same time, the death toll has mounted, including the death of a Michigan woman, Kayla White, in a fiery rear-end collision on a Detroit highway last November.Now, regulators’ patience appears to have worn thin, one safety expert said.“It is unprecedented to have a hearing on so many different recalls from the same manufacturer,” said the expert, Allan Kam, who served as a senior enforcement lawyer for the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration for more than 25 years before he retired in 2000. “It’s a sign that there is a systemic issue with Chrysler.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The announcement signals a newly aggressive approach at the agency, Mr. Kam said.“There’s a new administrator, Mr. Rosekind, who is evidently willing to use the agency’s power to a greater extent than his predecessors,” he said. Mr. Rosekind took over in December.AdvertisementDuring his short tenure, the agency has levied a record $70 million penalty against Honda and announced an investigation into a 2013 Ford recall of its biggest pickup trucks.Depending on what is learned at the hearing, Mr. Rosekind said, Chrysler could face financial penalties and an order for the company to buy back defective cars. He said that the last such public hearing occurred in 2012, when the agency scrutinized the recalls of vehicles made by Wildfire Motors and ordered buybacks.The 20 Fiat Chrysler recalls in question span February 2013 to March 2015 and involve multiple models and defects ranging from loss of steering control to the inadvertent deployment of airbags.Included in the recalls is one issued late last year to fix driver’s-side airbags made by Takata that could explode with too much force, sending metal fragments into the passenger compartment.Regulators also singled out a recall from July 2, 2014, that involved more than 651,000 Dodge Durangos and Jeep Grand Cherokees from the 2011 to 2014 model years that had defective vanity lamps that could short and cause fires.Mr. Rosekind said the agency had received reports of fires in those vehicles even after they had supposedly been repaired.Last year, the agency came under intense criticism from lawmakers after General Motors recalled millions of small cars with a defect that went undisclosed for more than a decade and has been tied to at least 104 deaths.Congressional lawmakers called Mr. Rosekind’s predecessor, David J. Friedman, to Capitol Hill five times last year as auto safety problems increased. In September, a New York Times investigation found that in the last decade the agency had often been slow to identify and act on safety defects and reluctant to use its full legal powers against automakers.In the end, Mr. Rosekind said in a statement, significant questions had been raised as to whether Chrysler was “meeting its obligations to protect the drivers from safety defects.”Advertisement“It is not enough to identify defects,” he said. “Manufacturers have to fix them.”A version of this article appears in print on May 19, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Regulators Set Hearing on Recalls by Chrysler.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.