By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMAY 18, 2015
Tiger Global Management, which has risen to prominence by investing in start-ups, will change its leadership as two executives depart, the firm told investors in a letter on Monday.One of the firm’s investment heads, Feroz Dewan, will leave at the end of June to set up his own investment firm, according to the letter. Another partner, Caleb Watts, will also leave next month to focus on managing his fortune.The moves will lead to one of the biggest reorganizations at Tiger Global since its founding in 2001. Mr. Dewan, who joined the firm in 2003, oversaw its roughly $6 billion hedge fund business and led one of two “long-only” funds that invests in public stocks.With his departure, Scott Shleifer will assume control of all of Tiger Global’s public equity business, which manages roughly $10 billion in assets. Mr. Shleifer, one of the firm’s earliest employees, had previously co-led its $10 billion private equity business, which has invested in technology companies like Facebook and the Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba Group.Advertisement“Scott joined Tiger Global in 2002 and has been an integral decision maker and large and consistent profit generator in both our public and private equity funds for many years,” Tiger Global’s founder, Chase Coleman, wrote in the letter.AdvertisementThe private equity division’s other co-chief, Lee Fixel, will assume sole control of the unit.“Lee joined in 2006 and has played the leading role in our private equity investing efforts in recent years, specifically having spearheaded many of our most important and successful investments,” Mr. Coleman wrote.As part of the reorganization, Tiger Global said that it would combine its two long-only funds, merging the four-month-old Internet Opportunities fund into its Long Opportunities vehicle.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the letter, the firm said that it realized that running so many public stock funds proved to be a challenge and that simplifying was the better answer.According to Tiger Global, both funds had been performing relatively well, with the Long Opportunities vehicle posting a 20 percent net investment return over the past 19 months and the Internet Opportunities fund returning 11 percent over its four months.“We regret that it took launching T.G.I.O. for us to fully appreciate this, and we apologize for the inconvenience,” Mr. Coleman wrote.As part of the reorganization, Tiger Global will let investors in its public equity funds withdraw their investments if they wish as of June 30.A spokeswoman for Tiger Global declined to comment on the letter.A version of this web log appears in print on May 19, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Deal Space.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.