AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GoughHONG KONG — For the last year, real estate in China has been a gloomy place for investors.Housing prices have plunged. Well-known developers suffered. At least one major property company even defaulted on its debt — a rarity in the country’s closely controlled economy.But there may be small signs of stabilization, data showed on Monday. In China’s biggest cities — metropolises like Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen — housing prices ticked slightly upward.The tentative rebound in some cities’ housing prices suggests that recent steps by policy makers are helping engineer at least a slight turnaround in the market. Last week, the central bank cut interest rates for the third time since November; it had already removed several restrictions on some home purchases.“April’s home sales growth returned to positive territory, the first time since December 2013, following a slew of easing measures introduced to support the weak housing market,” analysts in Hong Kong at Bank of America Merrill Lynch wrote on Monday in a research note. “We expect home sales to remain robust in the coming months as the recent monetary and property easing measures continue to provide support.”The data on Monday painted a divided picture of China’s housing market. New-home prices fell 6.3 percent in April compared with a year earlier, their biggest monthly drop in a decade, according to figures compiled by Wind Information, a financial data service focused on China.But in month-to-month terms, which tend to better capture the most recent trends, prices showed signs of stabilizing, falling only 0.1 percent in April from March. In the biggest cities, prices increased, rising at their fastest pace since late 2013.Plunging housing prices in China were partly to blame last month when Kaisa Group became the first Chinese developer to default on its overseas debt, throwing a chill over the market.Even with tentative indications of a turnaround, investors say a genuine recovery in Chinese housing may still be some way off.“The issue that really began to scare us is the extent of the inventory overhang,” Russell Platt, the chief executive of Forum Partners, a private equity firm based in London that invests in Chinese real estate, said of China’s glut of unsold homes. Forum was an early investor in Kaisa, but cashed out well before the default.Forum has been slowing its investments into China’s property market. “You have to know when to get in, but more important, you’ve really got to know when to get out,” Mr. Platt said.China’s residential property market is a major indicator of the country’s economic health. By some economists’ estimates, housing and related industries account for more than 20 percent of China’s gross domestic product. Partly as a result of the sluggish property market, China’s economy grew at its slowest pace in six years in the first quarter, as the Communist Party tried to reduce China’s reliance on credit-propelled investment and to bolster consumer demand.If it continues, the improvement in housing prices in recent months could provide help to some of the hardest-hit parts of the economy, lifting businesses as diverse as developers, construction companies, steel and cement plants, property brokerages and banks.One of the biggest challenges to a recovery in China’s residential property market remains huge swaths of unsold homes, but the situation varies greatly across the country. In a working paper published last month, economists at the International Monetary Fund found that overbuilding in China’s so-called Tier 1 cities of Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Shenzhen had created an inventory equal to less than 12 months’ worth of sales.That level is fairly manageable, especially considering that those cities continue to attract migrants from the countryside. But in Tier 2 cities, unsold inventories rose to nearly 1.5 years’ worth of sales. China’s least-developed cities, those in Tier 3 and Tier 4, had an alarmingly high stock of unsold homes equal to nearly three years’ worth of sales.Despite the overbuilding, China’s heavily indebted developers have only recently begun to curtail borrowing for new projects and land purchases. Last year, net debt levels for the country’s biggest developers rose 29 percent from 2013, nearly twice as fast as their revenue growth, according to calculations by Moody’s Investors Service.Such a precarious financial position could lead more developers to follow Kaisa into default. But other builders appear to have caught a break. Companies like Evergrande Real Estate Group have been promised huge credit lines from China’s biggest state-owned banks. And, following in the footsteps of China’s stockbrokers, property companies have found a new source of funding in the continuing stock market rally that can help them reduce their reliance on bank debt and bond sales.Last week, China Resources Land raised 10 billion Hong Kong dollars, or $1.3 billion, by selling new shares. Also last week, Yuzhou Properties, a smaller developer, said it would raise 800 million Hong Kong dollars in a share sale.“The recent run-up in Chinese property developers’ share prices has made it attractive for developers to raise equity capital,” Franco Leung, a vice president at Moody’s in Hong Kong, wrote on Monday in a research note. “The proceeds will expand the companies’ funding channels and reduce their reliance on debt, which has been a major funding source for developers over the past few years.”Advertisement