AdvertisementSupported byItinerariesBy Tanya MohnOn a recent Wednesday, Giuliano Barolo worked in Dow Chemical’s business process service center in Mumbai while Swati Tribedy worked at Dow’s manufacturing plant in Mozzanica, Italy.He was doing her old job, and she his. She even sat at his old desk.Since early April, Mr. Barolo, 28, and Ms. Tribedy, 31, have been in a talent swap, a foreign assignment in which employees in the same company from different countries temporarily switch jobs.The new sharing economy includes things like house and apartment swaps, car transportation and co-working spaces. Now the same kind of philosophy is gaining traction in the corporate world, at least for some overseas employees.Talent swaps, which typically last less than a year, can involve less paperwork and expense than traditional expatriate assignments, in which companies have the added cost of moving a family and dealing with schools and costly housing.“It is shorter term, lower risk and easier to administrate,” said Peter Clarke, leader of the Global Mobility Services practice at PricewaterhouseCoopers. The swaps are also effective for career development, to promote cross-border mobility earlier and to attract and retain employees who are seen as having high potential.Mr. Barolo heard about the idea from a colleague from his hometown who had recently returned from a talent swap. “She was very enthusiastic,” he said, “and I was immediately drawn to it.”Ms. Tribedy, who studied mechanical engineering in college but had never worked in manufacturing, said: “I really wanted to experience another function. It’s different from what I imagined.”A recent PwC report predicted a 49 percent increase in talent swaps in the next two years, with more than one in five global businesses planning to introduce the concept.“Typically, the two swapped employees share a similar wage-pay structure and skill-experience level, so it’s basically a plug-out-plug-in situation,” Mr. Clarke said. Sometimes employees even swap housing, which is convenient for workers and a cost savings for companies because a spouse and children often remain at home. And candidates often volunteer for the assignment, he said.That was the case for Karen Jung, a manager at PwC in Tysons Corner, Va., who switched jobs in early February with Marie-Claire Delpin, a manager with the company in Paris. Like many swappers, both are young at 29, junior level and unmarried with no children.The short length of the talent swap was appealing, and Ms. Jung recalled pushing for the assignment. Things quickly fell into place. Ms. Delpin was approached, and she, too, liked the short commitment. “You can enjoy a professional experience without changing everything in your home country,” she said.The benefits, the women said, were as varied as learning the differences between American and French tax law to breaking down cultural stereotypes. And the experience created a closer connection with clients and colleagues based in the United States, Ms. Delpin said.PwC said that many companies engaged in the practice on an ad hoc basis and look to formalize and expand their programs. A recent survey by the firm found that 71 percent of younger workers wanted to work internationally and considered it essential to career growth.“Now, organizations are saying: ‘Hey, what can we do to retain talent and give younger workers the experience they want?’” Mr. Clarke said. “It is an increasingly important part of mobility strategy and a global mind-set. ”But not all multinational organizations or their clients engage in talent swaps or are even familiar with them.“They do happen but generally more on a one-off basis,” said Achim Mossmann, a principal in KPMG’s Global Mobility Services practice. “Often the logistics proved too cumbersome — it is difficult to identify like-for-like candidates and release them from their roles at the same time.”And there are downsides: possible loss of productivity, disruption to clients and companies, and lateral moves for employees, said Dennis J. Garritan, co-managing partner of the private equity firm Palmer Hill Capital. “They learn new skills but are not being promoted — not everybody is in love with that,” he said. “But they want to check that international box as early as possible, and they are smart to do that.”Since Dow’s talent swap program began three years ago, 126 employees in 18 countries have participated. Of the 76 people in the first two groups of swaps, all returned or will return to new positions or promotions within six months, said John Kolmer, Dow’s manager of global leadership development.“We swap people across all geographic areas and functions,” he said, adding that goals include gaining cultural fluency, expanding professional networks and “intentionally taking people out of their comfort zones.”Employees and their company “get the benefit of a catalyst early on that can be leveraged for the rest of their careers,” Mr. Kolmer said.The approach worked for Alex Hoffmann. Five years ago, he was head of strategy for Europe at PayPal in Luxembourg when he sought management experience. A colleague, a managing director in Paris, wanted stronger strategic skills.The two swapped jobs, an idea proposed by their manager.“I remember my first week on the job,” Mr. Hoffmann said. “I got a call from a top salesperson who said we were about to lose the account of our biggest client. It became a bit of a firefight.” But he worked with the team and kept the account. “I honed skills as a line manager and had a totally different professional experience. I learned a ton of things.”Afterward, both swap partners were promoted.Today, as executive vice president for business development and global product at MoneyGram International in Dallas, Mr. Hoffmann continues to use both skills.“It worked out well,” he said. “I would do it again.”Advertisement