By AARON M. KESSLERMAY 19, 2015
Anthony Foxx, the secretary of transportation, announced that the recall of defective airbags made by Takata now affects nearly 34 million vehicles.WASHINGTON —  As auto safety officials here announced what they called “the most complex consumer safety recall in U.S. history,” they also said it could take years to complete, leaving the fate of everyday drivers unclear.After months of defying the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration over calls to issue a nationwide recall, the Japanese supplier Takata agreed on Tuesday to a sweeping agreement to recall an estimated 34 million vehicles across the country — roughly twice the number previously identified as defective.But the scale of the recall meant that as of Tuesday, federal regulators did not yet know which makes and models would be affected.The safety agency’s administrator, Mark R. Rosekind, said it was working to quickly come up with a definitive list and that consumers should frequently check the agency’s vehicle identification number look-up page — vinrcl.safercar.gov/vin — as more vehicles are added.In the course of reporting, The Times obtained video showing the potentially dangerous consequences of mishandling Takata’s airbags. Millions of vehicles with the airbags have been recalled worldwide.Still, Mr. Rosekind said that even when consumers learned they needed the fix, it could be months or even years before they could get one.Advertisement“Every day that someone has to wait to have their car fixed, that could be another life,” said Angelia Sujata, who was injured in South Carolina in March 2012, at age 18, when her 2001 Honda Civic collided with another car and her airbag exploded.AdvertisementAt least six deaths and more than 100 injuries have already been linked to the defect worldwide.“It’s not like a toaster; they can’t just return it to the store,” said Rosemary Shahan, the founder of Consumers for Auto Reliability and Safety. “Most people have to drive, because they have to get to work. What are they supposed to do?”Ms. Shahan said that in light of Tuesday’s developments, it was time for the industry to offer consumers broad access to rental cars while they waited for repairs. Some manufacturers have indicated they will provide loaner cars on a “case-by-case basis,” but Ms. Shahan said that was no longer acceptable.“Every consumer that’s part of this mess should have the right to demand a rental car until their car is made safe,” she said.Millions of vehicles have been recalled worldwide over faulty airbags
made by Takata. Six deaths have been linked to ruptured Takata airbags, five of
them in the United States.People in the United States can find out if their vehicle has been recalled on the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration’s recall page. Outside the United States, vehicle owners should consult their national safety regulator.A spokesman for the safety agency said the agency had encouraged manufacturers to make loaner cars available, “and we suggest that consumers ask.” He declined to be more specific.Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, said it was imperative to provide “a remedy that removes the serious risk to people who are now driving cars with these airbags.” He added the auto industry needed to marshal its resources to fix the Takata airbags quickly, and that federal officials should be ready to force the companies to do so.“This kind of extraordinary recall requires extraordinary remedies,” he said.Mr. Rosekind said on Tuesday that some consumers may eventually wind up having to replace their replacement airbag, because it remains uncertain whether Takata’s new airbags are completely safe.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But he said the new Takata airbags were believed to be “safer” — and therefore better in the interim until the cause of the problem can be determined.For Ms. Sujata, the Takata victim from South Carolina, the damage has already been done. She said she was reminded daily of her crash when she looked down at the scar on her chest.“It really upsets me,” she said. “I try not to act like it does, but it really does.”Danielle Ivory contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on May 20, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Recall’s Huge Scale Could Delay Repairs .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.