AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily Steel and Michael J. de la MercedAfter building up a French cable empire, Altice appears poised to extend its reach across the Atlantic.The French company is in discussions to buy Suddenlink Communications, a privately held American cable operator, a person briefed on the matter said on Tuesday.A deal could be announced soon, though this person cautioned that talks were continuing and could fall apart.If the talks succeed, Suddenlink would be the latest outpost for Altice and its Numericable-SFR broadband operations. Born of a merger of cable networks, Numericable-SFR is one of the biggest telecommunications companies in France, claiming some 6.5 million fixed-line customers and 22.5 million mobile customers.Altice and Numericable have been unafraid of growing through acquisitions. Its largest so far was its 17 billion euro takeover of SFR, the mobile wireless company previously owned by Vivendi.Representatives for Altice and Suddenlink declined to comment.News of the talks was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal, which said the deal would value Suddenlink at $8 billion to $10 billion, including the assumption of debt.The development comes as a new wave of consolidation is expected to sweep across the country’s cable industry after the collapse of Comcast’s $45 billion takeover of Time Warner Cable because of regulatory concerns. On Monday, Charter Communications announced that it would pursue a $10.4 billion deal for Bright House Networks. That deal is considered to be a potential precursor to Charter’s push to acquire Time Warner Cable.Altice’s motives for pursuing an acquisition of Suddenlink are unclear. Suddenlink, based in St. Louis, is the seventh-largest cable operator in the United States with about 1.5 million total customers in 17 states, including North Carolina, Texas and West Virginia.Suddenlink has about 6,000 employees and annual revenue of $2.33 billion.Amy Yong, a media analyst with Macquarie, said that the industry had seen this playbook before, when Cogeco, a Canadian telecommunications company, in 2012 acquired Atlantic Broadband, which operated in Pennsylvania, Florida and Maryland.“Interest rates are low and at the end of the day, it’s a great cash-flow business,” Ms. Yong said. “But it definitely makes the M.&A. playbook even more complicated.”Suddenlink has been a part of one of the fiercest, drawn-out disputes in the media industry. In October, Suddenlink dropped the channels from the media conglomerate Viacom, including MTV, Comedy Central and Nickelodeon, after the two companies failed to reach an agreement. Viacom was seeking a significant increase to the rates Suddenlink paid for its networks, and Suddenlink refused because of the tumbling ratings.That standoff persists, illustrating how some smaller cable providers like Suddenlink are placing more emphasis on selling broadband rather than paying the escalating fees television groups are demanding. Increasingly, the profits of cable operators are tied to selling broadband service, which faces less competition, rather than video, where more companies compete for customers.In the most recent quarter, Suddenlink counted more high-speed Internet customers than basic video customers. Suddenlink’s high-speed Internet subscribers increased 7 percent, to 1.2 million, during the most recent quarter compared with the same period last year, while its basic video customers fell 4.8 percent, to 1.1 million.Advertisement