By BEN PROTESSMAY 19, 2015
Mary Jo White’s top aide at the Securities and Exchange Commission is stepping down, the latest personnel move at the Wall Street regulator.Lona Nallengara, a veteran of the agency and Ms. White’s chief of staff, announced on Tuesday that he would depart at the end of June. His move will cap a four-year tenure in which he climbed from midlevel lawyer to Ms. White’s right-hand aide.“He is a trusted adviser who brings strong leadership, incredible intellect and a tremendous work ethic that is beyond compare,” Ms. White, the S.E.C.’s chairwoman, said in a statement, nodding to the odd hours he kept, often responding to emails she dispatched in the midnight hours and during the weekend. “I am deeply grateful for all he has done for me and the agency.”Under Ms. White, Mr. Nallengara played the role of ambassador to the agency’s four other commissioners, negotiating deals on regulations and other policy changes, including the so-called Volcker Rule. He also acted as Ms. White’s deputy to the Financial Stability Oversight Council, the body of regulatory tasked with preventing another financial crisis.AdvertisementOther times, deal-making proved elusive for Mr. Nallengara and the S.E.C. when the commissioners were sharply divided along party lines. The agency’s two Democratic commissioners typically advocate strict regulations and enforcement cases, but the two Republicans are decidedly more skeptical. That dynamic often leaves Ms. White, a political independent, to straddle the political divide and forced Mr. Nallengara into the center of the tension.AdvertisementIt is a time of transition for the S.E.C. One of the Republican commissioners, Daniel Gallagher, is expected to leave the agency soon, as is one of the Democrats, Luis A. Aguilar. David Woodcock, the head of the agency’s Fort Worth office, also recently departed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Nallengara’s next move is unclear. But the typical path for S.E.C. lawyers is through the so-called revolving door, the metaphorical portal between government and the private sector.For Mr. Nallengara, a 44-year-old marathon runner, it would not be his first stint as a private lawyer. A Toronto native, Mr. Nallengara previously worked at a Canadian law firm and then as a partner at Shearman & Sterling in New York, where he worked on corporate deals and capital raising.Mr. Nallengara joined the S.E.C. in early 2011, starting as deputy director in the agency’s corporation finance unit, which handles corporate disclosures and rulemakings, including those arising from the Dodd-Frank regulatory overhaul in 2010 and the Jobs Act that focused on start-up financing. He eventually became the unit’s interim director before joining Ms. White’s staff in 2013.Mr. Nallengara lived in Washington during the week and commuted home to his wife, Joanne Wong, and their children, Benjamin and Jonathan, on Friday evenings after work.“It has been an incredible honor and privilege to serve Chair White and to work alongside the talented S.E.C. staff,” Mr. Nallengara said in the statement. “My time at the commission has been a highlight of my career.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.