AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — The European Central Bank is not ready to pull the plug on Greece — not yet at least.Members of the central bank’s Governing Council are scheduled to meet in Frankfurt on Wednesday and are expected to conduct an intense discussion about the life support they are providing to Greek banks. But despite being unhappy with the way the Greek government has been handling debt negotiations, the policy makers are not likely to do anything that would provoke a crisis, according to analysts and a person familiar with the governing council’s thinking.The central bank has lent more than 110 billion euros, or about $125 billion, to struggling Greek lenders. If the Greek government went bankrupt and caused the country’s banking system to collapse, the central bank could suffer huge losses.But, despite having little patience remaining with the behavior of leaders of Greece’s leftist government, the central bank’s policy makers are not likely to further restrict the flow of emergency cash to Greek banks quite yet, analysts said.The central bank has placed a ceiling of €80 billion on lending to Greek banks through a program known as emergency liquidity assistance. The central bank has been raising the ceiling in increments weekly, keeping the banks on a short leash.Greece is in such a precarious position that any change in central bank policy could alarm markets and have serious consequences.“That could be self-fulfilling,” perhaps forcing Athens to take drastic measures like imposing restrictions on bank withdrawals, said Lefteris Farmakis, an economist at Nomura in London. “Clearly it’s not a trivial thing to do.”But, he said, the European Central Bank could soon run out of patience. “Next week, it’s quite likely,” Mr. Farmakis said, that the Governing Council will impose stricter conditions on lending to Greek banks, unless there is more progress toward a deal between Athens and its creditors.And he was reluctant to rule out action by the central bank this week.Traders and investors are clearly nervous about the state of the eurozone. On Tuesday, the euro fell sharply against the dollar after a top official at the European Central Bank said it could temporarily step up its stimulus measures.Benoît Cœuré, a member of the central bank’s executive board, said in London that purchases of government bonds could increase in May and June in anticipation of reduced purchases during the summer.Trading volume is typically thinner during July and August, when many bankers, investors and traders are on vacation. As a result, Mr. Cœuré said, the European Central Bank is “moderately front-loading its purchase activity in May and June, which will allow us to maintain our monthly average of €60 billion, while having to buy less in the holiday period.”Mr. Cœuré’s statement, made late Monday and published by the European Central Bank on Tuesday, appeared to be merely advice to markets of a technical adjustment in the bond-buying program, which is part of a stimulus package.But the euro fell nearly 2 percent against the dollar, slipping to just above $1.11 in late-afternoon European trading. Recently, the euro had been rebounding from lows of a few months ago, when it was close to trading at a one-to-one rate against the dollar.The market-moving remarks by Mr. Cœuré caused some embarrassment for the European Central Bank because he delivered them to an audience Monday night that included several hedge fund managers, but the text was not released publicly until Tuesday. Theoretically, some people in the audience could have profited from information that was not widely available.“The intention was to publish the speech at the time it was delivered,” the central bank said in a statement, “but an internal procedural error meant this did not happen until the morning.”Mr. Cœuré also expressed concern about recent sharp movements in the prices of German government bonds and other eurozone debt. “After several similar episodes, it is yet another incident of extreme volatility in global capital markets,” Mr. Cœuré said.Greece has been struggling just to pay civil servants and pensioners, and it is running out of time to agree on the terms of continued financial aid from other countries in the eurozone. It is unclear how Greece will make payments due in June to the International Monetary Fund.Yanis Varoufakis, the Greek finance minister, said in a television interview broadcast late Monday that he believed a deal would be sealed within a week. “I think we’re very close,” Mr. Varoufakis said.But leaders elsewhere in Europe were more pessimistic. The European Commission denied a report that its president, Jean-Claude Juncker, had offered to make further concessions to Greece to reach a deal.With talks seemingly stalled, some members of the central bank’s Governing Council, which includes the heads of national central banks in the 19 eurozone countries, have been arguing that the European Central Bank should impose further discounts on the Greek bonds that are used as collateral at the central bank. Such a move would make it more difficult for the Greek banks to borrow from the central bank.Greek banks hold large quantities of their own government bonds, which they have been using as collateral to get emergency loans from the European Central Bank. If the government cannot pay its debts, the bonds being used as collateral would plummet in value, and the central bank would suffer huge losses.At least some of the losses would be passed on to taxpayers in other eurozone countries.The European Central Bank, as guardian of the euro, clearly does not want to cause a crisis that would force Greece out of the eurozone and raise questions about the durability of the currency bloc. But the central bank has already bent its rules to keep Greek banks functioning, and at some point it might be forced to further restrict the flow of cash.The central bank would probably not cut off cash altogether. But it could increase the discount, or so-called haircut, that it imposes on the value of Greek bonds when they are used as collateral.Such a measure would affect any bank in the eurozone using Greek bonds as security for central bank loans. But Greek banks would be hit hardest because so much of their collateral consists of those bonds.Niki Kitsantonis contributed reporting from Athens.Advertisement