By JONAH BROMWICH and DANIEL VICTOROCT. 21, 2015
We were promised hoverboards. And if you’re angry because we don’t have them, the movie that planted the dream might also be to blame.When it came out in 1989, “Back to the Future II” suggested we would be bouncing off walls and racing cars while floating above the ground, all with the ease of a skateboard. Our futuristic and really fun transportation device would surely arrive by Oct. 21, 2015. (Yes, we’re milking a meme here, but for a good cause: hoverboards.)There are many reasons — mostly involving the laws of physics — that we don’t yet have hoverboards. Actual designs, which have emerged in recent years, are far more rudimentary than the model used by Marty McFly in the movie. And one hoverboard maker says the film may have led astray the generation of engineers it inspired.Philippe Maalouf, 39, the co-founder and chief executive of the Montreal-based company Omni Hoverboards, said that the “visuals of the movie, how it looks, held back the hoverboard industry.Advertisement“We’ve noticed that with the design of other hoverboards that have been done so far by Lexus and Hendo, they’ve created a hoverboard that looks exactly like the one in the movie,” he continued. “But when it comes to usability, it doesn’t work like the one in the movie. It’s like a banana peel.”AdvertisementJill Henderson, 51, a co-founder of the company Arx Pax, which owns Hendo, says that “the Hendo Hoverboard is a proof of concept designed to capture the imagination.”She added that the company’s boards are a work in progress, and that a new beta version of the product — Hendo 2.0 — has “adopted a more true-to-skateboard-like design for usability purposes.” That model makes its public debut late Wednesday. The date is not a coincidence.Lexus did not respond to a request for comment.Tony Hawk, the professional skateboarder, rode a Hendo hoverboard with Dave Carnie, a writer for The Ride Channel, but it proved difficult to balance, making neither look like a professional.“I had arrived with all kinds of silly ideas of what to do on the hoverboard, but after my first spin on the thing I realized that all of my hover dreams were way too ambitious,” Mr. Carnie wrote.A writer for The Verge had a similar experience with a hoverboard made by Lexus. “Marty McFly would be disappointed,” Sam Sheffer wrote.The Omni Hoverboard does not closely resemble the models from the film. In a survey of various models, Wired magazine said that it performed “most like what we would expect of a hoverboard.”The board uses propellers, and an early model was powered by a battery. But problems with the weight and capacity of current battery technology led Omni back to a more faithful standby: fuel.Advertisement“We’re kind of sick of waiting for a hoverboard. We want one to work for real, today,” Mr. Maalouf said. “So we had to move on from battery technology.”He claims that a model using fuel will be able to fly for “about 25 minutes,” but admits that a current model — one still using battery-power — can only stay aloft for a little more than a minute.The other two prominent hoverboards use electromagnetic technology. Hendo, which Ms. Henderson said allows for about 15 minutes of hover time, can stay aloft over metals that do not contain iron, but will fall flat over other surfaces.The Times paid a visit to Hendo in 2014.Ever since Marty McFly rode a hoverboard in 1989’s “Back to The Future II,” people have been dreaming of making the floating device a reality. In 2014, a California start-up said it had it figured out.The Lexus model uses superconductors cooled by liquid nitrogen, but also fails if the surface below it is not embedded with magnets.So while both boards, particularly the Lexus, bear a striking resemblance to the models from “Back to the Future II,” neither board would enable a dramatic getaway from Griff or Biff.But even skeptics like Mr. Maalouf and his co-founder, Alexandru Duru, have paid tribute to the film in their own way. They had a working prototype in 2013, but waited to start the company.“We said, let’s wait until the year 2015 until we found the company, just so that it overlaps with what we saw in the movie ‘Back to the Future II,’ just as a symbol,” Mr. Maalouf said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.