AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelThere were 352 original, scripted television series last year on broadcast, cable and streaming services. None were televised on Epix, the premium television network known for its selection of movies.Not anymore. On Thursday, Epix is to announce that it, too, is jumping into the competitive world of scripted television with two original series. The first is “Graves” a half-hour comedy from Lionsgate starring Nick Nolte as a former United States president who goes on a Don Quixote-like quest to repair the wrongs of his administration. The second, “Berlin Station,” is an hourlong modern spy thriller from Viacom’s Paramount about a C.I.A. agent’s quest to uncover a leak at the agency’s Berlin station.The two series start production in the fall and are to make their debut on the network next year. A series with MGM Studios also is in the works.Epix was started in 2009 as a joint venture between the entertainment groups Viacom, Lionsgate and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios. Initially, it was met with much skepticism. Over the years, however, the commercial-free network steadily gained subscribers as it built a reputation as the home for new movies, classic films, original documentaries and other comedy and music events.After gaining a place on major cable operators like Time Warner Cable, the network now has about 10.5 million subscribers, according to Macquarie. It nevertheless remains small compared with HBO’s 31.4 million subscribers, Starz’s 23.7 million and Showtime’s 22.8 million.Mark Greenberg, chief executive of Epix, said that televising original series had always been part of the network’s business plan, and it was only a question of when. Now, the time is right, he said, because the network is available to more than 50 million households, has hired the right talent and needs to amplify and differentiate its brand. The model follows the playbook deployed years ago by its rivals HBO, Starz and Netflix, which started hubs for watching movies, then distinguished their brands by developing their own original programming. “Clearly, there are a lot of people looking at this space, but there is no doubt about it: We think we can do things with a different flare, in a different way,” Mr. Greenberg said, noting that the network has looked at more than 100 scripts in the last year.To jump-start its plan, Epix is turning to television studios with a track record for bringing breakout hits to networks seeking to enter the scripted business or to redefine their brand. Lionsgate, for instance, is the studio behind “Mad Man,” which represented AMC’s first foray into original series. It also is behind the Netflix prison comedy “Orange Is the New Black.” “The stakes are high, the upsides and the downsides are significant,” said Kevin Beggs, chairman of Lionsgate Television Group. “When it works, the show, and by extension the studio partner, become inextricably linked to the overall branding of the network. The show lives in a slightly different place.”There is no doubt that Epix will have to roll out a strong marketing campaign to stand out. The competition for viewers has never been fiercer. For studios, the extra promotional push that comes with a debut on an outlet new to original series is desirable. “When something is starting new, there is momentum and excitement and energy,” said Amy Powell, president of Paramount Television. “ ‘Berlin Station’ has the opportunity to be the jewel in the crown.”Advertisement