By LIZ MOYEROCT. 21, 2015
Prepaid debit cards can help those who don’t have a bank account and don’t want to carry around bundles of cash. You don’t even need a good credit history to get one (nor do they help you build a credit history).But they also can cause serious headaches, as customers of one popular card found out over the last few days.RushCard customers discovered they couldn’t get access to their money — in some cases for more than a week — after the prepaid card purveyor experienced technical difficulties while switching processing providers over the Columbus Day weekend. RushCard says it has resolved nearly all the issues, but some cardholders were still complaining about being unable to use their cards as of Tuesday. The situation was particularly dire for some customers who had all of their weekly wages direct-deposited onto their RushCards.The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has advice for people who experience disruptions in service with their prepaid card. First, if your wages are direct-deposited onto a card, contact your company’s payroll office and put a stop to the direct deposit, either redirecting your paycheck to a new banking or prepaid account or asking that it be issued as a paper check.AdvertisementThose who find themselves unable to cover bill payments linked to prepaid accounts, incurring late fees as a result, can try to negotiate a fee waiver.AdvertisementCompanies aren’t required to waive fees, but some might be flexible, says Gail Hillebrand, the consumer bureau’s associate director for consumer education and engagement.Monitor your account for unusual activity and report any unrecognized transactions to the prepaid card issuer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And the regulator says it is accepting consumer complaints on its website and by phone, at consumerfinance.gov or 1-855-411-2372.Since it began accepting complaints about prepaid cards last year, the consumer bureau has gathered 2,700 as of Oct. 1.Another thing to consider when selecting a prepaid card: fees. The Federal Trade Commission points out that some cards charge multiple fees, beginning at purchase and also including fees to add money to a card, buy something with it, take money out of an A.T.M., and check balances or other transaction information.It advises consumers to compare cards and pick the one with low activation fees, annual fees and A.T.M. fees.“Do not buy a card because you like the celebrity who talks about it,” the F.T.C. says. “It may have higher fees than other prepaid cards.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.