By BEN SISARIOMAY 20, 2015
Spotify now wants to help you jog, watch videos and catch up on podcasts, all in addition to listening to music — a move that will put the company into competition with Apple, YouTube and other technology outlets.Spotify, which has come to dominate the world of subscription streaming music, announced a series of changes to its mobile app on Wednesday, moving into new realms of media distribution just ahead of the expected arrival of a competing service from Apple.The new features on Spotify include podcasts and short video clips as well as playlists that anticipate what kind of music or media a user might be interested in, based on the time of day.Its new content will come from various media outlets like Comedy Central, NBC, Maker Studios, Nerdist and the BBC.Advertisement“The perfect music should always be just a touch away,” Daniel Ek, the company’s chief executive, said at a news conference in Manhattan.AdvertisementAnother feature matches the tempo of music in a workout playlist to a runner’s pace, as registered by smartphone. In one symbol of how closely it competes with Apple, Spotify also announced a partnership with Nike, which has been closely associated with Apple and iTunes for years.Spotify’s event also featured some celebrity power. Ilana Glazer and Abbi Jacobson, the creators and stars of the Comedy Central show “Broad City,” joked about serving as video distractions on people’s phones, and the singer D’Angelo played with a band that included the Roots drummer Questlove and the bassist Pino Palladino.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Apple, which last year paid $3 billion for Beats, the headphone company and streaming service, has said little about its plans. But the music industry is gearing up for what could be a colossal fight. Spotify, with a four-year head start in the United States, has 15 million paying users around the world, and 45 million more who listen free with advertising.While sales of downloads have begun to plunge in the last two years, Apple has been slow to enter the streaming market. However, its vast reach makes it a threat to all other players.Spotify’s new direction puts it in direct competition with other technology and media companies.Snapchat, the disappearing-message app, also offers short-form video and audio clips from many of the same partners, as do YouTube — Google’s giant video arm — and Yahoo. Tidal, a streaming music service bought by Jay Z this year for $56 million, offers thousands of high-definition videos, many of them exclusive. And this week Deezer, another music streaming outlet, introduced about 20,000 podcasts.To distinguish themselves and hold on to customers, music services have come to emphasize the value of playlists that can automatically supply songs, making it as easy as possible for a listener to plug in without feeling overwhelmed by endless choices. Last year Spotify paid about $55 million for the Echo Nest, a data-analysis company that Mr. Ek said was vital to the development of its new features.“Playlists are the new radio,” said Jay Frank, an independent record company executive and consultant with the firm DigMark, “and success in this area will determine the streaming winner.”Mike Isaac contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Spotify Is Expanding to Include Video and Predictive Playlists.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.