AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningWASHINGTON — Even as five big banks plead guilty to felonies and paying out billions of dollars, the question remains whether top executives will shrug off the penalties as just an average cost of doing business.The Justice Department hailed the guilty pleas by JPMorgan Chase, Citigroup, Barclays, UBS and the Royal Bank of Scotland to foreign exchange and Libor manipulation charges as a victory for discouraging corporate misconduct. Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch said that the penalty of more than $5 billion that the banks agreed to pay, including $2.5 billion in criminal fines, “should deter competitors in the future from chasing profits without regard to fairness, to the law, or to the public welfare.”Whether traders will ever be dissuaded from seeking out ways to gain any edge possible in financial dealings is an open question. The watchword for prosecutors and regulators these days in dealing with multinational businesses is “cooperation.”Last week, officials at both the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission  emphasized that corporations and individuals would receive consideration if they were forthcoming about known violations. The price will be much steeper if they choose not to tell everything they know as early as possible.Yet even as penalty after penalty is paid by big banks in various cases, it seems as though the same cast of corporate characters keeps reappearing. It makes you wonder whether the global banks are acting like teenagers who find it easier to beg forgiveness than actually change their behavior.The guilty pleas are noticeably tougher than the enforcement actions of just a few years ago, when virtually every case involving violations in the financial sector resulted in only a deferred or nonprosecution agreement. To send a message that repeat offenders will now pay a price, the Justice Department took the additional step of tearing up the 2012 nonprosecution agreement with UBS, which had resolved the investigation of its manipulation of the London interbank offered rate, or Libor.Now, UBS is pleading guilty and paying an additional $203 million fine. The bank had no defense to the Libor charges because its admissions could be used against it once the government found that it breached a provision of the nonprosecution agreement that promised it would not commit any more crimes.In the foreign exchange case, however, UBS dodged a guilty plea because it was the first to report misconduct to the Justice Department. Under the corporate leniency policy in antitrust cases, the first company to report a violation will not be prosecuted as long as it cooperates in the inquiry (never mind that UBS’s cooperation in the foreign exchange case was the basis for tearing up its earlier agreement that had helped it avoid prosecution over rigging of interest rates).For UBS’s part, the list of settlements that it has to answer for keeps getting longer. In 2009, it entered into a deferred prosecution agreement with the Justice Department after helping Americans hide assets and avoid taxes, paying $780 million to resolve the case.In 2011, it paid $160 million and entered into a nonprosecution agreement over antitrust violations for bid-rigging of municipal bond sales. The 2012 Libor nonprosecution agreement was part of a broader settlement in which its Japanese subsidiary pleaded guilty (and payments to American and foreign governments totaled about $1.5 billion).UBS is not the only repeat offender. JPMorgan has had several significant cases before federal prosecutors over the last couple years. That bank entered into a deferred prosecution agreement in January 2014 that required it to forfeit $1.7 billion for violations of reporting laws related to accounts at the bank used by Bernard L. Madoff as part of his Ponzi scheme. In November 2013, JPMorgan settled civil fraud charges related to sales of residential mortgage-backed securities with a $13 billion settlement that included a $2 billion civil penalty.The Justice Department made good on its threat to hold companies that are repeat offenders accountable in an effort to ratchet up the pressure to cooperate. In April, Leslie R. Caldwell, an assistant attorney general, said that the agency’s criminal division “will not hesitate to tear up” any previous deferred prosecution or nonprosecution agreement if “such action is appropriate and proportional to the breach.”The Justice Department has also been demanding that companies identify the employees who perpetrated the misconduct as part of its cooperation. Still, it is unclear whether the government will actually prosecute those it views as the bad actors.There is no indication that anyone involved in the foreign exchange manipulation has been charged at this point, and although a few traders may be indicted in the future, it is unlikely that any senior executives will be held responsible for the violations.Even the act of pleading guilty to a felony does not hold the same shame it once did in corporate America. At one time, the accepted wisdom was that a bank could not survive a criminal conviction because of the threat to its ability to do business.This was named the “Arthur Andersen effect,” after the accounting firm’s demise when it was convicted of destroying documents related to its Enron audit. (The conviction was overturned after the Supreme Court held that the trial judge’s instructions to the jury failed to require the necessary proof that Arthur Andersen knew its actions were wrong).Guilty pleas in 2014 by BNP Paribas and Credit Suisse have had little long-term effect on those banks’ continuing operations. Indeed, after prosecutors announced those deals, the banks’ chief executives promptly assured their investors that the effect of the penalties would be minimal.One reason that a criminal conviction is no longer viewed as a potential corporate death sentence is that the government has actively sought to make sure a guilty plea does not hamstrung a bank’s operations too much. As DealBook reported on Wednesday, the announcement of the case against the five global banks was delayed until the S.E.C. granted waivers from rules that would make it more difficult for them to issue securities and prohibit participation in the issuance of stocks and bonds through private placements.Banks appear willing to plead guilty as long as the collateral costs are not too heavy. Thus, the potency of a criminal conviction as a deterrent seems to have been dissipated, perhaps to the point that it is just another business expense. In a sense, they have become pleas without the baggage that comes with acknowledging guilt when all that is involved is the payment of fines, something that can be done as well in a civil proceeding.The Justice Department’s decision to tear up the nonprosecution agreement with UBS signals that there is a limit to the amount of recidivism that will be tolerated. But this may turn out to be just a special case.To change corporate culture and prevent violations from happening in the future, prosecutors may have to go beyond just demanding cooperation and threatening ever larger fines.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningAdvertisement