
Breakingviews By                     
FIONA MAHARG-BRAVO

MAY 20, 2015
The French cable king Patrick Drahi is showing controlled ambition by extending his multibillion-dollar telecom empire to the United States.Altice is buying 70 percent of the American-based cable operator Suddenlink Communications from its private equity owners, valuing the company at $9.1 billion, including debt. That is equivalent to 10.1 times last year’s earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, a closely watched figure in the cable world. The move is more considered than it might look.Cheap debt has powered Altice into an mergers and acquisition machine. In the last year or so, the group has spent nearly $35 billion on SFR and Portugal Telecom. Entering the fast-growing United States cable market gives the company a foray into the backyard of Liberty Media’s John C. Malone, the cable king for whom Mr. Drahi once worked. It also suggests that Altice wants to replicate in the United States its European model of bringing together several companies under one roof. Suddenlink is the seventh-largest cable operator in the United States with 1.5 million customers, and it could serve as a springboard for further American deals for Altice.With all the existing acquisitions to integrate, overreach is a concern. Yet Altice investors, who have greeted the deal enthusiastically, have a number of reassurances. Instead of finding his way in a new market, Mr. Drahi could have gone straight for the $44.6 billion Time Warner Cable, which would have been a stretch considering Altice’s size.AdvertisementSecond, expected synergies of $215 million mean the Suddenlink deal’s ratio of enterprise value to Ebitda drops to 7.6 times, closer to what it paid for Portgual Telecom.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Altice’s track record in cutting costs helps offset concerns that cross-border synergies are harder to achieve. It managed to increase Ebitda margins by four to 10 percentage points in subsidiaries across Israel, the Dominican Republic, Benelux and French overseas territories last year, according to Barclays research. Adjusted Ebitda margins at Suddenlink were 39 percent in 2014, below the mid-to-high 40s achieved in some of Altice’s other subsidiaries.Lastly, Altice is only putting in $1.2 billion of cash. The rest will be covered by $6.7 billion in new and existing debt, plus a $500 million vendor loan from Suddenlink’s owners, BC Partners and the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board.AdvertisementLeverage looks high at more than seven times, but Altice estimates that it can get it down to 6.1 times if the company delivers on the synergies. The relative caution, and the fact that the private equity owners are sticking around for the ride, should convince investors that Mr. Drahi’s latest foray is worth backing.Fiona Maharg-Bravo is Reuters Breakingviews Madrid correspondent. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »