By RICHARD SANDOMIROCT. 21, 2015
ESPN plans to lay off about 300 employees as it reacts to the shifting ways that sports are consumed and as it devises new ways to market and distribute its vast array of sports programming.“The demand for sports remains undiminished,” John Skipper, ESPN’s president, wrote in a letter to employees on Wednesday, “though the landscape we operate in has never been more complex.” He added, “No matter how many times we’ve adjusted course to lead the industry over the years, the decisions affecting our employees are never made lightly.”ESPN, which has about 8,000 employees, cut 300 to 400 jobs two years ago, but said it would continue to hire. Several prominent employees have left in recent months, including the popular columnist Bill Simmons, the television host Keith Olbermann, the radio host Colin Cowherd and Jason Whitlock, the editor in chief of a yet-to-be-launched website focused on race and sports.ESPN did not say who would be dismissed or which departments would be affected, but it said the layoff notices would go out almost immediately. Mr. Skipper said in his memo that ESPN would be looking at “integrating emerging technology into all aspects of our business,” as well as “enhancing our sales and marketing efforts with new tools and techniques,” and “integrating our distribution efforts to better serve current and future distribution partners.”The company is trying to deal with various trends in the broadcasting business, like cord cutting, in which people cancel their television subscriptions in favor of web-based streaming alternatives. According to Nielsen, ESPN’s subscriber base has fallen to 91.8 million, from 98.9 million in October 2013.ESPN, a critical pillar of cash for the Walt Disney Company, which still attracts sizable sports audiences, has been coping with rising production costs and steep rights fees. Big investments in long-term rights to major events like the college football playoff and National Football League games have been cutting into the quarterly operating profits of Disney’s cable networks division. The company has asked ESPN to reduce its costs but has disputed reports about the size of those cuts.A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: ESPN Plans to Lay Off About 300 Employees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.