By JENNY ANDERSONMAY 20, 2015
LONDON — A London judge on Wednesday denied an appeal by Navinder Singh Sarao, the futures trader accused of playing a major role in causing the “flash crash” of 2010, to reduce his bail after the United States government froze his assets worldwide.Mr. Sarao’s lawyers said it would be unlawful for Mr. Sarao to gain access to his money because of the asset freeze, a situation that makes it impossible for him to pay 5 million pounds, or about $7.8 million, of the £5.05 million bail set last month in a district court. His parents and brothers have already paid £50,000.“There is no substantial reassurance that this applicant is not a flight risk,” Judge Ross Cranston said at the appeal hearing in London on Wednesday. “Fifty thousand pounds, compared with what is alleged to be $40 million in profits he has made, is no assurance at all.”Mr. Sarao, 36, who traded from his parents’ home in West London, was arrested on April 21 and charged by the United States government with 22 counts of fraud and manipulation. He is fighting extradition.AdvertisementMr. Sarao’s lawyers argued that his relatives had used their life savings to meet a court order requiring them to pay £50,000 of the bail, and had surrendered their passports. Mr. Sarao, who has lived with his parents for his whole life and does not own a car, would not put the family’s life savings at risk by fleeing, they said.Advertisement“They are an ordinary, hard-working family,” one of his lawyers said.The United States government argued that the bail conditions set by a district judge were appropriate considering the serious charges being brought against Mr. Sarao and the flight risk he posed. Judge Cranston concurred.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Sarao is accused of helping to cause the so-called flash crash of May 2010, when American stock markets plummeted more than 1,000 points in a matter of minutes. Although the markets recovered their losses quickly, the events rattled investors and confounded regulators, who charged Mr. Sarao five years later after receiving help from an informant.Richard Egan, one of Mr. Sarao’s lawyers, said after the decision on Wednesday that he was “disappointed that he’s in the situation that he’s in,” but he added that the judge had left open the possibility of Mr. Sarao’s being released if he could prove that he had no access to funds.He has been in jail since his arrest.The American government has requested that Mr. Sarao identify all of his assets, including those outside the United States.“We believe everything he owns has been restrained,” Mr. Egan said.Mr. Sarao’s parents and brother appeared in court. They sat quietly through the proceedings, and his mother often closed her eyes. They left quickly after the end of the hearing.A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: No Reduced Bail for ‘Flash Crash’ Trader.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.