By LIZ ALDERMANOCT. 21, 2015
PARIS —  When European Union regulators started digging into the tax practices of Starbucks, they asked a lot of questions about a little-known business in London that the American coffee chain had operated for years.To authorities, the business — named after Alki Avenue, a popular beachfront strip in Starbucks’ hometown, Seattle — was a mysterious, opaque box. Yet the entity, Alki L.P., seemed to serve a vital role: helping Starbucks slash its taxes in the Netherlands simply by collecting payments for a coffee bean roasting recipe.Shortly after regulators publicly aired their concerns late last year, top executives at Starbucks dissolved Alki L.P.On Wednesday, the European Commission ordered that Starbucks pay up to 30 million euros, or $34 million, in back taxes to the Dutch government, a ruling with potential implications for thousands of corporate tax structures across the region. The commission accused Dutch authorities of making an illegal fiscal deal that allowed Starbucks to cut its Dutch tax bill, in part by moving large amounts of profit to Alki.AdvertisementThe case is part of an intensifying campaign by Europe’s antitrust regulator, Margrethe Vestager, to clamp down on sweetheart tax deals that countries strike with multinational companies. American companies including Starbucks, Apple and others have drawn scrutiny for using increasingly sophisticated strategies, especially in Europe, to pay little or no taxes on billions of dollars of profits.AdvertisementLast year, Starbucks moved its European headquarters to London from Amsterdam, after withering criticism that it had avoided paying taxes in Britain since 2009. As part of the change, it made a tax payment of 5 million pounds, or $7.7 million, to the British government. The company said the decision to shutter Alki was part of the headquarters move and not related to the European investigation.Rather than targeting Starbucks and others directly, Ms. Vestager is employing a little-used legal route to go after countries that might be providing state aid to companies through special tax rulings. The rulings, known as “comfort letters,” often help the companies find the lowest tax jurisdiction where they can set up.The European Commission ordered the Netherlands and Luxembourg to recover back taxes from Starbucks and Fiat Chrysler.“Tax rulings that artificially reduce a company’s tax burden are not in line with E.U. state aid rules,” Mrs. Vestager said in a statement. “They are illegal.”In a parallel inquiry, the commission said on Wednesday that Luxembourg struck an illegal tax deal with a unit of the auto giant Fiat Chrysler, and ordered the government to collect up to €30 million in unpaid tax to level the playing field. Fiat said its financing unit had not received any state aid from Luxembourg.European authorities are also investigating Luxembourg’s low-tax arrangement with Amazon, and Apple’s business in Ireland.Starbucks said it would appeal the commission’s ruling. In a statement, it said it complied “with all relevant tax rules, laws” and international tax guidelines, and paid $3 billion in global taxes between 2008 and 2014. The company said it shared concerns by the Dutch government “that there are significant errors in the decision.”Tax avoidance is a sore point in the United States, where the largest companies, including Apple, Amazon and many others, routinely try to minimize their bills. In Europe, the cases have hit a raw nerve in countries where citizens have been squeezed by years of austerity, and stoked friction among member states that are jockeying with one another for jobs and investment.AdvertisementWhether the crackdown will work remains to be seen. “Nothing prevents these companies from continuing to try to optimize their tax operations and their tax liability,” said Nicolas Petit, a professor at the University of Liège in Belgium who specializes in antitrust law. “It also won’t necessarily prevent European countries from saying they’ll just change their tax regimes” to a different format to lure business, he added.To further dissuade countries from doing tax deals, the commission has proposed that they disclose more tax information. If approved, new rules would require all 28 European Union countries, starting next year, to share basic data each quarter on the sweeteners they are offering to multinationals.The Starbucks case helps illustrate why.After asking Dutch tax authorities and Starbucks to provide details of their tax deals last year, the commission determined the company’s tax setup with the Netherlands had no realistic economic justification. The case zeroed in on Alki, the British-based entity at the center of Starbucks’ efforts to reduce its Dutch and European tax bills.In 2001, Starbucks installed its European corporate headquarters and a massive new coffee roasting plant in Amsterdam after conferring with Dutch tax authorities. The setup proved beneficial: Starbucks created several Dutch partnerships that were not subject to the country’s corporate tax, including one named Emerald City, a nickname for Seattle.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Emerald City owned Alki, which was set up in London to house Starbucks’ intellectual property. The intellectual property included logos and the recipe for roasting coffee beans, which Starbucks subsidiaries pay Alki a royalty to license. Because of its structure, Alki was not subject to corporate tax in the Netherlands or Britain.In 2008, Dutch tax authorities issued a new tax ruling for Starbucks. After that, the Amsterdam coffee roasting business began to send large royalty payments to Alki for use of the bean roasting recipe, which the commission said on Wednesday appeared vastly inflated for what it was.The recipe was basically the temperature for roasting beans, and appeared to be more like instructions than intellectual property. Yet counting it as such allowed Starbucks’ roasting unit to reallocate most of its profit to Alki in the form of royalties, the commission said, nearly wiping out the Dutch tax bill. No other Starbucks companies or roasters paid royalties for the same information, the commission said.Starbucks disputed that finding. “That is false,” a spokesman said in a statement, adding it would form one basis for Starbucks’ appeal.Starbucks also lowered its Dutch tax by paying what the commission said were inflated prices for unroasted or “green” coffee beans from a Swiss subsidiary. While the Swiss company does not physically handle the beans, it buys them for Starbucks operations worldwide and sells them at a 20 percent markup, which lowers the amount of taxable profit.Those two systems shifted “the large majority” of the European profits made by Starbucks, “which cover coffee but in reality are largely generated from tea, pastries and cups, etc.” to the British subsidiary, Alki, Ms. Vestager said Wednesday.AdvertisementThanks to its deal with the Dutch government, Starbucks cut its tax burden by up to €30 million since 2008, the commission said. Last year it paid the Netherlands just €2.6 million in corporate tax on pretax profit of €407 million, a rate of less than 1 percent.The Dutch government said on Wednesday that it was “surprised” by the ruling, adding that the Netherlands followed international tax standards.Alki, for its part, was such a mystery during the investigation that the commission asked Starbucks to answer a basic question: “Describe Alki L.P.”Despite its opacity, Alki appeared to manage large sums. Starbucks Coffee International Inc., which is linked to Emerald City, transferred payments to Alki worth €283 million and $158 million, according to corporate filings from April 2014 provided by DueDil, a London-based corporate intelligence firm.Because Alki was not required to file financial statements, it is unclear whether Alki kept the royalties or passed them elsewhere.Whatever the case, Alki was shuttered as the commission’s inquiry gained steam. A Starbucks spokesman, David Henderson, said on Wednesday that Alki was wound down in conjunction with Starbucks’ decision to move its headquarters to London from Amsterdam last year. “The structure for our old European headquarters was subsequently dismantled and no longer exists,” the spokesman said in a statement.Alki was folded into a new company, Starbucks EMEA Holdings.That business has yet to file any financial statements.James Kanter contributed reporting from Brussels.A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Tax Ruling Singes Starbucks .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.