By DAVID GELLES and CHARLES NEWBERYMAY 21, 2015
After languishing in prison for more than a year without facing charges, a private equity executive who once controlled Uruguay’s national airline will be released, the country’s Supreme Court announced on Thursday.The release of Matías Campiani comes a week after The New York Times published an article about his case.Mr. Campiani was chief executive of Leadgate, a private equity firm that in 2007 took control of the airline, Pluna.Along with his partners, Arturo Álvarez-Demalde and Sebastián Hirsch, Mr. Campiani worked to turn around Pluna, opening new routes and buying new planes.AdvertisementBut after a promising start to the investment, a series of misfortunes — including an erupting volcano, a new president who was unsympathetic and troubles with unions — forced Mr. Campiani and his partners to return Pluna to the government for a loss in 2012. The executives also closed their firm.The Uruguayan government shuttered Pluna soon after it regained control. At the time of the transfer, Mr. Campiani and his partners, who are Argentine citizens and have business degrees from the United States, signed agreements with the government indemnifying them of any claims associated with their management of Pluna.Yet more than a year later, in December 2013, the three men were summoned to the capital of Uruguay, Montevideo, to testify at an inquiry into the closing of Pluna. Once in court, they were accused of fraud and arrested.Mr. Álvarez-Demalde, now 42, was freed in April 2014. Mr. Hirsch, 44, was released in February. But Mr. Campiani, now 47, was forced to stay in jail with no timetable for his release.On Thursday, Mr. Campiani was still incarcerated at the Campanero prison, north of Montevideo. According to Raúl Oxandabarat, director of communications for Uruguay’s Supreme Court, Mr. Campiani must post $50,000 in bail before he is released.AdvertisementMr. Oxandabarat said the release order came after members of the court visited prisoners at Campanero last week as part of a routine annual review. After re-examining Mr. Campiani’s case, they determined that he should be released on parole.Part of the reasoning was that Mr. Campiani had already been in prison for nearly half the time for which he could be sentenced in the event he were found guilty of fraud. “There is no conviction yet,” Mr. Oxandabarat said. He added that Mr. Campiani was able to reduce his time in prison by good conduct and through work or study.Though Mr. Campiani is on the verge of being released, his prolonged detention exposed flaws in the Uruguayan justice system. Uruguay is one of just a few countries that allow for lengthy imprisonments of people not formally charged with a crime.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Uruguay has served justice and finally respected the right to due process,” said Luis Moreno Ocampo, an Argentine lawyer and a former prosecutor of the International Criminal Court who has reviewed the case. “It’s a victory for human rights.”This week, the head of the Supreme Court acknowledged there were problems with the system.“The Uruguayan criminal process is outmoded,” the court’s president, Jorge Chediak, said in an interview with El Observador, a newspaper in Montevideo. “It has become obsolete.”He added that the court was working to draft a new penal code that it hoped to enact in 2017, noting that the current criminal process “has been criticized by international organizations.”Reached in prison on Thursday, Mr. Campiani said he was eager to go home but remained frustrated by the Uruguayan justice system.“I was given my freedom in a system that is not just,” he said. “I was lucky to have resources and support, but there are still a lot of people left behind here who are suffering the same injustice that I have been suffering.”Mr. Campiani was expecting his father to pay the $50,000 on Friday. “I am still in jail tonight,” he said. “My dad has to come tomorrow and pay bail.”AdvertisementJorge Barrera, one of Mr. Campiani’s lawyers, said that he expected the bail to be paid by midday on Friday.Mr. Barrera said he made the request for the release last week to the Supreme Court. He said Uruguayan law allowed a prisoner to be released once two-thirds of an anticipated sentence or penalty had been served.“We hope that this will be the last of the cases of preventive prison without criminal charges,” he said.Mr. Campiani said that he was planning to celebrate with his fellow inmates Thursday night, sharing food that his family recently brought him.“You build bonds here, so I am happy to be leaving,” he said. “But I am also leaving them behind after spending 17 months with them, which is a very long time.”A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Uruguayan Court Orders Imprisoned Financier Freed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.