AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSan Francisco — On the surface, Goldman Sachs’s annual shareholders’ meeting on Thursday was a yawn.The gathering drew no more than a few dozen investors and other attendees, half-filling a dimly lit auditorium in the tower that houses its San Francisco offices. All of its directors easily won re-election. And the meeting was done in just over a half-hour.But it was notable that Goldman’s annual gathering was held here at all. It was, in a sense, the bank’s way of staking a claim in the heart of tech country, as Goldman fights to win its share of business from the boom that has lured billions of investor dollars and produced huge transactions.“I think it’s ground zero for innovation and entrepreneurialism in the U.S.,” Lloyd C. Blankfein, the firm’s chairman and chief executive, told reporters after the meeting. “It’s a different kind of gold rush.”Or, as Mr. Blankfein said he told attendees at one of the private events that Goldman’s management team and board has held during this trip, “I’m not going to waste any time telling you why we’re here. You know why we’re here.”Although the old guard Wall Street bank has its headquarters in Lower Manhattan, Goldman has often showcased its presence around the country through its annual investor meetings, including at its offices in Salt Lake City and Dallas.On this trip, the firm’s top executives — including Mr. Blankfein; Gary D. Cohn, Goldman’s president; and David M. Solomon, co-head of investment banking — have held meetings throughout the Bay Area over the past few days, demonstrating the firm’s commitment to and understanding of technology.Goldman has been busy battling rivals like Morgan Stanley in trying to claim the allegiance of Silicon Valley’s hottest start-ups as they raise money and prepare to someday go public. Goldman has claimed some notable assignments of late, including helping Uber raise $1.6 billion from private wealth clients early this year.The firm has been looking to establish its tech bona fides in other ways as well. This month, it said it had hired a senior executive from Discover Financial to lead an online lending venture catering to consumers and small businesses.And officials from the bank boasted about the investments it has made in technology, including an array of custom high-security file systems.“We have a very technologically oriented firm,” Mr. Blankfein told reporters.Not that investors who attended Thursday’s meeting seemed particularly interested in Goldman’s campaign to win over Silicon Valley.Two questions focused on tensions between China and Japan, to which Mr. Blankfein could offer only, “I don’t want to reduce this to such a simplistic thing, but let’s say peace is good for Goldman Sachs.”Advertisement