
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

MAY 21, 2015
CVS Health’s $12.7 billion deal for Omnicare portends lower merger activity in the pharmacy sector. The drugstore company’s purchase gives it entrance to nursing homes and expands specialty medicine distribution. But the increasingly concentrated industry is bumping up against antitrust concerns and may have to live with fewer transactions.CVS acts as a drug middleman as well as a retailer. Its Caremark division negotiates pharmaceutical discounts for companies and health plans, and shares the savings. The more patients that Caremark and other pharmacy benefits managers, known as P.B.M.s, represent, the greater their leverage and profit.Hence the urge to merge. In March, UnitedHealth Group agreed to pay $12.8 billion for pharmacy benefits manager Catamaran Corporation, which did a lot of deals of its own. And Rite Aid paid $2 billion for EnvisionRx, also a P.B.M., in February.The result is a concentrated industry. The three largest pharmacy benefits managers — CVS, Express Scripts and UnitedHealth — control between two-thirds and three-quarters of the market, depending on the measurement used. That’s a troubling development for trustbusters and consumers.AdvertisementCVS’s latest acquisition may skirt regulatory concerns. Omnicare’s biggest business is distributing and dispensing drugs in nursing homes and other institutions, a new market for CVS. But the combination offers consumers potential savings from less expensive medications.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Whether the entire deal makes strategic sense is another issue. One of Omnicare’s main moneymakers is expensive niche medicines, which it helps manufacturers distribute and get reimbursed for by insurers and the United States government. Those drugs account for about a quarter of company sales, and those sales are growing at an annual rate of more than 20 percent. But the lucrative business may end up conflicting with Caremark’s focus on extracting discounts from pharmaceutical firms.AdvertisementCVS investors warmly greeted the deal, pushing company shares up 3 percent after it was announced. They seem smitten with the prospect of CVS expanding into a new area and adding bulk to its pharmacy arm.It might have made more sense to craft a merger with Express Scripts or another rival, given the potential synergies.That CVS settled for Omnicare shows its options were limited and that the era of frantic pharmacy mergers is nearing an end.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »