AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinDavid Letterman closed out his 33 years in late-night television on Wednesday with one of the highest-rated shows of his career. “The Late Show” brought in 13.7 million viewers, Mr. Letterman’s biggest audience since February 1994. It also beat every network show in prime time on Wednesday.The finale represents his fourth-most-viewed show since Mr. Letterman joined CBS in 1993.Mr. Letterman had no formal guests on Wednesday night but the show featured a star-studded Top 10 list, with appearances from, among others, Chris Rock, Bill Murray, Tina Fey and Peyton Manning. Mr. Letterman delivered his final words from his desk (“The only thing I have left to do for the last time on a television program: thank you and good night”) and handed it over to the Foo Fighters. As the band performed the song “Everlong,” hundreds of still-images and clips from Mr. Letterman’s shows on NBC and CBS played on screen.Mr. Letterman’s final edition of “The Late Show” also ran 20 minutes long, and went off the air at 12:55 a.m.The show also had a 3.1 rating in the 18-to-49-year-old demographic, its best rating in that category since Oprah Winfrey appeared in 2005, according to data from Nielsen.Mr. Letterman was a towering role model to a generation of comedians, including much of the late-night roster now on the air. ABC’s Jimmy Kimmel ran a rerun so as not to compete with Mr. Letterman’s finale, and Conan O’Brien on TBS repeatedly told his viewers to turn off his show to watch “The Late Show” finale.Though Mr. Letterman had a huge influence in the culture, he mostly trailed his 11:30 rivals in the ratings. He consistently drew lower ratings than Jay Leno on NBC’s “The Tonight Show’’ and on Wednesday he fell short one last time: Mr. Leno’s finale on “The Tonight Show” in February 2014 attracted 14.6 million viewers, almost a million more than Mr. Letterman’s did.The best-rated “Late Show” was broadcast in February 1994, when Mr. Letterman presumably benefited from the lead-in from CBS’s Olympic run. That show attracted 15.4 million viewers.The finale provided a bump for CBS’s new 12:30 host, James Corden. Mr. Corden’s “The Late Late Show” drew four million viewers, its highest rating over his first two months on the job.OpinionAdvertisement