By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINMAY 21, 2015
A serial entrepreneur with a Yale undergraduate degree and a penchant for raising money for his ventures from fellow graduates is finding himself answering to authorities.On Thursday, federal authorities based in New Jersey arrested the entrepreneur, Joshua B. Newman, and charged him with two counts of wire fraud and misappropriating money from more than a dozen investors. The charges stem from efforts by Mr. Newman to raise money for several CrossFit training centers that he said he planned to own and operate in New York and New Jersey, authorities said.Mr. Newman, 35, who graduated from Yale in 2001, has positioned himself as something of a local spokesman for the high-intensity fitness movement that has swept the nation. At one time, he was a co-founder of one of the larger independently owned CrossFit centers in Manhattan.He is not affiliated with CrossFit Inc., a fitness consulting firm based in Washington. Centers using the CrossFit brand name are independently run.AdvertisementMr. Newman was arrested by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation at his Manhattan apartment, and made his first court appearance Thursday afternoon in federal court in Newark. No plea was entered, and Mr. Newman was ordered to post a $300,000 bond.AdvertisementIn a 13-page criminal complaint, prosecutors working for Paul J. Fishman, the United States attorney for New Jersey, accused Mr. Newman of defrauding investors out of at least $2 million over a three-year period. They also said he was trying to “solicit money from new investors” until the time of his arrest.Over the last five years, Mr. Newman has left behind a trail of unpaid debts to investors, many of them either Yale graduates or investors who specialize in investing in Internet start-ups. In April, The New York Times reported on some of the investors who claimed that Mr. Newman had a history of bouncing checks, not paying debts and misrepresenting intentions.The charges against Mr. Newman focus on his efforts to raise money from investors in New Jersey, New York and Connecticut. Among the complaint’s accusations is that much of the money Mr. Newman raised for the high-intensive workout regimen was used to pay off debts to other investors and personal expenses.In December, for instance, Mr. Newman transferred a $55,000 payment from one investor to his personal checking account at Santander Bank, the complaint said. Authorities said that before the money transfer, Mr. Newman’s account had a balance of just 67 cents. The complaint also stated that Mr. Newman used that money to pay back an earlier investor he owed money to and to pay for restaurant bills, grocery store purchases and a gym membership.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Josh is a very bright, energetic and creative entrepreneur. All of his business ventures have been legitimate and well intentioned,” said Priya Chaudhry, a lawyer for Mr. Newman. “While his ventures were not always as successful as he hoped they would be, he never did anything to justify the overreaching charges issued against him today. Josh intends to vigorously defend himself against any notion that he ever did anything criminal.”A call to a cellphone owned by Mr. Newman, who lives on the Upper West Side with his wife, Jessica, went to voice mail.Mr. Newman has fashioned himself as something of an Internet guru, raising money while a student at Yale for a fund that invested in online start-ups. After graduating, he founded an independent movie production company called Cyan Pictures that soon ran into money trouble, and he began accumulating a list of unpaid judgments to investors in that venture.While at Yale, Mr. Newman gained a bit of notoriety for being a founding member of a group that called itself “Porn ‘N Chicken” and claimed to get together on Friday nights to watch pornographic movies and eat fried chicken. The group also announced plans to make a pornographic film of its own among the Yale library stacks featuring real students. The movie was never made, but Comedy Central made a cable television movie in 2002 based on the incident.AdvertisementMr. Newman wrote about his involvement with “Porn ‘N Chicken” on the blog on his website, which includes quotes from various news articles over the last decade that have called him a “Silicon Valley pro” and an “Internet elder statesmen.”On Thursday, Mr. Newman’s website still listed him as the chief executive of NorthStar CrossFit, which he described as “a fast-growing chain of the best CrossFit boxes in the world.” (Boxes is the term CrossFit operators use to describe their fitness centers).The sums of money that federal prosecutors in New Jersey contend that Mr. Newman raised and misappropriated are relatively small compared with other white-collar frauds. But federal prosecutors say that he repeatedly deceived investors by misrepresenting his intentions and presenting them with “doctored or bogus” investment documents.A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Yale Graduate Who Promoted CrossFit Ventures Is Arrested on Fraud Charges.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.