By RACHEL ABRAMSMAY 21, 2015
Lumber Liquidators, under scrutiny for months as it faces accusations that it sold products with dangerous levels of formaldehyde, said on Thursday that its chief executive had left the company.The chief executive and president, Robert M. Lynch, resigned “unexpectedly,” the company said. Thomas D. Sullivan, the company’s founder, will serve as acting chief executive.The company has been reeling since a report by the CBS program “60 Minutes” broadcast in March said that some of the company’s laminate wood contained potentially hazardous levels of formaldehyde, a known carcinogen. That flooring came from factories in China and was mislabeled as safe, according to the report.The retailer announced weeks ago that its chief financial officer, Daniel Terrell, would resign in June. Shares of Lumber Liquidators fell about 14 percent in morning trading on Thursday.Advertisement“Obviously, the key word that everyone’s been picking up on is the word ‘unexpectedly,’ ” said Brad Thomas, a research analyst with KeyBanc Capital Markets. “That’s why this is worrying to the market and makes the market think there could be other shoes to drop rather than thinking that we’re getting to the bottom here.”The company has disputed the CBS program’s testing methods and maintained that its products are safe as used. Still, Lumber Liquidators’ stock has fallen more than 30 percent since the report, and the company has come under investigation by the Consumer Product Safety Commission.AdvertisementSales have also fallen sharply. Lumber Liquidators faced more than 100 lawsuits related to its Chinese-made laminate as of April, when the company posted a loss of $7.8 million, or 29 cents a diluted share, in the first three months of the year.“It seems like they really weren’t prepared for the fallout from the CBS ‘60 Minutes’ program,” said Carl Tobias, a product liability expert at the University of Richmond school of law.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This month, the retailer said that it would suspend sales of laminate products entirely.In response to the situation, Lumber Liquidators has offered free air testing to consumers. But while the tests can measure overall levels of formaldehyde in a room, they cannot pinpoint the source of the emissions.As he took on the chief executive role on Thursday, Mr. Sullivan said he was proud of the Lumber Liquidators team. “I look forward to working with them and providing our customers with the best hardwood floors at the best prices, as we have since I founded the company over 20 years ago,” he said.The company also announced on Thursday that John M. Presley, the company’s lead independent director, had been appointed nonexecutive chairman of the board. The board also accepted Mr. Lynch’s resignation as a director.Mr. Lynch, an executive with years of retail experience, had been Lumber Liquidators’ chief executive since 2012. Before he joined the company in 2011, he held the top position at Orchard Supply Hardware, a garden and home improvement retailer, and also held positions at Home Depot.A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Lumber Liquidators’ Founder Steps In as Chief Resigns.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.