By JACK EWINGMAY 21, 2015
Top executives of Deutsche Bank tried to reassure increasingly restive shareholders on Thursday that they were making progress on cutting costs, delivering more consistent profits and avoiding legal problems that have cost Germany’s largest bank billions of euros in fines and settlements.The bank, one of the last European lenders with a large presence on Wall Street, held its annual shareholders’ meeting in Frankfurt amid calls from some investors for the co-chief executives, Anshu Jain and Jürgen Fitschen, to step down.Instead, late on Wednesday, the bank’s supervisory board gave Mr. Jain more power. He will take direct responsibility for a reorganization plan, announced last month, aimed at simplifying the bank, saving 3.5 billion euros, or about $3.9 billion, annually and producing a profit equal to at least 10 percent of the capital invested.Previously, Stefan Krause, the chief financial officer, had direct oversight of the reorganization. As part of the changes, Mr. Krause will take some responsibilities from Mr. Jain, including oversight of a unit that provides banking services to large international corporations.AdvertisementAddressing shareholders, Mr. Jain acknowledged that it had taken longer than expected to overcome problems that have led to costly penalties. Last month, the bank agreed to pay $2.5 billion to United States and British authorities to settle accusations that some employees had conspired to rig benchmark interest rates.Advertisement“We have faced many challenges,” Mr. Jain said in a speech to shareholders. “We have successfully addressed some. We have a clear strategy for dealing with others. We are convinced we are on the right path.”Discontent among Deutsche Bank shareholders has become increasingly vocal after years of management turmoil, legal problems and mediocre gains by the bank’s shares.Deutsche Bank shares have risen less than 7 percent since Mr. Jain and Mr. Fitschen took office three years ago. The shares were little changed in trading in Frankfurt on Thursday.Hans-Christoph Hirt, a director at Hermes EOS, which represents large investors, said on Wednesday that the firm would cast a vote of no confidence at the shareholders’ meeting.“We urge the bank’s supervisory board to review the composition of the management board,” Mr. Hirt said in a statement.He said that the poor performance of Deutsche Bank shares showed that the lender’s strategy had failed. Mr. Hirt also said that management lapses had unnecessarily increased the cost of a settlement with United States and British authorities last month on charges that Deutsche Bank traders conspired to manipulate interest rates.The $2.5 billion fine, more than other banks paid in the same case, reflected what the authorities said was foot-dragging by Deutsche Bank in providing information to investigators.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The levels of the fines reflect both the severity of the misconduct of Deutsche’s employees but also the bank’s slow response to the investigations and inadequate cooperation,” Mr. Hirt said. “The management board bears ultimate responsibility for the apparent defects and delays in responding to the investigations and thus the increased fines.”AdvertisementPartly because of the fine, Deutsche Bank’s profit in the first three months of the year sank by about half, to €559 million from €1.1 billion a year earlier. Legal costs more than offset a 24 percent increase in quarterly revenue, to €10.4 billion.As part of the management changes announced late on Wednesday, the executive in charge of Deutsche Bank’s services to private clients will leave the bank. Rainer Neske, a 25-year veteran of Deutsche Bank, lost an internal battle over the future of the bank’s business in Germany, according to German news reports.Deutsche Bank said only that Mr. Neske was leaving by mutual agreement.As part of the reorganization announced last month, and presented to shareholders on Thursday, Deutsche Bank plans to sell its Postbank unit, which provides banking services primarily to German individuals. Deutsche Bank will also shrink its investment bank in response to increased pressure from United States and European regulators.However, top management rejected proposals for a more radical reorganization that would have separated investment banking from the rest of Deutsche Bank, Paul Achleitner, the chairman of the supervisory board, told shareholders.Since the financial crisis, American institutions like Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase have become even more dominant in investment banking, and many European banks like UBS have scaled back their operations on Wall Street. Some investors and analysts said that Deutsche Bank could compete only if it became a pure investment bank, without other commercial banking services such as lending to large corporations.Mr. Jain said that Deutsche Bank’s status as a European competitor with a large range of services was an advantage.“We realized that this did more than make us strong,” he said. “It made us unique.”A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Power Shift.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.