By KATIE THOMAS and CHAD BRAYMAY 21, 2015
As the American population gets older, pharmacies and other health care providers are increasingly positioning themselves to capitalize and serve the needs of this demographic. This group often needs drugs for chronic conditions like diabetes and heart disease, as well as lifesaving medications for sudden conditions like infections or pneumonia.To cater to that group, the CVS Health Corporation is acquiring the pharmacy services provider Omnicare, which distributes prescription drugs to nursing homes and assisted-living operations.On Thursday, CVS said it would pay about $12.7 billion, including debt, for Omnicare, a publicly traded company based in Cincinnati. The deal is expected to extend CVS Health’s operations in dispensing prescription drugs to assisted-living and other long-term care centers, and to broaden its presence in the specialty pharmacy business.“I think it’s an excellent move by CVS,” said Adam J. Fein, president of Pembroke Consulting, a management advisory and business research company based in Philadelphia. “It opens up a really great new market for them in long-term care and assisted living.”AdvertisementIn addition to operating retail pharmacy stores around the country, CVS manages pharmacy benefits, handling the fulfillment of prescriptions on behalf of major insurers and employers. Dr. Fein said this deal would help the company control the rising cost of specialty drugs by having a presence in a variety of markets.AdvertisementHe added that the deal would fit in well with the acquisition CVS made in 2013 of Coram, a provider of infusion services, which also allowed it to expand into a new market. “It demonstrates an ability to manage specialty drugs across many care settings, with a broader set of patients,” Dr. Fein said.Under the terms of the deal, CVS Health will pay $98 a share in cash for Omnicare and assume $2.3 billion in debt. Investors seemed to cheer the deal. CVS’s stock was up 2.4 percent Thursday, closing at $103.69 a share. Omnicare shares were up 1.7 percent to $96.26.The purchase also allows CVS to broaden its reach in the specialty pharmacy arena. About a quarter of Omnicare’s net sales in 2014 came from its specialty unit, which dispenses drugs that are typically expensive and require special handling, like refrigeration.The specialty pharmacy industry has been booming in recent years as drug makers increasingly focus on medications that are complex — often requiring injections — and that treat rare or serious chronic diseases with small patient populations.Omnicare’s specialty unit is no exception. Its net sales increased 20 percent, to $1.67 billion, in 2014 over the previous year. Its long-term care business, by contrast, rose just 2.6 percent in that period, to $4.8 billion. Mr. Fein said Omnicare’s specialty pharmacy business will help solidify CVS’s position in the industry. “I think the specialty business is the crown and the jewel of Omnicare right now,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.CVS executives also signaled that they were looking into expanding the company’s business of serving the long-term care industry. “The acquisition of Omnicare significantly expands our business, providing CVS Health access into a new pharmacy dispensing channel,” Larry J. Merlo, the president and chief executive of CVS Health, said in a news release. “It also creates new opportunities for us to extend our high-quality, innovative pharmacy programs to a broader population of seniors and chronic care patients as they transition across the care continuum.”Omnicare posted sales of $6.4 billion in 2014. It employs about 13,000 people at 160 locations in 47 states.CVS Health, which is based in Woonsocket, R.I., and a number of its rivals in pharmacy benefits management have been on a merger spree recently.AdvertisementIn February, Rite Aid agreed to acquire the pharmacy benefit manager Envision Pharmaceutical Services for $2 billion in cash and stock from the private equity firm TPG. In March, a unit of the UnitedHealth Group said it would buy the pharmacy benefits manager Catamaran Corporation in an all-cash deal worth nearly $13 billion. The deal combines UnitedHealth’s pharmacy services business with Catamaran’s BriovaRx.Although not directly tied to its pharmacy benefits management business, the Omnicare deal is expected to strengthen CVS Health’s negotiating power with drug makers — a major driver of a number of the recent deals by pharmacy benefits managers.CVS owns the country’s largest specialty pharmacy, which brought in $20.5 billion in revenue last year and holds 26 percent of the specialty market. Accredo, which is owned by the pharmacy-benefits manager Express Scripts, accounts for about 19 percent, and Walgreens Specialty Pharmacy is 11 percent, according to a report by Pembroke Consulting.CVS is the largest pharmacy company based on prescription revenue, when sales at its retail stores and mail-order pharmacy are included. In 2014, its retail outlets brought in $47.1 billion in prescription revenue, and its mail pharmacy sales were $25.4 billion, according the Pembroke Consulting report. The Walgreen Company had the slight edge in terms of prescription sales from retail outlets — bringing in $49.4 billion in 2014 — and is the second largest pharmacy in the United States, according to the report.Both companies’ boards have approved the transaction. Omnicare’s shareholders will now consider the potential deal, which is also subject to regulatory approval.The transaction is expected to close near the end of this year.Barclays, Evercore and the law firms Sullivan & Cromwell and Dechert advised CVS Health. Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Centerview Partners and the law firm White & Case advised Omnicare.A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: CVS Health Is Acquiring Omnicare for $12.7 Billion .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.