By REUTERSMAY 21, 2015
HONG KONG — Shares of two companies owned by the Chinese billionaire Pan Sutong fell sharply in the Asian financial hub of Hong Kong on Thursday, in a second day of steep share-price declines of previously high-flying stocks in the city.The companies, Goldin Financial Holdings and Goldin Properties Holdings, fell more than 60 percent in Hong Kong trading at one point, wiping about $23 billion off their value. By afternoon, they were down 40 percent.Their drop follows that of Hanergy Thin Film Power Group, which on Wednesday fell nearly 50 percent before trading in the stock was halted.The share slides place Hong Kong’s reputation as a financial hub under scrutiny at a time of increased interest in the territory by global investors following the introduction of a landmark trading link with Shanghai’s stock exchange last November.AdvertisementIn an analysis of the companies’ financial statements, the values of Goldin Financial and Hanergy had risen more than fourfold since September, an increase at odds with much more modest gains in underlying business fundamentals. Goldin Property’s climb was more sudden, spiking almost sixfold between March and May this year.AdvertisementReuters could not immediately determine any link between Hanergy and the Goldin companies beyond the stock movements, and on Thursday, all three companies said they were not aware of any reason for the falls.Hanergy’s parent company, in a statement on its website, said its financials were sound and that it had not sold any of the 30.6 billion shares it holds in its Hong Kong-listed unit.The Hong Kong-Shanghai stock trading link has brought big inflows of Chinese money and has caused a rally in the Hong Kong stock market, but it has also led to a surge in volatility. Hanergy shares were among the top traded on the link.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The stock declines on Thursday were accompanied by a spike in trading volumes. About 26 million Goldin Properties shares changed hands on Thursday compared with between two and six million shares in prior sessions. Goldin Financial shares rose to more than 12 million from the past month’s range of between two and three million shares.Goldin Financial, which is 70 percent owned by Mr. Pan, is involved in so-called factoring, which is a means of providing finance to small businesses secured against their sales. It also owns vineyards in France and California.The company had a peak market value of about 247 billion Hong Kong dollars — the equivalent of $31.9 billion — and a net profit of 1.4 billion Hong Kong dollars for the first half of 2015.And though profit had surged from 571 million dollars in the same period a year earlier, the increase was almost entirely on gains in the value of property.Mr. Pan, who also owns about 65 percent of Goldin Properties, was estimated to have a net worth of $14.8 billion by Forbes.In March, Hong Kong’s Securities and Futures Commission cautioned investors on trading in Goldin Financial’s shares, noting that just 20 investors, including Mr. Pan, own 98 percent of the shares.AdvertisementAt its share price peak in March, the company was worth $48 billion, more than its nearest two dozen rivals combined and making its founder, Li Hejun, one of China’s richest men, even as analysts and market watchers questioned the validity of some of its bullish proclamations. The stock’s precipitous tumble came shortly after the beginning of the company’s annual general meeting in Hong Kong.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.