AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Dominic ElliottCredit Suisse looks like a cut-price UBS. Can it do better?The fresh strategy from its new chief, Tidjane Thiam, goes some way toward closing the Swiss bank’s valuation gap with its crosstown peer. Credit Suisse will raise 6.05 billion Swiss francs ($6.3 billion) in equity and become a wealth manager first and foremost. What is needed next to shake off the invidious comparison is growth.Mr. Thiam’s approach is right. UBS reworked its strategy in 2012 and its shares now trade at a 30 percent premium to forward book value, compared with a 10 percent discount at Credit Suisse. And Mr. Thiam’s third-quarter results showed the need to cut in fixed-income trading: revenue fell 42 percent year-on-year, more than at any Wall Street institution.Wealth management, meanwhile, is at least still attracting healthy savings — even if it missed forecasts on weaker transaction revenue. Cuts to the balance sheet and personnel will leave an investment bank that is a touch bigger than UBS’s and a wealth manager with room to grow.Mr. Thiam has also grasped the need to increase the bank’s lowly capital position. Via a share placing to institutions and a rights issue, Credit Suisse’s key core equity Tier 1 ratio should rise to 12.2 percent from its 10.2 percent end-of-September level. Listing the bank’s Swiss businesses could raise up to an additional 4 billion Swiss francs.The snag is that with more equity, even more earnings growth will be needed to create a decent return. Assume Credit Suisse after its revamping carries equity of around 40 billion francs. Adding together the company goals for pretax profit by 2018, as well as, perhaps, an additional 2 billion Swiss francs for investment banking comes to a total of 8.5 billion Swiss francs. Apply a tax rate of 30 percent and Credit Suisse might make a return on equity of 15 percent in three years’ time.That would compare favorably with UBS, which is forecast to produce 13 percent. But that assumes that all the growth projections come true. Assume no growth and lower investment banking earnings and the returns might be just 9 percent. Mr. Thiam eschews return on equity targets because he argues that is something he cannot control. Yet growth can be just as hard to pin down.Dominic Elliott is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement