By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMMAY 22, 2015
Janet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, said on Friday that she still expected the Fed to start raising its benchmark interest rate later this year.Weak growth during the first part of the year most likely reflected temporary disruptions, including the impact of winter weather, Ms. Yellen said in a speech delivered to the Chamber of Commerce in Providence, R.I. She added that government estimates also may have overstated the impact on the economy.“If the economy continues to improve as I expect, I think it will be appropriate at some point this year to take the initial step to raise the federal funds rate target and begin the process of normalizing monetary policy,” Ms. Yellen said.Ms. Yellen’s speech is the latest indication that the Fed’s plans have shifted only slightly in recent months even as disappointing data has piled up. While reflecting her personal view, it largely echoes an account published on Wednesday of the Fed’s most recent policy meeting. The Fed has backed away from the possibility of raising rates as soon as June, but officials have made clear that they do not see a reason to wait much longer.Advertisement“Assuming that economic growth does rebound, and particularly now that there are signs of a pickup in underlying price inflation and wage growth, we don’t think the Fed can wait any longer than September,” Paul Ashworth, chief United States economist at Capital Economics, wrote on Friday after Ms. Yellen’s speech.AdvertisementThe Fed has held rates near zero since December 2008 as the centerpiece of its effort to strengthen the economy. Low rates encourage borrowing by businesses and consumers, and risk-taking by investors seeking higher returns.Higher rates would be aimed at gradually withdrawing further stimulus, cooling off the economy to help keep future inflation from rising much above the Fed’s target rate.A minority of Fed officials argue that the economy is not yet strong enough to lift rates. They point to the sluggish pace of inflation, which since the recession has lagged below the 2 percent annual pace that the Fed regards as most healthy. Some investors also expect economic weakness will force the Fed to wait.Charles Evans, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, argues that the Fed should be patient until inflation rebounds, which he regards as unlikely before next year. “I see no compelling reason for us to be in a hurry to tighten financial conditions before then,” Mr. Evans said on Wednesday in Munich.In her speech, Ms. Yellen explained why she and other officials were inclined to move sooner, so long as they see the expected improvement in the economic data.She noted that the economy added more than three million jobs last year, and that other signs also suggested labor market conditions were improving, including an increase in workers who are quitting their jobs in pursuit of better opportunities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She said lower gas prices had yielded savings of about $700 a household.And she said some of the economy’s problems appeared to be getting smaller.Home prices are rising and mortgages have become a little easier to obtain. State and local governments have stopped cutting back on spending. And Ms. Yellen said that she expected economic growth in the rest of the world to strengthen.Advertisement“With the waning of the headwinds that I have discussed, the U.S. economy seems well positioned for continued growth,” she said.Ms. Yellen also said the economy might be stronger than suggested by recent economic data, including the government’s estimate that gross domestic output increased just 0.2 percent in the first three months of the year.“Some of this apparent weakness may just be statistical noise,” she said.The government has consistently reported weak first-quarter growth in recent years, leading some economists to question its methodology. The reported numbers are seasonally adjusted, meaning the government tries to strip away predictable seasonal variations, like holiday hiring around Christmas and declines in construction in the middle of winter, to reveal the underlying trend.In a research note published on Monday, economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco said the government’s seasonal adjustment was too large. The actual pace of growth in the first quarter was about 1.8 percent, they concluded.That view, however, does not yet command a consensus. A group of Fed economists based in Washington published a research note earlier this month concluding that “our analysis here does not find convincing evidence” of a problem.Even the optimists among Fed officials see evidence of nothing more than moderate growth. Ms. Yellen noted that wages continued to rise slowly, notwithstanding recently announced pay raises at large companies with many low-paid workers, including Walmart and Target.She also noted that the recovery remained uneven. She laced her speech with references to the Rhode Island economy, which suffered outsize losses during the recession and has since recovered more slowly than the country as a whole.While the overall American economy is returning to health, she said, “We are not there yet.”A version of this article appears in print on May 23, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Yellen Expects Rates to Increase This Year.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.