AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The Dutch government announced plans on Friday to proceed with a sale of shares of the state-owned lender ABN Amro, possibly via an initial public offering as soon as the fourth quarter of this year.The move, which must be approved by Parliament, is the next step for the Dutch government in its efforts to recoup tens of billions of euros it pumped into the bank in a rescue seven years ago.In a letter to Parliament on Friday, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the Dutch finance minister, said an I.P.O. would be the best option for selling the government’s stake.“We agree with the finance minister’s conclusion that an I.P.O. is the best option for selling ABN Amro,” Gerrit Zalm, the chairman of ABN Amro’s managing board, a post that is the equivalent of chief executive, said in a news release.“This is a logical next step in the bank’s development,” Mr. Zalm said. “The internal preparations we have made this past year are well on track, and both the managing board and the supervisory board believe that ABN Amro is ready for an I.P.O.”The bank itself has been valued at 15 billion euros, or about $16.7 billion, in previous estimates by the outside experts, the government said on Friday. It also could be one of the largest I.P.O.s in the Netherlands.The Dutch government said it planned to sell shares of the bank in stages and was likely to remain a shareholder for a number of years. The first sale will probably represent a 20 percent to 30 percent stake in the lender and could come as soon as the fourth quarter.The bank traces its roots to ABN Amro Holding, which was broken up in 2007 after a €71 billion deal in which the Royal Bank of Scotland, Banco Santander of Spain and the Belgian bank Fortis acquired pieces of the former company.The Dutch assets of Fortis and the Belgian lender’s share of ABN Amro were nationalized during the 2008 financial crisis, costing the Dutch government more than €21 billion. It also led to the loss of thousands of jobs at the bank.The Dutch finance ministry has said it would only seek to return the bank to the private markets if the financial sector was stable and there was sufficient interest in the market for the shares. It also is seeking to recover as much of the capital spent on the lender as possible.The move comes less than two months after Mr. Dijsselbloem delayed a decision on an I.P.O. following a disagreement with lawmakers about executive salaries at the lender.A group of ABN Amro’s top managers eventually gave up a pay increase after the outcry.ABN Amro’s prospects have improved in recent years as it has shed operations and reduced its provisions for bad loans.The bank’s underlying profit, which excludes certain special items, more than doubled in 2014, to €1.55 billion from €752 million in 2013.Advertisement