MAY 23, 2015
To the Editor:Tyler Cowen asks if the current lower-wage economy is transitory or a reset of what we should expect as normal (“Signs of a Shakier New Normal,” Economic View, May 17). He adds that “if a reset is underway, we might have to accept that public policy cannot reverse it easily.” Is that really so?There is no doubt that globalization allows many corporations to make larger profits by shifting manufacturing overseas. But public policy can help determine how these profits get distributed. Similarly, cheap documented and undocumented immigrant labor lowers the competitive labor cost. This can be mitigated by increasing the minimum wage. And infrastructure jobs are not being filled despite urgent needs because of a “don’t tax, don’t spend” public policy mentality.We can revise our tax and public spending policies and maintain a strong and equitable economy, or we can cry poor and become poor. The choice is ours.Zvi J. DoronPittsburgh, May 17To the Editor:Tyler Cowen warns that we may have to accept lower wages as the new normal. We shouldn’t be optimistic about public policy efforts to counter this trend, he says.AdvertisementWhat I don’t understand is how this analysis squares with the article and column on the front page of the business section about the unflagging rise of executive pay, “It’s (Still) Their Party” by David Gelles, and “Shareholders’ Votes Have Done Little to Curb the Festivities” (Fair Game by Gretchen Morgenson). Perhaps Dr. Cowen meant to say that everyone but the richest needs to accept lower wages. But the message of these pieces seems to be that political will plus the right policies (see, for example, early drafts of Dodd-Frank) could limit executive pay. And if the resulting savings were shifted into pay at the bottom, those wages would rise. No?Humility about our ability to understand, much less direct, the economy is well warranted, but we wouldn’t want it to serve as an excuse for political quiescence or cover for bad policy choices.AdvertisementTamara MetzPortland, Ore., May 19The writer is a professor of political science at Reed College.Letters for Sunday Business may be sent to sunbiz@nytimes.com.A version of this letter appears in print on May 24, 2015, on Page BU6 of the New York edition with the headline: The Economic Reset .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.