AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Lori Senecal, global C.E.O. of the ad agency C.P.&B. and C.E.O. of the MDC Partner Network, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences for you?A. I grew up in Montreal. I’m the fourth of four girls, so my birth order gave me some motivation to carve out my own identity and achievements because my sisters were all very talented and close in age.Tell me about your parents.They had a really strong work ethic, so they always instilled in us the desire to work hard and to reach for excellence. They never really imposed any sort of gender expectations on us, either. We all took out the garbage and we all watched “Hockey Night in Canada” with my father.And what did they do for a living?My father worked in commercial banking for a while and then he had a retail store. And my mother worked in the education system and did a lot of interesting things, including creating curriculum and working with special-needs children. He had quite a business mind and she was quite creative, so I feel like I inherited a little bit of left brain, right brain. It’s served me well in this industry, where there’s a lot of appreciation for both art and commerce.What did you do outside of classes during school?I was really into gymnastics growing up, and then when I was about 15, I became too tall to compete, so I started coaching. That was my part-time job during high school and college.It was also the source of early leadership lessons. Gymnastics is both an individual sport as well as a team sport, so you have to discover the unique and full potential of each athlete, but you also have to make sure everyone succeeds as a team.It was really motivating to see them start with very few skills and end up becoming incredibly proficient and confident. To this day, I like seeing that development trajectory. If you can help someone become more confident and achieve their ambitions, that’s something that you can always feel good about.What were the specific skills you learned about coaching?Part of it is acting with consistency. You have to set goals very clearly and communicate them clearly — this is the vision for the team and what we’re going to do — and then you have to continually communicate and reinforce them. That gives everyone a sense that they’re on a great path, and it also makes them feel secure that they always know what to expect. You can’t be changing your perspective every five minutes or treating them one way one day and a different way the next. That creates the ideal conditions for them to feel confident.What other leadership lessons did you learn?You have to strike a balance between the need to strive for excellence but also the need for compassion. Gymnastics is not an easy sport. You have to really dedicate yourself to an incredible amount of training, and you really have to set the bar high in terms of excellence.But with that comes a need for a strong sense of compassion, because it can be emotionally intense for young girls who are participating in the sport, and you need to have the compassion to be able to recognize when too much is too much. You want to unlock all of their potential but not be so hard on them that they’re going to feel demotivated and quit. You need to really strike that balance.When you went to college, did you have an idea what you wanted to do for a career?Not really. I was kind of naïve when I was going to college. I didn’t really have any contacts or connections in the business world. When I graduated, I just sent a bunch of résumés to marketing departments of companies and to a lot of advertising agencies. I ended up getting an offer to join the media department of an agency in Toronto. I decided to go for it.That was a time when I embraced one of the philosophies that I go back to a lot today, which is that action creates opportunity. I didn’t know what the nature of the job would be, but I knew that if I took action, other possibilities would appear, and they did. Ever since then, I’ve often thought about action creating opportunity.How do you hire?There are three areas I’m most interested in when I’m talking to a candidate. The first is the inventor mind-set. I’ll say, “What have you invented?” That doesn’t mean you have to have created a robot that can get a beer from a fridge. It could be anything. It’s to see whether they have the mind-set of creating something. That shows a desire to find fresh solutions.Then I try understand their ability or desire to collaborate. I’ll often say, “Talk to me about one of your greatest achievements,” and I’ll listen to the story from the perspective of whether it was an “I” and “me” achievement or a “we” achievement.And then I’m looking for passion and commitment. So I’ll say, “Tell me about a time when you really had to stick your neck out for the greater good of the mission.” You want to see whether people were willing to take bold action to move the mission forward.What advice do you give to new college graduates?I talk to them about action creating opportunity. So dive in, and great things will come of it.The other thing I like to focus on is the importance of impact. You have to learn to prioritize the impact opportunities rather than just being busy. There’s an infinite amount of things that you can do, but focus on the things that will catapult the company and your career forward.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about the challenges of leading and managing. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice.Advertisement