AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher JensenFiat Chrysler’s refusal to repair some of the almost 1.6 million Jeeps recalled for a fire risk has upset some owners and raised questions among current and former regulators.“Jeep advised us they are unable to complete repairs necessary because the rear of the car has ‘too much rust,’ although we rely on the car every single day to get us to/from work and school,” one owner wrote in a complaint filed last week with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.At the same time, the highway safety agency is preparing for a hearing in July on Fiat Chrysler’s recall practices in general. An agency spokesman, Gordon Trowbridge, declined to comment on the Jeep recall other than to note in an email that “it’s possible that participants would raise the corrosion issue” at the hearing on July 2.As many as 96,000 vehicles are affected by Fiat Chrysler’s decision not to repair certain vehicles it deems too rusty, a small proportion of the overall recall. But under federal regulations, automakers undertaking a recall cannot opt to repair some of the affected vehicles and not others, said Allan Kam, who worked for the highway safety agency from 1975 to 2000. In his last position there, he was the senior enforcement lawyer.“They can’t be selective and say, ‘If they are rusty, they don’t get the remedy,’ ” Mr. Kam said in a telephone interview. “If you can’t repair it, you replace it or buy it back.”The recall involves the gas tank on 1993-98 Grand Cherokee and 2002-7 Liberty models, which is behind the rear axle, an unusual location. Gas tanks are typically in front of the rear axle, which provides protection in case the car is hit from behind.In 2013, the highway safety agency concluded that the Jeep gas tanks were unacceptably vulnerable to deadly fires in rear impacts. The repair involves putting a trailer hitch — a device designed for towing, not crash protection — on the back of the vehicle in an attempt to protect the gas tank.Fiat Chrysler has admitted the trailer hitch will offer only limited protection, mainly in low-speed crashes, but the safety agency allowed it.In December, however, Fiat Chrysler informed the safety agency that an estimated 3 to 6 percent of the 1.6 million recalled vehicles would not be repaired because of “corrosion, accident damage or abuse.” That is 48,000 to 96,000 vehicles.Other automakers have followed the federal regulation and bought back recalled vehicles they could not repair. Ford, for example, bought back some of the 493,000 1998-2003 Windstar vans that it recalled in 2010 because the rear axle could rust and fracture, making the vehicle difficult to control. A Ford spokeswoman could not immediately say how many vehicles the automaker repurchased.Mr. Kam said the highway safety agency is legally responsible for forcing an automaker to abide by that regulation.If repairs are not being made, the secretary of transportation can order the automaker to provide a replacement vehicle or a refund, Michael Brownlee, a former agency official, wrote in an email. Mr. Brownlee ran the safety agency’s Office of Defects Investigation from 1987 to 1991 and retired in 1997 as associate administrator for enforcement.A Fiat Chrysler spokesman, Eric Mayne, said in an email, “From the earliest stages of this campaign” the automaker “communicated to N.H.T.S.A. that vehicle condition affects the proper installation of a trailer-hitch assembly.”But he declined to answer whether the exclusion of some vehicles with a rust problem was part of an agreement reached at a meeting of high-level officials in 2013.That meeting involved David L. Strickland, then the agency’s administrator; Secretary of Transportation Ray LaHood, who has since left the position; and Sergio Marchionne, Fiat Chrysler’s chief executive. The meeting was unusual by the agency’s standards since none of its safety staff members attended. Chrysler had initially refused to agree to a recall but changed its position after the meeting.Last November, the agency expressed concern about Chrysler’s failure to make the fixes on rusted vehicles.“This is of great concern because it suggests that at least some vehicles are being turned away from dealers,” the agency’s deputy administrator, David J. Friedman, wrote the automaker. “As we have reiterated to Chrysler we believe the repair of these vehicles is of critical importance and must be completed in order for drivers and passengers to be adequately protected.”One issue for the Jeeps is their age. Under federal regulations, automakers cannot be required to repair vehicles that are more than 10 years old. But automakers typically fix such vehicles rather than face bad public relations. Many of the recalled Jeeps are more than 10 years old, but Chrysler is still fixing them.So the automaker cannot use the age of the rusted vehicles as an excuse to do nothing, Mr. Kam said.“What if Chrysler said, ‘We are going to remedy without charge only vehicles that are painted blue’? ” he said. “Either you are going to observe the 10-year period or you are not.”Advertisement