AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere are some of the top business stories to pay attention to in the coming week.Opening arguments in the criminal trial of three former top executives of Dewey & LeBoeuf, the once-mighty New York law firm that collapsed in May 2012, are scheduled to begin on Tuesday in a courtroom in State Supreme Court in Manhattan. The trial is expected to last up to six months and will delve into some of the arcane accounting maneuvers that prosecutors charge the former executives, all of whom are lawyers, used to hide the law firm’s failing finances from creditors, bond investors and lenders. The three defendants — Steven Davis, Dewey’s former chairman; Stephen DiCarmine, the firm’s former executive director; and Joel Sanders, the former chief financial officer — are charged with dozens of criminal counts and could spend years in prison if convicted. —Matthew GoldsteinA gauge of consumer spending, which is one measure of consumer confidence, will be out Tuesday from the Conference Board. Rising gas prices and stagnant wages are probably to blame for what is expected to be a relatively low showing of confidence. —Dionne SearceyFinance ministers and the heads of central banks from the Group of 7 nations will meet in Dresden, Germany, on Wednesday through Friday. While Greece is not on the formal agenda, the risk of the country soon going bankrupt and leaving the eurozone is likely to be a major theme. The meeting comes ahead of a summit meeting of the G7 heads of government, including President Obama, in Bavaria next month. —Jack EwingThe influential Committee on International Trade at the European Parliament is expected to vote on Thursday on a report assessing a planned trade and investment deal between the European Union and the United States. The role of the lawmakers is advisory at this stage. But the full parliament would have a final say on whether to approve an eventual Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership. The planned deal, which is being negotiated by trade officials in Washington and Brussels, has attracted strong criticism from some lawmakers who are concerned that it would diminish the ability of European Union member states to make rules protecting food quality, the environment and labor rights. The full Parliament is expected to vote on the report next month. —James KanterRevised Commerce Department data on the gross domestic product, due out on Friday, is expected to show that the economy shrunk during the first quarter of the year. Earlier data on first-quarter G.D.P. indicated that the economy barely grew, at 0.2 percent. If analysts’ predictions hold true for the revised data, it would be the first contraction in a year. Economists blame a bigger gulf than anticipated in the trade deficit, among other causes. —Dionne SearceyRoss Ulbricht, below, the founder of the Silk Road, the online drug bazaar, will be given his prison sentence on Friday in federal court in Manhattan.Mr. Ulbricht was convicted in February on seven counts related to his operation of the Silk Road, which grew into a huge global enterprise before Mr. Ulbricht’s arrest in October 2013. The site was often compared to an eBay for drugs and relied on the Bitcoin virtual currency for payments.The charges in Mr. Ulbricht’s case carry a minimum sentence of 20 years. Federal prosecutors have argued that Mr. Ulbricht should be sentenced to a life in prison, in part because of the drug overdose deaths of six Silk Road customers that the government plans to discuss at the sentencing.Mr. Ulbricht’s lawyer has argued that the overdose deaths cited by the government cannot be directly attributed to the Silk Road, and that the site actually created a safer environment for drug users who would otherwise have had to buy from street dealers. —Nathaniel PopperAdvertisement