AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes an auction of new three- and six-month bills on Tuesday and an auction of four-week bills on Wednesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.08 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida State University, $60.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYPennsylvania, $1.24 billion of revenue bonds. General obligation. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKArlington, Tex., Higher Education Finance Corporation, $54.2 million of education revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.California Infrastructure Economic Development Bank, $91.6 million of revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.Camden County, N.J., Improvement Authority. $52.8 million of lease revenue bonds. Raymond James. Chicago, $650 million of general obligation bonds. Bank of America.Chino, Calif., Public Financing Authority, $50 million of local agency refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Decatur, Ala., Board of Education, $83 million of special tax warrants. Morgan Stanley.El Paso County, Colo., $110 million of Colorado College project revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Escambia County, Fla., $65 million of solid waste disposal revenue bonds. J.P. Morgan Securities.Houston Independent School District. $65 million of tax refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Houston Independent School District, $349 million of bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Johnson County, Kan., Unified School District No. 512, $118.6 million of general obligation refinancing and improvement bonds. George K. Baum.King County, Wash., Public Hospital District No. 4, $50 million of revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.Kyrene, Ariz., Elementary School District, $64.3 million of school improvement and refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Laredo, Tex., Independent School District, $75 million of tax refinancing bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Massachusetts Educational Financing Authority, $184.8 million of education loan revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.School Board of Miami-Dade County, $460 million of certificates of participation. Citigroup Global Markets.Montgomery County, Pa., $454 million of health system revenue bonds. Bank of America.Northwest, Tex., Independent School District, $137.6 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Bosc.Philadelphia, $176.1 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities. Placentia-Yorba Linda, Calif., Unified School District, $62.7 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Riverside, Calif., $195 million of sewer revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.St. Paul Housing Redevelopment Agency, $302.2 million of revenue and refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.St. Paul Housing Redevelopment Agency, $191.5 million of taxable revenue and refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.San Mateo County, Calif., Community College District, $127 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley. Texas Children’s Hospital, $50 million of revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Advertisement