AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi Somaiya and Brooks BarnesIn 2011, when Isaac Lee, president of news for Univision, set out to persuade his company and Disney to back Fusion, a digital news service and cable channel he wanted to start, he promised nothing less than the holy grail: young viewers for the older media conglomerates. He played a slide show in which a middle-aged white man transformed into a young brown woman. The executives present were dazzled. “It’s very hard to say no to Isaac Lee,” said Ben Sherwood, president of the Disney/ABC Television Group, describing him as “extremely charismatic and dynamic and a visionary.” Randy Falco, president and chief executive of Univision, said of Mr. Lee: “Oh, my God. He is really a force of nature.”The reality, since Fusion began in October 2013, has been more complex. Many inside and outside the company are hard pressed to define what exactly Fusion does. Traffic to its website has been anemic at times, and it has yet to deliver the kind of attention-getting stories that digital media rivals like Buzzfeed and Vice have produced. The site was originally aimed at young Latinos who spoke English as a first language, but it quickly shifted its target audience to young viewers of all ethnicities. In April, it shuffled its news and features editorial team and appointed a new editor in chief. Fusion has grown quickly, with 250 employees and offices in Miami, New York, Washington, D.C., Boulder, Colo., and Oakland, Calif. Mr. Lee and his senior editors say the organization is young and quickly finding its way — they point to an interview with Marco Rubio as an example of the kind of noteworthy journalism they strive for. They believe that Fusion will eventually fulfill a mission that news organizations across the world see as vital to survival: reaching younger and more diverse audiences on the platforms they go to for news, like Snapchat and YouTube. In an interview, Mr. Lee, 44, said his employees “have the ability to bet and to make mistakes, and the results are there,” specifying both written and visual storytelling and investigative reporting. “I think that this is one of the very few organizations that is about journalism and talent,” he added.Fusion is, in many ways, the archetype for broader movements in media. As traditional news organizations have struggled to adapt to the rhythms of the web, a new generation of media companies, like Buzzfeed and Vox, have moved from bright ideas to full-fledged businesses at breakneck speed. They are often backed by big corporations — Disney is also behind the websites Grantland and FiveThirtyEight — or venture capital firms making big bets that all the people browsing the web on their phones will demand fresh content. Many covet millennials — a group loosely defined as those born after 1980, or about one-third of the current American work force, according to the Pew Research Center. Nobody has quite figured out what they want or if it is possible to tell stories that appeal universally to a huge number of Americans who sometimes seem united only in the dreams of marketers. Disney and Univision supplied Fusion with an additional $30 million in financing recently, according to a person involved with the deal who spoke on the condition of anonymity. But the cultures of the companies and Fusion have already clashed. For instance, according to two senior Fusion staff members, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, Disney put the organization on notice that it would not take kindly to coverage that might dent its standing with consumers. The warning came after Fusion published several stories based on documents that hackers stole from Sony. Fusion is not alone: In negotiations to create a Vice cable channel, Disney and Hearst insisted on a clause protecting the companies in the event that Vice content “embarrasses Hearst or Disney in any way,” according to people with knowledge of the matter, who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss private negotiations. Fusion has offered lavish wages to hire a number of highly regarded journalists. Big names include the financial writer Felix Salmon and The Atlantic’s Alexis Madrigal, who was named editor in chief in late April in a broad reshuffling of the organization’s management ranks.Mr. Lee made his name starting and editing a series of publications aimed at audiences in Mexico and his native Colombia. He became the head of news at Univision in 2010 and is known in media circles to be funny, profane and inclined to go off on philosophical tangents. He said that no one, however close to him they are, receives preferential treatment. Addressing high wages, he said he believed that journalists, “not just suits,” should be paid well. Though Fusion was recently nominated for two Livingston Awards for its investigative work, the network is perhaps best known for sifting through hacked Sony emails — something that made Disney the target of criticism in Hollywood — and for using foul-mouthed puppets in its State of the Union coverage in January. Recently, Fusion’s website had stories on the potential dangers of virtual-reality pornography and on new emojis, and an investigation into industrialized chicken farms titled “Cock Fight.” Its television offerings include “America with Jorge Ramos,” the popular Univision news anchor, and the Cannabusiness Report, on “the mainstreaming of marijuana.” Several current and former Fusion employees mentioned a masculine and raucous office culture inside the organization.Last year, when the company instituted what it described as a routine training program on appropriate sexual behavior, some employees took it as a reaction to widespread rumors of office liaisons. David Ford, a spokesman for Fusion, said that, just like other corporations, it conducted “respect in the workplace training as part of our overall compliance program.” Its web traffic late last year, according to internal figures obtained by The New York Times, dropped as low as 23,000 page views on some days. Fusion said its traffic this past December reached 1.9 million unique users and increased to about five million by April. The media measurement company Nielsen said it did not measure Fusion’s viewership on television. Mr. Madrigal described the organization in simple terms: “Fusion is a cable and digital network that is championing a more diverse and inclusive America.” It will do so by hiring those who are “naturally and natively interested in things that the rising generation of people in America are interested in,” he added. That will include television shows on topics like prisons and technology, with matching content online, on social media and in live events.Mr. Falco said Fusion was “different, experimental.” It should act as a kind of ideas lab, he said, that feeds the lessons it learns back to its parent companies. One goal, he said, was to expand Fusion’s cable channel from its current reach of 40 million homes to as many as 70 million homes over the next few years. It is a complex time to introduce a new cable channel — the pressure from consumers is to narrow the bundle of networks sold to them, not to expand it. But Fusion, one of the most modern of media enterprises, is supported in part by one of the most old-fashioned of revenue streams: cable fees. For his part, Mr. Sherwood, the president of Disney/ABC Television Group, repeatedly compared the service to ESPN, which began as a small-town Connecticut cable channel and grew into a media behemoth.“It’s going to be a big success,” Mr. Sherwood said of Fusion. “You have to take the long view when you’re building a multiplatform service.” He added that he was “excited” about the comedy news program with the puppets, which is called “No, You Shut Up!”Mr. Lee projected confidence, too. “I have nothing to worry about,” he said. “I know exactly what I am doing. I know that we don’t know everything, but we are running the best possible process to figure it out. This is a marathon.”Advertisement