AdvertisementSupported byGlobal ManagerBy Sonia Kolesnikov-JessopLoh Lik Peng is the founder and chief executive of the Unlisted Collection, a hospitality group with properties in Singapore, London, China and Australia.Q. Did you display an entrepreneurial spirit as a child?A. Not really. In fact, my parents always encouraged us to take up one of the professions, and so it was never on my horizon to be an entrepreneur. It’s just not something we would talk about and didn’t seem an option for me.I became a lawyer, but after two years in practice I was really bored. There was a bit of push and pull. I’d entered the work force at the tail end of the Asian financial crisis [of 1997-1998], and as a young lawyer I was doing a lot of bankruptcies, winding-up petitions, and that wasn’t really what I had signed up for. I thought it would be much more exciting, fighting for justice [laughs], not quite the reality, and I got rapidly disillusioned with it. I wasn’t really looking for lots of options and didn’t think I had other options, but a hotel property came onto the market, and although it was in a red-light area, I saw some potential.Q. That was a bit of a risk.A. It was so cheap, it wasn’t really a huge risk, because the opportunity cost wasn’t that high. I borrowed some money, and my parents invested and supported me. I actually didn’t think I would leave my law practice — I wasn’t prepared to take that giant leap and change everything. My intention was to take a year off, do the hotel and get someone to run it and go back to practice. But after I launched, it was pretty successful and I really enjoyed running it. I did keep my practice license for a few years after that, so I had a fallback plan.Q. What were the first lessons that you learned?A. For a while we were almost coasting after the launch. Then the SARS [Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome] epidemic came along [in 2002], and the business literally more than halved overnight. Nobody could predict what was going to happen, and it was quite scary. We immediately switched our focus from tourists to locals, and it taught me a lot of lessons about being agile and working as a team. We were able to exploit the fact that we were small — people thought you were less likely to catch SARS in a smaller place — and we did rather well.I was lucky and unlucky with SARS. It was a very good lesson in how to run a business. There is always an alternative, a silver lining to a problem. You just have to focus on the solution.Q. You expanded rather rapidly, and now you have 27 properties.A. It was a matter of opportunity. I could see the trend moving toward boutique hotels in Singapore, and in those days you could buy small buildings, known as shop houses, for very little. Owners were not excited about renovating these old buildings, and no one wanted them back then. But I thought that if you were doing something creative, you could make something of those places.Q. You started developments in other countries in 2007-2008 and picked London first. Why choose the other side of the world when you could have stuck to Asia?A. My family already had some investments in London, so I knew the market. I guess my training as a lawyer has also been a hindrance; perhaps I’m much more concerned about regulatory environment and commercial risk than most entrepreneurs might be. Singapore is a relatively sheltered market with very strong law and order, and if you looked to our neighboring countries, certainly six years ago, you wouldn’t be able to open without a very strong local partner who could navigate minefields. It’s less of a problem in Asia now, but in London at the time it wasn’t an issue.Q. As you were developing your first U.K. hotel, how did you manage it from a distance?A. At the time I didn’t have a family, I was single and it was easy flying there regularly, staying three weeks at a time. It was manageable, but I don’t think I could do it now. Now, I have a local management team there so we could do it without me being there, but when you’re a start-up, to do it properly you need to commit time and attention. With time, what I’ve realized is that in developed countries like Britain and Australia you can localize management very easily and rapidly. There are enough people with strong management skills, and you really don’t need to parachute in anyone. But in a country like China, where we have a small property in Shanghai, it’s a little bit more difficult.Q. What has been your experience with doing business in China?A. Even though I’m ethnic Chinese, I don’t speak the language well and the culture in Singapore is very different from China’s. So going into China has actually been more difficult than elsewhere. There are cultural business customs you need to appreciate, like for example if you sign a contract. Here, you just go to your lawyer’s office, sign on the dotted line, and that’s it. In China, they expect a whole round of entertainment. It’s a bit weird for me coming from Singapore. But getting drunk together is a way of bonding, for them to trust you.Q. Are there downsides to expanding as quickly as you have?A. You need to have some strong back-of-house support — accounting, management, H.R. That all needs to keep up with the growth of your operational unit. This is not something I’ve always been good at. We went from about 20 people in 2003 to now 500, and our back of house hasn’t fully followed. I have to rely on the managers of each place, so I delegate a lot and give a lot of autonomy. Each restaurant is a different brand and has a different position, because they were all set up in partnership with the chefs that run them. As a result we don’t have a lot of efficiencies of scale even though the group is quite big now.Q. How are you addressing this?A. We grew up as a boutique hotel and boutique restaurant, and this independence is very much ingrained into the DNA of the group. We haven’t really grown brands beyond single outlets. But I think this is going to have to change in the next 10 years. Managing 15 restaurants with 15 different concepts is not that easy, and I realize that to grow the business to the next level, I now need to change this mind-set. At some point we will have to cherry-pick a few brands and grow those.Q. How do you pick? Isn’t that like asking which is your favorite child?A. There are certain concepts that I think will naturally lend themselves to replication.Q. What would you tell your 25-year-old self?A. Take your time a little bit more. I think I grew the business very rapidly, and looking back I would slow down a little bit.Advertisement