AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedTrying to succeed where Comcast failed, Charter Communications has struck a deal to buy Time Warner Cable, an acquisition that would create a powerhouse in the consolidating American cable and broadband industry.Charter plans to announce on Tuesday a $55 billion deal for its larger rival and an approximately $10 billion takeover of a smaller competitor, Bright House Networks, people with direct knowledge of the matter said on Monday.With those deals, Charter will become a significantly stronger rival to Comcast, the giant of the cable industry, which had until last month sought to buy Time Warner Cable itself until the plan met resistance from federal antitrust regulators.The flurry of deal-making reflects the efforts of an industry grappling with a tectonic shift in how Americans watch and pay for television. With customers increasingly turning to the Internet for videos, cable companies have sought to combine to gain bigger scale and leverage in negotiations with content providers.That has often meant strikingly huge acquisitions. In the last week alone, the European telecom giant Altice bought a controlling stake in the small cable operator Suddenlink to extend its broadband and pay television empire across the Atlantic as part of a campaign that may eventually extend to buying other smaller cable operators.Time Warner Cable, spun off from the parent it was named after in 2009, is the No. 2 cable operator in the country and has long been viewed as an important trophy for any company looking to dominate the American cable and broadband landscape. Buying Time Warner Cable, as well as Bright House, will transform Charter — a small operator born in St. Louis in 1993 — into the most serious competitor to Comcast to date. The two acquisitions will approximately quadruple Charter’s customer base to about 24 million, compared with Comcast’s 27 million.Also intensifying the high-stakes competition for video subscribers is AT&T’s deal last year to buy the satellite television operator DirecTV for $48.5 billion. Opposition to that deal is not nearly as contentious as the Comcast-Time Warner Cable deal was, in part because that deal does not pose nearly as much consolidation in video or broadband.Under the terms of its deal, Charter will pay about $195 per Time Warner Cable share in cash and stock. That is almost 14 percent higher than Time Warner Cable’s closing stock price on Friday — and 47 percent higher than Charter’s original bid for its rival from early last year.To help finance the deal, Charter will sell $5 billion worth of stock to Liberty Broadband, part of the telecom empire owned by the billionaire John C. Malone.Time Warner Cable operates in 29 states, from Maine to Hawaii.Charter and its main backer, Mr. Malone, have coveted the company as a way to improve its national reach and bargaining power with programmers like CBS and Discovery Communications. But last year the two were thwarted by Comcast, which bid $45 billion to unite the country’s two biggest cable operators.Owning its next-biggest competitor would have given Comcast nearly 60 percent of the nation’s high-speed Internet customers and about a third of American pay television subscribers.Despite its wealth of connections and army of lobbyists, Comcast proved unable to persuade the Justice Department and the Federal Communications Commission that the deal would not lead to higher consumer prices or anticompetitive roadblocks for online video providers like Netflix.As that takeover was falling apart, Charter and Mr. Malone again approached Time Warner Cable, promising both friendlier deal negotiations and a higher price tag, people briefed on the discussions have said.Charter again appeared to face competition, this time from Altice, which had held preliminary discussions with Time Warner Cable, people briefed on the matter have said. Yet the French telecom company will be busy integrating Suddenlink and is not expected to put up a serious fight for Time Warner Cable.Representatives of Charter and Time Warner Cable declined to comment on the matter, which was reported earlier by Bloomberg News.Charter is still likely to face close scrutiny from the Justice Department and the Federal Communications Commission, though some analysts and industry watchdogs said that the company was unlikely to face the same level of opposition that Comcast did.Here are some prominent services offering live TV, à la carte networks and other on-demand streaming options in the United States.Together, Charter and Time Warner Cable will still be smaller than Comcast. And the newly enlarged Charter also does not run a big media operation, as Comcast does through its NBCUniversal division.“It does not look to be nearly as big an antitrust concern as the Comcast deal was,” Gene Kimmelman, the chief executive of Public Knowledge, a consumer advocacy group, and a former antitrust official at the Justice Department, said of the Charter deal. “In this instance, you’re combining the No. 2 company with a smaller player that can be a bit of a counterweight to Comcast.”But the government may still take a tough look, particularly since Comcast and the newly enlarged Charter will all but control the nation’s landline high-speed broadband connections, according to Rich Greenfield, an analyst at BTIG.“It is much easier to prevent others from getting to Comcast’s size,” he wrote in an email. “With no broadband competition in most of the country, it is hard to see how the positives outweigh the risks for the F.C.C. and the D.O.J.”As part of the deal with Charter, Time Warner Cable will receive a $2 billion breakup fee if the transaction falls apart. (It received nothing when Comcast withdrew its takeover bid last month.)The deal’s rich premium will benefit the hedge fund manager John Paulson, whose Paulson & Company owns 8.7 million shares of Time Warner Cable stock, making the hedge fund firm the sixth-largest institutional investor in the cable concern, according to regulatory filings. Time Warner Cable is the third-largest stock investment for Mr. Paulson’s firm, based on market valuation.Another top hedge fund investor in Time Warner Cable based on the most recent regulatory filings is the Children’s Investment Fund Management, a fund based in Britain and operated by Chris Hohn. It last reported owning 15 million shares of the cable company, adding about five million shares since the end of last year, regulatory filings show.In the near term, it is unclear whether existing Time Warner Cable subscribers will see much difference in their service. Charter is likely to argue that the deal will lead to faster services, newer options for streaming video products and potentially lower prices by bargaining with content providers. Comcast has already been developing its X1 service, which lets customers record shows and stream content to their devices.Also unclear is whether customers’ opinions of Time Warner Cable or Charter services will improve. Charter ranks near the bottom of customer satisfaction surveys, along with Comcast and Time Warner Cable.Matthew Goldstein, Mark Scott and Emily Steel contributed reporting.Advertisement