AdvertisementSupported byNews AnalysisBy Jonathan MahlerWhen Comcast agreed in early 2014 to buy Time Warner Cable for $45 billion, it looked to a lot of people like a safe bet for regulatory approval. We all know how that turned out.Now Charter Communications wants to buy Time Warner Cable, for $56.7 billion. Will this deal go through? “We’re a very different company to Comcast, and this is a very different transaction,” Charter’s chief executive, Thomas M. Rutledge, said on Tuesday.His confidence seems at least partly justified, and not only because Charter does not own a major broadcast network, as Comcast did with NBCUniversal.In Charter’s case, as in Comcast’s, the government is likely to focus less on what the merger would mean for cable TV packages and more on what it would mean for the public’s high-speed Internet access. Had the Comcast-Time Warner Cable deal been approved, a single company would have controlled about 57 percent of that access. For its part, Charter would end up with under 30 percent of the country’s high-speed Internet market, less than Comcast currently holds.But if we learned anything from the government’s handling of the proposed Comcast-Time Warner Cable merger, it is that antitrust oversight has been reinvigorated in Washington, and those who enforce it are not afraid to say no to powerful cable companies. Also, in the largely unsettled realm of Internet regulation, the winds can shift very quickly. “By no means is it a slam dunk for approval just because it’s smaller than the gargantuan size Comcast would have achieved,” said S. Derek Turner, research director for the media policy group Free Press.The Comcast-Time Warner Cable deal would have combined the nation’s two largest cable companies. This one would bring together the fourth-largest, Charter, and the second-largest.Still, like Comcast’s, this merger debate will almost inevitably become part of a larger one over America’s nascent Internet policy. President Obama has made it clear that he considers high-speed broadband a form of infrastructure — a service that should be available and affordable to all Americans — and he has urged the Federal Communications Commission to adopt “the strongest possible rules” to regulate the Internet.It remains to be seen exactly what that is going to mean. Or, more to the point, how it will square with the flurry of mergers sweeping the industry.“You don’t want to see the government backed into a corner by all of this consolidation,” said Diana L. Moss, president of the American Antitrust Institute. “A national broadband policy, which we badly need in this country, should be formulated outside the context of any merger activities.”If approved, Ms. Moss said, the Charter-Time Warner Cable merger would create an effective “duopoly” over high-speed Internet access in America, with the new company and Comcast together controlling well over half the market. (Charter is also acquiring the smaller Bright House Networks for $10.4 billion, which will further add to its customer base.) Critics took some solace from a brief statement issued by Tom Wheeler, chairman of the F.C.C., noting that “the absence of harm” was not enough for the deal to clear the government’s bar. In other words, the burden will be on Charter to prove that the merger will benefit consumers. Mr. Rutledge said in a conference call that the company’s increased size and cost savings would allow it to offer better prices, a faster Internet and more high-definition content.If the deal does go through, it will be a coup for Charter’s biggest investor, John C. Malone. Mr. Malone, a 74-year-old billionaire, was a pioneer of the American cable industry before leaving the business more than a decade ago. In 2013, he got back in, when his Liberty Media bought 27 percent of Charter. Soon after, he attempted a hostile takeover of Time Warner Cable, but failed, leaving the door open for Comcast.Charter has no doubt learned from the mistakes Comcast made during its review. Most memorably, Comcast lashed out at its critics, accusing them of trying to extort billions of dollars from the company to keep their complaints to themselves.The success of the Charter deal will also hinge, in part, on who lines up against it, either publicly or behind the scenes, and what arguments they marshal to support their opposition. Netflix has not taken a position on the merger yet, but as one of the biggest providers of streaming services — and an outspoken critic of the Comcast merger — its voice will be an important one.The government will have a variety of options. It could simply approve the deal or it could place conditions on it that would amount to a kind of de facto policy making. For instance, it could mandate subsidized high-speed Internet access for those in need. Or it could take steps to ensure that Charter doesn’t interfere with fiber Internet providers, which at the moment represent the only real threat — using the term loosely — to the cable companies when it comes to home Internet service.Of course, regulators could also reject the deal outright. On its face, this may seem hard to imagine; Comcast, after all, has been allowed to grow to its current, larger size through mergers. But the dynamics of the market have changed rapidly, with the move away from traditional TV and toward online video happening much faster than anyone could have anticipated. (If anyone anticipated it at all.)What is sure to be a protracted process is just now getting underway. We saw with Comcast how abruptly the momentum can change, but things appear to be off to a good start for Charter, anyway. Senator Al Franken, who served up daily beatings for Comcast when its merger was pending in Washington, responded to the news with uncharacteristic restraint, urging regulators to “carefully review” the deal.“I think it’s more likely than not that it will go through, unfortunately,” said Susan Crawford, a co-director of the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard. “Which will make it even less likely that we will see cheap, ubiquitous, world-class Internet access in America. And that should really be our goal.”Advertisement