AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromHormel Foods, the company behind brands like Spam and Skippy, announced on Tuesday that it was acquiring Applegate Farms, a maker of natural and organic meats, for about $775 million.The deal was Hormel’s largest acquisition ever and signaled even more clearly the efforts of Jeffrey M. Ettinger, its chief executive, to diversify the company. It bought Skippy in 2013, and last year it added CytoSport, the maker of the Muscle Milk line of sports drinks, bars and powders, to its portfolio.With the purchase of Applegate, Hormel is adding meat products, but Mr. Ettinger said there was almost no overlap between the two companies’ businesses. Half of Applegate’s sales are through organic and “natural” foods stores like Gourmet Garage in New York and PCC Natural Markets in the Pacific Northwest, where Hormel has very little presence. Hormel’s only organic products are a version of Wholly Guacamole and versions of some Muscle Milk products.So the company is diversifying into what Mr. Ettinger called the “holistic product area.”“Clearly, the natural and organic space is a dynamic and growing category,” he said. “We really look at it as a movement and not a fad, and the Applegate team has been a leader in that marketplace.”He said grocery store chains were seeking more such products, and while Applegate has already started moving more into mainstream retailers, Hormel will be able to accelerate and expand that effort.Consumers increasingly look for products with minimal ingredients, and from animals raised humanely and without antibiotics that are important to human medicine. Applegate, for instance, promotes its deli meats as having “all the great taste you want without the junk that you don’t,” and its website allows consumers to sort its products according to whether they are gluten-free, antibiotic-free and grass fed, among other things.“Our mainstream products include some wonderful items with great traditional appeal, but more and more consumers are looking for those attributes,” Mr. Ettinger said.And Applegate’s business, unlike Hormel’s, has not been struck by avian flu, a viral disease that has affected almost 41 million poultry birds since it appeared in a backyard flock in the Pacific Northwest in December. Since then, it has decimated the turkey and egg businesses in the Midwest, but it has not yet hit flocks on the East Coast, where Applegate’s suppliers are.Hormel warned in April that its Jennie-O brand would probably be hurt by the flu. It repeated that warning last week when it announced its earnings for the quarter that ended April 26. In that quarter, the company’s second of the year, operating profit from Jennie-O grew 41 percent and sales increased 15 percent, accounting for roughly 20 percent of the company’s revenue.The Hormel barns that were affected by the flu now stand cleaned, disinfected and empty. Mr. Ettinger said the company would not repopulate them until it could be more certain that the flu would not strike new flocks.Nonetheless, Hormel’s second-quarter sales grew 1.5 percent to $2.3 billion and its earnings reached $180.4 million, or 68 cents a share, compared with $140.1 million in the same quarter last year.Mr. Ettinger said Hormel hoped to retain Applegate’s 100 employees, including its founder, Stephen McDonnell, in its current location in Bridgewater, N.J. Applegate will add 7 to 8 cents a share to Hormel’s earnings in the next fiscal year and roughly $165 million to net cash flow, Mr. Ettinger said.Advertisement