AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesWhen the billionaire media executive John C. Malone bought a million acres of Maine forestland in 2011, assuming the mantle of America’s top landowner from his friend and fellow mogul Ted Turner, he made no triumphant announcement. Instead, he shielded his identity through a shell company. Now, as Mr. Malone tries to pull off the biggest land grab of his career, he is once again avoiding the limelight. When Charter Communications announced the acquisitions of Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks on Tuesday, its news release did not mention Mr. Malone’s name. He was not on the investor call. He declined to comment for this article. Yet there is little doubt that Mr. Malone is behind the scenes, orchestrating an upheaval of the industry he helped create two decades ago. “He’s the genius behind the curtain,” said Jason Bazinet, a media analyst with Citigroup. “He hands it off to lieutenants to run the businesses.”Mr. Malone shaped the cable television industry in the 1980s and ’90s, selling TCI — which he built into the country’s largest cable operator — to AT&T for $48 billion in 1999. (That is about $68 billion in 2015 dollars.)He walked away from the business that made him a fortune and went on to control a disparate collection of media companies, including the satellite radio provider Sirius XM, the Atlanta Braves baseball team, the QVC home shopping channel and big telecommunications companies in Europe. Though seemingly unrelated, the companies Mr. Malone has preferred share some qualities: They tend to have stable, recurring revenues. They are capital intensive, making it hard for new entrants to pose a challenge. And they have allowed him to engage in famous bouts of financial engineering, taking on leverage, spinning off subsidiaries and creating tracking stocks, much to the delight of enriched shareholders. Then, two years ago, Mr. Malone invested in Charter, taking a minority position and a seat on its board. And though Mr. Malone does not officially control Charter, he is widely understood to be guiding the company’s aggressive acquisition strategy. “When he talks, I listen. And he is a significant talker,” Charter’s chief executive, Thomas M. Rutledge, said in an interview on Tuesday. “I know what he thinks, and he knows what I think.”If Charter completes its deals, the enlarged company would have a national footprint to rival that of Comcast, the media giant whose own offer for Time Warner Cable fell apart last month. In Charter, Mr. Malone sees the same qualities that have attracted him to companies in the past. Though cable television is challenged by consumers’ shifting media habits, Charter and Time Warner Cable are big providers of high-speed Internet service, a lucrative and growing business. And in its enlarged state, Charter will be able to wield influence. “He’s got tremendous confidence of his vision of where this industry should go,” said Jim Nail, an analyst with Forrester Research. “And he is incredibly determined and creative in pursuing that vision.”Charter’s new position of prominence would also mean that Mr. Malone, who was once known as the “king of cable,” could be close to reclaiming that title.Mr. Malone, 74, is no longer a chief executive. Instead, he exerts influence as chairman of the board, directing a loyal and well-compensated cadre. Today his main investments are in Liberty Media, owner of the Atlanta Braves and a controlling stake in Sirius XM; Liberty Global, a big European telecommunications group; Liberty Interactive, which runs home shopping sites; and Liberty Broadband, which owns the stake in Charter. “He is the power behind the throne,” said Mark Robichaux, author of “Cable Cowboy: John Malone and the Rise of the Modern Cable Business.” “He doesn’t have a huge need to have his ego stroked. He doesn’t revel being up on stage in the spotlight.”This approach has allowed him to help shape an unusually wide swath of the media business. “He has no peer,” Mr. Bazinet said. It has also afforded him the time and the budget to pursue his appetite for land. It was Mr. Turner who gave Mr. Malone the land bug. In the early 1990s, Mr. Turner had recently acquired the Flying D Ranch in Montana and took Mr. Malone on a helicopter tour of the pristine landscape.Since then, Mr. Malone has assembled a patchwork of the North American continent, from the hinterlands of the Northeast to the deserts of New Mexico to vast acreage in his home state of Colorado. He owns 2.2 million acres of land, according to The Land Report magazine.Yet Mr. Malone’s true passion has always been the United States cable industry, even as he had to watch new empires being built after he cashed out with the sale of TCI to AT&T. “He regretted getting out of the U.S. cable industry,” Mr. Robichaux said. “He sat on the sidelines and watched AT&T squander everything he bequeathed them. Then he saw what Comcast created.”And even as he turned Liberty Global into the biggest cable operator in Europe, observers thought it was only a matter of time until he returned to the United States market.“He has a core set of beliefs about where the world is going,” Mr. Bazinet said. “And he’s very patient. He waits for the stars to align.”His first opening came in 2013, when a meaningful stake in Charter was available for purchase. But Charter’s initial pursuit of Time Warner Cable was foiled last year when Comcast swooped in with a higher offer. When the Comcast deal was blocked by regulators, however, Mr. Malone pounced. In recent weeks, he and Mr. Rutledge approached Time Warner Cable, offering an easy path and a generous price. Charter’s transformation is no done deal. The sale must still be approved by the same regulators who thwarted Comcast’s attempt at a nearly identical deal. And at times, Mr. Malone has had a contentious relationship with regulators in Washington. “I’d rather cut off my left leg than go to Washington,” he said in 1993. “I have no respect for politicians, and I’m very poor at suppressing that.” Yet if history is any guide, Mr. Malone is likely to seize his prey. “Malone is like an alligator,” Mr. Robichaux said. “He is perfectly content to wait for the right opportunity for a long time, then will pounce with a ferocity that knows no bounds.”Emily Steel contributed reporting.Advertisement