
Breakingviews By                     
JEFFREY GOLDFARB

MAY 26, 2015
Time Warner Cable has concluded that one out of four ain’t bad.Last year, the cable operator rejected a takeover bid from a smaller rival, Charter Communications, balking at the price and the amount of leverage, cash and stock on offer. Most of the terms haven’t changed much in the deal it just agreed to, but the valuation has gone up appreciably, to more than $56 billion. It’s a stark reminder about what really matters in mergers.In January 2014, Time Warner Cable’s chairman, Robert D. Marcus, and his board rejected a “third grossly inadequate proposal” of $132.50 a share from Charter, backed by the cable mogul John C. Malone. Time Warner Cable didn’t like the amount of debt the combined company would carry. Mr. Marcus also wanted more cash and protection — so-called collars — for his shareholders against any swings in the Charter stock being proffered, because it was trading so richly.If nothing else, the tough stand bought Time Warner Cable the time that Comcast needed to swoop in with a higher bid. The offer was all in stock, at about $159 a share, and included none of the safeguards Mr. Marcus had wanted from Charter. It even lacked a provision for Comcast to pay a fee if the deal fell apart. That proved foolish, as regulators eventually killed the transaction.With the European telecommunications company Altice unexpectedly circling Time Warner Cable, Charter’s chief executive, Thomas M. Rutledge, and Mr. Malone delivered a knockout bid of almost $196 a share. It values its quarry richly at over nine times earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, before the effect of any cost savings — worth about $6 billion today — compared with the seven times it offered last time.AdvertisementThe deal includes the $100 a share in cash that Mr. Marcus originally requested, but this time it’s a lower proportion of the overall price. And the combined company, including Bright House Networks, which Charter is also buying for $10.4 billion, will carry hefty debt equivalent to about 4.5 times Ebitda.The huge premium Time Warner Cable has secured is impressive. Its shares were trading at about $95 each two years ago, before initial reports of Charter’s interest. It certainly helps distract from the complex ownership structure, high leverage, regulatory risks and rapid shifts occurring in customer habits.AdvertisementIn financial transactions, money, not love, covers a multitude of sins.Jeffrey Goldfarb is United States editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »