By JACK EWINGMAY 26, 2015
SINTRA, Portugal —  By some measures, the European Central Bank is confounding the naysayers.When the eurozone’s central bank started its stimulus program in March, critics warned that its planned monthly infusions of 60 billion freshly minted euros would not be enough to jolt the economy back to life.But growth is picking up. Eurozone inflation, whose dangerously low level helped spur the central bank to action, is showing signs of life. Borrowing costs for businesses and individuals have fallen, though any growth in lending has been slow to emerge.And if the eurozone’s weakest member, Greece, tips into bankruptcy and its economy collapses — a danger looking increasingly likely — the stimulus program could give the currency bloc a safety cushion. The central bank’s huge purchases of eurozone government debt, known as quantitative easing, would help calm bond markets if Greece is forced out of the eurozone.Still, there are reasons to doubt how much credit the European Central Bank can take for the improved economic outlook — and, more important, how long the good times will last.AdvertisementAt the very least, “quantitative easing removes the risk of another shock,” said Stefano Micossi, director general of Assonime, a business association and research organization in Rome.AdvertisementA lot of the positive effect from the stimulus program, though, comes from the declining interest rates it provoked — which translated into a plunge in the euro’s value as investors turned to other shores in search of better returns. A weak currency is good for exports, because it makes eurozone products cheaper for customers paying in other currencies like the dollar.But gains for eurozone exporters come at the expense of competitors in the United States and elsewhere. It’s a zero-sum game. In the long run, the eurozone has no interest in undercutting the American economy, a huge market for its goods and services.What’s more, the stimulus from a weak euro could prove only temporary. The euro is still down 11 percent compared with November, when the European Central Bank began sending strong signals that quantitative easing was imminent. But the currency was much lower than that earlier this year, and it has risen 6 percent against the dollar since mid-April, as there are signs that the United States economy is not growing as fast as expected.As of May 22, the European Central Bank had bought government debt valued at €134 billion, or about $147 billion. It plans to keep buying €60 billion of eurozone government debt each month through at least September of next year — and beyond that, if deemed necessary.The main purpose of quantitative easing, or Q.E. in economists’ jargon, is to push inflation closer to the 2 percent rate that the European Central Bank considers optimal for healthy growth. Inflation in the eurozone was zero in April — not good, but progress compared with the negative rates seen in previous months.The central bank’s objectives “are still a long way off,” economists at Commerzbank said in a note to clients. “We still believe that the E.C.B.’s hopes of far-reaching Q.E. success will be disappointed.”And yet, given the lengthy debate that preceded the European Central Bank’s decision in January to begin the stimulus program, the aftermath has been remarkably quiet. The feared political backlash has not materialized yet.AdvertisementAt a conference of high-ranking central bankers and economists held by the European Central Bank here late last week, quantitative easing was nowhere on the official agenda. The research papers that economists presented focused on the conference theme of inflation and unemployment.Before announcement of the stimulus program in January, Germany’s opposition to central bank bond buying had been intense — and a reason the European Central Bank did not adopt the program much sooner.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Jens Weidmann, the president of the German central bank, who was one of the most vocal critics of bond buying, has been notably restrained since the program began. Mr. Weidmann told the German newspaper Handelsblatt this month that he remained skeptical of quantitative easing, but that it would damage the credibility of the European Central Bank “to repeatedly call its decisions into question.”The timing of the bond-buying program proved to be fortunate. The European Central Bank began its stimulus just as the Federal Reserve was winding down its similar, yearslong program in the United States. The beneficial effect on the euro exchange rate was immediate.Another dose of stimulus came from the sharp decline in fuel prices, which merely coincided with the quantitative easing program. But that positive impetus to growth could also prove temporary, now that global oil prices have started edging back up.Mr. Micossi, of the Assonime business association, said the stimulus program had had a particularly strong impact in Italy, one of the eurozone’s shakiest economies. During the first three months of this year, the Italian economy grew for the first time since 2013. Registrations of new passenger cars in Italy surged 24 percent in April, according to the European Automobile Manufacturers Association.The European Central Bank cannot take all the credit for Italy’s resurgence, given that the bond buying began only in March. But even the announcement of quantitative easing two months earlier provided an immediate boost to confidence, making businesses more willing to invest and consumers more willing to spend, Mr. Micossi said.“Demand is coming back,” he said. “The effect is very visible.”A key objective of the bond-buying program is to drive down market interest rates and ease a credit squeeze in Italy and other countries like Spain and Portugal.Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, told an audience in Washington this month that lower rates were trickling down to private borrowers. “Our purchases have a direct and indirect effect across the whole financial system,” he said.AdvertisementAnd yet, so far there are only weak indications that banks are writing more loans. True, lending to businesses and households in the eurozone rose in March compared with a year earlier, the first annual increase in three years. But the gain was meager — just 0.1 percent. Many banks are still struggling with many problem loans and are reluctant to issue new ones. More than a quarter of loans in Italy are classified as nonperforming.Even quantitative easing’s biggest fans do not think that the European Central Bank can revive the eurozone economy by itself. Mr. Draghi said at the conference here in Sintra that growth in the eurozone was chronically lower than in the United States, while unemployment is persistently higher, because political leaders have not done enough to create a better climate for entrepreneurs.Most of the 19 countries in the eurozone rank poorly in the World Bank’s index of how easy it is to do business, well below countries like the United States, Britain and South Korea.Mr. Draghi urged political leaders to take advantage of the space that the central bank stimulus had given them to undertake what he called structural reforms — a broad range of steps that would increase the eurozone’s potential to grow.“Monetary policy can steer the economy back to its potential,” Mr. Draghi said in Sintra. “Structural reform can raise that potential. And it is the combination of these demand and supply policies that will deliver lasting stability and prosperity.”A version of this article appears in print on May 27, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Jury Is Still Out on European Central Bank’s Stimulus Program.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.