AdvertisementSupported byBy Aaron M. KesslerAs victims of the General Motors ignition switch scandal gathered at a congressional hearing on Wednesday to push for legislative reforms in auto safety, the automaker had a much warmer reception on Wall Street.G.M. surprised investors with stronger-than-expected profits despite paying large penalties to resolve litigation over its handling of the defective switch, which led to the recall of 2.6 million cars last year and has been linked to at least 124 deaths. In the clearest signal yet that investors viewed the recall scandal as a fading memory, G.M.’s stock price closed up nearly 6 percent on Wednesday at $35.42 — even though nearly half of the company’s earnings in the third quarter, 66 cents a share out of $1.50, were eaten up by $1.5 billion to resolve a criminal inquiry by the Justice Department along with many civil lawsuits.Those charges drove G.M.’s third-quarter profit down to 84 cents a share, roughly flat from last year. But investors focused on the automaker’s core performance, and by that measure the third quarter was a success.“I think people for the most part are looking past it now,” Colin Langan, an equity analyst at UBS, said of the recall scandal. “Especially with the D.O.J. fine settled, it’s more about how the business is performing than what the next shoe is that’s going to drop.”The company’s third-quarter performance was almost entirely achieved in North America. G.M. posted a nearly 12 percent operating profit margin in North America on pretax operating income of $3.3 billion. That was up from $2.5 billion a year ago.The market in China also delivered stronger-than-expected results, even as volume there fell. G.M. reported equity income of $500 million in China and generated a 9.8 percent net income margin.“China was a good data point for them. It showed they could deliver even in a tough environment,” Mr. Langan said.The same could not be said for South America and Europe. G.M. posted a loss of $217 million in South America, much worse than the loss of $32 million a year ago. In Europe, the company lost $231 million, compared with $387 million last year. But with Americans continuing to buy trucks and sport utility vehicles, the North American profit engine is going strong, and Wall Street appears to be willing to give G.M. some leeway not only for lackluster performance in troubled markets like Latin America but also for any remaining costs of reckoning with its defective ignition switch.G.M.’s chief executive, Mary T. Barra, cautioned on Wednesday that the company still faced repercussions from the safety crisis. Questioned by analysts eager to know when G.M. would buy back more stock, Ms. Barra pushed off such decisions until sometime next year, when the company expects to have a better grasp on its total recall-related expenses.“We did extinguish some risks but still have a handful of open items,” Ms. Barra said in a conference call, noting investigations by the Federal Trade Commission, the Securities and Exchange Commission and state attorneys general.G.M. will also soon face contract negotiations with the United Automobile Workers union, whose members have been voting on a new contract proposal with Fiat Chrysler.G.M.’s chief financial officer, Chuck Stevens, said that the company’s “operating circumstances are different than Fiat Chrysler” and that “when it’s our turn, we expect that we’ll engage in a constructive way.”Mr. Stevens said that G.M. hoped to book operating margins of 10 percent for the year in North America and that its objective in any negotiation would be to ensure it made similar profit margins over the next several years.“We’re committed to sustaining our 10 percent margins,” he said.G.M’s earnings report came as a congressional committee met to consider new auto safety legislation stemming from the scandal.The auto industry has lobbied against stronger auto safety reforms, including significantly higher financial penalties for automakers, as well as criminal penalties for individuals who engage in behavior similar to that of certain G.M. executives, engineers and corporate lawyers.Advertisement