AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberAt least 20 companies have distanced themselves from TLC’s popular reality show “19 Kids and Counting” since the cable network announced last week that it was withdrawing the program from its lineup. The network’s decision — and the subsequent move by brands to remove ads — came after a report that one of the show’s stars, Josh Duggar, had been investigated on suspicion of molesting several underage girls.Among the companies that have removed their ads from the show are Walgreens, the biggest drugstore chain in the country, as well as General Mills, Pizza Hut and Choice Hotels. Many brands used Twitter to announce that they had removed their ads — or were taking steps to do so — after hearing from consumers. “Please know that we will no longer be advertising on ‘19 Kids and Counting,’ ” Pure Leaf Iced Tea wrote on Twitter on Tuesday. Another company, Crayola, wrote, “We share your concern for the safety of children and have no plans to air Crayola commercials during future episodes.”Companies have long been wary of being connected with anyone viewed negatively by the public. But the rise of social media has made them publicly dissociate themselves from any hint of a scandal more quickly than ever. “If you’re on the wrong side of a social issue or a citizenship issue, the social media downside is often not worth the benefit of being connected to a company, a show or a celebrity,” said Allen Adamson, the chairman in North America of Landor Associates, a global brand company. “It’s usually risk management that’s driving this decision.”TLC decided to withdraw all episodes of “19 Kids and Counting” after In Touch magazine reported that Mr. Duggar, now 27, had molested young girls when he was a teenager. In a subsequent Facebook message, Josh Duggar wrote, “Twelve years ago, as a young teenager I acted inexcusably for which I am extremely sorry and deeply regret.” It is not clear if the show has been canceled or is simply on hiatus, so it is not clear if any of the ads that were withdrawn would have been broadcast with the show again anyway. The network declined to comment on Thursday. (The show is also no longer available on the streaming service Hulu.) Since “19 Kids and Counting” began in 2008, it has been one of TLC’s top performers. The show follows the Duggar family — the parents Jim Bob and Michelle and their 19 children — who are conservative Christians from Arkansas. Its most recent season averaged 3.5 million viewers an episode through April, according to Nielsen data, while it drew 3.9 million viewers in the previous season. The measurement firm iSpot.tv estimates that the show has secured $25 million from television ads this year. TLC, which is owned by Discovery Communications, has in recent years increasingly relied on family-based reality shows. It remains a top 20 network in prime time and is particularly popular among women. The network is projected to have advertising revenue of $311 million in 2015, according to the data firm SNL Kagan. But several of the channel’s reality shows have been sources of embarrassment. Last year, the network canceled “Here Comes Honey Boo Boo,” about a child beauty pageant contestant, after it was reported that the show’s matriarch, June Shannon, had dated a registered sex offender who served time in prison for child molestation. And in 2009, TLC put another hit reality show, “Jon & Kate Plus 8,” on hiatus after the show’s stars, Jon and Kate Gosselin, said they were separating. (The series was later renamed “Kate Plus 8.”)If TLC continues to broadcast reality shows that run into trouble, the network risks alienating viewers and advertisers, said Andrew Gilman, the president and chief executive of the CommCore Consulting Group, a crisis communications firm.“After about the third or fourth time, I think people decide, ‘You know, I’m not trusting or believing the other stuff they’re putting on their network,’ ” he said. He added that the behavior of reality TV stars could often be less predictable than that of actors in scripted series.For now, however, many of the companies that have distanced themselves from “19 Kids and Counting” indicated that they would still advertise on TLC.Arlene Lester, a spokeswoman for the insurer State Farm, said in an interview on Thursday that the company had removed advertising from “19 Kids and Counting” and any other Duggar-related shows that TLC might have, but would continue running ads on the network. “We just felt it was the right thing to do at this time given what was going on,” she said.John Koblin contributed reporting.Advertisement