AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesAfter nearly seven years of public silence, Richard S. Fuld Jr., the former chief executive of Lehman Brothers, had a lot to say.In a rambling speech at the Marcum MicroCap Conference at the Grand Hyatt New York in Midtown Manhattan — his first public appearance since the financial crisis — Mr. Fuld offered an opinion about the Islamic State, fretted about Vladimir Putin and proposed that the economy was not nearly as healthy as the stock markets might suggest.But while Mr. Fuld, known as “the Gorilla” of Wall Street for his brusque style, was eager to share his views about the world, he assiduously avoided talking about his role in the largest bankruptcy in United States history.Instead, he offered insights into his views on personal topics, including love and death, and made frequent references to his resilience. “What did Sigmund Freud say? ‘You can say whatever you want about me. I’m O.K. because I know my mother loves me,’ ” he said to a crowd of 1,300 financial professionals. “And my mother still loves me. She’s 96.”At another moment, Mr. Fuld offered a boxing analogy: “What did Rocky say? ‘It’s not how hard you hit but whether you get up after you’ve been knocked down.’ I love Rocky.”Mr. Fuld was vilified during the crisis, becoming the face of Wall Street’s excess and imprudence. However, he was unapologetic on Thursday, suggesting that Lehman could have survived if the Federal Reserve had allowed it to, and deflected blame for the crisis onto policy makers instead of bankers.He appeared anxious at first, removing his jacket at the podium. “I haven’t done this in a while,” he said. “This is my first public event since ’08. I don’t include my wonderful time with Congress.”Explaining the origins of the financial crisis, Mr. Fuld avoided any mention of investment banks’ eagerness to issue subprime mortgages. (Lehman had an enormous portfolio of subprime loans.)“It’s not just one single thing,” Mr. Fuld said. “It’s all these things taken together. I refer to it as the perfect storm.”At the root of the crisis, in his view, was the government’s push for homeownership. At the same time, hedge funds, private equity firms and sovereign wealth firms grew rapidly, supercharging the global financial system and driving up equity values, balance sheets, the volume of financial products and the need for financing, he said.“There was very little regulation or market supervision,” Mr. Fuld said.Then in 2007, the Fed raised interest rates, essentially ending the housing boom it had encouraged, Mr. Fuld said.“The increased rates led to increased mortgage rates and payments, a huge number of residential foreclosures,” he said. “Banks wrote down and sold assets.”In the wake of this, companies began cutting costs and jobs, Mr. Fuld said, and it became “a self-fulfilling economic loop.” “The rest is history,” he added.Mr. Fuld believes that the current economy is not as healthy as it appears. “Why the hell does it not feel better?” he asked. Part of the problem is that small companies cannot obtain financing, he said. While banks have record lending capacity, they are not making it available to companies that need it. Corporations are cutting expenses and jobs but not increasing revenues rapidly, Mr. Fuld added. All of this, he said, was exacerbating income inequality.“I know you don’t want to hear this from me, but the wealthy are getting wealthier, and again, the belly of America is getting hurt,” he said. “Look, I’m a hard-core capitalist. But let’s be fair — capitalism only works if it starts at the top and filters down. If it doesn’t get down, we’re going to lose.”Global instability also poses challenges to the United States economy, he said. The rise of the Islamic State, China’s aggressiveness in the South China Sea, Russia’s assertiveness beyond its own borders and Iran’s nuclear ambitions all made Mr. Fuld’s list of worries.“Taken together, they are fraying the fabric of our system,” he said. And once again, he pointed the finger at Washington, prompting the crowd to cheer: “Maybe that all gets changed with new leadership. I don’t want to get into that. We need new leadership.” Despite his best efforts, Mr. Fuld could not help discussing Lehman in passing remarks. He began by admiring the culture of the firm, noting that employees, whom he called “risk managers,” owned more than 30 percent of the $40 billion company.Mr. Fuld also quickly offered three data points that he suggested made it clear that Lehman could have survived, had the Fed not forced it to fail: “When Lehman was mandated into bankruptcy, we said our equity capital was $28 billion. Second, we had a Tier 1 capital ratio of 11 percent. Third, Lehman had unencumbered collateral of $127 billion.”“God, there’s so much I’d love to say,” he added. Then, gesturing to a dark drink in his hand, he said, “No, this is not Scotch or rum.”He then paraphrased the Rat Pack singer Dean Martin: “You know what, I feel sorry for all of you that don’t drink, ’cause when you wake up in the morning, that’s as good as you’re going to feel for the rest of the day. I told my children that for many years.”At times, Mr. Fuld displayed his trademark bombast. “There’s nothing graceful about me,” he said. “I thought it was time for me to raise my ugly head.”After his formal remarks, a moderator pressed Mr. Fuld to answer questions about the last days of Lehman.“It’s very easy to look back. As they said, hindsight is 20/20. There is no ‘if’ or ‘woulda coulda shoulda,’ ” he said. “You can only make a decision at any specific time with the best information that you think you have.”Going further, Mr. Fuld insisted that he could have saved the firm: “Lehman Brothers at the point of 2008 was not a bankrupt company.”Asked what he could have done differently, he avoided answering directly, and instead said, “I think I missed the violence of the market and how it spread from one asset class to the next. Did we do everything we could? Did we fall prey to some other agendas? I’ll leave it at that.”In the end, Mr. Fuld seemed hung up on the fate of his own firm, not the broader crisis that its bankruptcy helped ignite.“Please understand, not a day goes by when I don’t think about Lehman Brothers. Not a day,” he said. “I’d love to tell you I’m over it, it’s behind me. It doesn’t happen. But having said that, I do have to move on.”Mr. Fuld concluded with a rumination on the meaning of life.“My motto is, that was then, this is now,” he said. “Understanding the difference between reality and perception. Take smart risks without being reckless. Enjoy the ride.”Advertisement