
Breakingviews By                     
RICHARD BEALES

MAY 28, 2015
Avago Technologies is offering what might become a textbook merger case. In its $37 billion acquisition of rival chip maker Broadcom, Avago’s record, industry logic, cash-and-stock mix, premium of just less than 30 percent and synergies all add up. Only an interloper could spoil the party.It’s the biggest deal so far in a round of consolidation in a maturing industry. NXP Semiconductors and Freescale Semiconductor announced an essentially premium-free combination in March. Avago completed a $6.6 billion cash acquisition of the semiconductor and software firm LSI just a year ago. The Broadcom acquisition will create the industry’s third-largest player with more than $15 billion in annual sales, according to the companies, behind only Intel and Qualcomm.Avago is paying a premium of about 28 percent to Broadcom’s closing price on Tuesday. That’s about $8 billion in value. Synergies are estimated, apparently conservatively, at $750 million a year. With both Avago, which is based in Singapore, and Broadcom, which is based in California, sporting single-digit effective tax rates, those are worth more than $7 billion to shareholders on a rule-of-thumb multiple of 10 times.That almost covers the premium. Avago is also hedging its shareholders’ bet by paying half or more of the total price in stock. Jefferies analysts noted in a March research report that mergers and acquisitions has been good to semiconductor companies, with Avago’s LSI transaction a prominent example of an acquirer’s stock that performed strongly. Broadcom was also listed among companies that might become targets because of their relatively high costs.Though Avago will borrow an additional $9 billion to finance the deal, the combined company will not be as indebted as Avago was immediately after the LSI purchase, its executives said, trumpeting their ability to deleverage quickly after that transaction. Shareholders seemed to buy it, lifting Avago’s stock by nearly 10 percent and Broadcom’s by nearly 30 percent on Wednesday when news of an impending deal first surfaced.The enthusiasm for both stocks waned slightly after the deal was formally announced early Thursday along with details of the terms. The fact that Broadcom’s shares fell may suggest investors had expected a bigger premium. Though the company is a big bite for anyone, that leaves the door open just a crack.Richard Beales is assistant editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »