AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — Americans signed contracts to buy homes in April at the fastest pace in nearly nine years, evidence that steady job growth is strengthening the real estate market.The National Association of Realtors said on Thursday that its seasonally adjusted pending home sales index climbed 3.4 percent to 112.4 last month, for a fourth consecutive monthly gain. The index now is at its highest since May 2006.“The confidence has returned to housing, not only as shelter but as a good long-term investment,” said Ronald J. Peltier, chief executive of Berkshire Hathaway’s real estate affiliate, HomeServices of America.Also Thursday, the Labor Department said that more Americans sought unemployment benefits last week. The overall level remained low, though, with weekly applications increasing 7,000 to a seasonally adjusted 282,000.The four-week average, a less volatile measure, rose 5,000 to 271,500. The average had fallen to a 15-year low two weeks ago.Applications are a proxy for layoffs. They have remained below 300,000, a historically low number, for 12 weeks, pointing to a generally healthy job market.“We continue to get signs that the labor market remains resilient,” Derek Lindsey, an economist at BNP Paribas, wrote in a note to clients.The total number of people receiving benefits increased 11,000 to 2.22 million. That figure has fallen 16 percent in the past year, and represents roughly one-quarter of the total number of unemployed. Many of those out of work have used up all their benefits. Others, such as recent college graduates looking for work, are not eligible for unemployment aid.The upswing in home sales comes after a year of strong hiring, which has heightened demand to buy houses. Increased sales should help bolster the economy, but the surge could potentially destabilize the housing market, cautioned Mr. Peltier of HomeServices of America. Inventories remain low, causing home values to rise at a pace that is eclipsing wage growth.Signed contracts are a barometer of future purchases. A one- to two-month lag usually exists between a contract and a completed sale.Pending sales increased in the Northeast, Midwest and South, and barely edged up in the West. Greater demand has propelled sales growth this year after a lackluster 2014. Still, there is evidence that limited inventories are beginning to weigh on the market.Sales of existing homes fell slightly from March to April, to an annual rate of 5.04 million last month, the Realtors reported last week. The decrease may reflect complications in completing sales, in addition to the shortage of listings.The inventory of homes listed for sale has declined 0.9 percent over the past year, so would-be buyers have fewer choices and may face bidding wars.On average, existing homes sold in 39 days last month, versus 52 days in March and 62 days in February, the Realtors said.Nationwide, the median price of an existing home surged 8.9 percent over the past 12 months to $219,400.Advertisement