By JACK EWINGMAY 28, 2015
DRESDEN, Germany — Central bankers and chief finance officials of the world’s wealthiest democracies received a master class in economics Thursday, as they struggled to find ways to make their torpid economies grow faster.Meeting at a baroque palace here, high-ranking officials of the Group of 7 nations spent the morning hearing brief lectures from some of the world’s most prominent economists, including Robert J. Shiller, a Nobel laureate and professor at Yale, and Lawrence H. Summers, a professor at Harvard and former United States Treasury secretary.According to several people present, there was a consensus that governments should invest more in infrastructure like roads, airports and broadband Internet.There was also general agreement that countries needed to do more of what is called structural reform — a vague term that usually refers to measures that make it easier for companies to dismiss unwanted workers, or encourage companies to replace old factories with new, more productive ones.AdvertisementOfficials and others present spoke only on the condition of anonymity because the meetings were closed to reporters.AdvertisementThe presentations by outside economists were a new feature of the G-7 gathering and reflected concern about the weak growth that is a chronic problem, to varying degrees, in all the member countries.The usual remedies like rock-bottom official interest rates, are not working the way they used to. The officials, who included Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, and Jacob J. Lew, the United States Treasury secretary, were looking for new ideas.Greece was not mentioned during the official discussions, but was a major topic during coffee breaks, one participant said. Greece is struggling to meet conditions to receive further aid and avoid missing payments on its debt that are looming in coming months.Among officials of the three eurozone countries present — Germany, France and Italy — there is agreement that the onus is on the Greek government to present a realistic plan to overhaul its economy and control government spending, one official said.Mr. Shiller, who was awarded a Nobel in 2013 for his work on the behavior of asset prices, told the ministers and central bankers that there was already a stock market bubble and they should be thinking about unconventional ways to deal with it.In a telephone interview afterward, Mr. Shiller said that he told the officials that this bubble was different from others in recent history because it was driven by fear, and investors’ desperate search for a return, rather than exuberance.“Usually when you think of a bubble, people have extravagant hopes for the future,” Mr. Shiller said. “When bond yields are zero, no one can be having extravagant hopes for the future.”AdvertisementHe said that the Federal Reserve should consider raising interest rates, but also that policy makers should think beyond the usual remedies. For instance, he said, the government could offer bonds linked to the growth rate, which would reduce risk.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Shiller declined to comment on how the ministers and central bankers responded, saying he had been instructed not to.The seven economists included two other Harvard professors in addition to Mr. Summers: Kenneth Rogoff and Alberto Alesina. Mr. Rogoff spoke about the perils of making the wrong kind of investment, as when a country like Spain spends too much on housing.Mr. Alesina spoke about what factors drive growth. According to one person who was in the room, Mr. Alesina stressed the importance of good education and research and development, the elements of innovation and productivity.The finance ministers and central bankers were engaged pupils, asking pointed questions and taking notes, according to one person present.The officials also included Stanley Fischer, vice chairman of the Federal Reserve; Haruhiko Kuroda, governor of the Bank of Japan; and Christine Lagarde, managing director of the International Monetary Fund.The discussion was moderated by Wolfgang Schäuble, the German finance minister, and Jens Weidmann, the president of the Bundesbank, the German central bank.The members of the G-7 are Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the United States.The officials continued the discussion among themselves on Thursday afternoon. According to one person present, they agreed on the need for structural changes and that the time to put them into effect was now.There was also agreement among the ministers and central bankers that they did not need to be unduly worried about recent gyrations in financial markets, like a sudden decline in the price of German government bonds. The sharp price changes reflect a healthy correction, the official who was present said.AdvertisementMr. Summers advised the officials to invest more in infrastructure. With the exception of Japan, there is little sign that lawmakers in the G-7 countries are taking that advice, at least not yet.Although the German government organized the G-7 meeting this year, only one German economist was on the program, Martin Hellwig, director of one of the Max Planck institutes in Bonn. A person familiar with the selection process said that the German government organizers did not want to be seen as promoting a peculiarly German point of view.Mr. Hellwig is considered a nonconformist among German economists, who are often focused on budget discipline and fixated on inflation. He has argued for much stricter regulation of banks, including forcing them to rely much less on borrowed money than they do.The other speakers were Nouriel Roubini, an economist based in New York known for predicting the onset of the financial crisis; and Jaime Caruana, general manager of the Bank for International Settlements, a clearinghouse for central banks in Basel, Switzerland.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.