
Wheels By                     
AARON M. KESSLER

MAY 28, 2015
IN the rarefied world of ultraluxury cars, buyers can already own some of the most lavish vehicles on the planet.But these days, just owning a Rolls-Royce or a Bentley is not enough. Now, buyers are looking for even more exclusivity, and automakers are more than happy to serve them, offering custom-tailored cars and limited-production “special edition” sedans — especially to lucrative overseas markets — as owners try to distinguish themselves among the 1 percent.This month, for example, Rolls-Royce unveiled the Inspired by Fashion edition of its Wraith at an extravagant event in Lower Manhattan with models and fashion-industry insiders. The details are intended to satisfy even the most persnickety of buyers: leather door panels accented with welting and silk, a steering wheel stitched using an invisible seamless technique from English tailors, and headlights with the Rolls-Royce logo etched into them. The lacquering process for the wood on the dashboard alone took nine days.The nearly all-white Wraith, with black accents and a splash of color, will be available to a few dozen customers and built only upon request.AdvertisementA base model Wraith already costs $285,000, but the Fashion edition will set a jet-setter back by at least $350,000, depending on options.Advertisement“Our customers expect personalized luxury in every element of their life,” said Eric Shepherd, president of Rolls-Royce’s North American operations. “They expect that uniqueness and individuality. So we’re giving them the ability to have something that is theirs alone.”The car follows another custom version introduced last year, when designers looked to Hollywood to create a film-inspired version that oozed Hollywood glam.Ross Klein, of Palm Springs, Calif., said he was already considering buying one of the fashion-inspired Wraiths. Though the new coming Rolls-Royce convertible catches his eye as well.Mr. Klein, 52, who works in the hospitality industry, has bought several Rolls-Royce models over the years, and most recently he took the ultimate step: having a Ghost created especially for him, which the company calls “commissioning.”“Commissioning a Rolls is an experience like no other,” he said. “It’s like acquiring a piece of art.”The process takes several months, and Mr. Klein said he visited the factory in Goodwood, England, where the car was being built by hand, and met the people who were putting it together.“It’s like you get to meet the tailor of a spectacular suit,” he said. “It gives you an emotional connection and pride of ownership. Nobody has one like it, even though there are other Ghosts out there. It’s totally one of a kind.”AdvertisementRolls-Royce is hardly alone in pushing the limits of exclusivity. Other ultraluxury automakers are vying for top customers like Mr. Klein, finding ways to differentiate themselves and their vehicles in ways that give wealthy owners an experience that a Rockefeller or a Rothschild would have approved of.Karl Brauer, an analyst with Kelley Blue Book, said the economy had experienced something of a “two-pronged recovery,” with those at the top doing quite well while middle-income earners continue to struggle.That has led to ultraluxury cars surging in popularity among well-to-do buyers.“There are always plenty of wealthy people to go around,” Mr. Brauer said, adding, “What makes you feel special is special treatment, and access. If you can possess something others in your social circle can’t have, then that’s what stands out.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the recent Los Angeles Auto Show, Porsche unveiled a limited-edition version of its Panamera called the Exclusive Series. Only 100 of the 562-horsepower, hand-painted vehicles will be sold in the United States — for about $264,900. Each features a tag showing its limited production number. Seats and door panels are covered in handpicked leather skins described as “exceptionally soft.” And the color won’t be found in a box of Crayolas: Agatha Chestnut Brown.Maserati started a partnership last summer with the Italian fashion house Ermenegildo Zegna, which led to a limited-edition Quattroporte branded with the Zegna name. Production is limited to 100 cars, with prices starting at $175,000.Christian Gobber, president and chief executive of Maserati North America, called such custom vehicles “perfect for that connoisseur that is looking for the next level of luxury and custom fit and finish.” He said for Maserati’s 2016 model year Ghibli and Quattroporte sport sedans, which go on sale this fall, the company was working with Zegna again to create new “made to measure” interior packages.The interiors, he said, would offer distinct color combinations made from high-end Italian materials including Mulberry silk, styled by Zegna.“The Zegna touch brings an added sense of individuality for the discerning driver,” Mr. Gobber said, adding that the company strove to deliver a product that was “the absolute opposite of ordinary.”Even the relatively simple steps that Maserati has taken to specialize its cars have resonated with high-end customers, such as a Neiman Marcus-branded edition of its Ghibli model. The 100th Anniversary Neiman Marcus version sold for $95,000; only 100 were made.Advertisement“When you get down to it, something like the Neiman Marcus car is really just an extra treatment on top of an existing car, so it doesn’t cost the company much to make, but they can charge a big premium for the exclusivity,” Mr. Brauer said.In a nod to the booming market for luxury in certain overseas markets, ultraluxury brands are creating vehicles specifically for those regions. And they are using the same strategies to sell them: limiting production and enhancing the allure and uniqueness of the vehicles.Bentley built a special edition Mulsanne Majestic aimed solely at the Persian Gulf states of Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Only 15 cars have been made — five for each country — which feature interiors fit for royalty, with tablet computers for rear passengers and a champagne refrigerator.Aston Martin debuted a special limited edition set of vehicles only for the Chinese market in 2012, which was aptly called the Dragon 88 edition. Only 88 cars were offered to celebrate the Year of the Dragon, decked out with features that the automaker said would “celebrate the mystical qualities of the dragon symbol, synonymous with power, strength and good luck in Chinese folklore.”That included 24-karat gold badges, custom interior trims and three special paint colors intended to evoke traditional Chinese art. Parking on the street is at the owner’s risk.Mr. Shepherd, the Rolls-Royce executive, says ultraluxury brands know that the superrich are not just comparing their cars to other cars. They are shopping for things like yachts, private planes and vacation homes at the same time they are considering whether to add a $300,000-plus car to their garage.“They don’t look at us as transportation,” he said. “They look at us as an extension of their lifestyle.”An article on the Automobiles page on Friday about limited-production versions of luxury cars misstated the price of the Porsche Panamera Exclusive Series at its Los Angeles debut. The car is priced at about $264,000 in the United States — not $315,000, which is the dollar equivalent of its European price in euros.A version of this article appears in print on May 29, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: When an Off-the-Rack Rolls-Royce Just Won’t Do.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »