AdvertisementSupported byBook EntryBy Jonathan A. KneeThe crisis of “income inequality” has become a cause célèbre. Until recently, the gap between the rich and poor was a topic rarely championed aggressively even by the more liberal wing of the Democratic Party out of fear of being branded a tax-and-spender or class warmonger.Now, both declared and would-be Republican presidential contenders are trying to gain advantage over one another with the depth of their concern over how much of the pie is going to the very richest. “We’re facing right now a divided America,” the conservative Ted Cruz recently complained, “the top 1 percent earn a higher share of our national income than any year since 1928.” Even the 2012 Republican ticket bearers of former Gov. Mitt Romney and Representative Paul Ryan have felt obliged to get in on the act. Each has separately expressed disappointment that since the election, “the rich have gotten richer,” which has “exacerbated inequality.”The source of the sudden universal embrace of income inequality as “the defining issue of our time,” as former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida recently described it, is unclear. The unexpected success of the French economist Thomas Piketty’s 700-page 2013 tome, “Capital in the Twenty-First Century” was, at a minimum, an important accelerant.Even less clear is whether all those professing a commitment to greater income equality are actually talking about the same thing. Indeed, universal rhetorical consensus in the political realm is more than likely to mask fundamental disagreements that ensure continued finger-pointing and policy inertia.Into this charged environment steps Prof. Anthony B. Atkinson, the godfather of modern income inequality research, whom Mr. Piketty himself describes as the “model” for his initial graduate work on the subject. There is no one better placed to summarize what the research says about the what and why of income inequality and light a path forward. Unfortunately, Professor Atkinson’s new book, “Inequality: What Can Be Done,” papers over critical differences to preach largely to the converted.The most interesting part of “Inequality” is its review of the historic research. What quickly becomes clear is that definitions matter enormously. Are we concerned with inequality of income or wealth? Are individuals or households the relevant unit of measure? Should we really be concerned about the absolute level of poverty rather than the difference between the bottom and the top of the pyramid?Depending on how we answer each of these fundamental questions, the data leads to radically different conclusions. So, for instance, the drastic increase in the number of women in the work force over the decades after World War II ensured that overall household income inequality remained relatively stable even as wages of America’s top and bottom earners dispersed. Similarly, although inequality – as defined by a nonintuitive economic term called the Gini coefficient – has soared since the 1980s, the rate of poverty has remained relatively constant.Rather than fully explore the concept of income inequality, Professor Atkinson is too eager to dive quickly into his flurry of largely recycled policy proposals that take up the vast majority of “Inequality.” For instance, rather than examine closely the divergence between poverty rates and Gini coefficients, Professor Atkinson simply points out that more people live in poverty even with no increase in poverty rates because the population has increased. “Inequality” represents a squandered opportunity to establish common ground on which to build a genuine consensus regarding the real problems that need to be addressed. Instead, the book is an oddly Britain-focused policy polemic that fails to leverage Professor Atkinson’s special credibility in the domain (he is the centennial professor at the London School of Economics and a fellow of Nuffield College, Oxford).In the American context, the biggest difference in perspective on income inequality is between those who focus on difference in outcome and those who focus on difference in opportunity. Republicans like Jeb Bush usually speak of “the opportunity gap,” seeking to avoid association with the redistributive policies advocated by Professor Atkinson.If Republicans pursue this line aggressively, however, they are likely to discover that equalizing opportunity can be far more politically explosive than increasing taxes on the rich. The late Senator Ted Kennedy learned this the hard way when he tried to introduce legislation in 2003 that would have eliminated legacy preferences in higher education. Even the watered-down bill that eventually emerged — simply requiring universities to disclose the data — was swiftly killed.The intensity of focus on the problem of income inequality clearly reflects a public discomfort with where we have come to and where we are going. “Inequality” represents one of a half-dozen books dealing with the subject that Harvard University Press alone has published on the subject since it introduced the translation of Professor Piketty’s opus to the United States market last year. What is needed is for someone to translate that collective discomfort into a collective consensus of what really ails us. Until that happens, we are likely to see increasing rhetorical efforts by politicians of all parties to exploit our anxieties with little prospect that they will take constructive action to alleviate the underlying conditions.Jonathan A. Knee is professor of professional practice at Columbia Business School and a senior advisor at Evercore Partners.Advertisement