AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinA United States senator wants securities regulators to explain how a previously unknown investment firm was able to electronically submit an apparently bogus takeover bid for Avon Products with a top federal database for filing securities documents.Senator Charles E. Grassley, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, said in a letter sent on Wednesday to the Securities and Exchange Commission that the apparent false filing by a firm calling itself PTG Capital raises questions about the integrity of the Edgar database, which is used by more than 300,000 publicly traded companies, investment firms and individuals to file documents electronically.Mr. Grassley, an Iowa Republican, asked Mary Jo White, the S.E.C.’s chairwoman, to conduct a “review of standards for posting on Edgar” and asked her to respond to questions he had about steps the S.E.C. had taken to address the problem of false filings. He gave Ms. White until June 16 to submit a written response.A spokeswoman for the S.E.C., which is investigating the filing along with the F.B.I., was not immediately available for comment.On May 14, the day the bid from PTG Capital to buy Avon for $18.75 a share appeared on Edgar, the S.E.C. issued a statement that said “filers are responsible for the truthfulness of their filings, and they are subject to enforcement actions when they are false or misleading.” The agency noted the Edgar system receives about 4,000 filings each day, and they are automatically available to the investing public.Filers must obtain access codes to submit documents to Edgar, and the S.E.C.’s main procedure for verifying applications is requiring that the forms be signed and stamped by a notary public. Notaries, who are issued licenses in the states where they operate, typically charge $10 or less to vouch for the authenticity of a signature on a document.In his letter, Mr. Grassley noted that on at least one other occasion, “another apparently nonexistent investment firm made a buyout proposal” — that one involving a December 2012 takeover bid for the Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory in Colorado.“This pattern of fraudulent conduct is troubling, especially in light of the relative ease in which a fake posting can be made,” Mr. Grassley said in his letter.Bryan J. Merryman, the chief financial officer of Rocky Mountain Chocolate, said after the Avon incident that it was far too easy for a potential stock manipulator to gain access to Edgar. He said the false bid for Rocky Mountain Chocolate cost it time and money to investigate.A representative for the S.E.C.’s Office of Inspector General said an overall audit of the agency’s electronic systems, including the Edgar filing system, began about a month ago. The audit will take a comprehensive look at the agency’s databases and plans by the agency to modernize them.Advertisement