By REBECCA R. RUIZ and KATIE THOMASMAY 28, 2015
The pharmaceutical company Cephalon had a cash cow on its hands. In the United States alone, its prescription drug Provigil, which treats sleep disorders, generated over $475 million in sales in 2005 and almost double that in 2007. It made up about half of Cephalon’s business.When the company was faced with an expiring patent and the prospect of generic drug makers selling far cheaper versions of Provigil, it chose to buy off the competition, according to federal regulators.The Federal Trade Commission announced on Thursday that its seven-year lawsuit against Cephalon, now owned by Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, would be settled for $1.2 billion, the largest amount ever secured by the F.T.C. The deal resolves the commission’s charges that Cephalon had blocked four competitors from entering the market and limited consumer choice. The case had been set to reach federal court in Philadelphia next week.The announcement was the latest and most significant signal yet that the federal government, and the F.T.C. in particular, are focused on increasing competition in the pharmaceutical industry, with the aim of reducing health care costs. In a separate case that rose to the Supreme Court, the F.T.C. successfully argued that tactics like those employed by Cephalon could violate antitrust laws, and since then, it has made similar cases a priority.Advertisement“The F.T.C. has been very committed to putting a stop to these kinds of deals,” Edith Ramirez, the commission’s chairwoman, said in a news conference on Thursday. “There’s no question that pharmaceutical companies have gotten very creative in the way they try to get around the antitrust laws. We’re going to continue our fight.”AdvertisementAt issue in the case was an industry practice known as reverse-payment settlements. In this instance, Cephalon paid the generic manufacturers more than $300 million to agree not to begin selling their copycat versions until 2012, according to the F.T.C. Were it not for the deals with generic companies, the drug would have faced competition in 2006.In 2011, the year before a generic version of Provigil, which is used to treat excessive sleepiness, was available, domestic sales of the drug exceeded $1 billion, the agency said.“We are pleased to have reached an agreement with the government,” Denise Bradley, a spokeswoman for Teva, said in an email on Thursday. The two sides agreed to a consent decree, which does not require an admission of liability. Ms. Bradley said that was “the right path for our company, for the industry and for the patients we serve.”The $1.2 billion Teva agreed to pay will go toward reimbursing past buyers of Provigil — including wholesalers, pharmacies and insurers — which the F.T.C. said overpaid because of Cephalon’s conduct. In April, Teva reached a $512 million settlement over the same issue with drug purchasers and others that buy products directly from manufacturers; that amount is included in the $1.2 billion settlement, according to the F.T.C.Even when that earlier settlement is subtracted from the full $1.2 billion, the deal reached this week is six times bigger than the next-largest settlement in the commission’s history, which was reached in 2010 when Countrywide Financial agreed to pay $108 million during the mortgage crisis, the agency said.The five F.T.C. commissioners were unanimous in the vote to resolve the current lawsuit. Ms. Ramirez said that the agreement still needed court approval and that a payment timetable for Teva was not yet final.Michael A. Carrier, a professor at the Rutgers School of Law-Camden who specializes in antitrust and patent law, said Teva may have decided to settle after a judge ruled in April that the F.T.C. could seek disgorgement of Cephalon’s profits from Provigil between 2007 and 2012 if it prevailed in the trial that was scheduled to begin on Monday.AdvertisementHad the trial proceeded, Mr. Carrier said, “they could have been looking at billions.”Still, he said, the settlement amount would catch the attention of companies that engage in similar practices and would be a powerful deterrent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“A billion is a big figure,” he said. “That will wake people up.”The settlement was the first F.T.C. case to be resolved since the Supreme Court ruled in 2013  that the trade commission could sue pharmaceutical companies for potential antitrust violations in such cases. The commission and consumer groups have criticized reverse-payment agreements as anticompetitive because, they say, the deals artificially delay the entry of cheaper generics, hurting consumers. Sales of brand-name drugs typically fall sharply after generic alternatives enter the market.“The government wants more generics in the market, more quickly, in order to cut health care costs,” said Erik Gordon, a professor at the University of Michigan’s business and law schools who focuses on the pharmaceutical industry. “Anyone doing anything to slow the flow of generics should expect trouble.”Testifying before Congress in the weeks after the Supreme Court’s 2013 decision, Ms. Ramirez said the F.T.C. was empowered by the court’s ruling. She said the number of potentially anticompetitive agreements between name-brand and generic drug makers had ballooned, to 40 in 2012 from 28 in 2011 and none in 2004, according to antitrust agency records.In addition to the Cephalon case, the commission is litigating two similar reverse-payment settlement cases, one against AbbVie and Teva and the other against Actavis. Since 2013, the agency has also filed several briefs seeking to influence court decisions on related cases.David A. Balto, an antitrust lawyer and a former policy director at the F.T.C., said that Thursday’s announcement demonstrated how crucial antitrust enforcement was to controlling health care costs in America. “These agreements cost consumers billions every year in higher drug costs,” he said.Under the terms of the settlement, Teva is prohibited from engaging in similar reverse-payment agreements. Mr. Gordon noted that Teva, the world’s largest generic drug manufacturer, had a history of challenging other companies’ brand-name patents and being on the other side of the kind of dispute settled on Thursday.Before it bought Cephalon in 2012, Teva was one of the four generic drug makers — along with Ranbaxy Pharmaceuticals, Mylan Pharmaceuticals and Barr Laboratories — paid by Cephalon to keep their pills off the market until 2012, according to the F.T.C. complaint filed in 2008.“Anyone keeping the cost of health care high,” Mr. Gordon said, “has come under huge scrutiny.”A version of this article appears in print on May 29, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: F.T.C. Settles Suit With Drug Maker .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.