AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la Merced and Chad BrayWhen the chip maker Avago Technologies went public in 2009, it seemed like a modest player in the semiconductor industry with a market value of just $3.5 billion. But the company has long wanted to grow through deal-making, and it took its most ambitious step on Thursday.With its $37 billion takeover of Broadcom, whose chips are used in iPhones and other consumer devices, Avago will leap to the top ranks of semiconductor makers though still behind Intel and Qualcomm.The transaction, one of the biggest deals for a chip maker, illustrates the growth-by-acquisition strategy that Avago has followed since spinning out from its former corporate parent. It also highlights the broader wave of consolidation that has swept over the computer chip industry as manufacturers have sought to expand to keep pace with customers like Apple and Amazon.com.“We believe with this broader portfolio of products under one umbrella and common customer base, we can add a lot more value to be more relevant,” Hock Tan, Avago’s chief executive, told analysts Thursday on a conference call.In recent years, chip makers have turned to buying growth to cut costs, using mergers to combine sales forces and back-end operations. The bigger scale also allows them to stay attractive to customers who want to cut the number of suppliers for their products.In March, NXP Semiconductors paid nearly $12 billion for a rival, Freescale Semiconductor, to become a top supplier of chips for use in cars and Internet-enabled devices. Others like Qualcomm and Infineon have also made acquisitions.But Avago has been more open than most about using mergers as an engine for growth. Some analysts have compared the company, born as a component division of Hewlett-Packard, to Valeant Pharmaceuticals, a drug maker whose meteoric growth has been powered by serial acquisitions.Avago was originally a part of Agilent Technologies, the former semiconductor arm of HP. It was spun out in an initial public offering in 2009 by its owners at the time, the private equity firms Silver Lake and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts. Since Avago became a public company in 2009, its management team has pursued a half-dozen acquisitions. Aiding the company’s plan are several rare factors, including a roughly 5 percent tax rate that comes from being based in Singapore and ready access to low-cost debt financing.The first sign of the company’s consolidation ambitions was its $6.6 billion takeover of the LSI Corporation, a networking and storage chip manufacturer, in late 2013. Early this year, the company struck a $606 million takeover of Emulex.But Avago has had its eye on bigger game for some time. It had considered a potential bid for Freescale and other bigger deals before deciding upon Broadcom several months ago, people who had been briefed on the company’s deliberations but were not authorized to speak publicly said. Broadcom, which is based in Irvine, Calif., was founded in 1991 by Henry Samueli, a professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, and Henry Nicholas III, who left the company in 2003. Mr. Samueli, the owner of the Anaheim Ducks hockey team, is Broadcom’s chairman and chief technology officer.Its products include chips that are used in a variety of technologies, including smartphones and set-top boxes for satellite television. Broadcom posted revenue of $8.43 billion in 2014 and employs more than 10,000 people.The combined company, which will keep the Broadcom name, will have annual revenue of about $15 billion. Avago estimates its annual cost savings from the deal at $750 million.Under the terms of the deal, Broadcom shareholders may choose either $54.50 a share in cash, roughly 0.44 of a share of a newly created holding company that will own both businesses, or a combination of cash and stock. Over all, Avago plans to pay out about $17 billion and the equivalent of $20 billion worth of stock.Current Broadcom shareholders would own about 32 percent of the combined company.Though Broadcom shares fell 1.6 percent on Thursday, to $56.25, they remained above Avago’s offer price. Investors and analysts have speculated that another bidder may emerge.Yet the cash part of the deal values Broadcom at about four times last year’s earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, Bloomberg News calculated — significantly higher than in recent acquisitions of semiconductor companies.JPMorgan Chase, Evercore and the law firms Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom and Davis Polk & Wardwell advised Broadcom. Deutsche Bank, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Credit Suisse, Barclays, Citigroup and the law firm Latham & Watkins advised Avago, which has headquarters in San Jose, Calif., and Singapore.Advertisement