AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil Gough and Amie TsangHONG KONG — China’s sprawling manufacturing sector continued to shrink in September, data released on Thursday showed, despite strength in service industries.Yet some economists said that because of unprecedented government spending, monetary stimulus and a growing services sector, China’s economy as a whole might be more resilient than it seems at first glance.“All this talk about this impending crisis just seems so far off the mark, when you look at these indicators,” said Julian Evans-Pritchard, an economist following China at Capital Economics.Chinese and Hong Kong stock markets were closed on Thursday for a holiday, but other Asia markets were up. And that momentum carried over to European stocks, which opened strongly higher — despite new manufacturing data indicating only slow growth in the eurozone and signs of a potential slowdown in Britain. By mid-afternoon in Europe, though, stocks indexes were flat or only slight up for the day.For China, manufacturing output, as measured by the official purchasing managers index, was 49.8 in September, compared with a reading of 49.7 in August. The official nonmanufacturing survey result was 53.4, unchanged from August. The survey measures the change in conditions from the previous month; readings below 50 signal contraction.The results of another survey, compiled by Caixin, a Chinese financial news company, and Markit, an economic data provider, suggested a worse picture. The Caixin manufacturing purchasing managers index, also released on Thursday, was 47.2 in September, down slightly from 47.3 in August and the lowest reading since the depths of the global financial crisis in March 2009.China’s economic growth has been battered in recent months by a fall in housing construction. That has led to a huge surplus in materials like steel and cement, which has idled plants or caused them to operate at a loss.“The industry has reached a crucial stage in its structural transformation,” He Fan, the chief economist at the Caixin Insight Group, said in a news release accompanying the data. “Tepid demand is a main factor behind the oversupply of manufacturing and why it has not recovered.”At the same time, lackluster demand in crucial export markets in Asia and the West, and broader slumps in emerging markets like Brazil, Russia and Turkey, have weighed further on China’s economy.On Monday, official figures showed profits at China’s larger industrial companies fell 8.8 percent in August, compared with a year earlier, the biggest drop since the state statistics agency began releasing monthly data in 2011. Profit fell 22 percent at automakers and 72 percent at oil and natural gas companies.The statistics agency said that industrial profits had been reduced by China’s surprise decision on Aug. 11 to devalue its currency, the renminbi, by the most in nearly two decades.That could benefit exporters, making China’s goods relatively cheaper for overseas buyers. But it also makes imported materials more expensive for Chinese industries. The subindex for new export orders edged up 0.2 to 47.9, but activity was still shrinking over all.European manufacturers, which count on China as a big export market, are generally holding steady at low-level growth, according to the purchasing managers index published on Thursday by Markit. With some variations among the 19 eurozone countries, the overall index remained at 52 — still slightly in the growth range.But manufacturing activity in Britain, which has been Europe’s fastest-growing economy, dipped to a three-month low, according to Markit, registering a 51.5 reading for September, compared with 51.6 the previous month.In China’s case, although questions about the country’s economic data are not new, many economists now doubt that the country will be able to reach its official target for economic growth of 7 percent this year. Official data did, however, show that rate being achieved in the first six months of the year.Li-Gang Liu, the chief economist for greater China at the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group, said there were reasons to hope for a better outlook, especially if the government eased monetary policy again this year. Mr. Liu said he expected growth in gross domestic product to improve slightly toward the end of the year, despite the gloomy manufacturing data.“The authorities will definitely miss a 7 percent growth, but we may not miss that target by a great margin,” he said.Officials had hoped that consumer demand and the rise of a vibrant services sector would help offset the industrial slowdown and become the economy’s main engines of growth.Both purchasing managers index surveys released on Thursday showed that the services sector continued to expand in September, but that growth, too, faced pressures. The Caixin services purchasing managers index reading, released alongside official data, was 50.5, down from 51.5 in August and at a 14-month low.“If you look at manufacturing sectors associated with consumption and services, their profitability remains quite healthy,” Mr. Liu said.He pointed to profits in the food processing, education and recreation industries as evidence that services were strong, though not enough to counter the weakness in manufacturing.Mr. Evans-Pritchard agreed that the services figures were a sign of resilience in the economy.“People have been talking about the need to rebalance towards consumption. There’s a tendency to focus on industry data, but it is worth mentioning that those are no longer the key driver,” he said. “A lot of the growth is coming from consumption.”Markit’s eurozone purchasing managers index, also released on Thursday, showed manufacturing slowing its pace of expansion. The index for September was 52, below the 52.3 reading in August. It has been above 50 for more than two years.Advertisement