AdvertisementSupported byBy David BarbozaSHANGHAI — Kaisa Group, the troubled Chinese property developer, needs another lifeline.On Thursday, the only serious offer for the company evaporated, as Sunac China Holdings abandoned its proposed $1.2 billion takeover of Kaisa.Sunac agreed in February to pay about $580 million for a 49.3 percent stake in Kaisa, with plans to pay far more for a controlling stake. The caveat was that Kaisa had to restructure its finances with creditors and bondholders, something it has struggled to complete.In an announcement filed with the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, Sunac said it had decided to terminate the agreement because “certain conditions” it had set for the deal were unlikely to be met before a deadline to complete the transaction. It did not say what those conditions were.“For Kaisa, it’s really a case of whether they can find another white knight,” said Annisa Lee, an analyst in Hong Kong at Nomura International. “No one knows the company’s cash levels now, but they got drained. It may be difficult for them to operate without some help.”The deal’s collapse is the latest twist in the dramatic downfall early this year of the once high-flying Chinese property developers.Kaisa had been heavily backed by global investors, many of whom had purchased the company’s offshore bonds in Hong Kong. But shares in Kaisa have been suspended since March, and the company’s financial results have been delayed. In April, the company defaulted on its offshore bonds.Doubts about Sunac’s willingness to go ahead with the purchase began to emerge, analysts say, after the surprise return last month of Kaisa’s chairman and co-founder, Guo Yingcheng, who resigned late last year. In the weeks after he returned, Kaisa dismissed some Sunac employees who had been working at Kaisa’s offices, in a sign that Mr. Guo was reasserting his control over the company.Sunac, which is listed in Hong Kong, released no further comment Thursday about its decision. A representative at Kaisa, which is also listed in Hong Kong, could not be reached for comment.Excited by China’s property boom, wealthy investors poured money into the distressed property developer, Kaisa. Those who jumped in later have suffered.Not long after the Sunac announcement, Moody’s Investor Service downgraded its rating on some of Kaisa’s corporate and unsecured debt. The rating agency said that Kaisa continued to suffer from financial stress and that the termination of the deal would force Kaisa to refund a large prepayment that Sunac made in anticipation of the deal closing.Kaisa’s troubles began late last year when the Chinese authorities began blocking the sale of its properties in Shenzhen, where the company has its headquarters.Soon after, the company’s 50-year-old chairman, Mr. Guo — who also uses the name Kwok Yingshing in Hong Kong — resigned from Kaisa for health reasons facing speculation that the company’s troubles with the government may have been linked to a corruption investigation in southern China.In February, with Kaisa’s financial troubles mounting and a growing number of high-ranking executives departing, Sunac, a Tianjin-based property developer, stepped in.The company promised to revive Kaisa by acquiring the Guo family’s 49.3 percent stake. Under Hong Kong regulations, Sunac was also obliged to make an offer for a much larger, controlling stake in Kaisa, which would have raised its bid to nearly $1.2 billion.In doing so, Sunac seemed determined to get a foothold in southern China with a company that had earned robust profits developing land, mostly in Shenzhen, one of the country’s most affluent cities.After Sunac’s bid, Kaisa’s finances continued to deteriorate and the company’s advisers announced that the developer had far more debt than had been reported, about $10 billion.Sunac’s bid for Kaisa had hinged on whether the company could successfully restructure and refinance its debt. After Sunac’s chairman, Sun Hongbin, stepped in, Kaisa pressed creditors to accept a restructuring plan that would have cut the interest rates on the bonds and deferred payments, or risk getting just 2.4 cents on the dollar. That plan was quickly rejected.Since returning, though, Mr. Guo and his team at Kaisa have reopened negotiations with offshore creditors.Many analysts had been skeptical the Sunac deal would be completed, because it seemed likely the return of the co-founder signaled a decision to back away from selling the company.Advertisement