AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaLOS ANGELES — If Nikki Finke had not been a journalist, she says she could have been a detective. The police in New York, where she reported decades ago, used to show her “these gruesome homicide photos,” she said, to try to freak her out. Instead she found them fascinating. The memory came up on a recent day in Ms. Finke’s obsessively tidy apartment, overlooking a swath of the city from West Hollywood toward the airport. Her stomach for the unsavory side of the business was never in question as she built her reputation as perhaps the most feared reporter in Hollywood.With a combination of tenacity and intimidation, Ms. Finke generated scoop after scoop on the entertainment industry at Deadline, the website she started in 2006. Mention of her name still elicits a blend of terror and fascination from the coterie of agents, executives, stars and others who were her sworn enemies or closest allies, depending on the day. But now at 61, Ms. Finke finds herself facing a daunting new chapter in her career: a plan to leave journalism and write and publish fiction about the entertainment industry. She recently came to a lucrative legal settlement with Jay Penske, the owner of Variety and Women’s Wear Daily, who bought Deadline in 2009, only to clash with Ms. Finke, forcing a split. She is now barred from practicing journalism about the entertainment industry online for about a decade, according to a person with detailed knowledge of the settlement. Ms. Finke declined to discuss the settlement for fear of violating it. She has been a journalist for 40 years, she said, at Newsweek, the Los Angeles Times, New York Magazine and The New York Observer among other publications. Peter W. Kaplan, the legendary editor of the Observer, once told her three things she said had become “the words I live by:” 1. You’re best when angry; 2. Write what you really know; and 3. Tell the truth about Hollywood. She remains angry, though she says it is directed only at the use and abuse of power in Hollywood. Perhaps, she said, it is rooted in defiance of her old-fashioned family that once tried to bribe one of her editors to prevent her being assigned to Moscow. And the memories of some moments from her journalistic career can prompt tears. But she can no longer report on Hollywood for the Internet, the place she feels most at home, unless she finds a way to do so for Mr. Penske. She began her hiatus by going on a cruise, she said, taking in Spain and Portugal before crossing the Atlantic. She read 22 books while aboard. She attended to her health — she is a diabetic and said that she had burned out, working up to 22 hours a day. Not to mention dealing with the ire of executives and others whom she had targeted over the years with a blend of news and scathing personal attacks. She began contacting old friends, and old enemies, to invite them over for lunch — a fact, she said, that should dispel the myth that she is a recluse. She had a new portrait taken recently, despite a lifelong fear of photographs. She declined to be photographed for this article, supplying the portrait instead. She toyed with other positions in journalism, most notably the chance to move to Washington to write a column about politics. Jim VandeHei, the chief executive of Politico, said he had tried to hire her because she is “tenacious, fearless and vicious,” and “unafraid to rattle the rich and powerful.” But she did not relish the prospect of starting from scratch, has never really loved Washington and has decided that she cannot work for anyone else again. The idea she settled on, she said, is a website dedicated to fiction — short stories, novellas and excerpts — on the entertainment industry. It is called Hollywood Dementia, and she plans to charge $1 to $3 to read a story when it begins publishing this year.“There is a lot of truth in fiction,” she said. “There are things I am going to be able to say in fiction that I can’t say in journalism right now.” She said there was an appetite on both sides and cited creative people in Hollywood who have no forum to air their stories on the industry, for fear of losing work, and readers who ate up the sometimes salacious details revealed by the hacked Sony emails. She has begun writing stories for the site, though she declined to reveal details about them. She has also been contacting other writers and said she has gathered dozens of potential contributors. In Hollywood, said Patrick Goldstein, a former Los Angeles Times film industry columnist who has known Ms. Finke for decades, people are “scared of their own shadows.”“I would say that everyone is secretly full of trepidation about what Nikki’s new site will be like,” he said. “Will it be literary short stories, or will it be fiction as a thin disguise for the truth?” On a recent day, surrounded by paintings and photographs, some made by friends, and a library of books on Hollywood, Ms. Finke was an energetic presence. She asked what a reporter thought of her appearance (whether it matched the public perception) and expounded on topics ranging from marriage (“never again,” she said after being divorced in the 1980s) to movies (she grew up on Long Island and in New York City, watching mostly subtitled European films). She said she had been tempted to write a book on the craft of journalism, her way. It might include what she describes as a common technique — calling a source, telling him he is a bad person and demanding he justify, by providing fresh news, why he is not. Mr. Goldstein said Ms. Finke had significantly swayed entertainment reporting, for better and worse: It became more aggressive and rigorous, but also more vicious and relentless. “It’s fascinating to see that since she left Deadline, the trades have again by and large gone back to that same very respectful reporting, and that the hard edges have been buffed away.” Ms. Finke’s have not. Asked why she consistently used to describe an executive with a phallic expletive, she said she did so because he fit the description. “Most of my career I’ve talked to incredibly powerful, rich people,” she said. “How can I bully someone like that?”She learned from those she covered, she said. “I mean, they play rough. I have to play rough, too.”Advertisement