AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedElliott Management, the activist hedge fund run by Paul E.. Singer, has poached a top Citigroup executive to serve as its new chief operating officer, the firm announced in an internal memorandum on Friday.The new executive, Zion Shohet, will oversee functions like relationships with trading partners, finance and accounting and both physical and cybersecurity, according to the memo, which was reviewed by DealBook.The appointment is an infusion of new blood into Elliott, a roughly $25 billion firm that is known as one of the most prominent activist investors. The hedge fund has challenged both big companies like the EMC Corporation and, perhaps more famously, governments like that of Argentina.Mr. Shohet will sit on the firm’s management committee and report to Jon Pollock, one of the hedge fund’s two co-chief investment officers.He will replace Keith Horn, who announced his plans to leave in March after spending 12 years at the firm.Mr. Shohet was most recently the head of Citigroup’s global regulatory reform and implementation group, responsible for leading the bank’s responses to the shifting regulatory environment. He had previously served in roles like treasurer, a position he held during the financial crisis of 2008.A spokesman for Elliott declined to comment.Here’s the text of the memo:We are pleased to announce the appointment of Zion Shohet as Chief Operating Officer, effective July 13th, 2015. Zion will be responsible for Operations, Finance and Accounting, IT Infrastructure and Applications, Physical and Cyber Security, and counterparty relationships. He will serve on the management committee and report to Jon Pollock, Co‐Chief Investment Officer. Zion succeeds Keith Horn, who in March announced his intention to leave Elliott.Zion joins us from Citigroup, where he served as an Executive Vice President and Head of the Global Regulatory Reform and Implementation group, overseeing Citi’s firm‐wide response to financial regulatory reform. In his 14 years at Citi he held a number of senior positions including COO of the Institutional Clients Group, Treasurer (during the credit crisis), and Head of Strategy and M&A.Before joining Citi, Zion worked in venture capital, where he made investments in financial services companies, and for McKinsey & Company, where he advised institutional and retail financial clients on strategy, operations, and corporate finance. Earlier in his career, he worked for Oliver, Wyman and Company in retail banking and insurance.Zion received his JD from Harvard Law School and his BA in economics from Princeton University.Please join us in welcoming Zion to Elliott.Paul Singer and Jon PollockAdvertisement