
Breakingviews By                     
DANIEL INDIVIGLIO

MAY 29, 2015
The Securities and Exchange Commission will soon have two top vacancies, and a Wall Street pedigree would be a plus for new watchdogs. Nominees with financial industry ties might prompt gripes about the revolving door, but it pays to know how the market works.The Republican commissioner Daniel Gallagher and the Democratic commissioner Luis Aguilar are stepping down, and the White House has suggested Keir Gumbs and Philip Khinda as replacements. Both work at law firms that represent financial institutions.The activist group Credo Action urged President Obama to pick reformers rather than Wall Street defenders. It mentioned Commissioner Kara Stein, a former congressional staff member who helped write the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial overhaul. She also criticized the S.E.C. for waiving certain penalties for bank wrongdoing, like fixing foreign exchange rates.Ms. Stein champions transparency, clearer rules and other useful reforms. But there are good reasons to grant banks relief from technical rules that bar them from dealing in areas unrelated to their misbehavior. The point of waivers is protection, not punishment, and depriving investors of financial services is often counterproductive. That’s been the position of Mary Jo White, the S.E.C. chairwoman and a veteran Wall Street lawyer.AdvertisementThe regulator could use more commissioners who, like Ms. White, understand the practical consequences of overly aggressive enforcement. Aside from Ms. Stein, the only other one staying on is Michael Piwowar, an economist.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There’s little doubt that former financial honchos can be tough watchdogs: the former Commodity Futures Trading Commission chairman Gary Gensler served as Goldman Sachs’s co-head of finance; and the former S.E.C. enforcement chief Robert Kuzami set an agency record for filing the most cases in a year, and he still managed to land a partnership at the law firm Kirkland & Ellis.The revolving-door issue is real, however, because of conflicts of interest. For example, the S.E.C. is deadlocked on an accounting fraud case against Computer Sciences. It’s an indirect conflict, but Ms. White can’t cast the deciding vote because her husband’s law firm represents the company.AdvertisementThat’s still a small price to pay. The S.E.C. needs the idealism of a Kara Stein, but it could also use some market-wise commissioners.Daniel Indiviglio is Washington columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »