By BRETT COLEMAY 29, 2015
SYDNEY, Australia — In November 2013, John Locke and Nate Niparko, two members of the investment team at the American venture capital firm Accel Partners, got off a plane here and jumped in a taxi.They told the driver to take them to Erina, a sleepy coastal town 57 miles north. Erina was an unlikely home of one of the world’s most popular invoicing apps for small businesses, Invoice2go, created by Chris Strode, a 40-year old programmer with a passion for surfing.“I guess John and Nate wondered what they had wandered into when they arrived in Erina,” Mr. Strode recalled. “But they told me they are always on the lookout for companies getting traction organically.”Accel, which is based in Palo Alto, Calif., invested $25 million in Invoice2go last year along with another Silicon Valley investor, Ribbit Capital, which invested $10 million. Invoice2go has 200,000 customers, a chief executive from Accel, Greg Waldorf, plus a new office in Palo Alto with 28 employees, Mr. Strode said.AdvertisementAccel is not alone in its interest in Australia. United States venture capital firms invested $240.7 million in the country in the year that ended June 30, 2014, more than three times the amount invested by Australian firms in the same period, according to the Australian Private Equity and Venture Capital Association.AdvertisementFirms like Accel, Peter Thiel’s Valar Ventures, Insight Venture Partners, the hedge fund Matrix Capital Management and the private equity giant Carlyle Group are scouring investment opportunities in Australia and New Zealand, attracted by a familiar legal and regulatory environment and few competitors.“Entrepreneurship is alive and well outside Silicon Valley,” said Ryan Sweeney, a partner at Accel. “We pride ourselves on our hustle.”Over the last four years, Accel has invested about $200 million in six Australian and New Zealand companies: Atlassian, Xero, Campaign Monitor, Invoice2go, 99designs and OzForex.“For the Aussie company, Silicon Valley offers a network of expertise and business contacts that Australian venture capital firms just can’t compete with,” said Patrick Llewellyn, chief executive of 99designs, an online marketplace for crowdsourced graphic designs.Moreover, few venture capital firms in the country can write the kind of checks that their United States counterparts can. In 2010, Accel invested $60 million in Atlassian, a software company that other companies use to build their own software. Insight Venture Partners last year invested $250 million in Campaign Monitor, which makes software for email marketing.“Early stage capital is readily available in Australia, but if you’re looking for more than $5 million as an Australian start-up, you’re likely to look overseas,” said Tessa Court, the founder and chief executive of IntelligenceBank, a six-year-old business software company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The dearth of Australian venture capital money often means rich pickings for United States investors. By the time Australian start-ups are willing to take a call from Silicon Valley, the success of their business models has caught the attention of Sand Hill Road.Mr. Sweeney and another Accel partner, Rich Wong, flew to Sydney to have lunch with Atlassian’s co-founders, Scott Farquhar and Mike Cannon-Brookes, after the firm began to hear that its portfolio companies were using Atlassian software.AdvertisementInvoice2go had more than 100,000 customers and 25 employees, many commuting daily from Sydney, when Accel called on Mr. Strode.Xero, a New Zealand cloud accounting company, had a different approach to raising money from many other Australian and New Zealand start-ups. Xero’s chief executive, Rod Drury, raised $11.8 million through an initial public offering within nine months of starting it in July 2006.Mr. Drury has also been courted by hedge funds and venture capital firms as he has sought to finance the company’s global expansion. Xero has raised $373.2 million through the public markets and investments from individuals and venture capital firms like Valar Ventures and the hedge fund Matrix Capital.“Hedge funds are getting on the plane early to invest in promising start-ups,” Mr. Drury said. “Venture capital funds have moved to later-stage investing, seeking to get liquidity faster.”The reputations of Accel and Insight Ventures after their investments in some of the most successful Australian start-ups has helped in the pursuit of their next deals in the country.Mr. Farquhar of Atlassian introduced Accel and Insight Ventures to SafetyCulture, which runs a safety audit app that has been used more than 12 million times worldwide.Luke Anear started SafetyCulture in his garage in his hometown, Townsville, in Australia’s tropical northeast.“U.S. V.C.s are willing to meet people wherever they are as they know opportunities are coming out of garages around the world,” Mr. Anear said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.