AdvertisementSupported byBy Nelson D. SchwartzThe United States economy got off to an even weaker start this year than first thought, the government reported Friday, as economic activity contracted because of a more dismal trade performance and continued caution by businesses and consumers alike.The 0.7 percent annual rate of decline in economic output in the first quarter of 2015 was a reversal of the initial 0.2 percent advance for the period reported last month by the Commerce Department.Although statistical quirks and one-time factors like wintry weather in some parts of the country played a role, as did a work slowdown at West Coast ports, the lackluster report for January, February and March underscores the American economy’s continuing inability to generate much momentum.The pullback was the third time that economic activity had posted a quarterly contraction since the current recovery began in mid-2009, with declines in output in the first quarters of 2011 and 2014. Even acknowledging flaws in the way the government takes account of expected seasonal variations, that on-again, off-again pattern helps explain why annual growth rates in recent years have been well below the pace of gains recorded in the 1990s and mid-2000s.Much of the revision reported Friday was spurred by new data showing that exports fell more than first thought and imports rose higher. Economists at Goldman Sachs noted that the change in the trade balance shaved 1.9 percentage points off overall growth last quarter, the largest quarterly drag from net exports in three decades.Volatile even in the best of times, the trade balance is especially hard to gauge in the wake of a labor dispute and slowdown at West Coast  ports. Although the balance was negative in the first quarter, some experts like Ian Shepherdson of Pantheon Macroeconomics say a return to normal trade patterns could propel a healthy rebound in the second quarter.But he cautioned that the data remained in flux and warned that even his own estimate could end up being wide of the mark.“Anybody estimating gross domestic product for the second quarter is kidding themselves, because the trade data is so unpredictable at the moment, and we have no hard numbers yet,” Mr. Shepherdson said. “I’m guessing there will be a reversal in trade flows, and we’ll see 3 percent growth in the second quarter. But it could be anywhere between 1 percent and 5 percent.”Exports had been a particularly bright spot for the American economy in the first years of the recovery, as world trade rebounded from the plunge that followed the financial crisis in late 2008 and early 2009. Those gains have moderated more recently, and are likely to remain under pressure as the stronger dollar makes American goods more expensive for overseas buyers.Most experts had expected the data released on Friday to show a contraction in the first quarter, and virtually no mainstream economists are predicting that the economy is about to fall into a recession. Still, the weak start for the year is a crucial reason that the Federal Reserve has pulled back from any plans to raise short-term interest rates in June, with officials now suggesting that the first rate increase from near zero is not likely to come until September or even later this year.Although Wall Street and the Fed are already looking ahead to the June 5 report on employment gains in May and other more recent data, the rearview mirror take on economic activity discouraged buying on the stock market. At the end of trading on Friday, the Dow Jones industrial average, the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index and the Nasdaq were all off 0.6 percent. Bond yields also crept lower.After the economy grew at an annual rate of nearly 5 percent in the spring and summer of 2014, some experts concluded that the economy had found its footing and predicted that a healthier, sustained growth rate of near 3 percent was finally at hand.The new data for the first quarter of 2015, and signs of only a tepid rebound in the current quarter, are forcing some economists to rethink earlier assumptions.“This isn’t the off-to-the-races kind of expansion we envisioned six months ago,” said Scott Anderson, chief economist at Bank of the West in San Francisco. “More and more folks are coming around to the view that the long-term growth rate of the American economy is 2 percent, at best. We can’t sustain 3 or 4 percent growth for very long, so it’s two steps forward, one step back.”Although cloudy, the economic outlook is not particularly dark.Unemployment has been falling steadily, and experts think it could fall to about 5 percent by the end of the year, from 5.4 percent now. The jobless rate stood at 8 percent a little over two years ago.The real estate market has also been robust as of late, with a measure of pending home sales last month hitting a nine-year high, according to data released Thursday by the National Association of Realtors. New-home sales and construction were also strong in April.Indeed, an upward revision in residential construction last quarter offset some of the weakness elsewhere.Despite the windfall provided by lower gasoline prices, consumer spending, which accounts for roughly two-thirds of economic activity, was only modest. Personal consumption rose by 1.8 percent last quarter, down from 4.4 percent in late 2014.Experts say some of the weakness in the first quarter of the year reflects how the numbers are analyzed by government statisticians to account for seasonal variations, like the retail slowdown that follows the holiday shopping season or business activity that is lowered as temperatures plunge.That process, known as seasonal adjustment, may indeed have exaggerated the underlying weakness last quarter, according to an analysis by private economists at firms like Barclays and Macroeconomic Advisers, as well as at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.Whatever role that seasonal adjustments did play, however, Mr. Anderson cautioned against dismissing the first-quarter weakness as entirely a statistical quirk.“Some economists have been trying to explain away the negative numbers,” he said. “I don’t think it’s so easily dismissed. We will get a modest bounce back this quarter.”In particular, he said, the dollar’s surge against foreign currencies like the euro is hurting manufacturers and other exporters, a trend that is likely to continue even with the resolution of the West Coast port slowdown.Although Mr. Anderson expects the annual rate of growth to rebound to above 2 percent this quarter and to about 3 percent in the second half of 2015, that still leaves his estimate at 2.2 percent for the annual growth rate for the year. Last year, the economy grew at an annual rate of 2.4 percent.“There’s some truth to the statistical issues and the one-time factors, but we are still left with a real deceleration,” Mr. Anderson said. “Two percent is probably where the economy will gravitate longer term.”Advertisement