AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The Steris Corporation, a maker of medical equipment, said on Friday that it would fight a decision by the Federal Trade Commission to block its proposed takeover of Synergy Health, a British company that provides equipment sterilization services to businesses.The transaction was one of a series of so-called tax inversions announced last year, in which companies based in the United States sought to reincorporate overseas to lower their corporate tax rates. Steris had said it would reincorporate in Britain as part of the transaction, which was first announced in October.The United States Treasury Department introduced new rules last year to make it harder for companies that go through inversions to get access to overseas profits, leading some American companies to reconsider such deals.In a statement on Friday, the F.T.C. said it issued an administrative complaint claiming that the merger would violate antitrust laws by significantly reducing future competition in regional markets for equipment sterilization services using radiation. Both companies provide such sterilization services to businesses on a contract basis.The regulator said it would seek a temporary restraining order and preliminary injunction ahead of a trial before an administrative judge on the merits of its complaint. The administrative trial is set for October.Steris and Synergy Health said on Friday that they had been informed by the F.T.C. that the regulator would seek to block the transaction, but had yet to see a formal complaint or announcement from the regulator. They were obliged under British takeover rules to announce the development.“It is unfortunate that we have come to this point with a transaction as strategic and geographically complimentary as ours,” Walt M. Rosebrough, the president and chief executive of Steris, said in a news release. “We have worked diligently to address the F.T.C.’s concerns and to avoid litigation, but we will now focus our efforts on prevailing in court.”The companies said they would “welcome a full judicial review of the combination” and believed the transaction was “pro-competitive.” They said they were committed to completing the transaction “as expeditiously as possible.”Under the terms of the offer, Steris, which is based in Mentor, Ohio, offered to pay 19.50 pounds, or about $29.89, a share, in cash and stock for Synergy Health. The deal valued Synergy Health at about $1.9 billion at the time.Shares of Synergy Health declined 4.9 percent to £18.02 in late trading in London on Friday“We continue to maintain that the combination is firmly in the interests of all our and Steris’s stakeholders, notably including our respective customers,” Richard Steeves, the Synergy chief executive, said in a news release. “We are very disappointed by the F.T.C.’s decision to impede this transaction and intend to vigorously challenge their claims in court.”Synergy Health, based in Swindon, England, posted revenue of £380.5 million in its 2014 fiscal year. Steris reported a much heftier $1.62 billion in revenue that year.Synergy’s business includes providing sterilization services to hospitals, medical equipment makers and pharmaceutical companies. It also provides infection prevention services, such as fresh linens, hand sanitizers and cleaners for hard surfaces in a medical setting.Advertisement