By JOHN KOBLINMAY 29, 2015
Bob Schieffer tried to retire a decade ago. CBS asked him to stay. Mr. Schieffer tried again a few years later. CBS asked him to stay. Mr. Schieffer tried once more last year. CBS asked him ... well, you get the idea.Now, after several false starts, Mr. Schieffer, a 46-year veteran of CBS, is finally hanging it up. He has been host of the public affairs show “Face the Nation” for 24 years; Sunday morning’s edition will be his last. He promises this retirement will stick.“The interesting thing about my life — a lot of the recognition I got was after most people retired,” Mr. Schieffer said.In the 12 years since he turned 65, Mr. Schieffer moderated his first presidential debate (and then his second and third); wrote a best-selling memoir, “This Just In”; and led “Face the Nation” to its highest viewership since he took over as the host in 1991. He became a steady and familiar on-air presence while other prominent personalities came and went (Katie Couric, David Gregory), died (Tim Russert, Peter Jennings) or became mired in scandal (Brian Williams).AdvertisementMr. Schieffer does not have the same star power that many of his peers enjoy but the tumult of the news business over the past decade has given him room to thrive.Advertisement“I had a little at the end there,” Mr. Schieffer said in a telephone interview. “All of that happened when I was basically a senior citizen.”It wasn’t supposed to go this way. In 2003, Mr. Schieffer had bladder cancer diagnosed, and after it went into remission, he said that he was done broadcasting.“Ever since I got the bladder cancer, I look at everything as a temporary assignment,” he said in 2005, announcing that he planned to retire in early 2007. He then added: “I’ll be 70. That’s long enough.”He replaced Dan Rather as host of the “CBS Evening News” on an interim basis in 2005, an assignment that wound up lasting a year and a half after he received strong reviews and solid ratings.Then in 2007, he said he would retire before the inauguration of a new president. He was talked out of that decision, too, and was likewise persuaded to stay last year.Mr. Schieffer said CBS had been reluctant to let him leave over the years because succession plans were unclear. The network finally found his replacement in John Dickerson, the political director for CBS News, who will take over hosting duties for “Face the Nation” on June 7. Though Mr. Dickerson has little experience hosting a TV show, CBS executives say that his reporting background fits a network tradition. (Mr. Schieffer and Mr. Rather both began as reporters at CBS.)Mr. Schieffer has left Mr. Dickerson a strong platform. In the past few years, ratings have boomed for “Face the Nation.” It expanded to an hourlong show for most of the country in 2011, and though the ratings are not exactly comparable, the program’s first 30 minutes draw 3.4 million viewers a week, compared with 2.8 million for the hourlong editions of “Meet the Press” on NBC and “This Week” on ABC, according to data from Nielsen.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.(In the show’s second half-hour, which is shown in 76 percent of the country, the viewership falls to 1.9 million.)Advertisement“The audience for these shows is interested in the topics that Bob’s interested in,” said David Rhodes, the president of CBS News. “They are interested in someone with experience asking good questions with some authenticity. When people run into trouble in these jobs is when they start overthinking that and having too many focus groups and meetings and consultants in conference rooms. It’s not that complicated, you know? And Bob made it uncomplicated.”Tom Brokaw, the former NBC News anchor, said Mr. Schieffer’s low-key approach was part of his appeal. “He exuded that everyman quality, played it straight and knew what he was talking about,” Mr. Brokaw said. “It was no surprise to me that he did as well as he did. I think he was pleased to finally get that recognition. But it was not something that he ever wore on his sleeve. He was never somebody who went around kind of strutting that star stuff.”As Mr. Schieffer prepares to sign off, other networks are dealing with other issues. Mr. Williams has been sidelined since February after acknowledging that he had embellished an account about being on a helicopter that was shot down in Iraq in 2003. NBC is conducting an internal investigation into the matter.Two weeks ago, George Stephanopoulos, the host of “This Week” and “Good Morning America,” acknowledged having donated $75,000 to the Clinton Foundation over the past three years and subsequently apologized for what he described as an “uncharacteristic lapse.”Mr. Schieffer did not want to reflect on any of that. “I’ve just decided I’m not going to say anything about either one of those cases,” he said.Mr. Schieffer said that he remained cancer-free and that his health had played no role in his decision.“I have all these other diseases, diabetes and ulcerative colitis and all that — but they seem to be in remission and treatable,” he said. “As my doctor said, ‘For the shape you’re in, you’re in pretty good shape.’ ”Mr. Schieffer started his career as a reporter in the 1960s with The Fort Worth Star-Telegram, and joined CBS in 1969. He covered the Pentagon, Congress and the White House and became the network’s chief Washington correspondent in 1982. He has interviewed every sitting president since Richard M. Nixon. And as Mr. Schieffer reflected on entering the prime of his career at a very late hour, what he said had echoes of Woody Allen’s adage: 80 percent of success is showing up.“I wrote ‘This Just In,’ and after that I anchored the debate, in 2004, and I think a lot of people came to know me as a result of those two things,” he said. “I think that people just became familiar with me just because I had been there and others had come and gone.Advertisement“The other part,” he added in his Texas accent, “is I don’t think I changed very much. I always was what I was.”A version of this article appears in print on May 30, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Newsman at CBS for 46 Years Is Set to Sign Off.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.