By CHAD BRAYOCT. 21, 2015
LONDON —  Credit Suisse’s new chief executive began his overhaul of the giant Swiss bank on Wednesday, with plans to raise as much as $6.3 billion in new capital, shrink its investment bank and slash costs.The bank, which is based in Zurich and has large operations in New York and London, is betting on growth in Asia and other emerging markets, where it will build up its private banking and wealth management businesses. It also said that it would seek to publicly list part of its Swiss banking operations but that it would retain control of the business.The new chief, Tidjane Thiam, has inherited a bank that is facing steeper capital requirements by regulators and that has been criticized for not reducing the size of its investment bank operations as aggressively as some of its rivals, like UBS.Yet the change of course was not greeted with enthusiasm by investors on Wednesday. Shares of Credit Suisse slumped 3.6 percent in trading in Zurich.AdvertisementCredit Suisse reported a weaker-than-expected profit in the third quarter as uncertain market conditions weighed on its fixed-income and trading operations. The bank said third-quarter profit declined 24 percent, to 779 million Swiss francs, or about $816 million, from the quarter a year ago. Revenue fell 9 percent, to 5.99 billion francs.Advertisement“Our third-quarter results reinforce the need for a restructuring of the bank aimed at reducing the volatility of our earnings and better aligning the activities of our investment bank behind the needs of the clients of our private banking and wealth management division,” Mr. Thiam said in a statement.He said that Credit Suisse was in the process of “right-sizing” its investment bank as it looks to reduce capital used by that business.As part of its overhaul, Mr. Thiam said the bank planned to cut jobs in Britain, Switzerland and the United States, mostly through attrition. He said the bank also expected to make new hires as it expanded other operations.Mr. Thiam noted that Credit Suisse had more than 4,000 back-office positions in London, a high-cost location, and said as many as half of those jobs could be relocated to less costly offshore locations.Still, streamlining is not the sole focus.Kian Abouhossein, a banking analyst with JPMorgan Chase, said in a note that the objectives of Credit Suisse’s strategy shift were “very revenue-driven rather than cost-based (with some divisions to double revenues over three years).”As part of the changes, Credit Suisse said it planned to expand its universal bank in Switzerland and its private banking and wealth management arm in Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, Latin America and the Middle East.“Emerging markets, particularly in Asia, present us with great opportunities, and we will work hard to capture the wealth management opportunity in these economies that we are confident will become the largest proportion of the world economy over time,” Mr. Thiam said.In hopes of unlocking value in its Swiss banking unit, Credit Suisse plans a partial initial public offering of 20 to 30 percent of the business by the end of 2017.AdvertisementMr. Thiam called the unit undervalued and said that a public stock offering would clarify pricing of the business. It would also make it possible to acquire assets from smaller private banks in Switzerland, which are facing much higher compliance costs.The lender also said it would streamline and reorganize its structure, with three geographic divisions focused on its Swiss banking, Asia-Pacific and international wealth management operations. The investment bank is to be split into two divisions: global markets in one, and investment banking and capital markets in the other.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We want to be a leading private bank and wealth manager, with strong investment banking capabilities,” Mr. Thiam said in a briefing with journalists. “We need to stay good at investment banking to succeed with private banking.”Mr. Thiam, the former chief executive of the British insurer Prudential, took the top job at Credit Suisse on July 1, succeeding Brady W. Dougan, an American who had led the Swiss bank since before the financial crisis.The bank also announced management changes. Iqbal Khan will head the international wealth management business. Timothy P. O’Hara will run the new global markets division within the investment bank business, while James L. Amine will head the new investment banking and capital markets division.Mr. Khan will join the bank’s executive board as part of a shake-up that will include the appointment of six new members.Credit Suisse also expects to sell or close less profitable businesses.It announced on Tuesday that it would shift advisers and clients in its domestic private banking business in the United States to Wells Fargo early next year.On Wednesday, Credit Suisse said that business, as currently structured, was not positioned to be competitive “without significant investment or acquisition” and did not meet the bank’s “profitability criteria.”AdvertisementAfter the revamping, Credit Suisse expects to more than double its pretax income in the Asia-Pacific region by 2018 and to post pretax income gains in its international wealth management and Swiss bank divisions.Credit Suisse said it planned to raise up to 6.05 billion francs through two share offerings. The bank also said it planned to further reduce its costs by 3.5 billion francs by the end of 2018 and would invest about 1.5 billion francs from those savings to support growth in other parts of the bank.Moody’s Investors Service, the credit ratings agency, placed Credit Suisse’s long-term debt ratings under review for a possible downgrade after the announcement.“Moody’s believes that if the bank achieves the targets set out in the plan on a sustainable basis, the improved profitability and capital position would be positive for creditors,” the ratings agency said.“However, the likely drag on profitability the plan will cause over at least the next two years is a primary credit concern in the near term, and will be a focus of Moody’s review.”A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Credit Suisse Plans to Raise $6.3 Billion in New Capital .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.