
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
MAY 29, 2015
Are Fidelity Investments and the Vanguard Group, two of the nation’s largest mutual fund companies, the skunks at the proxy access party?That’s the question some investors are asking as they tally up the votes cast at this spring’s annual corporate meetings. On one important shareholder rights issue — the ability of stockholders to nominate corporate directors and challenge entrenched boards — Vanguard and Fidelity appear to be standing against investors who want to bring much-needed fresh air to the stale director selection process.For decades, shareholders have been shut out of any role in nominating directors. That’s been an insider’s game, and it has kept boardrooms clubby and unresponsive to investors.Some institutional investors, mostly large public pension funds, have tried to change this dynamic, pushing in recent years for what’s known as proxy access.AdvertisementScott M. Stringer, the New York City comptroller, who oversees five city pension funds with $160 billion in assets, is one of them. He has put forward proposals this year at 68 companies that would allow investors to nominate directors as long as they have held a stake of at least 3 percent for three years or more.AdvertisementAs of May 27, shareholders at 47 companies had voted on Mr. Stringer’s proposals; at 29 of them, a majority of the votes were cast in favor of shareholders being able to nominate directors.This is great progress, Mr. Stringer said in an interview on Thursday. “In a matter of months, the landscape has shifted dramatically in favor of greater accountability,” he said. “Because of this unprecedented coalition, proxy access is becoming the new normal.”These were so-called advisory votes, which means that the companies do not have to abide by their shareholders’ wishes. Still, boards often pay attention to these outcomes; seven of the companies targeted by the New York City pension funds have changed their bylaws to allow for shareholder nominations from investors holding 3 percent stakes. These companies include Abercrombie & Fitch, Big Lots, Staples, and United Therapeutics.According to vote tallies, investors overwhelmingly supported proxy access this year at Apache, Avon Products, FirstEnergy and Republic Services. Votes at Chevron, Duke Energy and eBay were a bit closer, but still represented big wins for shareholders.Among the votes that failed, many were squeakers. Exxon Mobil shareholders cast 49.4 percent of votes in favor of proxy access, while 49.79 percent of shares voted at Community Health Systems favored it.So who’s voting against these proposals?“There are a few major mutual funds that still aren’t with us and they are the reason we are not batting 1.000,” Mr. Stringer said. “I don’t understand what they are afraid of, but they are providing cover to resistant boards.”In many cases, the mutual fund companies Mr. Stringer is talking about are Fidelity and Vanguard.Fidelity, which oversees $2 trillion in global assets, generally votes against proxy access, a spokesman, Vincent Loporchio, confirmed. The fund company even opposes shareholder access when it is supported by a company’s management.AdvertisementThe company votes for incumbent and nominee directors “except where a director has failed to exercise reasonable judgment,” according to Fidelity’s policy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Vanguard, with $3 trillion in assets, is a little better. John Woerth, its spokesman, said the firm had supported nine of the roughly 60 proposals that have been voted on this year. Citing Vanguard policy that bars discussing specific votes, he declined to identify which proposals the company had supported.Mr. Woerth said Vanguard’s default position is to support proxy access in cases where longtime shareholders hold at least a 5 percent stake. But this puts Vanguard alongside many companies whose management also advocates that threshold. That’s problematic because few shareholders own stakes that large. A 5 percent threshold would bar nearly all investors, even those with a long-term and substantial commitment, from making director nominations.Lower thresholds open up the process, without imposing an excessive burden on companies. Investors in some European companies can nominate directors if they hold just a 1 percent stake for at least one year.And yet the opposition is there. Analyzing the recent votes on proxy access indicates that many of the 18 failed proposals to allow a 3 percent threshold would have won if Fidelity had supported them, according to calculations by the comptroller’s office. (It is impossible to know where a yes vote from Vanguard could have made a difference without knowing which proxy access votes it supported.)For example, at Chipotle Mexican Grill, the proxy access proposal won 49.86 percent of votes cast. With support from Fidelity’s 14.44 percent stake, the proposal would have sailed through.Ditto for Alexion Pharmaceuticals, where the proposal received support from 49.22 percent of votes cast. Fidelity’s 12.47 percent stake, if voting in support, would have meant a commanding win for shareholders.Peabody Energy is another example. Its shareholders cast 48.66 percent of votes in favor of the New York City pension funds’ proposal. Add Fidelity’s 10.17 percent stake to the tally and it would have been well into majority territory.Finally, Cabot Oil & Gas shareholders voted 45.26 percent of shares in favor of the pension funds’ proposal; if Fidelity had voted yes with its 7.07 percent stake, the proposal would have passed.AdvertisementInstitutions that vote against proxy access, some investors say, are preserving the status quo in corporate boardrooms, where there is little accountability on outsize executive pay, director diversity and other governance issues. And such a position is even more troubling when it is taken by an institution that has a fiduciary duty to do the right thing by its investors.“Serious investors ought to have access to the boardroom, and Vanguard and Fidelity ought to want it for their shareholders,” said Frederick E. Rowe, principal at Greenbrier Partners, a money management firm in Dallas.“Whose side are they on?” he asked. “The side of the entrenched management, or the side of the shareholders they are supposed to represent?”A version of this article appears in print on May 31, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Giants That Keep Insiders In .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »