
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
MAY 28, 2015
It’s not necessary to have all the answers, said Ms. Contreras-Sweet, head of the Small Business Administration. A leader’s job is to create an empowering environment where the best ideas can surface.This interview with Maria Contreras-Sweet, administrator of the United States Small Business Administration, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Tell me about the early years of your life.A. I was born in Guadalajara, Mexico. I always wanted to be a schoolteacher. I remember going on my grandmother’s roof and I’d organize the plants and talk to them and nurture them. When they produced a berry or little piece of fruit, that felt like my reward.And what about your parents?My father was over 30 years older than my mother. They had six children, but they didn’t have a cultural connection. My mother was from an immigrant family and my father was a business owner, and came from a more established family. That’s why my mother left and she traveled here to the United States with her six children.And how old were you when you came to the States?A. I was 5 years old. I still remember my first class, in first grade. My teacher thought that I was some unruly kid because she didn’t understand that I didn’t understand what she was saying. She would say, “Line up,” and I’d stay seated until I saw that everybody else was lining up and then I’d follow.AdvertisementIt was a really awkward time because it made me feel dumb and that I didn’t know anything. I was failing my tests. It was just a really difficult period. Because of that, I’m so much more sensitive now to people who come here to integrate and to learn about our society. You feel very different, particularly if you can’t communicate. Somehow you feel inferior to everybody else.But my first-grade teacher, Miss Tanaka, worked hard to help me learn English. She actually went to the principal to ask if she could teach second grade because she said that she saw promise in me and she wanted to be able to teach me into the next year. When I finally got to third grade, they said, “You know, she’s actually pretty bright.” And I was able to skip a grade. It just renewed my sense of confidence, my self-reliance. Once you learn any language — whether it’s English, or the language of medicine or the language of business — you can get in the game and win.It must have been hard for your mother to raise six children.She made enormous sacrifices. Call it chutzpah, moxie, or ganas in Spanish, but can you imagine what it took for her to leave a little community, after being married to a very established businessman, and settle into Los Angeles without any economic advantage? She was educated up to the third grade and she provided for us by working at a little poultry processing plant. I saw her fingers stiffen and her legs thicken, and some of those lessons really do inform me today.One of the things that I really appreciate about my mother and my grandmother is that they’ve always felt a sense of exceptionalism. Even today, my mother, who is now in her mid-80s, still has this sense of confidence, that “I matter,” when she enters a room. I think that’s important to instill in our young girls — that we matter, we deserve to be heard and we deserve to be treated equally.Are you the oldest of the six children?I’m No. 5. Everybody was one year older than the next until it came to me and then there was a three-year gap before I was born, and then there was a three-year gap after me. That did give me a little more space between my siblings and me. I have no idea if that changed me or affected me, but I always felt a little special. And when you feel special, you feel empowered.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And when you went to college, did you have an idea of what you wanted to do for a career?I had no sense of direction except that people always told me I was going to be a schoolteacher. I majored in public administration. Then I went to work for a local state assemblyman, who at the time was a key member of the State Assembly committee on education in California.AdvertisementDifferent companies would come in to express their interest in having us vote a certain way or represent them in some way. Some executives from Westinghouse came in because they wanted us to help them change a bill. After they got to know me, they said, “How do we get you to leave to come to Westinghouse?”They said that I could apply all the skills I had to the private sector. It was an important lesson because sometimes, as entrepreneurs or as women, we don’t understand the transferability of skills, that you can take the basic essence of management and apply it to a different set of industries. Once you have a basic set of skills that have applicability in different places, that gives you a sense of flexibility and a sense of freedom.What are the key qualities you look for in people you hire?When I’m building a team, I’m looking for people who are resourceful. That’s a very important quality. I need people who are flexible, and I really need people who are discreet. Sometimes you are in situations where you don’t know what the outcome might be, or maybe it’s a privileged conversation.I’ve learned that it’s really important to surround myself with people who are discreet, resourceful and flexible. Discreetness speaks to integrity. I need them to be flexible, because you never know what time of day you’re going to need them.What are some key interview questions for you?I really like to know what their relationship is with their family. I want to understand how well they work with other people. Because if they have strong relationships, it tells me that they already have the ability to go through highs and lows and work through problems. You really want to understand how that works.Sometimes I’ll ask, “If I could pick up the phone right now and call all of your peers at your office, what would they say to me about you?” And when they’re presented with the possibility that you might actually make those calls, they’re pretty candid and they share with you their challenges and their opportunities.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about the challenges of leading and managing. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice.A version of this article appears in print on May 31, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Taking Your Skills With You.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »