AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelSTAMFORD, Conn. — Thomas M. Rutledge declared victory last week when Charter Communications struck a $56.7 billion deal to acquire its much larger rival Time Warner Cable.From a corporate takeover standpoint, Charter had publicly battled for control of Time Warner Cable for the last two years. For Mr. Rutledge, Charter’s chief executive, it was the conclusion of a personal quest that goes back more than a decade.A cable industry veteran, Mr. Rutledge had been passed over for the chief executive job at Time Warner Cable in 2001. Years later, Mr. Rutledge tried to orchestrate an acquisition of Time Warner Cable when he was working as chief operating officer of Cablevision, the New York cable company.While talks between the two companies ultimately fell apart, a transaction was “seriously contemplated,” Mr. Rutledge said during an interview last week at Charter’s headquarters here.“People think that idea came to me from other people,” Mr. Rutledge said about the latest deal, alluding to news articles about the behind-the-scenes influence of John C. Malone, the billionaire media executive who is the primary backer of Charter. “But it is actually something that I have been pursuing for a long time.”Mr. Rutledge now appears to have captured his prize and stands to become one of the most powerful people in the Internet and television industries.Pending regulatory approval, the proposed merger — along with Charter’s $10.4 billion acquisition of Bright House Networks — will create the second-largest cable operator in the country, with 24 million customers in 41 states. The company would have more than 100,000 employees and control close to 30 percent of the country’s high-speed Internet market and account for 17 percent of video customers.“With this deal, he is ready to step in and be one of the real leaders,” said Jerald L. Kent, chief executive of Suddenlink, the cable operator that recently sold a controlling stake to Altice, the European telecommunications company.Mr. Rutledge, 61, has kept a relatively low profile outside the cable industry and rarely agrees to interviews. He has a reputation for being one of the best operators in the industry, a family man and a history and trivia buff, but at Charter he has mostly been overshadowed by Mr. Malone’s outsize reputation.“Why would anybody want to have a high profile?” Mr. Rutledge asked. “I don’t know what the advantage of it would be. I am trying to build a great company.”Nearly four decades ago, Mr. Rutledge helped construct a cable system from the ground up. He had been hitchhiking with a friend across Europe and the Middle East after graduating from high school in the 1970s when his father fell ill. He returned home to Pittsburgh and found an hourly job through one of his father’s friends at a small start-up cable company called Eastern Telecom.His position involved assembling devices on the ground and tossing them into the air to technicians, who were hanging from poles by belts and hooks. Soon, Mr. Rutledge was promoted and he, too, worked as a pole climber.That experience and technical understanding have been instrumental to Mr. Rutledge’s knowing exactly what it takes to lose and gain customers, industry executives said.“It is a single machine that is on 800,000 miles of roads, all interconnected, operating seamlessly so that you can deliver products anywhere and everywhere in digital form,” Mr. Rutledge said of cable service. “If you understand how it all works, which I do because I have actually built most of it, it is pretty fascinating.”After graduating from college in 1977, he took a job as manager trainee at American Television and Communications, which later became Time Warner Cable. Mr. Rutledge soon took on a position running decentralized operations across the country, moving his family seven times, working in the suburbs of Pittsburgh, Portland, Me., Albany and Austin, Tex.At the time, Mr. Rutledge said, the cable industry had an energy similar to that of Silicon Valley today, the feeling of building something revolutionary. “It was the place to be,” he said. “It was very cool. It is still cool.”Mr. Rutledge expected to take on a major operating role in the company. But after AOL acquired Time Warner in 2001 to form AOL Time Warner, Mr. Rutledge was passed over for the chief executive job at Time Warner Cable and left the company. “I just thought I would be miserable,” he said. “They didn’t believe in the vision of the industry the way I thought it should be.”That vision, he believed, did not involve owning networks like AOL but instead transforming the pipes that deliver entertainment and information for the digital age.Mr. Rutledge eventually landed at Cablevision, which is controlled by the Dolan family. He helped lead the company through a period of success and the development of a series of innovations, including the introduction of triple-play bundling, in which subscribers receive a discount for purchasing multiple services including cable television, phone and Internet. The company faced challenges and lost subscribers after Mr. Rutledge left, but analysts said that it is not clear whether he was to blame.“The open question has always been: Why did Cablevision end the way it did under his watch?” said Rich Greenfield, a media analyst at BTIG Research, adding that the company struggled in the face of stronger competition from Verizon.Cablevision declined to make an executive available for comment for this article.During his tenure at Cablevision, Mr. Rutledge met Mr. Malone, a larger-than-life figure who was one of the industry’s pioneers. Mr. Malone tried to recruit Mr. Rutledge to run DirecTV, the satellite operator he controlled at the time.Mr. Rutledge was not interested, but agreed to meet Mr. Malone for a dinner at the University Club in New York.“I thought the idea of sitting in a room and telling him why I didn’t want to go to DirecTV would be fascinating,” Mr. Rutledge said. “He is a frictionless thinker. By the end of the conversation, we were talking about how great cable is.”(Mr. Malone was not available for an interview, according to a spokesman.)The two executives talked occasionally over the next several years, but the fateful call came in February 2013 when Mr. Rutledge was on vacation in St. Barts.By that time, Mr. Rutledge had taken the reins at Charter, and the company had recently announced a $1.62 billion deal to acquire Cablevision’s Bresnan Broadband Holdings for systems in Colorado, Montana, Wyoming and Utah.Mr. Malone was curious about Mr. Rutledge’s strategy, and Mr. Rutledge laid it out for him: that consolidating the industry would allow cable companies to invest more in technology and deliver a better product to customers. “The vision has not changed at all,” Mr. Rutledge said.In 2013 Mr. Malone’s Liberty Media purchased a 27 percent stake in Charter; the tie-up combined Mr. Rutledge’s operational experiences with Mr. Malone’s financial skills and gave the company more firepower to pursue the industry’s crown jewel: Time Warner Cable. “The truth is boring,” said Eric L. Zinterhofer, chairman of Charter’s board. “The truth is that it is never one person in any of these things.”That set up a bitter, hostile takeover attempt by Charter for Time Warner Cable, which was thwarted when Comcast emerged with a $45.2 billion bid for the company 15 months ago.Mr. Rutledge, while disappointed, quickly changed strategy. Charter began negotiating for the subscribers Comcast would have to divest to appease regulators.“I describe him as very workmanlike and even-keeled,” Mr. Zinterhofer said. “He is focused on what he can control.”When Comcast’s takeover bid collapsed, Mr. Rutledge reassembled Charter’s deal team and started plotting a new strategy. The hunt for Time Warner Cable was back on.Mr. Rutledge worked on the deal over Memorial Day weekend from his home office in Greenwich, Conn., while one of his grandchildren played under his desk.It is certain that the deal will face stiff scrutiny from regulators, and Mr. Rutledge is taking on much of the lobbying effort himself. In fact, he called Federal Communications Commission officials last Monday, the day before the deal was announced, after watching a grandchild in a Memorial Day parade. “I thought about what I was going to say during the parade,” he said.Mr. Rutledge said it was gratifying to see his vision for the industry come together with Charter’s bid for Time Warner Cable. "Its future is better than its past," he said.Advertisement