AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.00 percent. The six-month rate was 0.06 percent, and the four-week rate was 0.01 percent. The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYArlington County, Va., $95.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Florida Board of Governors, $60.2 million of Florida State University revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $527.6 million of debt securities. Competitive.TUESDAYBroward County, Fla., School District, $158.9 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.East Bay Municipal Utility District, Calif., $181.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.New York, $300 million of taxable general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYMaryland Department of Transportation, $487.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAlameda, Calif., Unified School District, $93.5 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Berkley School District, Mich., $58.9 million of debt securities. Stifel Nicolaus. California Municipal Finance Authority, $162 million of medical center debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.California Municipal Finance Authority, $60 million of University of the Pacific debt securities. George K. Baum. Charlotte, N.C., $52 million of refinancing certificates of participation. Bank of America. Chicago, $111.7 million of sales tax revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Clark County, Nev., $162 million of airport system revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Community Health Network, Ind., $202.1 million of taxable debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.District of Columbia, $534 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. Douglas County, Neb., Hospital Authority, $228.9 million of health facilities refinancing revenue bonds. Cain Brothers. Duncanville, Tex., Independent School District, $88 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Dutchess County Local Development Corporation, N.Y., $90 million of Marist College project revenue bonds. Barclays Capital. Eastern Municipal Water District, Calif., $71 million of water and wastewater revenue bonds. Bank of America.Escondido Union School District, Calif., $62 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. William Blair.Franklin County, Ohio, $281.6 million of hospital facilities revenue bonds. Barclays Capital. Harris County, Tex., $75 million of medical facilities mortgage revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Leander, Tex., Independent School District, $300 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. William Blair.Lower Colorado River Authority, $231 million of transmission contract refinancing revenue bonds. Bank of America. Moon County, Pa., Industrial Development Authority, $137.1 million of revenue refinancing bonds. BB&T Capital Markets. New York City Cultural Resources Trust, $50.2 million of refinancing revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.New York City, $50 million of general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. New York City, $616.8 million of general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York Dormitory Authority, $620 billion of North Shore Long Island Jewish Health System bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York State Housing Finance Agency, $59.8 million of affordable housing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. Oregon, $115 million of general obligation higher education bonds. Citigroup Global Market.Successor Agency to the Poway Redevelopment Agency, Calif., $134 million of refinancing tax allocation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Raleigh-Durham Airport Authority, N.C., $82.1 million of airport revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital. San Bernardino County, Calif., $90 million of debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities. Sunnyvale, Calif., School District, $117 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Texas Public Finance Authority, $55.4 million of Midwestern State University revenue and refinancing bonds. BOSC. Advertisement