By THE NEW YORK TIMESMAY 31, 2015
On Monday at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department reports on personal income and consumption growth in April. Economists estimate that consumption spending rose 0.2 percent, while personal income rose 0.3 percent. Despite the big fall in energy prices over the last year, consumers have been cautious about spending, one reason that experts think consumption in April was muted.In a separate report on Monday, the private Institute for Supply Management’s manufacturing index reading for May is expected to show little change from April, with the strong dollar hurting manufacturers that sell overseas. —Nelson D. SchwartzDavid Rainey, a former BP executive, goes on trial Monday in a New Orleans federal court on charges of making false statements to congressional investigators in which he played down the rate of oil flowing from the well after the Deepwater Horizon oil rig exploded and sank in the Gulf of Mexico in April 2010.According to prosecutors, Mr. Rainey, who was BP’s vice president for exploration in the Gulf of Mexico, falsely claimed in statements that the leaky Macondo well was releasing oil at a flow rate of only about 5,000 barrels a day and deliberately left out documents that contradicted that figure. —Clifford KraussAdvertisementThe European Central Bank holds a monetary policy meeting in Frankfurt on Wednesday, followed by a news conference with Mario Draghi, the central bank’s president. Analysts expect Mr. Draghi to reinforce the E.C.B.’s determination to maintain its stimulus of the eurozone economy at least until September 2016. Mr. Draghi will also be questioned closely about Greece and the central bank’s willingness to continue extending emergency credit to Greek commercial banks suffering from an outflow of deposits. —Jack EwingAdvertisementThe battle over President Obama’s ambitious trade agenda moves to the House this week, where only 17 of 188 Democrats have come out in favor of the bill. Republicans generally support a trade deal, but many of the most conservative Republicans do not want to give Mr. Obama anything. The legislation would be the first to grant a president trade promotion authority since 2002.The Bank of England holds a monetary policy meeting on Thursday. Analysts expect the central bank to leave its benchmark interest rate at 0.5 percent. Although growth is strong, there is little sign of inflation, giving the Bank of England space to keep rates low to encourage borrowing and compensate for spending cuts that the re-elected conservative government is expected to make. —Jack EwingOn Friday at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department will report the latest data on hiring and the unemployment rate for May. Wall Street economists are looking for a gain of nearly 230,000 in payrolls, although some experts think the number could be higher because data on weekly initial jobless claims have signaled stronger hiring lately.On the other hand, new figures on Friday showed that the economy shrank in the first quarter. So investors will be watching closely to see if the economy gained steam in May or remains in the doldrums. The unemployment rate is expected to remain unchanged at 5.4 percent. —Nelson D. SchwartzOfficials of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries are scheduled to meet in Vienna on Friday. Analysts do not expect the 12-member group to change its target for production of 30 million barrels a day. OPEC, led by Saudi Arabia, decided in November not to cut output to try to bolster falling prices.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The new strategy is intended to preserve OPEC’s roughly 30 percent share of the global oil market and to force higher-cost producers like the Canadian tar sands projects and some shale oil drillers in the United States to cut their output. —Stanley ReedGreece, which has been locked in tough negotiations with its international creditors, faces a critical debt repayment to the International Monetary Fund on Friday. The country’s dwindling finances have fueled fears that it may default on its huge debt burden over the summer. Top eurozone and I.M.F. officials have indicated that a Greek exit from the single currency bloc cannot be ruled out, as speculation mounts about the global repercussions of such a development.The Greek authorities have given mixed messages about whether they will be able to pay the sum of 300 million euros, or $330 million, on Friday — the first of some €1.5 billion in repayments due to the I.M.F. in June. Even if it meets its June commitments, Greece will be unable to repay €6.7 billion owed to the European Central Bank in July and August without additional bailout funding. The country’s lenders have said Greece must commit to economic reforms to secure further loans. But the government, which was elected in January on a pledge to roll back years of austerity, is reluctant to impose further cutbacks. —Niki KitsantonisA version of this article appears in print on June 1, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.