
JUNE 2, 2015

Related Article
Two years after the investor William A. Ackman made a billion-dollar bet that Herbalife, a nutritional supplements company, was a “pyramid scheme,” the  company is responding with its own no-holds-barred appeal to the government. Both sides are spending tens of millions of dollars shaping the public narrative and federal investigations.Meetings With Lawmakers, F.B.I., S.E.C. and Federal ProsecutorsMr. Ackman has hired lobbyists, public affairs groups and so-called grassroots advocacy teams to build support for his ant-Herbalife cause and to attract the attention of lawmakers, including Senator Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, when Mr. Markey was a member of the House. In January 2014, months after his staff met with Mr. Ackman, Mr. Markey wrote letters to the F.T.C., the S.E.C. and Herbalife. Soon after, the F.T.C. said it had opened an investigation into Herbalife.
From a letter from Senator Markey to the F.T.C.: 
Herbalife has rallied members of Congress to scrutinize Mr. Ackman. The company also donated $40,000 to Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, a nonprofit group that has called on lawmakers to investigate Mr. Ackman. After receiving a call from a reporter, the group pledged to refund the $40,000 to avoid the “appearance of a conflict.” The incident echoed the decision by the League of United Latin American Citizens to return a $10,000 donation from Mr. Ackman after it was disclosed in the New York Times last year.
From a letter to members of Congress:
Herbalife’s Stock Rose as Ackman Railed Against CompanyMr. Ackman offered a marathon critique of Herbalife last year, comparing Herbalife’s sales practices and tactics to those of Enron, the mafia, drug dealers and even Nazis.
At one point, he appeared to choke up as he addressed Herbalife’s chief executive, Michael O. Johnson. “I’m a huge beneficiary of this country,” Mr. Ackman said. “Michael Johnson is a predator. This is a criminal enterprise. I hope you’re listening, Michael. It’s time to shut this company down.”
John DeSimone, the chief financial officer of Herbalife, went on CNBC to say that the Mr. Ackman was missing the real analysis of the nutrition supplement company.The company issued a statement to add: “Once again, Bill Ackman has overpromised and underdelivered on his $1 billion bet against our company. After spending $50 million, two years and tens of thousands of man-hours, Bill Ackman further demonstrated today that the facts are on our side.”
Websites Present the ‘Truth’ Behind the Matter This site from Herbalife, which went online on Monday, goes to great pains to point out Mr. Ackman’s investment mistakes.Therealbillackman.com  »This site, backed by Mr. Ackman’s Pershing Square fund, features what it calls victims of Herbalife’s harmful promises.Factsaboutherbalife.com »
Drawing the Government’s AttentionTo draw the government’s attention, Mr. Ackman has employed a handful of law firms and the Global Strategy Group, a public affairs firm that organized rallies and conducted opposition research on Herbalife.Herbalife has held four rallies so far this year for its distributors in cities from Los Angeles to New York. The company says it has many more planned. 
At an event held by the Sohn Conference Foundation in Manhattan, William Ackman of Pershing Square kicked off a three-hour presentation arguing that Herbalife’s retail sales were far less than it claimed.AdvertisementAt an event held by the Sohn Conference Foundation in Manhattan, William Ackman of Pershing Square kicked off a three-hour presentation arguing that Herbalife’s retail sales were far less than it claimed.