By PETER EAVISJUNE 1, 2015
Consumer advocates often bemoan Washington’s revolving door between government and industry, but one group is taking a page out of that playbook to make a seemingly counterintuitive hire.Better Markets, which fights for more restrictions on Wall Street, is hiring a senior lawyer, Frank Medina, from the House Financial Services Committee. The committee’s chairman is Jeb Hensarling, Republican of Texas, who is an unsparing critic of the Dodd-Frank law, the sweeping legislation that Congress passed in 2010 to overhaul the financial system.Mr. Medina was the committee’s deputy chief counsel. He had previously worked at the Securities and Exchange Commission and Citigroup.At Better Markets, Mr. Medina, 48, will take on the roles of senior counsel and director of research and will help formulate and support the group’s positions and policies. “This is a group that enjoys a reputation for being incredibly active in fighting for better regulation,” Mr. Medina said in an interview.AdvertisementUnder the group’s president, Dennis Kelleher, Betters Markets has become one of the most outspoken proponents of tougher financial regulation.AdvertisementEven though it has complained about the outsize influence of banks on government policy, Better Markets has never shied away from hiring people with Wall Street experience.The group, which describes itself as a nonprofit, nonpartisan “public’s voice in the fight to reform,” was founded by Michael Masters, a managing member of a hedge fund, Masters Capital Management. And Mr. Kelleher was a litigator at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, a top Wall Street law firm.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Republicans are often the fiercest critics of Dodd-Frank, asserting that it places a heavy regulatory burden on banks without necessarily making them smaller or safer. Mr. Hensarling, for instance, said last year that “Dodd-Frank has been the wrong remedy, adding incomprehensible complexity to incomprehensible complexity.”Even so, Mr. Medina said that there was common ground between Republicans and Democrats on important regulatory issues. He pointed to the concern that some banks are regarded as “too big to fail” — or so large that the government would need to bail them out in a crisis to stop their collapse hurting the wider economy. Mr. Medina said that he didn’t think that new regulations have ended the too-big-to-fail” threat. “That’s one of the things that’s unified Democrats and Republicans,” he said.Mr. Medina, who grew up in Kansas City, worked as a lawyer at Citigroup from 2001 until 2005. After a short stint at the S.E.C., he joined the House committee in October 2007, just as cracks were appearing in the financial system.His shift to the nonprofit sector comes at a time when Republicans have introduced legislation that aims to change provisions of Dodd-Frank — an effort that has been criticized by groups like Better Markets.“I don’t think anybody is entirely happy with the act,” Mr. Medina said. “I am here at Better Markets to participate in that dialogue.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.