By MICHAEL CORKERYJUNE 1, 2015
Handing banks a victory, the Supreme Court ruled that financially struggling homeowners who file for bankruptcy may not expect to have their second mortgage loans canceled, even if they owe more on their homes than the properties are worth.In a unanimous decision on Monday, the court determined that second mortgages may not be “stripped off,” or voided, if the property is underwater, or worth less than the mortgage debt.The ruling keeps intact a major protection for mortgage lenders, which extended tens of billions of dollars of second mortgages during the housing boom on homes that are now worth much less than their values when they were purchased. It also closes a legal avenue for homeowners with limited incomes and overwhelming debt to shed their underwater properties, bankruptcy lawyers say.The ruling, written by Justice Clarence Thomas, stems from Chapter 7 bankruptcy cases filed in 2013 by homeowners who sought to strip off their second mortgages. One of the homeowners, David B. Caulkett, owed a first mortgage totaling $183,264 at the time of his bankruptcy filing, but his Florida home was valued at $98,000.AdvertisementThe lender for Mr. Caulkett’s first mortgage could have expected to recover part of the loan by selling the home, since the house was considered collateral for the loan. But his lawyer argued that his home was so far underwater that the $47,855 second mortgage he took out from Bank or America was essentially unsecured, and thus should be stripped off as part of his bankruptcy filing.AdvertisementIn bankruptcy, Americans are typically permitted to cancel unsecured debts like credit cards and personal loans. The question before the Supreme Court was whether a second mortgage could be considered such an unsecured debt because the “security” backing the loan had been wiped out by falling home values.In a different case in 1992, the Supreme Court defined a “secured claim” as one “supported by a security interest in property, regardless of whether the value of that property would be sufficient to cover the claim.”But the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit in Atlanta sided with Mr. Caulkett, and Bank of America appealed the ruling to the Supreme Court.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The justices ruled on Monday that the second mortgage could not be stripped off simply because the home, the security underlying the debt, was worth less than the mortgage.During the housing boom, lenders extended multiple mortgages, like home equity loans, to homeowners, often enabling them to overextend their finances. These loans provided many homeowners with an additional source of cash to pay for college, medical bills or other expenses. And many consumers had hoped that soaring home values would one day allow them to pay off the additional loans in addition to the initial mortgages.The Supreme Court ruling will now prevent underwater homeowners from easily discharging home equity loans and other types of second mortgages in Chapter 7 bankruptcies.The ruling covers a potentially large pool of people who might seek bankruptcy protection as a solution to their housing woes. In Florida alone, 23 percent of the state’s roughly 1.3 million underwater homes have multiple mortgages, according to an analysis in March by RealtyTrac.A ruling in favor of the homeowners might have made banks and other lenders less willing to extend second mortgages in the future, although banks have greatly curtailed home equity lending since the financial crisis.The Supreme Court ruling does not completely prevent homeowners from voiding their second mortgages. Bankruptcy lawyers say homeowners may still seek to strip off second mortgages by filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy cases. But that process, the lawyers said, can cost more and take many years to complete. By contrast, Chapter 7 is geared toward helping lower-income people and typically takes just months.Advertisement“Chapter 7 is for people who need the most help,” said Linda Tirelli, a lawyer in White Plains who represents homeowners. “This ruling is an attack on the poor.”A version of this article appears in print on June 2, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Justices Curb Bankruptcy Filers’ Ability to Have Second Mortgages Canceled .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.