AdvertisementSupported byIn DebtBy Stephen J. LubbenJustice Clarence Thomas and his Supreme Court colleagues decided on Monday that the bankruptcy code would continue to be of little help to underwater homeowners, though he suggested that he perhaps wished it could be otherwise.In the meantime, big financial institutions can breathe a bit of a sigh of relief, knowing that the court has not forced a day of reckoning on billions of dollars of underwater second mortgages that debtors would like to rid themselves of in Chapter 7 bankruptcy.Let’s start with some basics. Under the bankruptcy code, the claims of secured creditors are typically cut into two parts: a secured claim up to the value of the collateral and an unsecured one for the rest.The question is whether this division means that a lien associated with the secured claim is cut down to the value of the collateral. For example, if a secured creditor is owed $100 and has a lien on property worth $40, does the secured creditor have a $40 lien after the bankruptcy case, or does it retain a lien for $100?From the debtor’s perspective, it would be helpful to restart life after bankruptcy with as little property encumbered as possible. But creditors would like to hold on to the bigger lien in case the property value rises.The short answer to whether a debtor can “strip off” a lien is: It depends. In particular, it depends on which chapter of the bankruptcy code the debtor files under.Individuals tend to file under Chapters 7 and 13. Under both of these chapters, the courts have ruled so-called lien-stripping impermissible, particularly with regard to the debtor’s home.On the other hand, corporate debtors routinely strip off liens of under-secured creditors in Chapter 11 cases.The crux of the most recent decision is the court’s 1992 ruling in Dewsnup v. Timm. In that case, debtors owned farmland valued at $39,000 that was encumbered by a trust deed securing a debt of $120,000, resulting in an unsecured claim of $81,000. The debtors wanted to reduce the lien to the value of the land.The court said it was “not convinced that Congress intended to depart from the pre-code rule that liens pass through bankruptcy unaffected.” That is, the court decided to follow the rule under the old 1898 Bankruptcy Act despite seemingly different language in the revised 1978 bankruptcy code.The Supreme Court’s opinion in Caulkett v. Bank of America on Monday rejected an attempt to create an exception to the Dewsnup rule.David Caulkett bought a home in Florida in 2006 with no money down, thanks to Countrywide Mortgage, which eventually became part of Bank of America. Countrywide lent him 80 percent of the money he needed under a first mortgage and the rest under a second mortgage. By the time Mr. Caulkett filed for bankruptcy, the second mortgage was entirely underwater.Thus, unlike the case in Dewsnup, where the loan was partially secured, this case involved a loan that was entirely unsecured.Most of the appeals courts had ruled that the Dewsnup rule applied to these facts. The key exception was the Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, which includes Florida. It had long held that liens could be stripped off unsecured loans.The Supreme Court disagreed, holding that Dewsnup applied across the board. Justice Thomas suggested that he thought the Dewsnup decision was wrong, and one footnote opened up speculation as to why the plaintiff’s counsel did not want to advance that argument.So homeowners continue to have no easy way out of the mortgage crisis. Financial institutions might eventually have to provide one, if they ever want to move on. After all, there were two main players in the mortgage crisis, and only one received a bailout.As long as homeowners continue to struggle with their mortgages, especially second mortgages that were given with a pretty clear understanding of the risks, they are not likely to let the big banks forget that.Stephen J. Lubben holds the Harvey Washington Wiley Chair in corporate governance and business ethics at Seton Hall Law School and is an expert on bankruptcy.Advertisement