By MARY WILLIAMS WALSHOCT. 22, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Officials from debt-plagued Puerto Rico, hoping for some comfort and sympathy — and even practical advice — from senators at a committee hearing in Washington on Thursday, got little of it.And the Obama administration’s proposal for helping the island out of its financial fix got no love either. (The Treasury Department, which outlined the plan for reporters Wednesday night, officially presented it to the Senate Energy and Natural Affairs Committee on Thursday.)There were glimmers of support from two prominent politicians: Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination, and Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, a Democrat, but they were just that — glimmers.Mr. Sanders said he had heard that some of the bonds the island is in danger of defaulting on might have been issued illegally and perhaps could be torn up. “Should debt be repaid if it was incurred in an unconstitutional way?” he asked, harking back to an argument that changed the course of Detroit’s historic bankruptcy. Whether that was true in Puerto Rico’s case was unclear.AdvertisementAnd Ms. Warren said she would fight for a new debt restructuring framework for Puerto Rico but chastised the Treasury Department for offering a plan she found unimpressive.AdvertisementBut mostly, the committee was critical of Puerto Rico officials, including Gov. Alejandro García Padilla, who testified at the hearing, for providing what it said were confusing and out-of-date numbers that failed to give a full understanding of the island’s balance sheet.Nobody, however, seemed to dispute that the finances were in a mess, that people were suffering and that the threat of a major default was real. Nobody, that is, except some of the island’s creditors, who, while not at the hearing, have been insisting from the sidelines that the island’s financial health is really not as dire as portrayed and that predictions of a collapse are overdrawn, meant to provide political cover for a government that can’t get its act together well enough to pay its bondholders.One creditor said he thought the Treasury was also painting too bleak a picture to attract attention and support.“The Treasury’s own numbers are mixing and matching,” said this person, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of confidentiality requirements. He said he had combed through the Treasury’s outline of its proposal and spotted what he said was a miscalculation — the outline said debt payments were running close to 40 percent of the island’s budget, but an apples-to-apples comparison would be 15 percent. It is easy to confuse the numbers because the debt is so complex.Melba Acosta Febo, president of the island’s Government Development Bank, attended the hearing but did not testify. She said afterward that with or without help from Washington, Puerto Rico would move forward as best it could and would begin restructuring talks with the holders of about $48 billion of debt in November. The island’s total debt has a face value of more than $72 billion, with a payment of more than $300 million coming due on Dec. 1.Ms. Acosta Febo said the coming negotiations would include certain bonds secured with very powerful pledges, and added that it would be much easier if Puerto Rico had even limited access to the bankruptcy courts. The general plan is to slow down scheduled payments due to creditors, and use the money saved that way to restore sustainable growth over five years. Once the economy is growing again, the government is to have a new debt payment schedule that is more manageable.During the hearing, senators expressed frustration about the lack of cost estimates for the administration’s rescue plan, which would expand federal support for Medicaid and other health care on the island and extend certain tax credits to Puerto Ricans who currently cannot use them. Health care makes up about 20 percent of the Puerto Rican economy, so by simply increasing Medicaid transfers, Washington could free up money that the island could use to repay its other debts.AdvertisementThe senators said that federal money was short everywhere, however, and that they would have to cut other spending to pay for even a limited rescue of Puerto Rico, so they needed to know how much.“We do want to be helpful, but in order to be helpful we need more information,” said Senator Lisa Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, closely echoing the sentiments expressed by her counterpart and fellow Republican on the Senate Finance Committee, Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, who led a hearing on the Puerto Rican debt crisis two weeks ago.Mr. García Padilla said it was “a misconception” that Puerto Rico was withholding critical financial information — a “red herring” being spread by “those with vested interests in seeing Congress defer taking action, so as to force Puerto Rico into a disorderly default.”He said that hedge funds had made short-term bets on the outcome of Puerto Rico’s crisis, and that they had “literally spent millions of dollars on a coordinated lobbying campaign to propagate disinformation of this type.”In the last six months, the governor said, Puerto Rico had disclosed more financial information than at any time in its history, hiring experts from the world of sovereign debt to produce its first long-term fiscal projections and analysis. He also disputed the idea that Puerto Rico was begging for a handout.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We have never asked Congress for a bailout, and we are not seeking one today,” Mr. García Padilla said, in his first congressional testimony since he announced in June that his government would seek a debt moratorium. “We are asking for a framework to restructure our debt.”But Senator Murkowski persisted.“We haven’t seen a comprehensive, independent audit since 2013,” she said. While the long-term fiscal analysis and a recent liquidity report were useful, she said, there was no substitute for the credibility that audited financial statements could impart. “What’s the status?” she asked.The governor said that he was already leaning heavily on the outside auditors to finish the overdue reports, and that if he pressed too hard, they might make mistakes. He also said his government had inherited antiquated computers and messy data sets that were hard to work with. He said he thought the 2014 audit would be available next week, but that only prompted Ms. Murkowski to say she wanted the 2015 audit too. (Puerto Rico’s 2015 fiscal year ended on June 30.)Ms. Murkowski then turned to Antonio Weiss, the Treasury counselor who led the administration’s months-long effort to draft a feasible rescue plan for Puerto Rico.Advertisement“Are you satisfied with the information that is available?” Ms. Murkowski asked him.“It is absolutely the case that Puerto Rico needs to make an investment in its reporting systems,” Mr. Weiss said. He said the administration’s proposal called for Congress to establish independent fiscal oversight for Puerto Rico and that “better I.T. infrastructure would go with that.”Democratic senators at the hearing made it clear that they were deeply concerned about some hedge funds betting on Puerto Rico’s crisis and the possibility that they were seeking to influence the rescue plan in order to maximize profits.Mr. Sanders said that what he termed “vulture funds” had been buying up Puerto Rico’s debt for as little as 30 cents on the dollar.“Why should they get 100 percent of their investment when they are paying 30 to 70 percent for their bonds?” he said.Mr. Weiss said that some debt securities were yielding 11 percent.“Whoa!” Mr. Sanders exclaimed. “They are receiving 11 percent and children in Puerto Rico are going hungry. That, for me, is not an equation that works.”It was then that Mr. Sanders asked if some of the debt had been issued unlawfully. One witness, Sergio M. Marxuach of Puerto Rico’s Center for a New Economy, noted after the hearing that the island’s Constitution requires any budget holes to be filled by raising taxes. Puerto Rico, he said, has gone for years issuing debt and using the proceeds to plug holes — pretending, in effect, that debt is revenue.“Is there a legal case? Well, that requires more research,” Mr. Marxuach said, noting that members of Puerto Rico’s legislature have been looking into possible irregularities in the issuance of the island’s debt.It is a huge job, but it could provide a powerful tool for the coming negotiations. Detroit’s bankruptcy was plodding along until Judge Steven W. Rhodes, who handled the case, asked a question about the validity of some pension obligation bonds issued in 2005. Not long after that, the city filed a lawsuit, saying the bonds were a sham and asking the court to void them. A bankruptcy that looked like it might grind on forever got momentum.Judge Rhodes has since retired and is now serving as a consultant to Puerto Rico.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Chilly Reception .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.