AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — Disney’s chief financial officer, James A. Rasulo, will step down on June 30, a departure that had been expected after his removal from consideration as next chief executive.Mr. Rasulo, 59, will remain an adviser to Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, the company said on Monday, as he considers various management opportunities. Disney did not announce a successor. One candidate among several is Kevin Mayer, executive vice president for corporate strategy and business development.Mr. Rasulo, who became chief financial officer in 2010, has worked without a contract since the beginning of the year. In February, Disney promoted a rival executive, Thomas O. Staggs, to the post of chief operating officer, making Mr. Staggs the favored internal candidate to succeed Mr. Iger when he retires in 2018.“As I look to the horizon for future endeavors, I am privileged to continue my friendship with Bob and remain as an adviser to him and the Disney team,” Mr. Rasulo said in a statement. Mr. Iger called him “a vital contributor to Disney’s success.”Inside Disney, Mr. Rasulo is respected for his ability to accomplish difficult assignments, even if his personal style has, at times, made him a feared figure. While serving as chief financial officer, for instance, Mr. Rasulo aggressively carried out a sweeping cost-cutting initiative set forth by Mr. Iger. He has also overseen the operation of Maker Studios, a YouTube-based video supplier that Disney acquired last year. Mr. Rasulo aided in the $4 billion acquisition of Lucasfilm in 2012.During his tenure as chief financial officer, Disney’s stock price has more than tripled.Before becoming chief financial officer, Mr. Rasulo served as chairman of Disney’s theme park division, where he oversaw a $1 billion overhaul of the company’s California Adventure park, opened Hong Kong Disneyland and laid the foundation for a complex new visitor management system at Walt Disney World. He joined the company in 1986.Advertisement