By DAN HORCHJUNE 1, 2015
SÃO PAULO, Brazil — Petrobras, Brazil’s troubled petroleum giant, is returning to the global capital markets with plans to sell a 100-year bond issue.The offering, which was filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on Monday, is Petrobras’s first since it sold $8.5 billion, in six different maturities, in March 2014.The company had been shut out of the markets after a corruption scandal caused it to delay the release of its third- and fourth-quarter results, which finally came out on April 22. A person with knowledge of the transaction said late Monday morning that the new bond deal would be “at least $500 million” but that “right now it looks like it will be less than $1 billion.”AdvertisementThe person said the company was expecting to pay about an 8.85 percent yield on the bonds. The S.E.C. filing lists JPMorgan Chase and Deutsche Bank as underwriters.AdvertisementIf the expected interest rate is confirmed on Monday’s bond issue, Petrobras will be paying a high price.Before this offering, the company was paying an average interest rate of only 4.4 percent on its $76.4 billion in dollar-denominated debt. Its 30-year bonds sold in 2014 paid a 7.25 percent coupon.“I do not see this move as a positive,” said Mariana Bertone, a petroleum analyst with the brokerage firm GBM in São Paulo. “The cost is very high.”Other issuance is expected soon. Petrobras said late last month that it planned to issue up to 4 billion reais, or $1.26 billion, in debentures in the local market, where interest rates tend to be higher than in the global market.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But to keep its heavy debt load – nearly $130 billion – from rising too much further, Petrobras announced in March that it would sell $13.7 billion of assets this year and next.Offshore petroleum reserves, electricity generation plants, chains of service stations in other South American countries and parts of its distribution network are all likely to be on the auction block.The company needs the cash to pay for its five-year investment plan, which despite cuts is still expected to total more than $130 billion when it is announced next week. So far this year, Petrobras’s petroleum production has fallen slightly since peaking last December.Despite the company’s problems, it may have a promising future, if global energy prices recover.“It has the best expertise in the world for deepwater petroleum production,” Ms. Bertone said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.