By KEITH WILLIAMSJUNE 1, 2015
Soon after the Running Specialty Group bought JackRabbit Sports in March, the changes began behind the scenes. Some employee positions were eliminated immediately, and a popular commission program for sales employees was discontinued.Now, with the departure of several longtime employees and noticeable gaps on the shelves, the store’s loyal cadre of New York City athletes fears something more intangible: the loss of a community hub.“We thought of JackRabbit as our local shop,” said Christine Frietchen, vice president of the Brooklyn Tri Club. “They went out of their way to support local clubs, and in exchange, we bought a lot of stuff that we could have easily bought online.”For some, that relationship stretches to 2003, when the first JackRabbit opened in Park Slope, Brooklyn; the brand has since added three locations in Manhattan. The independent JackRabbit sold apparel and accessories for running, cycling, swimming and yoga, and offered classes for all levels of experience.AdvertisementBut JackRabbit’s next chapter will come at the expense of its variety. Under the Indianapolis-based RSG, a subsidiary of the Finish Line Inc., the stores will focus mainly on running; as such, their popular swim and bike offerings have started to gradually disappear from shelves.Advertisement“It was surprising to hear that they were phasing out their triathlon products,” said Alison Kreideweis, co-founder of the Empire Tri Club. “They’re a go-to store for triathletes in the city.”While triathletes will certainly find their supplies elsewhere, the expertise of JackRabbit staff members will be difficult to replace. Take wet suits, for example: Because an uncomfortable swim is probably detrimental to the remaining two portions of the race, a proper fit is crucial.“There are a ton of online retailers who can sell you a wet suit,” Ms. Kreideweis said. “But when you get it at your house and try it on, you don’t have an expert to make sure it fits.”Between the conversion of JackRabbit’s four stores and the closure of Swim Bike Run in Midtown in late 2013, some triathletes pointed to just two shops in the city that can still fulfill their needs: Paragon Sports near Union Square and R&A Cycles in Park Slope.Store representatives said sales had not changed noticeably in the last three months. In theory, they should eventually absorb JackRabbit’s disenfranchised customers — but because a wet suit is a one-time purchase, often costing several hundred dollars, there are fears that the former competitor’s liquidation will actually dampen business.“I suspect they’ll slash their prices across the board to get rid of their inventory,” said Aldo Diaz, general manager of R&A Cycles. “That’s going to hurt any other tri-specific shop.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While the effects of JackRabbit’s acquisition have become obvious to triathletes, runners have also begun to notice subtle changes. When it came to fitting shoes, floor staff once devoted their full attention to a single client; now, they juggle up to three at once, a few customers said. Hours have been cut back for some workers, in addition to the loss of the popular sales commissions, employees said.“Employees are very pleased with the benefits RSG has to offer, the improvements with inventory levels and the customer-first approach,” said Bill Kirkendall, Running Specialty Group’s president, in an email. “When operating a business, however, change is inevitable. The key is to adapt, and we are confident that our RSG team will maintain and exceed customer expectations.”AdvertisementApparel tastes have changed, too, now that one team makes purchasing decisions nationwide. RSG has stopped ordering supplies bearing the store’s rabbit logo. Shopping bags with the name of another RSG property, the New York Running Company, have found their way into the mix.Over the last two years, RSG has rapidly expanded its portfolio, mostly through a series of acquisitions. With its purchase of JackRabbit, RSG brought its holdings to 75 specialty stores, up from 27 on April 3, 2013. (It has since opened one additional store, in Rhode Island.)As part of its purchase, RSG hired Lee Silverman, JackRabbit’s founder, to oversee branding in the continuation of that drive. But just a month later, Mr. Silverman, who had relocated to Denver, left. Mr. Silverman declined to be interviewed for this article.Mr. Kirkendall, RSG’s president, said that his company’s long-term goal was to have 200 to 250 locations. While not addressing the reasons for Mr. Silverman’s departure, he confirmed the growth plans had been delayed.Just two independent specialty running stores remain in New York City: Urban Athletics on the Upper East Side and Brooklyn Running Company in Williamsburg. Matt Rosetti, who co-founded Brooklyn Running Company in 2013, said that RSG’s experience was one of his top concerns for his own store.“With us, there are constant worries of overexpansion,” he said. “We want to get our model right before we go elsewhere.”But even with just one location, being independent has plenty of advantages, he said — particularly when it comes to building relationships with clients.“It’s a business model that’s not inherently scalable,” Mr. Rosetti said. “It’s about authenticity and creating an emotional connection with a customer, and that’s hard to do with quarterly earnings.”A version of this article appears in print on June 2, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Sale of a Local Sporting Goods Chain Frustrates Triathletes in New York City .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.