AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningTeddy Roosevelt was fond of the West African proverb to “speak softly and carry a big stick; you will go far.” The Justice Department is wielding one of its biggest sticks — the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, better known as RICO — to go after bribery and kickbacks that have been rife in international soccer for decades.RICO has been a popular tool for prosecutors to attack the mob, corporate fraud and corrupt politicians in the United States. Now, the latest Justice Department case will test whether the law can be applied to misconduct by foreigners that largely takes place outside the United States.The Justice Department certainly has a challenge on its hands with the latest case. It filed charges — including money laundering and wire fraud — against 14 defendants, most of whom are not United States citizens, over allegations of accepting bribes related to various soccer competitions sponsored by FIFA and its regional confederations. To prove a RICO case, prosecutors must show that those alleged crimes were part of a broader “pattern of racketeering activity” rather than just separate acts committed by different defendants.The Justice Department’s indictment outlines payments that date back to 1991, a time frame that is usually far outside the statute of limitations for corruption offenses (usually five years in such cases). But RICO can be a magic bullet to avoid that impediment by allowing federal prosecutors to file charges for operating an “enterprise” through the pattern of illegal acts stretching back decades, as long as one of them occurred in the last 10 years. That means allegations of bribes paid in the 1990s — such as payments made by Nike in the 1990s to sponsor the Brazilian World Cup team that were later said to be used to pay bribes and kickbacks — have been included in the case.Much of the allegations outlined in the indictment, which lists 47 counts and runs 161 pages, took place outside the United States.Prosecutors say bribery occurred for a wide range of events. They include FIFA’s vote in 2004 to select which country would host the 2010 World Cup and the award of broadcast rights to competitions like the Copa do Brasil, which involves that country’s top clubs. That instance is the basis for charging violations of the wire fraud statute, in particular the right of honest services owed to FIFA and other soccer confederations where the defendants were officers. According to the indictment, a major aspect of the corruption involved transferring funds derived from the illicit payments through banks in the United States. That is the basis for the money laundering counts.Charges that involve money laundering or wire fraud have to be based on discrete acts. Therefore, in most cases, only those directly involved can be charged. The RICO count gives the Justice Department the firepower to bring all the defendants together in a single case by asserting that there was a pattern of rampant corruption tying the defendants together into a larger scheme. The case would not be nearly as compelling if only one person here and one person there was indicted.The added ammunition of the RICO charge, in essence, accuses FIFA and the regional confederation of being turned into a criminal enterprise by the defendants. And it made for great press, letting the head of the criminal division at the Internal Revenue Service, Richard Weber, to proclaim that this amounted to the “World Cup of Fraud.”Strained metaphors aside, a crucial issue is whether the RICO statute can be applied to allegations of conduct largely occurring outside the United States. The Supreme Court made it more difficult to use American laws to pursue overseas misconduct in 2010 in Morrison v. National Australia Bank. The case involved application of the securities fraud statute to conduct by a foreign company impacting shareholders who bought their shares outside the American stock markets. The court said that a United States law should be presumed not to apply to conduct that takes place abroad unless Congress made its intention clear that the law should reach foreign violations.Using the opinion in the Morrison case, most lower courts found that RICO does not apply to conduct that primarily takes place outside the United States. But an important decision in 2014 by the United State Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan found that some RICO claims can be pursued as long as the underlying crime used to establish the pattern of racketeering activity is one that reflects a desire in Congress to reach foreign violations. That court ruling is crucial in the FIFA corruption prosecution because the charges were filed in Brooklyn, which falls under the jurisdiction of that appellate court.In European Community v. RJR Nabisco, the appeals court permitted a civil RICO claim against tobacco companies to proceed. That case related to a complex money laundering scheme involving the proceeds of illegal narcotics sold in Europe by Colombian and Russian criminal organizations that were used to purchase cigarettes.The court said that “RICO applies extraterritorially if, and only if, liability or guilt could attach to extraterritorial conduct under the relevant RICO predicate.” This means that a crime like money laundering can be charged for conduct outside the United States if one part of the transaction went through a bank in this country. And, as an extension, RICO can then be used when that is the basis for proving the pattern of racketeering activity.The decision in the European Community vs. RJR Nabisco case was quite contentious within the Federal Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. In April, five active judges on the court dissented from the denial of a request for the full court to review the case, known as an en banc hearing. That is a rare step in this circuit, which on average grants about one such rehearing a year.The dissenting judges argued that the decision extends RICO too far. They stated that that such claims sidestep the Supreme Court’s restrictive approach in the Morrison decision, which limits application of United States laws to foreign conduct. By including money laundering charges as one of the foundations for the pattern of racketeering activity related to the FIFA bribery, the Justice Department may apply RICO to conduct that does not have significant contacts with the United States.The FIFA defendants are sure to challenge the case by arguing that the RICO statute should not be used to prosecute allegations of conduct that only took place abroad. The Justice Department will counter that the decision in the European Community vs. RJR Nabisco case allows it the leeway to use RICO for actions that might not otherwise be subject to prosecution in the United States. If the government can avoid having the charges dismissed, then this case could balloon into even more corruption charges against those inside and outside FIFA.The money laundering statute is a powerful tool because any transaction through a bank in the United States involving the proceeds of a number of crimes, including broad provisions like the mail and wire fraud laws, can be the basis for bringing a charge. If RICO can be added to a case involving multiple defendants to claim that they engaged in a pattern of misconduct, then the Justice Department will indeed have a very big stick to attack corruption almost anywhere.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningAdvertisement