By DAVE MCKINNEYJUNE 1, 2015
CHICAGO —  The only complaint Mike Conklin ever received from his time helicoptering President Bill Clinton around in Marine One came from the White House chief usher, who politely asked if there were some way to quit strafing the flowers with wind from the rotors.That negligible complaint notwithstanding, Mr. Conklin is using the expertise he gained in piloting Mr. Clinton 192 times over more than four years to pitch Chicago’s corporate community on a new, potentially lucrative business concept: getting downtown mostly by helicopter, avoiding the city’s clogged expressways.He is well aware that helicopter flight isn’t the cheapest means of travel — a flight can run as much as $3,600 an hour — and his newly established helicopter airport in Chicago is no sure bet. But high-rolling executives in other cities, including New York, have paid big premiums for decades to ride choppers to reduce their time stuck in traffic.The $13 million Vertiport Chicago complex on the city’s near west side opened recently on 10 acres within plain view of the Willis Tower, two miles away. The facility sits in a cluster of hospitals and borders a sprawling freight yard on two sides. The complex’s main selling point is that it is a 10-minute car ride, if that, from the heart of Chicago’s main business district.AdvertisementThe heliport is substantially closer to the city’s business hub than either Midway or O’Hare airports and is poised to serve as a piece of transportation infrastructure that has been missing from Chicago since 2003. That is when former Mayor Richard M. Daley unleashed bulldozers in the dark of night to tear down Meigs Field, a downtown airstrip along Lake Michigan that the mayor turned into a park over the protests of business leaders.What Mr. Conklin and several private investors have built includes a landing pad that can accommodate eight helicopters, a hangar the size of almost two hockey rinks and a terminal with corporate office space and room for a sightseeing-by-helicopter operation.It’s open continuously for medical flights and can handle helicopters of almost any variety, including next-generation tilt-rotor aircraft, which travel nearly twice as fast and far as conventional helicopters.Advertisement“This is the first facility of its kind in North America,” Mr. Conklin said from his office inside the terminal of Vertiport Chicago, a work space adorned with photos, including one of him at the throttle of Marine One while Mr. Clinton is boarding the aircraft and waving.“The president would shake your hand on the way in or on the way out,” said Mr. Conklin, 59, who piloted Marine One between 1995 and 1999. “Because I did it as long as I did, I was a face he recognized.”Mr. Conklin’s complex is within the Illinois Medical District, a state, county and city partnership that oversees economic development in a 560-acre tract west of the Loop. It is financed with private dollars and was built largely without government subsidies.Vertiport Chicago counts Mayor Rahm Emanuel among its major supporters, and community opposition has been nonexistent — highly unusual for a heliport.Ray LaHood, a former transportation secretary turned consultant who now works for the same law firm as one of Vertiport Chicago’s investors, a lawyer named John Cusack, predicted that the facility would fill a transportation void in the region.“Once people become accustomed to it and figure out how to make it work for them, I think it has the potential to be very successful, particularly if the economy comes back,” he said in an interview.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The idea is for an out-of-town executive with a meeting in downtown Chicago to fly a corporate jet into delay-free DuPage Airport in the city’s western suburbs, hop onto a helicopter waiting on the airport tarmac and make the 36-mile trip to Mr. Conklin’s facility in 12 minutes. From there, the Loop is minutes away by car.In researching his business model, Mr. Conklin turned to New York City’s three long-established heliports as a template. Two heliports on the East River and one on the Hudson River serve more than 200,000 passengers annually and generate nearly $3 million in annual lease payments for the New York City Economic Development Corporation, according to a February 2012 study commissioned by the Eastern Region Helicopter Council.“This is no different than what they do in New York,” Mr. Conklin said. “We believe Chicago is a percentage of New York, and as a small percentage of New York, this facility is viable.”AdvertisementMr. Conklin said he expected the facility to begin turning a profit in a year to 18 months. And while some analysts have expressed optimism about his concept, they caution that its viability hinges on the ability to drum up business among Illinois’s blue-chip corporate base, which includes 31 Fortune 500 companies.“In Chicago, it’s a wonderful idea because of the fact they don’t have anything like that,” said Ricarda L. Bennett, a consultant in Thousand Oaks, Calif., who helps develop heliports around the country. “The challenge is getting people and the corporations to know it’s there.”Mr. Conklin’s anchor tenant is the freight-delivery company DHL Express USA, which began flying into Vertiport Chicago’s facility this year with rush document shipments for businesses in downtown Chicago.“It provides us the ability to improve our delivery times to customers who are sensitive to early deliveries,” said Karsten Aufgebauer, DHL Express’s senior vice president and general manager.Some Chicago-area companies that lease or own corporate aircraft have begun to take notice of Mr. Conklin’s endeavor. One is the Duchossois Group, a privately held, $3 billion umbrella of companies based in a western suburb of Chicago. After the closing of Meigs, Duchossois dispensed with its helicopter, but it is thinking about getting another since Vertiport Chicago’s opening, a company official said.Under Vertiport Chicago’s lease agreement with the Illinois Medical District Commission, medical flights will have top priority in and out of Mr. Conklin’s facility. No landing fees will be charged for those flights.Around the country, other commercial heliports have encountered resistance from noise-sensitive neighbors, but Mr. Conklin’s group has seemed to avoid that potential conflict. A couple of blocks away sits the regional headquarters of the Easter Seals of Metropolitan Chicago, which also operates a center for autistic children and adults in its nearby building.Mr. Conklin has been “very supportive in working with us and making sure the flight patterns didn’t interfere with us and the children we serve,” an Easter Seals spokeswoman, Kelly Anne Ohde, said in an interview.But one thing Mr. Conklin said is missing from Vertiport Chicago by design is a feature incoming and outgoing pilots will appreciate: There are no directives to remain 100 feet above landscaping obstacles on landings and takeoffs, as there were on the White House South Lawn with its fountain.A version of this article appears in print on June 2, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Bringing Helicopters Back to Chicago .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.