AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — A simmering federal investigation into whether the big movie theater chains are misusing their market clout to keep new films away from independent competitors gained steam on Tuesday.Cinemark Holdings, the nation’s third-largest movie theater operator, disclosed in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it had received a civil investigative demand for information from the antitrust division of the Justice Department. Cinemark’s two bigger competitors, Regal Entertainment Group and AMC Entertainment, on Monday alerted shareholders to similar requests.Together, the three chains control about 42 percent of the nation’s movie screens.For months, the government has been looking into antitrust complaints from a handful of independent theater owners. At issue is a decades-old business practice in the exhibition industry known as “clearances.” As part of their negotiation with studios over movie bookings, chains seek exclusive rights to show films in a certain geographic area. The goal is to prevent another theater a couple of miles away from playing the same movie at the same time.Several small theater companies — notably ones that have sunk large sums of money into new locations that bump up against the big chains — have been crying foul. Some have taken legal action. For instance, Cobb Theatres, which is based in Alabama and operates 20 theaters, is battling AMC in federal court, arguing in a suit that the chain has denied competitors “fair competitive access to films so as to drive them out of business.”In its filing on Tuesday, Cinemark said, “Although we do not believe that we have violated any federal or state antitrust or competition laws, we cannot predict the ultimate scope, duration or outcome of these investigations.” AMC and Regal made similar statements in their filings. Shares of the three publicly traded chains have been largely unaffected.Hollywood has so far viewed the investigation with a shrug, in part because clearance spats tend to arise about once a decade. The last one occurred in 2005, when the state of California issued subpoenas seeking information relative to anticompetitive booking claims. That investigation eventually faded away, and clearances continued.Advertisement