AdvertisementSupported byBy Vinod SreeharshaRIO DE JANEIRO — Nubank, the financial technology start-up founded by a former partner at Sequoia Capital, said on Tuesday that it had raised $30 million in a new funding round led by Tiger Global Management.Sequoia and another original backer, Kaszek Ventures, which is based in Buenos Aires, also joined in the round, which closed about two weeks ago, the company’s founder and chief executive, David Velez, said in an interview.QED Investors, which first invested in Nubank last year at the end of its Series A round, also participated.Tiger Global declined to comment, but two people briefed on the transaction and not employed by Nubank corroborated the company’s account.Mr. Velez also said that the company had added Nigel Morris, managing partner at QED Investors and a co-founder of Capital One, and Gene Lockhart to its board of advisers. They join Doug Leone of Sequoia and Nicolas Szekasy of Kaszek. Those two firms first invested in the start-up in July 2013. For Sequoia, it was its first investment in a Brazilian company. It added to that investment last year.The addition of a new investor is a vote of confidence in the company at a time when many start-ups in Brazil have struggled to obtain follow-on financing.Nubank provides a digital credit card, a Platinum MasterCard for smartphones, and is looking to take customers away from Brazil’s highly profitable banks.That means the company is now concentrating on people who can afford the phones and already have credit cards with Brazilian banks but are seeking alternatives, Mr. Velez said. He noted that more than 200,000 people had applied.Brazil’s banking industry has long seemed untouchable, one of the few sectors immune to the effects of the country’s moribund economy.Even after Dilma Rousseff criticized her opponent in last year’s presidential campaign for being too close to the country’s bankers, she promptly made a bank executive her new finance minister after winning the election.The sector has benefited from having some of the world’s highest interest rates. Its benchmark Selic rate has risen this year and now stands at 13.25 percent.Analysts expect that to increase again after the country’s central bank meets on Wednesday. Reports from Nomura and Bank of America Merrill Lynch Global Research expect an increase of 50 basis points. The central bank’s most recent weekly survey of economists published on Monday expects the Selic to hit 14 percent by the end of the year.By comparison, Turkey’s current benchmark interest rate is 7.5 percent and South Africa’s is 5.75 percent, according to Bank of America Merrill Lynch. In Latin America, the rate in Chile and Mexico is 3 percent and in Colombia it is 4.5 percent.That means higher credit card interest rates.Average annual credit card interest rates climbed in each of the first four months of this year and in April reached 81.4 percent, according to central bank data.Nubank is also hoping that an online platform can result in better customer service. Brazilian banks, after telecommunications companies, regularly generate the most customer complaints in Brazil.It also sees youth as an important demographic. Over time it expects to expand credit modeling in Brazil with the hope of reaching people with more varied credit profiles, Mr. Velez said.To do that, he said, part of the new capital will go toward hiring more data scientists, including some from the United States and Canada, something with which QED will help.Kaszek and Sequoia are familiar partners in the region for Tiger Global. Sequoia’s second investment in South America was in Despegar, a company long controlled by Tiger.Tiger has been one of the most active foreign investors in start-ups in Brazil and Latin America, albeit often countercyclically, which explains its current interest.Still, the broader financial services sector continues to attract numerous investors.Daniel Wainstein, the head of Greenhill & Company in Brazil, said that he continued to see significant activity in areas like payments and alternatives to conventional credit cards.“Both strategic and financial investors remain very interested in opportunities in the financial services space,” he said.Advertisement