AdvertisementSupported byBy Emmarie HuettemanWASHINGTON — John Koskinen, the head of the Internal Revenue Service, on Tuesday attributed a recent online attack that exposed the information of more than 100,000 taxpayers to the agency’s inability to keep up with increasingly sophisticated threats.Appearing before the Senate Finance Committee, Mr. Koskinen said the agency faced the same pressure as those in the private sector to stay ahead of nimble, international criminals intent on stealing people’s identities.“What worked yesterday, what worked a year ago may not be working anymore today, so you continually have to attack that problem,” he said.The I.R.S. revealed last week that an attack had exposed tax returns of thousands of people through Get Transcript, an application on the agency’s website. Mr. Koskinen said the agency had contacted those whose information had been compromised and offered them free credit monitoring.Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah and the committee’s chairman, was critical of the I.R.S..“Put simply, your agency has failed these taxpayers,” he said.J. Russell George, a Treasury Department inspector general who oversees tax administration, said his office identified protecting personal data as the agency’s greatest challenge in 2011, offering recommendations for how the I.R.S. could improve its practices. He declined to say whether following those suggestions could have prevented the recent breach.“I can say it would have been much more difficult had they implemented all of the recommendations that we made,” he said.Mr. George acknowledged the difficulties facing the agency and other entities in today’s “ever-changing and rapidly evolving hacker world.”“It’s a true challenge for the I.R.S. to make a balance between ease of access and security,” he said.Mr. George said reports that the attack had come from Russia alone were inaccurate, though he would not specify where else the hackers may have been based. Mr. Koskinen said it appeared to be the work of a global criminal operation.“Our experience looking at syndicates around the world is they cooperate when it’s in their interest, and they cross boundaries,” Mr. Koskinen said.Mr. Hatch said discussions about the agency’s funding should be delayed until the cause of the breach could be determined. But Democrats said that Congress — which has cut the I.R.S. budget by 18 percent since 2010, adjusted for inflation — should do more to help.Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, said the best way to defend against such attacks was to ensure that the agency had the funding to hire skilled employees and keep its software updated.“If you have I.T. from the dark ages, you are not going to be able to stay on top of these problems,” Mr. Wyden said.Mr. Koskinen said they were hamstrung by “an antiquated system,” adding that sometimes upgrades were not available for their software because the software’s creator no longer offered updates. He asked lawmakers to fully fund President Obama’s latest budget request, including about $101 million to protect taxpayers’ information.But emphasizing the scope of the problem in a culture where one leak can compromise security for governments and companies all over the globe, Mr. Koskinen pointed out that the hackers were able to complete a multistep authentication process using personal information about taxpayers that they had collected elsewhere.“This particular problem was not a question of resources,” he said.Advertisement