
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN and


RICHARD BEALES

JUNE 2, 2015
Acquisitive corporate chieftains love to talk about “synergies” from the deals they’re planning while they de-emphasize costs. On the flip side, managers who are trying to resist pressure to split their companies may overstate the “dis-synergies” such moves would create, but such costs are still real.The potential benefits of combining two companies are easy to identify. Redundant offices are shut, overlapping employees laid off and spare capacity can be used more effectively.Yet there are also downsides. Cultures clash, for example, customers leave, systems don’t fit together well or research functions don’t scale. Warren E. Buffett once said that he had never heard the word “dis-synergies” mentioned, but had witnessed plenty after deals had closed.Take one example: Pfizer. The company spent more than $200 billion altogether to buy Warner Lambert, Pharmacia and Wyeth from 2000 to 2009. Despite the extensive cost cuts each deal delivered, Pfizer suffered as R.&D. productivity stalled. The company’s market capitalization in 2010 was less than $140 billion.AdvertisementDis-synergies can, however, work in a board’s favor when directors aren’t inclined to follow an activist investor’s urging to carve a company up.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The $64 billion DuPont’s argument that splitting would incur costs worth more than $10 billion in present value terms helped persuade shareholders to reject the activist investor Nelson Peltz’s recent effort to gain board seats.AdvertisementJamie Dimon, chief executive of JPMorgan, argued this year that dissecting the mega-bank would forgo $15 billion a year of cross-selling revenue, or more than 15 percent of last year’s top line. He also said it would add $3 billion of operating expenses.Executives may overdo it when they are trying to resist action. Hewlett-Packard last week revealed that its planned breakup would cost less than half the $1 billion a year it estimated a few years ago when its chief, Meg Whitman, rejected a slightly different split. EBay argued that spinning off PayPal would create “significant distraction and dis-synergies” until it decided, under shareholder pressure, to do just that.Even so, there are still costs, which offset the probable benefit of splits. Companies are justified in pointing them out. But maybe the quid pro quo should be that they are more honest about the downsides of combining companies.Robert Cyran is a columnist and Richard Beales is an assistant editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »