

      By EMILY STEEL

OCT. 3, 2015

A sampling of viewers shines a light on the myriad ways that television  is consumed today.
If Connor Wise were forced to choose between a television and his iPhone, TV would not stand a chance. Connor, a high school junior from Larchmont, N.Y., said that his phone gave him more flexibility to watch the shows he wanted to watch, when, where and how he wanted to watch them. “TV is stationary in your house,” he said. “You can’t walk around with it. You have to watch what is on. You can’t search for other shows you find interesting.” Although Connor watches about four hours of programming a day, he rarely watches live — except for big events like the Super Bowl or the USA Network drama series “Suits,” which he watches with his father. There are five television sets in the house where he lives with his parents and two sisters, but Connor mostly streams shows to the computer in his bedroom, binge-watching shows on Netflix or Hulu like the long-running medical drama “Grey’s Anatomy” and the sitcom “How I Met Your Mother.” Only if he does not have a show to binge-watch will he flip on the television and watch with his sisters. He said that his phone was never out of reach and that he was constantly texting, surfing Facebook and playing games. While Connor would pick his iPhone over a television, he said that the screen was too small to enjoy full episodes. But his younger sister, Charlotte, 10, watches television almost exclusively on her phone.Crystal Boyd has a television in the Berlin apartment that she is sharing with her boyfriend for a couple of months but has never turned it on. She does not pay for cable, either. Still, Ms. Boyd says she watches “everything” and quickly ticked off a list of shows that she has worked her way through, including the dramas “Orphan Black” and “The Knick.” For comedy, Ms. Boyd streams clips of Comedy Central’s “Broad City” and Amy Schumer sketches. “I use my computer for everything,” Ms. Boyd said. She watches television with her boyfriend on the largest screen available, which typically means his computer. She watches shows on her phone only if she must, but she hates it. The couple decide what to watch based on reviews and social media. They typically juggle two or three dramas at a time. With comedy, they try to keep up with viral clips. To watch the shows, Ms. Boyd said she sometimes used sites like Popcorn Time that stream pirated content. She subscribed to Netflix while in Brooklyn, but let the subscription lapse when she moved to Germany. She said the selection there was lacking. Ms. Boyd said she watched TV on her own time and rarely paid attention to a network’s schedule. She felt retro last spring when she was forced to wait for episodes of the sitcom “Fresh Off the Boat.” “I felt like I was in the ’90s,” she said.Justin Morton’s monthly cable bill skyrocketed to $150 about six months ago, and he was fed up. Mr. Morton called his cable company to say he was canceling his service, hoping to negotiate for a better deal. Instead of making a better offer, the customer service representative instructed him to return his cable box. Mr. Morton cut the cord. Mr. Morton and his wife, Jane,  joke that they need to pick up a few hobbies because they watch about three hours of TV a night. That habit did not stop, even after they canceled their TV service. For the next three months, they cobbled together their own TV bundle using a combination of Netflix, Amazon Prime, Hulu, HBO’s stand-alone streaming service and Dish Network’s Sling TV streaming service. They also bought individual episodes à la carte, such as installments of the “Real Housewives” franchise, Ms. Morton’s favorite. They also tried using an antenna to watch live news like NBC’s “Today” morning show, but because they live in a rural area, they were unable to pick up the broadcast. Cutting the cord did not end up saving the couple much money and also proved to be a bit of a hassle. So they called their cable company and resubscribed, this time at a promotional rate of $86 a month. They continue to pay for Netflix and Amazon, but canceled their Hulu subscription and Sling TV service. “It was a little cheaper,” Mr. Morton said, “but not that much cheaper.”Stacy Schuepbach watches the St. Louis local news in the morning as she gets herself and her two teenage sons ready for the day and out the door. When Ms. Schuepbach returns home from work, she usually switches the television back on later in the evening. Her guilty pleasures, she said, are following news about the Kardashians on E! and watching “Snapped,” a true-crime series on Oxygen about women who murder their spouses. “It’s very addicting,” she said. Ms. Schuepbach typically watches television live because her sons, who are 13 and 15 years old, fill up the digital video recorder with World Wrestling Entertainment programs, which, along with hunting programs, are their favorite, she said. Beyond that, they don’t watch much television, she said. One plays video games. The other is into sports. Ms. Schuepbach is also rewatching old episodes of the drama “Breaking Bad” on Netflix, streaming the program to one of the four televisions in her house via Google Chromecast. She also uses the Netflix app on her phone to watch episodes in the morning as she works out on the elliptical trainer at the gym. Ms. Schuepbach pays $192 a month for a bundle of cable, Internet and phone service, not including premium channels. While she said the bill was “super expensive,” she said that she couldn’t imagine cutting the cord. “I don’t think I would totally give up the TV,” she said. “I would want to know what was going on.”Jeff Zeitlin calls himself a Sunday television addict. That’s the night you can find Mr. Zeitlin on the leather sectional sofa in his den watching his curved television and catching up on the latest hot program on HBO, AMC or Showtime. “Everybody knows that is my night of relaxation and cable TV,” he said. Although Mr. Zeitlin has five TVs — including one in a bathroom and another on a porch — it’s the television in the den where he watches most programs. Mr. Zeitlin typically tunes in live on Sundays. The rest of the week, he tends to watch recorded shows or to stream series on Netflix or Amazon. While he likes streaming, he said it’s too difficult to find shows. “Their search engines are not near where they should be,” he said. Mr. Zeitlin is a fan of bingeing on shows, watching an entire series in a couple of nights instead of waiting and watching episode by episode over an entire season. “The details, the art, the fineness of the TV show — you lose that when you watch it over a 10- to 15-week period,” he said. “When you are sitting down and watching it over a short period, you really get a lot more benefit of the show.” To discover new shows, Mr. Zeitlin asks his two sons, who are 21 and 24. “They are the best source, now that I am 55 and TV is made for 20-year-olds,” he said.If it’s Thursday at 9 p.m., Lorrie Dinner has a date with her television. “I still am old enough that I think shows come on at a certain time,” Ms. Dinner said. She says she is excited for the start of the new fall television season so that she can follow the latest twists and turns on ABC’s political thriller “Scandal.” During the rest of the week, she usually watches other programs airing during that time slot. Ms. Dinner says she gravitates toward dramas, the Food Network and reality series like “Big Brother” on CBS and “My Giant Life,” a TLC show about tall people, which she says is funny because she is less than five feet tall. Ms. Dinner doesn’t watch many comedies, because she doesn’t think they are very funny. To avoid commercials, Ms. Dinner typically records a program and waits 15 minutes before starting to play it back so she can skip the ads. “They are usually annoying,” she said. Ms. Dinner says she binge-watches shows on Netflix, especially its original series “Orange Is the New Black” and “House of Cards.” “Sometimes I get on a binge and watch five or six at a time,” she said. Ms. Dinner lives by herself and says she keeps her television on when she is home to keep her company. “That’s the way I was raised,” she said, “with the TV on.”Illustrations by James Taylor; Production by Aviva MichaelovAdvertisement