By SYDNEY EMBERJUNE 2, 2015
Madhulika Sikka, the executive editor at NPR News, is leaving the organization for Mic, a news site aimed at the so-called millennial generation, the companies announced on Tuesday. Ms. Sikka will oversee Mic’s newsroom operations in the new post of executive editor.Ms. Sikka is by far the most prominent hire for Mic since its founding in 2011 as PolicyMic, and her move reflects a flood of established journalists heading to digital-only news sites.As executive editor, a post she assumed in 2013, Ms. Sikka oversaw more than 150 editors and reporters for NPR News. She joined NPR in 2006 as a supervising senior producer for the radio show “Morning Edition,” and she eventually became executive producer. She has also worked at ABC News, CBS News and NBC News.In an interview, Ms. Sikka said she viewed moving to a digitally native site like Mic from traditional media as an “obvious next step” in her career.Advertisement“It’s an interesting time to go to an organization like Mic,” she said. “What greater challenge can there be than to grow the next great news audience, which is the millennial audience?”At Mic, Ms. Sikka said she would work to build a more sustained audience with content tailored to 18- to 35-year-olds. In particular, she said she would focus on introducing more videos. She also wants to expand the newsroom to more than 100 employees from 45.Mic received 15.6 million unique visitors in the United States in April, according to comScore.Bringing in Ms. Sikka will buoy Mic’s reputation, which was hurt this year when it fired its news director, Jared Keller, after he was accused of plagiarism.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Sikka joins a growing list of media professionals and journalists who have left more established news outlets behind. Ezra Klein, who founded The Washington Post’s Wonkblog, joined Vox Media last year as editor in chief of the news site Vox.com. David Pogue and Matt Bai left The New York Times for Yahoo, and Nate Silver left The Times for ESPN.The risk, of course, is that without a prominent platform, journalists’ work will not get noticed.But Ms. Sikka, who will be based in New York, said that was not a concern.“I’m not so hung up on the brand recognition,” she said. “That they were looking for someone with a deep experience speaks to what they are trying to achieve with Mic.”Ms. Sikka will assume her new role full time in September.Mic is a news site aimed at the highly coveted millennials, who are increasingly looking online for fresh takes on relevant issues. Among other topics, the site covers world news, policy, technology and science.AdvertisementMic also said on Tuesday that it had raised $17 million in new financing, bringing its total to roughly $32 million. The round was led by the venture capital firm Lightspeed Venture Partners, which has invested in the site previously.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.