By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJUNE 5, 2015
Hudson Executive Capital had already set out to not be the typical activist hedge fund. Its stated mission is to be constructive in dealing with corporate boards, rather than taking combative stances of the likes of William A. Ackman and Carl C. Icahn.Now, the firm is adding to its executive roster two prominent names who are unlikely hires for the sharp-elbowed world of hedge fund investing.Hudson Executive said on Wednesday that it had named Mary L. Schapiro, the former chairwoman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as a senior adviser for corporate governance and regulatory issues. And it was bringing on board Richard M. Kovacevich, the former chairman and chief executive of Wells Fargo, as one of its “C.E.O. Partners.”The appointments add more well-known names to Hudson Executive, which was founded in January by two prominent deal makers in the world of corporate mergers: Douglas L. Braunstein, a former chief financial officer of JPMorgan Chase, and James C. Woolery, most recently the chairman-elect of the law firm Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft.Both founders have said that they intend to be like other activist firms in terms of persuading companies to shift their corporate strategies. But they have distinguished their approach by pledging to work hand-in-hand with boards and management teams.AdvertisementThe aim, Hudson Executive has said, is to be helpful to companies. That may extend to corporations under pressure from other activists who are pursuing an unwelcome and more aggressive campaign. It is a tactic that Mr. Braunstein and Mr. Woolery believe can be profitable.AdvertisementThat angle has already drawn the support of prominent current and former corporate chieftains, many of whom previously had been clients of the firm’s founding partners. Among them are Ivan Seidenberg, formerly head of Verizon, and Darwin Deason, the chairman of Affiliated Computer Services.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Now, Hudson Executive is adding individuals with unusual experiences. Ms. Schapiro served as the first S.E.C. chairwoman during the Obama administration, overseeing moves like a lawsuit against Goldman Sachs over a mortgage-related investment created during the debt boom. In 2013, she joined the Promontory Financial Group, a bank consulting firm often criticized for its work in helping clients negotiate regulatory hurdles. She left as a full-time employee after less than a year.Ms. Schapiro is also a director at General Electric.Mr. Kovacevich led Wells Fargo during the financial crisis, watching as many of its competitors struggled. It was under him that the bank agreed to buy Wachovia in 2008 for $15.1 billion to bolster its nationwide presence. He left the bank in 2010.“We are pleased to add Dick Kovacevich and Mary Schapiro to our team and look forward to working with them and all of our Advisory Partners to generate investment opportunities and returns through Constructive Engagement,” Mr. Braunstein said in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Fund Hires Schapiro.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.