AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberIn their first interview since allegations emerged that their son had molested several underage girls, Jim Bob and Michelle Duggar defended their handling of his behavior and their later decision to start a reality show about their family.Four of the five girls their son Josh molested were his sisters, his parents told Megyn Kelly, the anchor of “The Kelly File” on Fox News Channel, on Wednesday night.Both parents excused their son’s behavior and praised him for admitting to them that he had inappropriately touched the girls.“Looking back, we did the best we could under the circumstances,” Mr. Duggar said.“He was still a kid. He was still a juvenile. He wasn’t an adult,” he added. “This was not rape or anything like that. This was touching someone over their clothes.”Mr. and Mrs. Duggar said they sent Josh to counseling and had him talk to the police.The interview on Fox News, which was pretaped at the Duggars’ home in Arkansas, came roughly two weeks after TLC said it was withdrawing the Duggars’ reality show, “19 Kids and Counting,” from its lineup. The show follows the Duggar family — Mr. and Mrs. Duggar and their 19 children — who are conservative Christians.That decision followed a report in In Touch magazine that Josh, now 27, had been investigated for molesting underage girls. Since TLC withdrew the show, at least 20 companies have distanced themselves from the program. Many have taken their ads off the show or are taking steps to do so.The Duggar parents, teary-eyed and looking to each other for support, defended their decision to start the reality show despite their son’s conduct, saying they saw no reason for concern.“When they asked us to do that reality TV show, all of this had been taken care of five years before, and we had a clean bill of health from the state,” Mr. Duggar said.Asked what would happen to the Duggars, given the backlash, Mr. Duggar replied, “I don’t know if the rest of our family should be punished for the act of one of our children.”“We are fine whether they film us or not,” he added.Mr. Duggar did not say whether TLC had indicated that the show would be canceled.Ms. Kelly also spoke to two of the sisters, Jessa Seewald and Jill Dillard. That interview will air on Friday.In a clip from Fox News, Ms. Seewald said in the interview that she was one of the victims and that what Josh did was “very wrong.”“I do want to speak up in his defense against people who are calling him a child molester or a pedophile or a rapist,” she said.“I’m like, that is so overboard and a lie, really,” she added. “I mean people get mad at me for saying that, but I can say this because I was one of the victims.”OpinionCharles M. BlowAdvertisement