AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter EavisRisky practices on Wall Street allowed the American International Group to place the dangerous trades that nearly took down the financial system in 2008.Now, seven years later, federal regulators are passing a rule that aims to end customs that helped A.I.G. bet the house.The rule focuses on the enormous market for swaps — the financial contracts that banks and investors use to hedge risks and make wagers. The new regulations seek to strengthen this market by requiring users of certain swaps to undergird their trades with financial collateral like cash or government bonds. Financial firms already post collateral, also called margin, on many of their trades. But this does not happen at the outset of a trade on a great many swaps, particularly those between the large Wall Street banks that dominate the swaps market.“This rule reduces risk, increases transparency, promotes market integrity within the financial system and addresses a number of weaknesses in the regulation and structure of the swaps markets that became evident during the financial crisis,” Thomas J. Curry, the head of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, a bank regulator, said in a statement after approving the rule on Thursday.The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation also approved the rule at a meeting on Thursday and other regulators, including the Federal Reserve, the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, are expected to do so soon. The rule, first proposed in 2011, requires swaps traders to start complying with the new margin requirements in September 2016. The rule does not apply to nonfinancial companies that use swaps to hedge risks associated with the output from their core businesses. Certain trades by community banks will also be exempt from margin requirements.The effect of the swaps margin rule will be felt most keenly on Wall Street, where swaps trading is generally more profitable than trading in stocks and bonds.Now, big swaps dealers, like Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase, will have to post margin to one another as soon as they enter a trade, rather than only when a trade progresses and causes a loss to one side.Using cash and other forms of collateral for the new margin requirements could be costly for the dealers. Still, the threat of such a cost may prompt the banks to streamline their swaps trading substantially, thus dampening any cost from posting more collateral.“We welcome the F.D.I.C.’s approval of its final rule on margin requirements,” said Mary Johannes, a senior director at the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, which represents participants in the swaps market. But Ms. Johannes added that adapting to the rule before next September would be “challenging, particularly as regulators in other jurisdictions have not yet published final rules, and harmonization across jurisdictions is not yet clear.”The swaps margin rule being approved by federal regulators applies to trades that take place directly between institutions.The Dodd-Frank Act, which Congress passed in 2010 to overhaul the financial system, sought to shrink these direct trades. The concern was that banks might set weak standards for certain big swaps customers, causing a precarious buildup of risks in a market that is quite opaque. In the lead-up to its near collapse, Wall Street banks exempted A.I.G. from posting much margin. When losses grew on A.I.G.’s trades, and A.I.G. was struggling to make its margin payments, the banks were exposed to potentially huge losses. In the end, the taxpayer bailout was needed to funnel payments to the banks that A.I.G. could not make on its swaps.Seeing the dangers of swaps struck directly between financial institutions, Congress also sought to reduce the amount of direct swaps and instead force firms to route their swaps through clearinghouses. In theory, clearinghouses make the swaps market safer because they collect standardized amounts of margin from all their customers on all the trades they handle.To help ensure that more trades go through clearinghouses, the swaps margin rule currently being approved in effect sets margin on direct trades at a higher level than what is required by clearinghouses. On a conference call with reporters, a federal banking official estimated that margin on direct trades might turn out to be 30 percent higher than trades going through clearinghouses.There was some disagreement around one part of the swaps margin rule.Units within a single bank often do large amounts of swaps trades with one another. Although there would seem to be little need for units within the same bank to post collateral to one another because they belong to the same entity, there was a concern about these internal trades. Some specialists feared that the main deposit-taking subsidiary of a bank, which benefits from taxpayer-backed deposit insurance, was taking on the risk of its swaps dealing affiliates. To help address this, Thomas M. Hoenig, vice chairman of the F.D.I.C., said in July that entities on either side of an internal bank trade should post margin to each other.The final rule did not go that far. Instead, it requires a “covered swaps entity” of a bank to collect margin from an affiliate at the outset of a trade. But it would not have to post margin to that affiliate at the start of a trade. “While the system over all would have been best served if banks posted as well as collected margin with their affiliates,” Mr. Hoenig said in a statement on Thursday, “much is accomplished with the requirement that the insured bank collect margin.”Advertisement