AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher JensenCiting a desire to make large trucks and buses safer, federal regulators said on Wednesday that they would require new vehicles to have electronic stability controls to help drivers maintain control during a skid.“Electronic stability control is a remarkable safety success story, a technology innovation that is already saving lives in passenger cars and light trucks,” the secretary of transportation, Anthony Foxx, said in a statement. “Requiring E.S.C. on heavy trucks and large buses will bring that safety innovation to the largest vehicles on our highways, increasing safety for drivers and passengers of these vehicles and for all road users.”Electronic stability control uses a computer and sensors to detect when the front or rear of a vehicle is moving inconsistently with the position of the steering wheel. The system can brake a single wheel to nudge the vehicle back on course.Safety researchers say the system can prevent vehicles from going off the road, which often leads to a rollover crash — a particularly dangerous type to which larger vehicles are susceptible. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration estimated that each year the requirement would prevent between 1,400 and almost 1,800 crashes, and as many as 650 injuries and nearly 50 deaths. But the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, which is backed by the insurance industry, has estimated about 300 fatal crashes each year could be prevented.The safety agency estimated the cost of such controls on a large truck would be about $585, and about $269 on a bus. The new regulation goes into effect for new large trucks in August 2017 and for new buses in 2018.Anne T. McCartt, senior vice president for research at the insurance institute, said electronic stability control was the most important safety device since seatbelts, and had “tremendous potential” for saving lives.The move also was applauded by the American Trucking Association. “Today’s announcement by N.H.T.S.A. will reduce crashes on our highways and make our industry safer,” the association’s president, Bill Graves, said in a statement.Stability controls have been standard on cars, pickups and sport utility vehicles since 2012. The agency estimated that in 2012 about 1,300 lives were saved by the technology. Advertisement