AdvertisementSupported byThe latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews conducted May 28 to 31 with 1,022 adults throughout the United States.SSRS of Media, Pa., conducted sampling, interviewing and tabulation for the survey. Interviews were in English or Spanish.The sample of landline telephone exchanges called was randomly selected by a computer from a complete list of more than 81,000 active residential exchanges across the country. The exchanges were chosen to ensure that each region of the country was represented in its proper proportion.Within each exchange, random digits were added to form a complete telephone number, thus permitting access to listed and unlisted numbers alike. Within each landline household, one adult was designated by a random procedure to be the respondent for the survey.Cellphone numbers were generated by a similar random process. The two samples were then combined and adjusted to ensure the proper ratio of landline-only, cellphone-only and dual phone users.Interviewers made multiple attempts to reach every phone number in the survey, calling back unanswered numbers on different days at different times of both day and evening.The combined results have been weighted to adjust for variation in the sample relating to geographic region, sex, race, Hispanic origin, marital status, age, education, and (for landline households) the number of adults and number of phone lines. In addition, the sample was adjusted to reflect the percentage of the population residing in mostly Democratic counties, mostly Republican counties and counties more closely balanced politically.In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, overall results based on such samples will differ by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have been obtained by seeking to interview all American adults. For smaller subgroups, the margin of sampling error is larger. Shifts in results between polls over time also have a larger sampling error.In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll. Variation in the wording, order and translation of questions, for example, may lead to somewhat different results.Michael R. Kagay of Princeton, N.J., assisted The Times in its polling analysis. Complete questions and results are available at nytimes.com/polls.Advertisement