By CLIFFORD KRAUSS and NELSON D. SCHWARTZJUNE 3, 2015
HOUSTON — Not long ago, what former Gov. Rick Perry and other conservatives like to call “the Texas Miracle” — the booming Texas economy — looked like a potential steppingstone to national office. But as Mr. Perry jumps into the ever-widening race for the Republican presidential nomination, his state’s economic performance appears considerably less miraculous.Although Texas’ unemployment rate of 4.2 percent remains well below the national average of 5.4 percent, the state lost 25,000 jobs in March. And while April was better over all, the oil industry in Texas lost an additional 8,300 jobs as plunging oil prices prompted drillers and producers to shut down projects.Aides to Mr. Perry said he was unavailable for an interview, but Avik Roy, a senior adviser to RickPAC, said the oil bust did not undermine Mr. Perry’s economic record. “It’s an opportunity, not a problem,” he said, “because if the Texas economy continues to do reasonably well even though the energy sector gets hit, that is only going to strengthen his case, not weaken it.”Even after the recent slide, Texas still looks like a bright spot in the national economy. During his years as governor, from December 2000 to January 2015, Texas created more than three out of each 10 new American jobs, and employment rose more than 2.2 million, a jump of nearly 25 percent. Nationally, payrolls increased just 6 percent over the same period.AdvertisementMr. Perry’s backers say the policies in place on his watch — no state income tax, a light regulatory touch, tax breaks for business and unquestioning support for the oil industry and hydraulic fracturing — were crucial to spurring the jobs bonanza.AdvertisementBut useful as that platform may have been in creating a benevolent economic backdrop, many economists say differences in state policies play only a limited role in inducing local economic growth.“Texas did pretty well, but it’s hard to say how much of that is because of policy choices versus luck,” said Tracy Gordon, senior fellow at the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center, a nonpartisan research group in Washington. “We often think of states as playing with the hands they are dealt and making policy choices based on that.”
            During Rick Perry’s tenure as governor of Texas from December 2000 to January 2015, the number of jobs in that state rose more than 23 percent.        Change in nonfarm payrollsSEASONALLY ADJUSTED, DEC. 2000 to JAN. 201511.8 mil.TEXAS+20%+15+10+509.5 mil.–5DEC. ’00JAN. ’15CALIFORNIA+10%15.9 mil.+5014.8 mil.–5DEC. ’00JAN. ’15UNITED STATES+10%141 mil.+50133 mil.–5DEC. ’00JAN. ’15JUNE 3, 2015
While Mr. Perry looks like a long shot in the Republican race, the low-tax, light-regulation model favored by many conservatives contrasts sharply with the economic blueprint that Hillary Rodham Clinton and other Democratic candidates are offering.Democrats warn of the dark underside of the Texas Miracle, pointing to low-wage jobs, failing public schools and legions of citizens who remain below the poverty line and without health insurance.To counter that kind of economic situation, Democrats offer another state as an example: California. Despite its high taxes, strict regulations, broader access to health care and a push to raise the minimum wage in several cities, the California economy is also thriving.The unemployment rate in the Golden State has fallen from 12 percent four years ago to 6.3 percent; the state has added nearly half a million new jobs in the last 12 months. Many of those are high-paying positions in the tech sector, which has flourished even with California’s high cost of living and heavier regulatory hand.“Both states are doing well, but there is a different tradition in California than in Texas, and it’s a question of taste,” said John Ellwood, a professor of public policy at the University of California, Berkeley.AdvertisementIt is no surprise why Gov. Jerry Brown is as much of a hero to some liberals as Mr. Perry is to many conservatives. As Mr. Ellwood noted, California has embraced President Obama’s health care overhaul, including the expansion of Medicaid, which Texas has resisted.What is more, California and Mr. Brown favor efforts that would be anathema in Texas, like building high-speed rail links and imposing tighter restrictions on greenhouse gas emissions.“Texas and California are similar in some ways — a young population, which means having to spend on education; multiethnic populations; and Sun Belt regions,” Ms. Gordon added. But in terms of policy, she said, “it’s just a different model.”And despite starkly different approaches, the results suggest that state economies can prosper — or not — under either policy umbrella, and that specific circumstances still largely determine the overall course of development.Just as California’s economic trajectory is linked to Silicon Valley and the tech sector, as well as the entertainment industry in Los Angeles, so Texas remains closely tied to the energy industry.That is not the whole story: The two most populous states in the country both have diverse economies, and Texas has diversified notably in recent decades.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Austin is now one of the hottest national centers for high technology and start-ups. The Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area has become a magnet for national corporate headquarters.On the Gulf Coast, Houston’s port is bustling, and its medical center has grown into an internationally recognized facility for research and treatment. Growing trade with Mexico has expanded the economies of San Antonio and border cities.That range of employers meant that even with thousands of lost oil jobs in April, the state was still adding leisure, hospitality and information services jobs, according to the Texas Workforce Commission.AdvertisementSince the 1980s, direct employment in oil and natural gas exploration and production has declined to 2.5 percent of the Texas work force from 4.5 percent, according Mine K. Yücel, senior vice president and director of research at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. The oil and gas industry’s contribution to the state’s economic output has fallen to 13 percent from 19 percent during the same time period.Still, as the leading state in oil production and reserves, with two of the three shale fields responsible for nearly doubling crude output in the United States in recent years, petroleum is still king of Texas. And that means busts as well as booms.As the price of crude oil fluctuates, why some countries are faring much better than others.“We are definitely slowing, and I think we are going to continue to see weakness,” Ms. Yücel said.Former Texas Gov. Rick Perry, on CNBC, discusses the strides made in his state in education, jobs creation and tax reform, and also commented on his decision to enter the 2016 presidential election.She noted that the Dallas Fed had lowered its forecast for the state’s economic growth rate to 0.5 or 1 percent from the 1.5 percent rate projected at the beginning of the year. That is a significant fall from the robust pace of 3.4 percent growth in 2014, a year in which oil prices galloped before beginning to turn in July.Ray Perryman, a prominent Texas economist, estimates that a total of 175,000 Texas jobs will be lost as a result of layoffs in the oil fields, cuts in oil-related manufacturing and services, and the ripple effect of lower consumer spending as the energy jobs disappear.Nariman Behravesh, chief economist at IHS, a private economics and forecasting firm, gave Mr. Perry credit for bolstering the Texas economy.“But just as important was oil at $100 a barrel,” he added. “Clearly the energy boom helped, but parts of West Texas are now in recession because of the oil bust. We have to get past the oil cycle to get a better read on it.”While also giving him high marks for much of his economic stewardship, Mr. Perryman said Mr. Perry turned more partisan in recent years, failing to provide enough funding for areas like higher education, infrastructure or an adequate safety net. “In effect, he oversaw Texas eating its seed corn,” he said.With Mr. Perry entering the presidential race again after his disastrous performance during the 2012 Republican primaries, supporters contend that voters in other states will draw a different conclusion.Advertisement“Governor Perry has prioritized low taxes, a predictable regulatory environment, a skilled work force and stopping abuse at the courthouse,” said Abby McCloskey, the policy director at RickPAC. “And those principles are not just Texas-centric but can be brought to the national stage as well.”Clifford Krauss reported from Houston, and Nelson D. Schwartz from New York.A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: As Texas’ ‘Miracle’ Fades, a Closer Look at Policy .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.