AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew Goldstein and Nathaniel PopperIn early 2010, with the financial crisis still reverberating through the economy, a top Justice Department official arranged a meeting with executives from Goldman Sachs and some of his prosecutors, a document shows.But the hourlong meeting at the Justice Department in Washington had nothing to do with the financial crisis or with Goldman’s role in marketing securities backed by mortgage loans made to borrowers with shaky credit histories, said a person briefed on the matter who spoke on condition of anonymity.Instead, the gathering, organized by Lanny A. Breuer, then the assistant attorney general for the criminal division, focused exclusively on the subject of terrorism financing.Several people from the general counsel’s office at Goldman attended the March 5, 2010, meeting, including David N. Lawrence, who at the time was global head of the company’s business intelligence group.Mr. Breuer arranged the meeting to sound out Mr. Lawrence’s views on how best to combat terrorism financing, given his experience in working with Wall Street banks to develop systems to prevent money laundering, the person briefed on the matter said.The email invitation for the meeting surfaced as a result of a Freedom of Information Act request to review Mr. Breuer’s electronic calendar. The agency was asked for a list of meetings between him and representatives of Goldman, JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America and the American International Group — institutions that played significant roles in the occurrences leading up to the financial crisis.The Justice Department’s Freedom of Information Office said that after a five-month search, it could find no other recorded meeting between the assistant attorney general and representatives from those big financial institutions. It is possible the search overlooked meetings that did not contain search terms identifying participants as members of those banks.The meeting with the Goldman representatives may revive questions about the Justice Department’s priorities after the financial crisis. Mr. Breuer’s tenure, which ended in early 2013, was marked by criticism that prosecutors working for him did not file criminal charges against prominent Wall Street bankers in connection with the crisis.About a month after that March 2010 meeting, the Securities and Exchange Commission sued Goldman, accusing it of fraud in the creation and marketing of a sophisticated mortgage security that promised to generate a profit for investors if the housing market crashed. (Goldman later settled that suit for $550 million.)With the financial crisis still reverberating, this 2010 gathering appears to be the only recorded meeting between Lanny Breuer, a top Justice Department official, and representatives from big Wall Street banks.A week after the S.E.C. filed its lawsuit, a Senate subcommittee held a hearing into Goldman’s activities in the mortgage market. The subcommittee ultimately sent a criminal referral to the Justice Department, asking it to investigate the Goldman-backed deals.“I applaud him for going to experts on money laundering, but how could you resist not asking even one question about the thing on everyone’s mind?” said Erik Gordon, a professor at the Ross School of Business of the University of Michigan. “It’s a real head-scratcher how he could be in the room with three or four people from Goldman and not take advantage to ask them about the financial crisis.”Still, the meeting also underscores that the government relies on banks to serve as a front line in enforcing anti-money-laundering laws and other laws governing the financial pipeline. And ever since the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks, an important mandate of law enforcement has been to trace and root out the sources of funding for terrorist groups.Mr. Breuer left the federal government in early 2013 to return to a job with Covington & Burling, a large Washington law firm. He referred inquiries about the meeting to the Justice Department’s news media office.A Justice Department spokesman declined to comment beyond the information provided in response to the Freedom of Information Act request.In August 2012, the Justice Department issued a statement saying that after investigating the information provided by the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, it had not found sufficient evidence to file criminal charges against Goldman or any of its employees.Mr. Breuer found himself on the defensive for that decision in a January 2013 documentary produced by “Frontline” and broadcast by PBS. The program, called “The Untouchables,” criticized the Justice Department over its investigation of the financial crisis.In an online transcript that accompanied the documentary, Mr. Breuer said: “We looked hard at Goldman Sachs. We looked at it for years, and we made a determination.”Little is known about the March 2010 meeting with the Goldman representatives beyond the general topic. The heading on the email invitation for the meeting simply said: “Goldman Sachs re Anti-Fraud Task Force.”All but one of the prosecutors at the meeting has left the federal government, with two of those prosecutors joining Mr. Breuer at Covington, where he serves as vice chairman. The names of the Goldman participants were blacked out by the Justice Department to avoid “unwarranted invasion of the personal privacy of third parties.”Mr. Lawrence, who left Goldman in 2014, is the founder of Risk Assistance Network and Exchange, a firm that specializes in connecting security experts with companies. His LinkedIn profile says he received an award from the Federal Bureau of Investigation for his “efforts in combating international terrorism.”Advertisement