AdvertisementSupported byBy Stacy CowleyIn 2012, President Obama signed a law that he called a “potential game changer” for entrepreneurs seeking financing to start or expand a business: Small companies looking for financial backers could advertise their offerings online, and average people — not just wealthy accredited investors — would be allowed to buy stakes in businesses they found promising.More than three years later, entrepreneurs are still waiting for federal regulators to finish drafting the long-overdue rules that would let that part of the law take effect. Now, state agencies and lawmakers, tired of waiting, are taking action, passing crowdfunding laws and regulations to let local businesses raise money from local residents.The movement is growing. Twenty-two states and the District of Columbia have enacted such rules, nine of them in the last six months. Eleven states are considering creating such laws and procedures. Three more states — Florida, Illinois and New Mexico — have rules or legislation awaiting the governor’s signature.“It’s exploded this year,” said Anthony Zeoli, a lawyer in Chicago who has been tracking the status of the states’ legislation on his blog. “People are clamoring for it, and those who see the power of it are pushing these agendas forward. I mean, who can say no to legislation designed to help open up capital for small and growing businesses?”The state-level rules have heavy restrictions, the biggest of which is that companies may raise money only from investors in their own states. In Texas, where intrastate crowdfunding became legal in November, that gives entrepreneurs access to around 20 million potential investors; in Vermont, only 500,000 or so. The amount of money companies can raise is also relatively small. The rules vary by state, but most limit the total to $1 million or $2 million, and the amount any individual investor is permitted to give is typically capped at $10,000 or less. (Accredited investors, those with an annual income exceeding $200,000 or a net worth of at least $1 million, play by a different set of rules and may invest larger sums.)But those rules give some small companies plenty of room to find the financing they need. In Madison, Wis., a three-year-old brewery called MobCraft recently took advantage of a new law to raise $67,000 in growth capital from 52 Wisconsin residents, nearly all of them first-time business investors.The concept of equity crowdfunding is still new and often confusing for the companies and their investors, Henry Schwartz, a co-founder of MobCraft, acknowledged. He initially planned to raise money with a donation-based crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter or Indiegogo, until he learned that those sites do not allow alcohol to be given away as a reward. Shopping around for an alternative, he encountered CraftFund. It is one of the first sites in Wisconsin to be licensed as an equity crowdfunding portal, where state residents with cash to invest can browse through ventures seeking capital.Backers on sites like Kickstarter are essentially giving money away in return for products and other perks. On the rare occasion that one of those projects becomes wildly lucrative — like Oculus VR, the virtual reality start-up Facebook acquired for $2 billion last year — the crowdfunding backers don’t share in the profits. Equity crowdfunders, however, receive actual shares in the companies they back.MobCraft made 2 percent of the company’s equity available for purchase during its crowdfunding campaign, with a minimum investment of $525. Potential investors were given a 13-page disclosure document detailing the company’s history, financial background and growth plans. Nine of those pages, Mr. Schwartz said, were an analysis of risk factors laying out “every bad scenario you could ever imagine.”That has been one of the biggest concerns for regulators trying to write rules. Small companies are inherently risky investments — only half survive for five years, according to government data — and private businesses are not required to disclose much about how they operate. It can be nearly impossible for potential investors to really know what risks they face.Some rely on an old-fashioned kind of due diligence: community reputation. Staci Fritz, a Madison resident who invested $4,000 in MobCraft, runs her own food business in the area, Calliope Ice Cream. “I see the MobCraft guys out at all these local events; I know how hard they’re working it,” she said. “Their beer is amazing, and people here love their concept. I don’t see how it could fail.”While state officials are bullish on equity crowdfunding, entrepreneurs and investors have been slower to join in. Around 95 companies nationwide have filed applications to raise money using the state laws, according to data compiled by The New York Times from state regulators. Few states track how many businesses completed their offerings, or raised the sums they sought.In many states, businesses are encouraged — and in some cases, required — to advertise their offerings through online portals. Dozens have opened in the last year. In Texas, potential investors will be able buy their own piece of an oil well through Crudefunders and browse real estate deals on MassVenture. People interested in investing in restaurants can shop the listings on EquityEats (District of Columbia) and CraftFund (Wisconsin), while those looking to explore ventures in a variety of fields can peruse truCrowd (Texas), HoosierCrowd (Indiana), Michigan Funders and Hatch Oregon, among others.Nearly all of those sites, however, look like ghost towns. David Lilenfeld, who in 2013 created the nation’s first intrastate crowdfunding portal, SterlingFunder in Georgia, recently stopped accepting new equity crowdfunding deals on the site. In more than two years, only one of the companies he worked with raised the money it sought.“We’ve got all of the pieces in place except for one thing: the investors,” he said. “I think there’s a lack of awareness about equity crowdfunding from the target audience.”Those in the field say they hope that will change when the Securities and Exchange Commission finally issues the rules that will let fund-raising take place on a national level — although many are pessimistic about the cost and complexity of the rules the agency outlined in a 2013 draft proposal. An S.E.C. spokeswoman declined to comment on when final rules would be issued. Mary Jo White, the agency’s chairwoman, said in a recent speech that it was on the agenda for action this year.The businesses that have been the most successful at using the local laws to raise money tend to be those with existing networks of eager supporters. In Kansas, for example — which in 2011 became the first state to legalize equity crowdfunding — the state’s “Invest Kansas” law has supported fund-raising campaigns for a microbrewery in Emporia and a grocery store in Minneola, a small, rural community that was left without a grocery after its previous one closed in 2009.Nearly 200 people bought shares for $50 each to raise the $150,000 needed to start Hometown Market. The store, which opened in 2012, now has sales of about $20,000 a week and five full-time employees.The project illustrates the economic power of tapping local investors to back local companies, said Luke Jaeger, a farmer and the chairman of the market’s governing board.“It provides local jobs,” he said. “And there’s around $16,000 in sales tax dollars that we’ve kept that would otherwise have flowed out to other areas. It helps keep the streets up and the water lines and sewers maintained. It’s really nice to retain that within the community.”Advertisement