By JACK EWINGJUNE 3, 2015
FRANKFURT — The European Central Bank left its main borrowing rate unchanged on Wednesday, but intends to continue with its bond-buying program, meant to stimulate the eurozone economy, as long as necessary to raise the inflation rate from its dangerously low level.At a news conference after the announcement, the central bank’s president, Mario Draghi, cited a “modest growth trend” for the eurozone that he said would broaden this year.But Mr. Draghi spent much of the news conference fielding — and in some cases, deflecting — questions about Greece. Mr. Draghi said that the European Central Bank continued to want Greece to remain part of the euro currency union, and that there was a “general will and strong determination that an agreement can be found” as Athens continues debt negotiations with its creditors.But he hinted that Greece’s longstanding debt and economic crisis were at least partly a fault of the country’s leaders, who he said did not respect the economic terms of agreements during five years of bailout programs.Advertisement“Programs have been designed, have been agreed, but implemented only partially,” Mr. Draghi said.AdvertisementSticking when possible to the monetary policy issues that he was clearly more comfortable discussing, Mr. Draghi said the central bank was revising upward its inflation forecast for the full 2015 year, to 0.3 percent — the rate that had already been reported for May.The eurozone’s inflation rate, he added, seems to have “bottomed out” at the beginning of the year. Concerns at the time about a possible lapse into deflation — an economically debilitating condition of falling wages and prices — prompted the European Central Bank to announce a stimulus program that is now underway.But Mr. Draghi said that growth in the eurozone was “likely to remain dampened” by what he referred to as structural economic impediments that would require changes by national governments. The central bank left its growth projections unchanged, forecasting an annual growth rate of 1.5 percent for this year, 1.9 percent in 2016 and 2 percent for 2017.The central bank left its benchmark rate at 0.05 percent on Wednesday, as expected. That is the rate at which commercial banks can borrow from the central bank, and it is typically used to steer market interest rates.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Having effectively run out of room to cut rates, the European Central Bank has resorted to new methods to push down the cost of borrowing and to stimulate growth and inflation in the 19 countries in the eurozone. In March, the central bank began buying government bonds and other debt at a rate of 60 billion euros, or about $66 billion, a month, a form of money-printing intended to inject cash into the financial system.The central bank is expected to continue the bond-buying program until inflation is on track to reach the official target of just below 2 percent. Mr. Draghi has previously said the central bank would keep buying the bonds until at least September 2016, and would continue longer if needed.On Wednesday, Mr. Draghi said that the central bank expected inflation to continue rising, but that it estimated inflation would reach only 1.8 percent through 2017.The European bond-buying program, known as quantitative easing, appears to have helped make credit more available to businesses and consumers in countries like Italy and Spain, analysts say, a good sign for the prospects of economic growth.AdvertisementBut at Mr. Draghi’s news conference on Wednesday, Greece’s debt talks were a subject he could not avoid. Mr. Draghi was among the European leaders who met in Berlin late Monday to work on what amounted to a “take it or leave it” offer to the Greek government.Greece needs more money soon if it is to repay its creditors — the European Commission, the International Monetary Fund and the European Central Bank — billions of euros in loan obligations that will come due in the coming days and weeks. But Athens has balked at the conditions the creditors have imposed, like additional reductions in pensions and changes to regulations that make it hard for companies to lay off workers.Asked directly by a reporter what would happen if Greece missed a debt payment due to the International Monetary Fund on Friday, Mr. Draghi declined to speculate.But he subsequently said that a Greek default on its I.M.F. loans would prompt the European Central Bank to look anew at the ability of Greek banks to use their government’s bonds as collateral for emergency liquidity loans from the European Central Bank. The emergency loan program, he said, “is designed to provide credit to the private sector, not to finance the government.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.