By JACK EWINGJUNE 3, 2015
FRANKFURT — Unemployment in the eurozone fell to 11.1 percent in April, the lowest rate in three years, according to official figures published on Wednesday.The jobless rate in April was down from 11.2 percent in March, according to Eurostat, the European Union statistics agency. The March figure was revised downward from an earlier reported rate of 11.3 percent.Unemployment in the 19 countries in the eurozone has been falling slowly since peaking at more than 12 percent in 2013. The last time the jobless rate was 11.1 percent was in March 2012. In April of this year, 17.8 million people were unemployed in the eurozone, Eurostat said.For the jobless rate to come down further, countries like France and Italy must roll back regulations that make it difficult for companies to dismiss unwanted workers, many economists and central bankers say. They argue that companies are reluctant to hire new workers if they know it will be costly and difficult to cut employees during a downturn.AdvertisementGermany’s jobless rate has plunged since it loosened job protections in 2005. In April, the rate was 4.7 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Changes to employment regulations are unpopular with the majority of citizens who already have jobs and fear they could become more vulnerable to dismissal.AdvertisementThe new leftist government of Greece has resisted demands by the International Monetary Fund and European Commission that it loosen employment rules. The government’s refusal to do so is one of the sticking points in negotiations between Greece and its official creditors.Greece had the highest jobless rate in the eurozone, at 25.4 percent. That figure is from February, the most recent available from Greece because of delays in compiling data.Spain had the second-highest rate in April, at 22.7 percent. That rate was an improvement over the same period a year earlier, when Spain’s jobless rate was 24.9 percent.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.