By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMJUNE 4, 2015
A review of the Federal Reserve’s response to recent leaks about its bond-buying plans raises new questions about the central bank’s efforts to police interactions with investors who can profit handsomely from inside information.In January 2011, the Fed adopted new rules for dealing with breaches, after a private research firm published an account of the central bank’s deliberations. Under the policy, an internal watchdog — the agency’s inspector general — was responsible for conducting investigations.But the next year, when a different research firm revealed details to its clients about a new round of bond-buying, Fed officials did not tell the inspector general or law enforcement about the breach. They spent nearly six months conducting their own investigation; they didn’t find the source of the leak.Then, in 2014, the Fed rewrote the rules, increasing the importance of such internal reviews and playing down the inspector general’s role.AdvertisementThe leak, and the Fed’s response, are now in the spotlight. They are the subject of investigations by the Justice Department, the House Financial Services Committee and the Fed’s inspector general. Members of both political parties have demanded a full accounting of the matter.AdvertisementBut less attention has been focused on the Fed’s reliance on internal investigations to police the leaks.The issue of leaks has cropped up intermittently almost since the Fed’s creation in 1913, as investors endlessly chase after the central bank’s valuable secrets. Investors can make a lot of money by gleaning confidential details about the direction of monetary policy.Andrew Levin, a former Fed economist who played a key role in creating the 2011 policy, said senior officials concluded at the time that the central bank did not have the resources to conduct its own investigations. He said he did not understand why the Fed deviated from that judgment in 2012, or why it later changed the policy.“It was a carefully considered decision, which reflected the fact that the inspector general’s office was the only part of the Fed that had any investigative capabilities at that time,” said Mr. Levin, who left the Fed in September 2012 and now works at the International Monetary Fund.Laurence M. Ball, an economist at Johns Hopkins University who has criticized the Fed for an overly cozy relationship with the financial industry, says the central bank has an obligation to explain more clearly what happened in 2012, and how it plans to prevent leaks.Mr. Ball compared the episode to an analyst publishing advance details of Microsoft’s earnings. “Only this is the U.S. Treasury market,” Mr. Ball said. “It’s a much bigger deal.”A Fed spokeswoman declined to comment on the record about the 2011 policy, the investigation of the 2012 leak or the changes made in 2014.AdvertisementJanet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, has told Congress the Fed takes the matter seriously and is awaiting results of the various investigations.“We recognize in particular the importance of safeguarding confidential information that could advantage individuals who gain access to it,” Ms. Yellen wrote in a letter last month addressed to Representative Jeb Hensarling, the Texas Republican who is chairman of the House Financial Services Committee.At the time of the 2012 leak, investors were eager for information about the Fed’s plans.In September 2012, the Fed had announced a new phase in its bond-buying campaign: It would accumulate mortgage bonds until job growth improved substantially.On Oct. 3, one day before the Fed released an account of its deliberations, Medley Global Advisors sent a note to clients offering two pieces of valuable information. Come December, the Fed would start buying Treasuries, too. And instead of merely aiming at job growth, it would specify a target level for unemployment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The author, Regina Schleiger, also included a juicy tidbit. Some of the Fed’s staff, she said, had stayed up past midnight preparing for the meeting.Medley sells access to investors. The company’s website says it seeks information “by cultivating relationships with senior policy makers around the globe.”In March 2009, a day after a meeting of the Fed’s policy-making committee, Ms. Schleiger participated in a conference call for investors. The Fed was in a “blackout period” after the meeting, during which its officials were not supposed to talk about policy. But Ms. Schleiger said she had spoken with some of those officials “since they broke from yesterday’s meeting,” according to a transcript.She also shared a colorful detail. When Fed Chairman Ben S. Bernanke had spoken earlier that month in his hometown, Dillon, S.C., “They had to buy him a blazer for the appearance,” Ms. Schleiger said. That did not appear in any published account of his appearance.The information in the Fed’s minutes often produces large movements in financial markets, according to a 2013 study by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. On the day Ms. Schleiger published her memo, the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury was 1.61 percent. After the minutes were published the next day, it rose to 1.74 percent on the day. Investors who saw the memo — titled “Fed: December Bound” — could have profited by anticipating that movement.AdvertisementNo clear evidence has emerged that anyone did. But J. W. Verret, a law professor at George Mason University, said the Fed should have referred the matter to law enforcement immediately because of the possibility that the leak amounted to insider trading. Mr. Verret, previously senior counsel for the House Financial Services Committee, initiated the committee’s investigation of the leak when he first learned about it from media reports in December 2013.“Presented with this clear of a possibility of insider trading, to me it’s a no-brainer that you should contact the F.B.I.,” Mr. Verret said.Instead, the day after Ms. Schleiger sent her research note, Mr. Bernanke informed members of the policy-making committee that he had asked two Fed officials to “look closely” into the leak, according to a summary of the resulting investigation that the Fed released in March 2015.The review was conducted by William B. English, an economist who ran the Fed’s powerful monetary affairs division and served as the committee’s secretary, and Scott G. Alvarez, the Fed’s general counsel. The Fed’s 2011 policy for investigating leaks — formulated by a committee headed by Ms. Yellen, then the Fed’s vice chairwoman — had called for those two officials to conduct an “initial review” and then determine whether to request a full investigation. The results of that investigation would be reported to the Federal Open Market Committee, which consisted of the Fed chairman and other top monetary officials.Instead, in March 2013, Mr. Alvarez and Mr. English reported to the committee that they had not been able to identify the source.By then, the inspector general had received a tip about the leak, eliminating the need for Mr. Alvarez to request a full investigation.Jon Faust, an economist at Johns Hopkins University who previously served as a senior adviser to Mr. Bernanke and Ms. Yellen, said that the Fed benefited from conversations with investors, particularly as the Fed has pursued a series of experiments in monetary policy to revive the economy.“Markets often behave in ways that surprise the policy makers,” Mr. Faust said. “It’s useful to hear what those folks are thinking.”Members of both political parties, however, say the Fed must do more to make sure investors are not taking advantage of that access. The Fed continues to adjust the way it deals with those interactions. In January 2014, the Fed made what it described at the time as “minor changes” to its rules for leak investigations. In the new policy, the internal review process is no longer described as an “initial review,” and its results can now be reported to the F.O.M.C. — just as the Fed had done in March 2013.AdvertisementThe inspector general’s office was part of the discussions that led to adoption of the 2011 policy. But John Manibusan, a spokesman for the office, said it was not consulted about the 2014 changes. He added that the inspector general’s office retained its ability to initiate investigations, as it has done in the case of the 2012 leak.A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Fed Deflects Outside Aid to Investigate Data Leaks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.