AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinThe impact of a landmark decision that made it harder to prosecute insider trading was amply demonstrated on Thursday as the top federal prosecutor in Manhattan moved to dismiss the charges and convictions of seven people.The 2013 conviction of Michael S. Steinberg — the highest-ranking employee at SAC Capital Advisors to stand trial for insider trading — would be dropped, as would the guilty pleas of six cooperating witnesses.The decision by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, came just a little more than two weeks after the United States Supreme Court declined to review a ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit that tossed out two other insider trading convictions and made it harder for authorities to pursue certain kinds of wrongful trading cases.A dismissal of Mr. Steinberg’s conviction had been seen as a possibility in light of the appeals court ruling, which overturned the earlier convictions of two former hedge fund managers, Anthony Chiasson and Todd Newman, on similar evidence of improper trading in shares of two technology companies.But Mr. Bharara’s decision essentially to wipe away the guilty pleas of six cooperating witnesses, some of whom testified at the trials of Mr. Steinberg, Mr. Chiasson and Mr. Newman, was somewhat unexpected.In a statement, Mr. Bharara said that “insisting on maintaining guilty pleas in these cases would not be in the interests of justice,” in light of the appeals court ruling. But he added that the prosecutions were brought in “good faith.”Daniel C. Richman, a professor of criminal law at Columbia University, said a decision to dismiss the pleas of cooperators was consistent with the “desire that cooperators never do worse than defendants who go to trial.”He added that if prosecutors sought to keep those pleas in place, it could send a negative message about the value of cooperating with investigations.The moves to dismiss were done through filings with the clerk’s office of the Federal District Court in Manhattan. They differed from the often high-octane press statements from Mr. Bharara’s office that routinely accompanied announcements of new convictions during the long-running crackdown on insider trading in the hedge fund industry.“Michael Steinberg did not commit any crime and is an innocent man,” said Barry Berke, the lawyer for Mr. Steinberg. “We hope that his vindication will receive as much attention as his wrongful prosecution.”The guilty pleas from cooperating witnesses that prosecutors moved to dismiss were those of Jon Horvath, Jesse Tortora, Spyridon Adondakis, Sandeep Goyal, Danny Kuo and Hyung Lim.Steven R. Peikin, a lawyer for Mr. Horvath, said: “This was obviously the only appropriate decision, given that the Second Circuit determined that Jon committed no crime whatsoever. Jon looks forward to moving on to the next phase of his life.”The dismissals, now nine in all, are a significant blow to one of Mr. Bharara’s crowning achievements in office. The decision puts a dent in Mr. Bharara’s insider trading record, which was perfect until last year. His conviction rate now stands at roughly 85 percent.The United States attorney in Manhattan oversaw a sweeping crackdown on insider trading in the hedge fund industry, but a federal appeals court upended the campaign.The actions to drop Mr. Steinberg’s case and dismiss the guilty plea of Mr. Horvath, a former analyst who worked for Mr. Steinberg at the hedge fund founded by Steven A. Cohen, would appear to diminish the sweep of the guilty plea by SAC to securities fraud. The plea deal by the former hedge fund company, which included the payment of $1.8 billion in fines to federal authorities and securities regulators, meant the end of Mr. Cohen’s run as one of Wall Street’s most successful hedge fund managers.Today Mr. Cohen, who was never charged with wrongdoing by prosecutors, runs an $11 billion family office called Point72 Asset Management that employs more than 800 people.Mark Herr, a spokesman for Mr. Cohen and Point72, said, “We are pleased that the ordeal for Mike Steinberg and his family is over.” Mr. Cohen, who still faces a civil administrative “failure to supervise” case brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission, declined to comment.It’s not immediately clear what impact, if any, the dismissal of Mr. Steinberg’s conviction and Mr. Horvath’s guilty plea will have on the S.E.C. lawsuit.The agency’s civil action is also predicated on Mr. Cohen’s failure to properly supervise Mathew Martoma, another trader convicted of insider trading, whose case is not expected to be affected by the appeals court ruling.The December ruling by the appeals court that threw out the convictions of Mr. Newman and Mr. Chiasson is not expected to lead to the dismissal of many other insider trading convictions. But it is likely that lawyers will cite the decision to challenge other convictions and pleas.Joon Kim, the deputy United States attorney under Mr. Bharara, said, “Although it may be the subject of some ongoing litigation, we expect this to be largely the extent of the fallout from the Newman decision on our prior insider trading cases.”There is precedent for prosecutors to dismiss guilty pleas of cooperators if a related and significant conviction is overturned.In the Enron investigation, prosecutors did not oppose a motion by a cooperating witness to withdraw his guilty plea after the Supreme Court in 2005 reversed the obstruction of justice conviction of Arthur Andersen, the former giant accounting firm.In 2008, a federal judge in New York vacated a number of guilty pleas taken in connection with an investigation into improper trading on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. Those pleas were vacated after an appeals court overturned the convictions of several so-called floor brokers and specialists, and other cases dropped by prosecutors.Mr. Bharara, in public comments, has been more focused on the future impact of the December ruling than its impact on convictions already secured by his office. He has said the ruling would make it harder for prosecutors to bring criminal cases when corporate executives pass on an inside tip to a friend or a relative expecting nothing special in return.The appeals court, in throwing out the convictions of Mr. Chiasson and Mr. Newman, said the original tips were not unlawful because the corporate investor relations employees who disclosed most of the confidential information did not do so expecting a personal benefit in return.The decision was seen as putting new teeth into an element of insider trading law that has waned in importance over the years, with prosecutors contending a personal benefit can be something as ephemeral as wanting to help out a friend.But the court said friendship alone might not be enough and authorities must show something more was meant to be exchanged in return for the stock tip.Just what that something more is, however, remains a bit elusive.Ben Protess and Alexandra Stevenson contributed reporting.Advertisement