By NOAM SCHEIBERJUNE 4, 2015
Employees at Gawker Media, the company that publishes websites like Gawker and Jezebel, voted by a substantial margin on Wednesday to form a union, a first for a prominent digital media outlet.The workers announced the organizing effort in April and conducted some of it publicly, including a long, free-ranging discussion by staff members on the Gawker website under the headline “How We’re Voting on the Union, and Why.”“I didn’t know how it was going to go till the vote came in,” said Hamilton Nolan, a senior writer who played a central role in the organizing. “Since we had a lot of public discussion about it, it might have given the appearance of more anger, opposition, that might not have numerically played out.”In all, 107 of 118 eligible writers, editors, illustrators and video producers cast a vote, 80 of them in favor of the union, according to Gawker.AdvertisementEmployees involved in the effort said the impetus was as much a desire to formalize arrangements that already existed in ad hoc form as it was to push for better pay and benefits. Many said they also hoped to improve communication between the staff and management, which they said was too haphazard, a legacy of the company’s start-up roots.AdvertisementIn all, they characterized the union push as a natural outgrowth of a maturing company, in which employees are older, stay longer and, increasingly, support families.“It was very simple things like severance if you get fired, things like having clearer salary minimums for each position, a clearer way to talk about raises, promotions,” said Anna Merlan, another worker active in the campaign.Many of the staff members were adamant that the union not seek rules that restricted their work habits, like the amount of time they can spend on the job in a given day or week or the amount of content they can produce.Both Mr. Nolan and Ms. Merlan said that employees were generally happy at Gawker and satisfied with the leadership of the company’s executive editor, Tommy Craggs.Nick Denton, the founder and chief executive of Gawker Media, discusses on CNBC his employees’ decision to unionize.“Since Tommy Craggs came on at the beginning of this year, there’s been a big push for what we want to do editorially being more geared to quality over quantity,” Mr. Nolan said. “Anyone who’s been here a while knows that the company goes up and down. It seems good to organize in a time when things are good.”The idea of unionizing Gawker Media first occurred to Mr. Nolan, who writes often about labor issues, in March during a conversation with Ursula Lawrence, an organizer at the Writers Guild of America, East, about an unrelated issue.Ms. Lawrence agreed to set up an initial meeting in mid-April so that Writers Guild officials could hear from employees and answer questions about how a union would function at the company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The roughly month-and-half-long campaign had a distinct lack of animus between employees and management, which was encouraging of the effort. Nick Denton, the company’s founder and chief executive, said in April that he was “intensely relaxed” about the possibility of his employees unionizing, while Mr. Craggs told Wired that he was “politically, temperamentally and, almost, sentimentally supportive of the union drive.”AdvertisementMr. Denton maintained his Zen-like posture during a brief interview over instant message after the vote. Asked if he worried that the union could restrict his ability to make strategic changes, Mr. Denton said: “It will close off a few options, none of them very appealing anyway. And it will open so many more.”He added: “The creative workers of the Internet are a force. I’d rather be on their side than that of the soulless conglomerates so many of them work for.”Employees said they expected that the process of putting together a committee of worker representatives to negotiate with management could take several months to a year. They planned to poll colleagues about a range of issues.In the meantime, some said they hoped that their union would begin a trend in digital media, even in the tech world writ large. (Among digital outlets, only The Daily Beast has a union, the result of its 2010 merger agreement with Newsweek, which was already unionized.)Since the vote, Ms. Lawrence, the organizer, said she had already received several calls from employees of other digital publications expressing interest in organizing their workplaces.“I would like to see Vice unionized, BuzzFeed unionized, The Huffington Post,” Mr. Nolan said. “Obviously if the industry is widely unionized, companies can’t play us off against each other.”A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Gawker Media Employees Vote to Form a Union, and the Bosses Approve .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.