AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan WeismanWASHINGTON — About a week ago, Representative Cedric Richmond of Louisiana, a passionate champion for the poor in New Orleans and the lone Democrat in the state’s congressional delegation, received a phone call from President Obama, pleading for his vote to enhance the president’s trade negotiation powers.Mr. Obama did not get very far.“I represent a trade district,” the congressman said. “I could very well vote for this. Problem is, I don’t want to.”That is a problem for the president. In recent days, he has been personally calling House Democrats, leaning particularly hard on the 45 House members in the Congressional Black Caucus, like Mr. Richmond, whom he hopes in the end can be persuaded to side with him. The pitch is one he has repeated to all audiences: Every modern president but Richard Nixon has had the congressionally given power to negotiate trade deals that cannot be amended or filibustered.His pro-trade emissary to the caucus, Representative Gregory Meeks, Democrat of New York, makes it more biting: Denying the first African-American president that same authority smacks of bias, especially when opposition is rising in the Republican Party’s Tea Party wing.But there is another hurdle as well. Labor unions demanding that Democrats oppose the president are threatening political punishment for any member who wavers.Congressional Black Caucus members whisper that the White House most likely is right; the president ultimately will have the votes he needs in the House to secure trade promotion authority, by the slimmest of margins. “The outcome of the vote is not really in question,” said one African-American Democrat who is opposed to the trade bill.But until the vote is called, a lot of black Democrats will find themselves in a painful, public squeeze between the president they admire and do not want to see fail and the unions that have sustained them for years. “I’m hoping he doesn’t call,” fretted one veteran black House Democrat, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he counts Mr. Obama as a friend who has stood by him on political matters.Yet on this issue, he has no intention of standing by the president. “I don’t want to get sideways with organized labor,” he said. “They’ve been there for me.”That squeeze could be protracted. The Senate, with bipartisan support, approved a delicately negotiated bill last month to grant Mr. Obama trade promotion authority, in hopes that with that power, he can complete the ambitious, 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership, an accord stretching from Canada to Chile and Japan to Australia, linking 40 percent of the world’s economy.A quick vote in the House slipped away this week, as Republican leaders and Democratic supporters hunted for votes, and it could slip further. House leaders are now just hoping for a vote by the July 4 recess.“We’ll go to the floor when we have the votes to pass it,” said Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, who called trade promotion authority “a June project, as far as we’re concerned.”Delay is not trade’s friend. To get Senate Democrats on board, lawmakers structured the trade promotion bill to ensure that once the Trans-Pacific Partnership is completed, Congress cannot even consider it for four months — two of those months with the full text available to the public. Trade talks are delayed as the 11 other countries wait to see if Mr. Obama can land trade promotion authority, which he originally hoped he could secure in March.The delay is now likely to push any consideration of the Pacific trade accord into the presidential election season, an uncomfortable prospect not just for the Democrats’ front-runner, Hillary Rodham Clinton, but also for a divided Republican presidential field.And Democratic leaders are not making Mr. Obama’s job any easier. Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House minority leader, practically taunted House Speaker John A. Boehner on Thursday, saying he would have to use “the awesome power of the speaker” to produce 200 votes for the trade bill, “a nice round number.”“It’s not my responsibility,” she said.In other words, she will not deliver any more than the 17 Democrats who have come out in favor already — out of 188 in the House. Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said on Thursday he had no reason to doubt her head count.Mr. Boehner said he spoke with the president on Wednesday and expressed sympathy, with “big labor and liberal special interests ratcheting up their threats.” But, he added, Mr. Obama “has some work to do.”White House aides caution that the president’s net is being cast widely, with as much focus on pro-business New Democrats and port city lawmakers as black Democrats — though there is a lot of overlap in those groups. But African-American lawmakers are feeling the presidential touch.Representative G. K. Butterfield, Democrat of North Carolina and the chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus, said the solidarity pitch “could be a factor.” He met personally with Mr. Obama in the Oval Office, he said. The problem is, black lawmakers tend to represent poor urban districts that have seen the glittering skyscrapers built by United States corporations flourishing in a global economy but have seen very little of that wealth find its way to constituents who struggle for jobs and pay raises in the face of fierce globalized labor competition.Mr. Butterfield said his constituents still remembered rural North Carolina hemorrhaging jobs after the North American Free Trade Agreement was signed in 1993. He is leaning toward no, he said, “but it’s not a hell no.”Mr. Obama should count that as a small victory. Most minds are made up in the Black Caucus, which did not give George W. Bush a single vote when he won trade promotion authority in 2002.“There is no more loyal supporter of this president than me,” said Representative Chaka Fattah, a Democrat who represents Philadelphia. “I’m not voting for fast track.”And the appeal to solidarity (Representative André Carson, Democrat of Indiana, put it visually with a clenched fist thumping his chest as a symbol of brotherhood) can only get so far — especially with Democratic veterans.“It doesn’t impress me,” said Representative John Conyers Jr., a Detroit Democrat who called himself “a hopeless case” against the president’s position.Advertisement