AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — Fewer Americans sought unemployment benefits last week, the Labor Department said on Thursday, and worker productivity declined more sharply in the first three months of the year than previously thought.The new figures from the agency also showed that labor costs rose more quickly in the first quarter.Fewer unemployment claims indicate that job cuts remain low as employers are confident enough in the business outlook to retain workers. The Labor Department said applications for unemployment aid dropped 8,000 to a seasonally adjusted 276,000. The four-week average, a less volatile figure, rose 2,750 to 274,750.Applications have been below 300,000, a historically low level, for 13 weeks. Applications are a proxy for layoffs, and the small number of people seeking benefits indicates job security.Many economists hope that the low level of applications is a sign that hiring will remain healthy, too.Jim O’Sullivan, chief United States economist at High Frequency Economics, forecasts that the jobs report for May, due Friday, will show that employers added 240,000 jobs. Applications “continue to show no sign of an uptrend, consistent with a still-strong trend in employment growth,” Mr. O’Sullivan wrote in a note to clients.Analysts predict that the jobs report will show that employers added 227,000 jobs last month, on top of the 223,000 added in April. They also forecast that the unemployment rate will remain 5.4 percent, a seven-year low.The number of Americans receiving unemployment aid fell to just below 2.2 million, the fewest since November 2000. That is a small fraction of the 8.5 million unemployed. Some of the unemployed have used all of their benefits, while others, like recent college graduates searching for work, are not eligible for aid.Worker productivity fell 3.1 percent in the first quarter, a bigger drop than the 1.9 percent decline estimated a month ago, the Labor Department said. Labor costs rose at a 6.7 percent rate in the first quarter, faster than the 5 percent increase first estimated.Growth hit a soft patch in the winter with the overall economy, as measured by the gross domestic product, contracting in the January-March quarter. But economists say they believe that growth and productivity are rebounding. Still, productivity, the amount of output per hour of work, has been weaker in recent years, and economists are split on the reasons.Economists say they expect the overall economy to rebound in the April-June quarter as the effects of a harsh winter and other temporary factors fade.Productivity is the crucial determinant for rising living standards. Increases in efficiency allow employers to pay higher wages based on greater output without having to raise the price of their products, which can set off inflation. A slowing of productivity growth that has been evident recently has caused concern, and economists are divided over whether this is a short-term development or a longer-term problem.For all of 2014, productivity grew a modest 0.7 percent, even less than the 0.9 percent gain in 2013. From 1995 to 2000, productivity rose at an average annual rate of 2.8 percent, reflecting in part the strength the economy received from the Internet boom. But since 2000, productivity has slowed to an annual rate of 2.1 percent.The Federal Reserve watches productivity and labor costs closely to see if inflation pressures are intensifying. The long-term increase in labor costs has been well below the level that would set off inflation alarms at the central bank. The annual rates of increase have averaged just 0.8 percent since 2000, significantly below the 2.8 percent average gains from 1995 to 2000.Advertisement