By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINJUNE 4, 2015
The Securities and Exchange Commission on Thursday charged a Bulgarian man with misusing an important federal database for filing securities documents to submit false takeover bids for two companies, Avon Products and Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory.In a lawsuit, the S.E.C. said the man, Nedko Nedev, tried to fraudulently manipulate the stock prices of the two companies by using the Edgar database to submit bogus takeover bids. He had taken positions in the companies and hoped to profit from artificial inflation of their stock prices after the fake bids became public, the S.E.C. said.The lawsuit also said Mr. Nedev was involved with issuing a false news release in 2014 concerning a buyout offer for the Tower Group that was issued in the name of what the S.E.C. called a supposed European insurer based in Bulgaria.The S.E.C. said the bids for Avon and Rocky Mountain Chocolate were submitted by two previously unknown investment firms, PTG Capital Partners and PST Capital Partners, which had been approved to file documents to the Edgar database, which businesses and investment professionals worldwide use to submit regulatory filings.AdvertisementThe S.E.C. filed the lawsuit in Federal District Court in Manhattan just weeks after what regulators said was Mr. Nedev’s most recent attempt to manipulate the market with a fake bid to buy Avon, the cosmetics company, for $18.75 a share. The takeover bid, which appeared on Edgar, caused the shares of Avon to jump 20 percent before the company issued a statement saying it thought the offer was a hoax.AdvertisementThe false bid for Avon raised concern about the integrity of the Edgar database, which more than 300,000 companies, investment firms and individuals use to electronically submit regulatory filings with information that has the potential to move markets.The S.E.C. requires a notary public to verify the signature on an application to submit filings to Edgar, but the agency does not do much checking on those applicants beyond making sure the paperwork is filled out properly. Officials with the S.E.C. have said that doing background checks on every Edgar filer would be costly and might impede the flow of information to the markets.In the case of the Avon bid, the S.E.C. said the notary signature on the application used by PTG Capital to gain access to the Edgar system to submit the Avon bid had been falsified. It is not clear if the notary signature was similarly falsified with the application submitted by PST Capital with regards to the Rocky Mountain Chocolate bid.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the suit, the S.E.C. said Mr. Nedev’s actions “caused tremendous intangible harm to the U.S. markets” and potentially undermined investor confidence in the Edgar system. It also said he made tens of thousands of dollars in profit, which the S.E.C. is demanding he forfeit.Although the trading profits were small, the S.E.C. said on Thursday it had also gotten a court order to freeze about $2 million in assets in two trading accounts said to be maintained by Mr. Nedev. No lawyer for Mr. Nedev was immediately available for comment.The S.E.C. said Mr. Nedev, 37, used a brokerage account held in the name of a firm called Strategic Capital Partners Muster, based in Sofia, Bulgaria, to trade shares and derivatives in the stocks he tried to manipulate. The complaint also said some trading was done through a company incorporated in Nevada called Strategic Wealth.The S.E.C. said the first time Mr. Nedev used a little-known investment firm to gain access to Edgar to submit a false takeover bid was in December 2012 with Rocky Mountain Chocolate.After the false bid to buy Avon, Bryan J. Merryman, the chief financial officer of Rocky Mountain Chocolate, said in an interview that it was far too easy for a potential stock manipulator to submit a false takeover bid through Edgar. He also said his company’s own investigation of the incident had traced the false bid back to a website in Bulgaria but the case went no further.The S.E.C. suit suggested that others might have been working with Mr. Nedev in his plot to manipulate the shares of the Tower Group, Avon and Rocky Mountain Chocolate.A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: S.E.C. Accuses Bulgarian Man in a Stock Manipulation Scheme.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.