By EMILY STEEL and DAVID GELLESJUNE 4, 2015
Merger mania has taken over the media business.Facing an unprecedented period of disruption, media companies are racing to guarantee their positions in a future controlled by digital and mobile by betting that scale matters. The latest development came Thursday, when it emerged that the satellite TV company Dish Network was in talks to acquire the wireless provider T-Mobile US, according to people briefed on the discussions.A merger would be the latest in a flurry of megadeals to reshape the country’s gateways to video, broadband and mobile. T-Mobile US has a market value of $31 billion, and Dish Network is worth nearly $35 billion.“Another week, another deal, or maybe not. Who knows?” said Amy Yong, a Macquarie Group media analyst. “It’s kind of crazy. When it rains, it just pours.”Should Dish and T-Mobile strike a deal, 2015 would set a record as the strongest period in deal making for the global media and entertainment sector since 2000, according to Thomson Reuters. So far, activity this year has reached $155.3 billion, with merger and acquisitions in the cable industry alone the biggest since records began in 1980.Advertisement“Consumer behavior now is changing so rapidly that you have to make your bets,” said Jonathan Miller, a venture capitalist and former AOL chief. “The stakes are very high.”AdvertisementIndeed, media companies are facing steep challenges to keep pace with a generation of consumers who want to pay for programming they want to watch, and want to control when and how they watch it. For the first time ever, the number of pay television subscribers declined in the first quarter this year. At the same time, a wave of new streaming services made their debuts, offering live and on-demand television without a traditional cable bill. And the amount of time people are spending watching video on mobile devices is increasing exponentially.“Netflix and digital is pressuring the entire system,” said Anthony DiClemente, a Nomura media analyst. “The fundamental strain that is being put on these companies is digital disruption.”The rising threat of Silicon Valley and other financial forces are also at play, executives and analysts said. Low interest rates are giving companies more access to capital to make deals at the same time that Wall Street is rewarding deal activity. Shares in Dish rose 3.5 percent and T-Mobile stock was up 3 percent after The Wall Street Journal reported the companies were in talks Wednesday night.Besides a potential Dish deal for T-Mobile, AT&T has proposed a $48.5 billion takeover of DirecTV that would unite the telecom giant with the satellite company to create the country’s largest TV distributor. Last month, Charter Communications announced deals to acquire Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks, for a total of $67.1 billion, that would create a new force in broadband.The European telecommunications company Altice also recently announced its $9.1 billion acquisition of a controlling stake in Suddenlink Communications, the regional cable provider, the first in what is expected to be a wave of cable company takeovers for Altice. Verizon Communications, meanwhile, announced a $4.4 billion deal last month for AOL, largely considered to target the future of ad technologies.The companies have said that increased scale would allow them to better compete by pooling resources and investing in new technologies.“I think each of the deals in some ways has its own rationale and in some ways have a common rationale,” said Tom Rogers, chief executive of TiVo. “The more you can distinguish your pipe into the home with an attractive consumer video package, the more likely you are to be able to drive a lot of value.”AdvertisementThe industry is watching whether mergers among distributors will set off a wave of deal activity among TV companies like Fox, Disney and Time Warner. “Does this mean there is a simultaneous wave of consolidation among the programmers?” Mr. DiClemente said.A merger of Dish and T-Mobile US would resolve two big questions looming over the broader media landscape.It would definitively answer what Charles Ergen, the billionaire who controls Dish, plans to do with his huge holdings of wireless spectrum — the airwaves that carry communications signals — which he has been amassing for years without any clear plan for putting it to use.And it would give T-Mobile US a clear path to grow and continue its role as a disrupter, giving it the spectrum and financial heft it needs to do both.The combined company would be led by John Legere, chief executive of T-Mobile US, while Mr. Ergen would be chairman, said the people briefed on the matter, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Details of the price, and the cash and stock mix, were still being worked out.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Both Dish and T-Mobile declined to comment.Company executives had previously indicated interest. “As you might expect, we’re keeping all our options open,” Mr. Ergen said last month. “But obviously we admire what John and his team have done at T-Mobile, and certainly we follow what they do.”In March, J. Braxton Carter, T-Mobile’s chief financial officer, complimented Mr. Ergen’s push to accumulate unused spectrum. “You look at what he is doing with some of his technologies, and that type of marriage could be very, very, very interesting, or partnership,” he said.Analysts said these talks were not surprising after the series of deals that created new industry behemoths. Dish and T-Mobile were among the few companies left that had not found a match.Instead of trying to bundle a Dish satellite television subscription with a T-Mobile wireless package, the emphasis at the company will be on creating a network that can stream powerful mobile video offerings to smartphones and tablets, one person briefed on the discussions said.Both companies, Ms. Yong said, “are seen as disrupters in the space.” Indeed, Dish also has been aggressive in its push to create new business models. This year, the company unveiled its Sling TV service, which provides live and on-demand television delivered via an Internet connection for $20 a month.AdvertisementHowever, Dish’s business model faces hurdles, as fewer customers are paying expensive monthly bills for cable and satellite television packages.That is one more reason that Dish is looking for new sources of revenue, and why it has long expressed an interest in entering the wireless business, with its bid for Sprint in 2013.Over the last year, T-Mobile US, the No. 4 American carrier after Verizon Wireless, AT&T and Sprint, has been adding subscribers at a faster rate than its rivals, but at a cost. Its wireless plans often involve some form of a giveaway, which diminishes its chances to become a strongly profitable carrier like AT&T and Verizon.For example, T-Mobile makes it cheaper to take a smartphone abroad by eliminating roaming fees, and it also offers to cover a new subscriber’s termination fees when switching to T-Mobile. Analysts have long questioned whether T-Mobile’s growth strategy is sustainable.A merger with Dish would allow T-Mobile to significantly expand its network while giving it more time and resources to devise a more lucrative business model.Analysts said a deal between Dish and T-Mobile would be likely to receive a green light from regulators. Regulators are also largely expected to approve AT&T’s takeover of DirecTV, which would create the country’s biggest television distributor, with about 26 million subscribers.Dish has been a vocal opponent of other proposed deals in the industry. Last year, it asked regulators to block Comcast’s bid for Time Warner Cable because it said that it would “create serious competitive concerns” in the pay-TV and broadband business. Dish also said that the deal between AT&T and DirecTV would pose a competitive threat.Brian X. Chen and Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Dish Joins Deal Mania With T-Mobile Bid.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.