AdvertisementSupported byBy Landon Thomas Jr.Imagine a fund that offers exposure to the strategies of the world’s sharpest hedge fund investors. Or one that tracks the steady dividends paid by companies like Apple, instead of their more volatile shares.In stodgy mutual fund land, these are distant thoughts at best.But at the far frontier of the booming exchange-traded fund business, everyday investors can have access to an increasingly eclectic menu of investment themes that, traditionally, were available to only wealthy individuals and sophisticated institutions.E.T.F.s are vehicles that trade like ordinary stocks and follow a standard or specially created index of stocks, bonds, commodities and currencies. Because of their liquidity, transparency and low fees, E.T.F.s have become the fastest-growing component of the fund industry and now stand at more than $2 trillion in assets.With such growth comes an increased appetite for risk though.Take the fund introduced last year by Reality Shares, an upstart exchange-traded fund outfit based in San Diego.The firm’s co-founder and chief executive, Eric R. Ervin, recalled that when he was a broker to wealthy individuals at Morgan Stanley, his clients were looking for a way to invest in growing businesses that threw off a consistent stream of dividends while reducing their exposure to the whims of the marketplace.“The dividends of a business are based on reality,” Mr. Ervin said. “The stock price is based on emotion.”Mr. Ervin also notes that in the last 43 years, there have been only three years when companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index have not shown positive dividend growth, while there have been many years when stock prices have ended up lower.So Mr. Evin left his job at Morgan Stanley and established Reality Shares, which, with its flagship DIVY fund, gives an investor, via a suite of derivatives, exposure to broad dividend growth, absent stock appreciation or depreciation.In a rising stock market, DIVY is likely to lag the main indexes. But when stocks sell off, as long as dividend payouts don’t decline as well, Mr. Ervin is betting that the Reality Shares fund will stand out.DIVY has seen some asset growth recently but has yet to truly catch on and has funds of just $31 million.It also relies heavily on derivatives to capture its dividend exposure, which increases its risk profile relative to its peer group. Wide gaps between its net asset value and its share price suggest that this reliance on difficult-to-trade derivatives makes the fund less liquid than other dividend-oriented E.T.F.s.“No doubt they are innovative, but it is also a complicated structure,” said Paul Britt, an E.T.F. specialist at FactSet Research Systems in San Francisco. “The wide spreads and the liquidity is also a concern.”To date, the E.T.F. sector has been dominated by giants like BlackRock, State Street and Vanguard, which oversee mammoth funds that track major stock and bond indexes.Firms like Invesco PowerShares, and in particular WisdomTree, have also seen explosive growth by churning out funds that track specific market segments, such as export-oriented companies in Japan and Europe that benefit from a strong dollar.Now, a slew of smaller names like Reality Shares are coming to the market with the idea of democratizing riskier trading strategies that had not been available to everyday investors in the past.One of the more successful E.T.F.s in this regard has been IndexIQ’s multi-strategy E.T.F., which tracks the so-called macro strategy that large hedge funds follow.Founded by Adam S. Patti, a former index specialist at Fortune magazine, the fund mimics core hedge fund strategies by buying the relevant E.T.F.s — ranging from bonds to equities. The fund strives for consistent returns, absent sharp ups and downs. And, to date, it has been more successful in raising funds than Reality Shares, with its main E.T.F. now at about $1 billion.And best of all, says Mr. Patti, one does not have to to put up the rich fees that hedge funds charge their investors.The expense fee for the fund is less than 1 percent.“There is no need to pay ‘2 and 20’ here,” Mr. Patti said.Advertisement