
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

OCT. 22, 2015
The case of Valeant Pharmaceuticals shows how accounting scrutiny can intensify once a company’s merger activity slows. The drug maker’s stock ended down 19 percent on Wednesday after a short-seller and others questioned its bookkeeping and relationships with other companies. The history of Valeant, a $40 billion serial acquirer, may make it an obvious target, but as growth and mergers slow a renewed investor focus on companies’ figures is a logical shift.Valeant has bought several dozen companies since 2008. Its stock rose more than twentyfold after J. Michael Pearson became chief executive that year, peaking this summer as deal after deal transfixed Wall Street. Since then, though, the shares have tumbled by more than half. The stance of the Democratic presidential front-runner, Hillary Rodham Clinton, against drug companies that raise prices but do little research and development put Valeant’s business model in the spotlight. In its latest earnings call, the company said that it would undertake fewer acquisitions, limit price increases and invest more in research and development.
            The drug company is known for growing through acquisitions and cutting costs.        Investors are now examining much more closely the stalled Valeant deal machine. Discrepancies have appeared, for instance, in statements from the various parties about how the company is connected to two specialty pharmacies that help dispense drugs and assist patients with payments – Philidor Rx Services and R&O Pharmacy. To make it more convoluted, R&O is suing Valeant. The confusion has raised questions about Valeant’s bookkeeping for drug sales through pharmacies like these. Valeant has categorically denied any improper accounting.American health care reimbursement is complex, opaque and sometimes prone to fraud. There could be an element of confusion over similar company names. Or it may just be that Valeant’s multiple deals have created a web in which one strand has little idea what another is doing. When chief executives like Mr. Pearson do a dozen deals a year, they may spend too little time getting their new charges to work together.Either way, the Valeant turbulence is a sign of a cyclical change in investor thinking. When growth through acquisitions dries up, there’s greater focus on the reality of sales and profit. Watchdogs, too, have shifted their attention to accounting issues from insider trading. The Securities and Exchange Commission’s newish audit task force, for example, is using special software to spot unusual numbers, dodgy off-balance-sheet transactions and auditor changes. As the recent surge of mergers and acquisitions dies down, both investors and regulators may find they have their number-crunching hands full.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »