By NIKI KITSANTONIS and LIZ ALDERMANJUNE 4, 2015
ATHENS — As it tries to negotiate a new bailout deal with creditors, Greece got some breathing room on Thursday by deferring a series of debt payments until the end of the month.But the move, in the face of growing restiveness in Athens, amplifies the pressure on Greece and its creditors to work out their differences.While some progress has been made in recent days, Greece continues to resist certain conditions, particularly on politically difficult issues like pension cuts. Thursday night, a Greek official said the government would not sign an agreement that did not include debt relief, something that has not been part of these negotiations.Until they come to terms over economic changes and spending cuts, the creditors have refused to release €7.2 billion ($8.06 billion) from Greece’s international bailout program.AdvertisementAs talks with the country’s creditors have stumbled and crawled this week, the big uncertainty has centered on whether Greece will make a $335 million payment to the International Monetary Fund due on Friday. Greek officials had suggested that the payment would depend on the prospects for a deal.On Thursday, Greece invoked a little-used option to put off that payment and three others, totaling €1.6 billion, until the end of June. Although the practice of bundling I.M.F. loan payments into a single sum during a calendar month is allowed under the fund’s rules, that option was last taken by Zambia in the 1980s.AdvertisementThe announcement came as a surprise. Just three hours earlier, the fund’s managing director, Christine Lagarde, said she was “confident” that Greece would make its loan payment on Friday and dismissed talk that it would bundle its payments.In a brief statement on Thursday, the I.M.F. said the bundling option was “intended to address the administrative difficulty of making multiple payments in a short period.” Athens had no immediate comment on the decision.The move by Athens is part pragmatism. By deferring the payments, Greece can continue to negotiate with its creditors and try to meet its financial needs at home even as it runs dangerously low on cash.But it also allows Greece some degree of leverage, since the specter of default still hangs over the bailout talks. The creditors — the eurozone countries, the I.M.F. and the European Central Bank — are wary of the potential consequences.“What they’re saying to the creditors is, You’re going to have to blink, we’re not prepared to sign up to more of the same austerity and a continuation of what we’ve been going through for the last year,” said Simon Tilford, deputy director of the Center for European Reform in London.The country became the epicenter of Europe’s debt crisis after Wall Street imploded in 2008. Now, it is struggling to pay its debt, and its people and creditors are growing restive.Greece’s prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, spoke Thursday night via telephone with Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President François Hollande of France, according to a Greek government official. The official said the conversation took place in a “good and constructive” climate. But Mr. Tsipras also told them the creditors’ proposal could not be the basis for a deal, since it did not take into account the common ground reached in technical-level talks in Brussels over the last few months, the official said.AdvertisementMr. Tsipras is set to brief the Greek Parliament on the state of the negotiations on Friday, ahead of debate involving opposition party leaders that is expected to be heated.There had been signs this week that Greece and its creditors were edging closer to an agreement.Greece and its creditors have worked on dueling proposals all week after a meeting in Berlin on Monday that brought together Ms. Merkel, Mr. Hollande, Ms. Lagarde and the president of the European Central Bank, Mario Draghi. Also present at the meeting on Monday was Jean-Claude Juncker, who as head of the European Commission — the executive arm of the European Union — is playing the role of broker for the negotiations between Greece and its creditors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Wednesday night in Brussels, Mr. Tsipras had a five-hour meeting to discuss the dueling proposals with Jeroen Dijsselbloem, president of the Eurogroup of finance ministers. The parties reached no deal, but agreed that meetings and working groups would continue.After initial indications of convergence, the tenor slowly started to shift.In a news conference early Thursday, Mr. Tsipras indicated that there might be vast differences yet to bridge as the sides seek economic compromises that would put Greece on a firmer financial footing. Mr. Tsipras ruled out one of the creditors’ demands — more pension cuts — noting that five years of austerity had led Greece to a “major catastrophe,” and that its economy had shrunk about 25 percent.“The proposal of the Greek government is the only realistic one on the table,” he said.Greece’s proposal points to some concessions, like tax increases. But it lacked the bold overhauls to the Greek pension system and the labor sector that the country’s lenders had been seeking.The creditors’ plan also contains some compromises, like lower annual targets for primary surpluses — the amount of revenue Greece is required to hold in its coffers after expenses have been paid and before servicing its debt. A lower primary surplus would free up more money for Athens to spend on stimulating its economy.But the proposal is also said to include calls for further cuts to pension spending, tax increases and other painful measures.Those demands prompted angry reactions from several government officials in Athens on Thursday, underscoring the difficulty Mr. Tsipras will have in gaining parliamentary support for any deal that is reached.Syriza party hard-liners have suggested in recent days that they may dissent if Mr. Tsipras strikes a deal that they consider a violation of the anti-austerity pledges that brought the party to power in January. The junior coalition partner, the right-wing Independent Greeks, has also said it would not back further austerity.AdvertisementAfter details of the plan were leaked, the rhetoric in Athens got heated.In Parliament, the labor minister, Panos Skourletis, referred to an “undeclared war” that he said was being waged “by modern capitalism.” In comments to Greek television on Thursday, Alexis Mitropoulos, the deputy speaker of Parliament and a prominent lawmaker of Syriza, accused Mr. Juncker — who is widely perceived as friendly to Greece — of “delivering the most vulgar, murderous and tough plan when everyone was looking toward the negotiations closing.”With the outcry, some analysts remain skeptical about whether any agreement might finally be reached.“On balance, the deal as it emerges in its current shape and form will be impossible for Tsipras to sell at home,” said a report by Teneo Intelligence, a research group based in London. Much will depend on whether the Greek prime minister can manage to secure further concessions, the report added.An article on Friday about Greece’s deferral of several payments to the International Monetary Fund until the end of June misstated the decade during which Zambia took advantage of the practice of bundling I.M.F. loan payments into a single sum during a calendar month. It was in the 1980s, not the 1970s.Niki Kitsantonis reported from Athens and Liz Alderman from Paris. Landon Thomas Jr. contributed reporting from New York and Jack Ewing from Frankfurt.A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Greece Defers Debt Payment, Hoping for Progress in Talks .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.