AdvertisementSupported byBy David JollyPARIS — Volatility weighed on global stock markets on Thursday as a roller coaster trading day in China added to the grinding uncertainty about the debt crisis in Greece. A rout in European bonds continued.The Shanghai composite index closed nearly 1 percent higher, despite having slid more than 5 percent in the course of trading on Thursday. The index has gained a remarkable 53 percent thus far in 2015.That fluctuation carried into Europe, where the Euro Stoxx 50 index of eurozone blue chips fell 1.5 percent in midday trading only to rally to roughly unchanged in the afternoon, while the FTSE 100 index in London had given up 0.7 percent by the afternoon.In New York, the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index fell 0.2 percent in midmorning trading. The S.&P. 500 had gained about 0.4 percent the day before.While the wild ride in Chinese stocks was the most visible sign of market volatility on Thursday, uncertainty over Greece’s negotiations with its creditors also weighed on European stocks.The creditors — the European Commission, the International Monetary Fund and the European Central Bank — “have been kicking the can down the road for a very long time,” Philippe Gijsels, chief strategy officer at BNP Paribas Fortis, said on Thursday. “But they don’t seem to have made much progress, and there are some deadlines ahead.”Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, may have contributed to the market turmoil when he said on Wednesday that the central bank would not try to manage bond markets or react to short-term fluctuations in prices. “We should get used to periods of higher volatility,” Mr. Draghi said at a news conference in Frankfurt.Big swings in prices, he said, are to be expected when interest rates are very low. And he emphasized that the central bank would continue a plan announced in March to buy 60 billion euros, or about $67 billion, of government bonds and other debt each month through September 2016 as part of an economic stimulus program.Investors on Thursday were selling off European bonds. Bond yields, which move in the opposite direction to bond prices, reached astonishingly low levels this year in the eurozone, as investors sought safe assets amid expectations of poor growth and fears that deflation would take hold in the euro currency bloc.But the bond rally has reversed as the eurozone economy has gathered momentum faster than many market watchers had expected, and as deflation fears have ebbed. The yield on German government 10-year debt, the eurozone benchmark, is back around 0.8 percent, after having fallen almost to zero.Investors who bought 10-year Italian and Spanish bonds, so-called peripheral eurozone debt, pushed yields down to lows of around 1.1 percent in March. On Thursday, those bonds had yields closer to 2 percent.“You can no longer justify yields near zero on 10-years,” Mr. Gijsels said. As a result, investors who bought in at a time of low yields are now rushing for the exits to avoid losses.Mr. Gijsels said investors were also nervous about the May jobs report for the United States, due to be released Friday morning in Washington. Because recent data has not given a clear indication of the direction of the American economy, he said, markets will be closely watching the unemployment report for indications of how soon the Federal Reserve plans to begin raising interest rates from their current levels, near zero.“We’re in a perverse world where bad news is good news for the market,” he said, because a weak jobs report “would mean that rates stayed low.”The dollar fell early Thursday against most other major currencies but recovered slightly in afternoon trading. The euro was a touch higher at $1.1283. The dollar was steady against the Japanese currency at around 124.5 yen.Jack Ewing contributed reporting from Frankfurt.Advertisement