AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil Gough and Choe Sang-HunHONG KONG — One of America’s biggest activist hedge funds is making a rare foray into Asia, betting that it can alter the restructuring plans of the heavyweight Samsung.The move by Elliott Management, run by Paul E. Singer, essentially threatens efforts by the family that controls the South Korean tech giant to consolidate its hold over a sprawling corporate empire. The fund, which bought a 7.1 percent stake in a Samsung Group company that Samsung had planned to sell to another unit, objected on Thursday to what it said was a low sale price.Elliott’s move is an unusual glimpse of investor activism in a region where such campaigns are seldom seen and where they have met mixed results. Family or state shareholders wield control of some of the biggest public companies in Asia and often bristle at outsiders’ telling them how to run their businesses.The Samsung patriarch, Lee Kun-hee, 73, has been ailing since May 2014, when he was hospitalized after a heart attack. His son and heir apparent, Jay Y. Lee, is vice chairman of Samsung Electronics and holds a 23 percent stake in what is now effectively the main holding company for the Lee family’s interests across Samsung Group: Cheil Industries.Last month, Cheil began an all-shares merger bid, worth a minimum of $8 billion, for another group company, Samsung C&T, a construction and industrial investment business that also owns a valuable stake in Samsung Electronics.Elliott said it had paid about $630 million for its stake in Samsung C&T. In a statement, the hedge fund said that it objected to Cheil’s bid because it “significantly undervalues Samsung C&T.”“The terms are neither fair to nor in the best interests of Samsung C&T’s shareholders,” the statement added.In a separate regulatory filing in Seoul, Elliott, which has $26 billion in assets under management, said it bought the shares “for the purpose of participating in management” of Samsung C&T.Analysts said Elliott was effectively challenging the Lee family’s plans to consolidate its hold over the dozens of companies that make up the Samsung Group.“The company to be created through the merger will be at the peak of the system of management control over the entire Samsung Group, even if we cannot call it a holding company for the conglomerate,” said Cho Yoon-ho, an analyst at Dongbu Securities in Seoul.Mr. Cho and others said Elliott was unlikely to be able to block the deal. But he said that complicating the restructuring process could lead to “capital gains” if the share price rose further, increasing the pressure on Cheil.Samsung C&T on Thursday rejected Elliott’s claim that the terms of the merger plan were poor. In a news release, the company said that it had pushed for the deal “to strengthen the future value of the company and eventually the values of stock owners.”The statement added that Samsung C&T would “communicate with various shareholders and try to boost the company’s value.” Representatives of Cheil could not be reached for comment.Last year, Elliot built up a small stake in the Bank of East Asia, one of Hong Kong’s biggest local banks, which is controlled by the family of David Li. But its stake was diluted after the bank sold new shares to the Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group of Japan. Elliott sought to challenge the decision, which some analysts described as a defensive move by the Li family. The matter is working its way through the courts in Hong Kong.Other activist hedge funds have also met resistance in Asia. Two years ago, another Wall Street firm, the billionaire Daniel S. Loeb’s Third Point, built a substantial stake in Sony and began pressing the company for a board seat. It also sought to have the company spin off part of its entertainment arm, which includes a Hollywood film studio and a music label.Mr. Loeb was largely rebuffed and eventually sold his Sony stake. More recently, he has found his new investment in Fanuc, the Japanese robot maker, better received. After a recent meeting with the company’s management, Fanuc agreed to double its dividend.“Nobody thought this could be done,” Mr. Loeb told the audience at an investment conference last month.Elliott will be hoping for a similarly warm response to its criticism of Cheil’s offer for Samsung C&T. Under the terms of the deal, shareholders will receive 0.35 share in Cheil for each share they hold in Samsung C&T. The timing of the deal looks favorable to Cheil, whose businesses include fashion, construction and theme parks and whose own stock has soared since its initial public offering in December. Samsung C&T’s shares have underperformed in the same period.Shareholders of Samsung C&T are set to vote on the offer in July, and the merger needs a two-thirds majority to pass.“Elliott’s 7 percent alone cannot block the merger,” said Park Hyung-ryul, an analyst at Daewoo Securities in Seoul.Other Samsung subsidiaries control a combined 19 percent of Samsung C&T. But the biggest single shareholder is the National Pension Service, with a 10 percent stake. The pension service effectively blocked a planned $2.4 billion merger between Samsung Heavy Industries and Samsung Engineering late last year, when it exercised an option under South Korean securities law to compel the companies to buy back its shares.The companies scrapped the deal because the buyback would have been too costly.Likewise, shareholders in Cheil and Samsung C&T who oppose the merger can also force the companies to buy back their shares. But in this case, the price for the option is well below where the shares in both companies are trading now, so exercising it would effectively mean selling at a loss.“That also makes any opposition of the merger unlikely,” Mr. Park added.Neil Gough reported from Hong Kong and Choe Sang-Hun from Seoul.Advertisement