By BROOKS BARNESJUNE 5, 2015
LOS ANGELES — Despite a tenure marred by a major legislative setback and a slow response to the Sony computer attack, Christopher J. Dodd, the leader of Hollywood’s top lobbying organization, was given a three-year contract extension on Friday.Mr. Dodd, a former Democratic senator from Connecticut, will remain chairman and chief executive of the Motion Picture Association of America until 2018, the group said.In a statement issued on behalf of its member companies — 20th Century Fox, Paramount Pictures, Walt Disney Studios, NBCUniversal, Warner Bros. and Sony Pictures Entertainment — Mr. Dodd was called “an impactful leader and a vigorous champion for the industry.”The statement added, “We are confident he will continue to effectively help steer our interest through a challenging media and policy landscape.”AdvertisementMr. Dodd, 71, was hired in 2011 to restore luster to the association. He has successfully worked since then to improve Hollywood’s access to China, a fast-growing movie market but one where the government limits the number of Western films. Tax incentives for production have been another focus, along with combating online piracy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In addition to lobbying efforts, the organization regulates movie advertising and runs the movie rating system.AdvertisementHollywood in some ways is still stinging from the 2012 failure of the Stop Online Piracy Act. The Motion Picture Association was badly beaten by a consortium of technology companies in its efforts to get the bill passed.Mr. Dodd was also criticized for being missing in action — at least publicly — in the early part of the online attack on Sony Pictures late last year; the problem turned out to be a lack of consensus among member companies about offering support to Sony.The Motion Picture Association did not disclose the terms of Mr. Dodd’s new contract. Tax records show he has been paid about $3.3 million annually.A version of this article appears in print on June 6, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Hollywood Lobbying Group Keeps Dodd as Boss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.