By PETER EAVISJUNE 5, 2015
Britain’s National Health Service has long provided free and universal health care to the country’s residents.In one case, though, it appears to have provided an unusual therapeutic benefit to corporate America.A United States regulator on Friday asserted that the N.H.S. made cash payments to a large United States technology company that were used to make it look healthier than it truly was. In its action, the Securities and Exchange Commission accused the Computer Sciences Corporation of overstating profits and concealing serious problems from its investors. The S.E.C. extracted a $190 million penalty from the firm, one of the largest for accounting fraud in recent years, and the company’s former chief executive and chief financial officer were also punished.Much of the wrongdoing, according to the S.E.C., stemmed from a large but deeply troubled information technology contract that Computer Sciences struck with the N.H.S. Computer Sciences constantly struggled to satisfy the terms of the contract, which led to a series of difficult renegotiations with the British government from 2008 through 2011.AdvertisementThe S.E.C. said that Computer Sciences had carried out a fraud because it failed to write down earnings when it knew that the contracts had lost value. The case created infighting among the S.E.C.’s politically appointed commissioners about how harsh punishments should be. But the agency was not divided over whether Computer Sciences had issued erroneous financial statements.Advertisement“C.S.C. repeatedly based its financial results and disclosures on the N.H.S. contract it was negotiating rather than the one it actually had and misled investors about the true status of the contract,” Andrew J. Ceresney, director of the S.E.C.’s enforcement division, said in a statement.The Computer Sciences case goes back to a vexing time for the N.H.S., which was aiming to overhaul its vast medical records. Several companies, including Computer Sciences, entered contracts with the N.H.S. for the work. Accenture, a large technology firm, soon pulled out of its projects, allowing Computer Sciences to assume the extra work. But Computer Sciences soon stumbled badly with its projects, unleashing a firestorm of criticism of the company. One member of Parliament, for instance, said in 2011 that Computer Sciences was “holding the taxpayer to ransom,” according to media reports.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the taxpayer may have been unwittingly helping Computer Sciences.Leading up to that time, according to the S.E.C., the N.H.S. made cash payments to Computer Sciences that the firm then used to make it look stronger than it was. On paper, these payments were cash advances that the N.H.S. agreed to pay for future work. But the S.E.C. said that they were structured in such a way that they were effectively loans with a 5 percent interest rate.These advances bolstered Computer Sciences’ free cash flow, a measure of how much cash a company is taking in that investors consider important. Cash that a company obtains from loans would not normally go into free cash flow. But because Computer Sciences did not classify the advances as loans, the company was able to book them in free cash flow. This was allowed under generally accepted accounting principles, but the S.E.C. said that company’s chief financial officer, Michael Mancuso, had failed to make the required disclosures about the advances.The cash advances were not small, and Computer Sciences became dependent on them, the S.E.C. said. They peaked in the firm’s 2010 fiscal year, which ended in April of that year. The N.H.S. advanced $580 million in the closing days of that period, prompting Mr. Mancuso to send an email to some employees in which he said that the company had “dodged a bullet.” Wall Street analysts who covered the company, primarily Rod Bourgeois, who was at Bernstein at the time, were deeply skeptical of Computer Sciences’ cash flow and peppered management with questions in conference calls.The S.E.C. order also describes how free cash flow helped drive compensation payments to senior executives at Computer Sciences. “Absent the $580 million N.H.S. cash advance,” the complaint asserts, “C.S.C.’s free cash flow results would have fallen hundreds of millions of dollars short of the bonus plan target, resulting in no payout to the executives.”The S.E.C.’s complaint does not say whether the N.H.S. knew that the cash advances played a decisive role in helping Computer Sciences to meet its public cash flow estimates. A spokeswoman for Britain’s Department of Health said on Friday that she could not comment. Many of the cash payments were made when the Labour Party governed Britain. A Conservative Party-led government assumed power in May 2010.Still, the N.H.S. did express some concerns, according to the S.E.C. These focused on how the company wanted to speak about the contract in public. In November 2011, the N.H.S. was informed about comments about the contract that Computer Sciences was thinking of using in a script for an earnings call. The N.H.S., according to the S.E.C.’s complaint, wrote back: “We are of the opinion that the comments could give the impression that the project is ‘on track’ with its delivery (which is clearly not the case).”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.