By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJUNE 5, 2015
NEW ORLEANS —  A federal jury on Friday found David Rainey, a former BP executive, not guilty of making false statements to investigators in connection with the 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil spill.Prosecutors said that Mr. Rainey manipulated calculations in the early days of the spill to match a far-too-low government estimate of the amount of oil that was spewing into the gulf. However, defense lawyers said Mr. Rainey’s figures were made honestly and that he had no reason to lie.The jury agreed, and so did the judge.“I agree with the verdict,” said United States District Judge Kurt Engelhardt.Eleven rig workers died in the Deepwater Horizon explosion, which resulted in the nation’s worst offshore oil spill. A federal judge overseeing civil litigation in the case ruled this year that roughly 3.19 million barrels spilled before the damaged well was capped — a rate of more than 36,000 barrels a day. The government’s initial estimate was about 5,000 barrels a day.AdvertisementMr. Rainey also faced a charge of obstructing a congressional investigation but Judge Engelhardt dismissed that charge this week, in part because members of Congress could not be subpoenaed to testify.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Rainey was one of a handful of people charged criminally in connection with the disaster.Kurt Mix, a former BP engineer, was convicted on one of two criminal counts in 2013 after prosecutors said he deleted text messages about the oil flow after the explosion. His conviction was overturned because a jury forewoman tainted the deadlocked deliberations by mentioning she had heard something outside the trial that affirmed her view of Mr. Mix’s guilt. Prosecutors have asked an appellate court to reinstate the conviction rather than have them try Mr. Mix again.Trial is pending for the BP well site leaders, Robert Kaluza and Donald Vidrine, who have pleaded not guilty to manslaughter charges stemming from the 11 deaths.AdvertisementAnthony Badalamenti, a former manager for Halliburton, BP’s cement contractor on the rig, was sentenced to one year of probation for destroying evidence in the aftermath of the spill.A version of this article appears in print on June 6, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-BP Executive Found Not Guilty of Lying to Investigators During 2010 Gulf Oil Spill .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.