
Breakingviews By                     
FIONA MAHARG-BRAVO

JUNE 5, 2015
It is good to talk. And Vodafone, the $100 billion British mobile giant, is right to open formal, if noncommittal, lines of communication about asset swaps with Liberty Global, Europe’s leading cable group.Vodafone shares fell 2 percent in morning trading, suggesting disappointment among investors who had thought a merger was in the cards. Smaller-scale deal-making is probably the right way forward, but it could get complicated.Few quibble with the strategic logic of finding some way to combine Vodafone’s and Liberty’s footprints, particularly in Northern Europe. Analysts at Morgan Stanley estimate that a combination would create 15.7 billion pounds, or $24 billion, in savings. Joining forces would produce a powerful player selling a converged package of TV, broadband, landline and mobile services. Liberty’s chairman, John C. Malone, said in an interview on May 19 that a tie-up in Europe would create “enormous” shareholder value.A straightforward merger looks difficult. Vodafone’s enterprise value is about £92 billion, or $140 billion, while Liberty’s is just less than $90 billion. Investors wondered if Vodafone could ease the path to a big deal by first spinning off its emerging-market assets. Even then, governance could prove tricky. Mr. Malone controls Liberty through supervoting shares. The companies also have different views on capital structure and returns. In Mr. Malone’s words, Vodafone has low leverage, low risk and high cash payout, whereas Liberty prefers to increase equity value.AdvertisementThat may explain why Vodafone said on Friday that the two were thinking about an “exchange of selected assets.” This would be cleaner than an unwieldy joint venture but also raises questions.The companies overlap mainly in Germany, the Netherlands and Britain. It is hard to see Vodafone, which already owns Kabel Deutschland, leaving Germany to Mr. Malone. It could swap its British and Dutch assets for Liberty’s German businesses, which have similar enterprise values, according to RBC. But a German deal may face antitrust hurdles because the two would create the dominant player in that market.AdvertisementVodafone’s shares may have sagged, but they are still 7.5 percent higher than they werebefore speculation over a tie-up intensified on May 19. Reaching a deal will be difficult, but may well be worth the trouble.Fiona Maharg-Bravo is Reuters Breakingviews Madrid correspondent. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com. We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »