AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill Vlasic and Rebecca R. RuizEver since General Motors began recalling cars with a defective ignition switch that has been linked to at least 109 deaths, Mary T. Barra, its chief executive, has repeatedly apologized for the automaker’s failings in what became the gravest safety crisis in its history.On Friday, it was the regulators’ turn to acknowledge their role, after more than a year of casting blame on G.M.Two internal reports released by the Transportation Department identified a series of failings by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration that allowed millions of defective G.M. cars to go unrepaired for more than a decade. The ignition switch could suddenly turn off, stalling the engine and disabling the airbags.While the reports still focused blame for the defect squarely on G.M., the nation’s largest automaker, they also included an unusually blunt assessment of mistakes made by regulators.The agency, for example, admitted it had clues of the defect that it did not pay attention to, and acknowledged that it failed to use its full authority to hold G.M. accountable.In response, the government is revising its investigative procedures, stepping up efforts to obtain safety data from automakers and creating an oversight team of outside experts to help put the changes into effect.Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx acknowledged on Friday that there were “deficits” in the investigative process at the safety agency and “room for self-improvement” in how the government regulates the safety of autos.“We have taken a set of actions that will aid in improving the effectiveness of N.H.T.S.A.,” Mr. Foxx said in a conference call with reporters.The admissions drew sharp responses from members of Congress who have been critical of the government’s inability for years to recognize that defective ignition switches in G.M. cars could suddenly cut engine power and disable airbags, putting occupants at risk of death or serious injury.“There needs to be a complete overhaul of this failing agency,” said Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut. “The results of this report are long overdue.”The agency’s new administrator, Mark R. Rosekind, took over in December and has since instituted a more aggressive stance toward the auto industry, pushing in particular for quicker responses on continuing safety issues at Fiat Chrysler Automobiles and the Japanese airbag manufacturer Takata.Mr. Rosekind said on Friday that he had not disciplined or fired any government officials for their role in failing to force G.M. to fix its defective small cars before the automaker began recalling 2.6 million Chevrolet Cobalts, Saturn Ions and other affected models in February of last year.But he said the G.M. scandal, which set off a record number of vehicle recalls for the entire industry in 2014, was the catalyst for substantial changes in how the agency ensures that some 250 million vehicles in America are safe to drive.“The G.M. experience changed the culture here,” Mr. Rosekind said. “What that means is challenge the information you’re getting, and challenge the assumptions you are pursuing.”Asked if that meant government investigators would be more skeptical of the safety data provided them by auto companies, he said the agency’s future approach would be to “trust, but verify” any information from carmakers.That is a seminal shift in how government regulators have long dealt with automakers, which are required by law to supply data on crashes, accident victims and internal defect investigations.G.M. has already paid a $35 million fine to the government for its prolonged failure to recall its unsafe cars, despite the fact that a number of its engineers, lawyers and product specialists were aware of ignition problems. Additionally, the company still faces probable criminal charges by the Justice Department, according to people with knowledge of its investigation.In a statement on Friday, G.M. did not address its part in spurring broad changes in government safety investigations. “We support the changes to N.H.T.S.A.’s organization announced today, and we will continue to work collaboratively,” the company said.In a shift, the agency said it would put manufacturers “on notice” about potential defects as soon as it identified troubling cases, without waiting to accumulate extensive evidence.The agency will also adopt a “risk control” program that better aligns various departments and encourages more sharing of safety information.It also proposed a formal process to reach out to lawyers who represent accident victims, partly to make government investigators aware of secret settlements between automakers and litigants on safety issues.The agency said it would be monitored for the next year by a team of outside experts including former officials of the National Transportation Safety Board and NASA, as well as by a professor of medicine and engineering at the University of Michigan.Their goal will be to prevent the errors made by the agency in its bungled investigation into G.M.’s flawed ignition switches, which were detailed in the two reports released on Friday.In one of the reports, N.H.T.S.A. acknowledged it did not pay sufficient attention to a Wisconsin state trooper’s report in 2007 that suggested a crash that killed two young women had been caused by the ignition switch.The agency also criticized itself for not exercising its full legal powers to hold G.M. accountable, noting that it had not required full responses from the company on the details of fatal accidents.“Rather than push back and request more information, N.H.T.S.A. analyzed the incomplete responses,” the report said.The agency’s admissions are a striking contrast to the tone it took last year under its acting administrator, David J. Friedman, who in congressional hearings repeatedly focused blame for the deadly ignition defect on G.M.Mr. Rosekind said on Friday that his task was to reform and improve the agency, rather than punish government officials who went too easy on G.M. or missed clues about the root cause of stalling vehicles.“G.M. intentionally deceived and withheld information,” he said. “That’s different than someone who had good intentions and made a human error.”He added that the reports highlighted the need for more funding for his agency in the coming federal budget — a key to enacting its overhaul.The report calls for more than doubling the number of staff members devoted to defect investigations. The agency has 54 full-time employees devoted to its defects division. It is requesting 85 new ones next year and ultimately hopes to add another 336 people, it said.One safety advocate argued that the changes made by safety agency did not go far enough, and urged the agency to open up investigative reports to the public.“It still soft-pedals why they have gone from one defect crisis to another,” said Sean E. Kane of the consulting firm Safety Research and Strategies. “What is missing is any mention of the importance of transparency.”Friday’s reports do not conclude scrutiny of the agency’s handling of the defect, however. The Transportation Department inspector general has been conducting its own examination and results are expected later this month.For one family tragically affected by the G.M. defect, the reports did bring some sense of closure.“From Day 1 I said, isn’t N.H.T.S.A. just as guilty as General Motors is?” said Ken Rimer, stepfather of Natasha Weigel, who died in the Wisconsin crash highlighted in the reports. “It’s terrific they are finally owning up to their mistakes.”Advertisement