AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben Protess and Peter EavisThe Securities and Exchange Commission has long sought to make an example out of the Computer Sciences Corporation, a large technology company with government contracts around the world. And on Friday, the S.E.C. seized the opportunity, bringing civil charges against eight former employees and executives and extracting a $190 million penalty from the company for “manipulating financial results.”But it almost didn’t happen. In recent weeks, infighting at the highest level of the S.E.C. imperiled the case, one of the agency’s biggest stands against accounting fraud in a decade. And the case nearly collapsed last month after the S.E.C. missed a legal deadline for charging some of the wrongdoing, according to people briefed on the matter — a misstep that forced the agency to reduce the penalty for at least one executive.The problems, which serve as the latest reminder of how political divisions disrupt the agency’s enforcement efforts to punish corporate wrongdoing, emerged after Computer Sciences publicly disclosed last year that it settled with the S.E.C.’s enforcement division. The case hit a wall when some of the S.E.C.’s commissioners, a majority of whom must approve enforcement settlements, balked at the settlement, according to the people who were not authorized to speak publicly.The case pitted the commission’s two Democrats, who channel the public uproar over corporate misdeeds, against two Republicans, who argue that big corporate fines unfairly punish shareholders. In this case, a Republican commissioner complained that the $190 million penalty was too harsh, while at least one Democrat called for charges against a former controller at the company, whom the S.E.C. did not plan to penalize. That approach raised alarms in the defense bar, which had already complained that individual employees were becoming bargaining chips in this political fight.Mary Jo White, the agency’s chairwoman and a political independent who pledged to crack down on corporate misdeeds when she took over the agency two years ago, would typically break such a stalemate. But federal ethics rules required her to step aside because her husband, a partner at the law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore, helped represent Computer Sciences in the S.E.C. investigation.The investigation centered on accounting missteps that arose from the company’s large and troubled contract with Britain’s National Health Service. The company, the S.E.C. said, altered accounting related to the contract to avoid hits to its profit in 2010 and 2011.The resulting case, and the tale of how a divided S.E.C. still managed to pull off a last-minute deal, offers a crash course in S.E.C. politics. S.E.C. enforcement actions are supposed to stick to the facts and the law, but they are also beholden to politically appointed commissioners. And when Ms. White is recused — Cravath has handled roughly 10 cases during her tenure — the enforcement division’s path to a deal becomes even narrower.Before President Obama named Mary Jo White to run the Securities and Exchange Commission, she was the top federal prosecutor in New York City.Such fissures have also appeared in S.E.C. rule-making, prompting a wave of negative news articles. The scrutiny reached a climax this week, when Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts and an outspoken critic of Wall Street, attacked Ms. White in a letter, calling her tenure “extremely disappointing.” Ms. Warren cited The New York Times’s coverage of the Computer Sciences case as a basis for her concern.And yet, this case also highlights the potential for compromise at the S.E.C. Rather than abandon a crucial case — and allow a wrongdoer to escape punishment — it appears that the Democratic commissioners overcame their disagreements with the enforcement division and reached a deal, even though it did not include charges against the former controller. Ultimately, the S.E.C.’s actions reached as high as the company’s former chief executive, Michael Laphen, and its chief financial officer, Michael Mancuso.“The significant sanctions in this case against the company, C.E.O. and C.F.O. reflect our focus on ensuring that such misconduct is vigorously pursued and punished,” Andrew J. Ceresney, head of the S.E.C.’s enforcement division, said in a statement.On Friday, Computer Sciences restated its financial statements to reflect accounting errors. “We are pleased to settle this longstanding civil investigation that focused largely on accounting issues from 2009 to 2012,” Richard C. Adamonis, a company spokesman, said in a statement.The S.E.C. did not require Computer Sciences to admit wrongdoing. Although the S.E.C. initially sought admissions, the people briefed on the matter said, the company argued that doing so would imperil its work as a government contractor.As Computer Sciences struggled to carry out its contract with Britain’s health service, the company faced the prospect of reduced earnings, according to the S.E.C. Instead, the company’s accountants adjusted a model in a way that shored up profits.The British health service also made cash advances to the company that the S.E.C. contended were effectively a loan. When financial analysts asked Mr. Mancuso whether cash flows had benefited from such advances, he replied that the company had achieved it “the old-fashioned hard way.” But after Mr. Mancuso learned that the company received a $580 million advance, he sent an email to colleagues that said the company had “dodged a bullet.”Much of the S.E.C.’s investigation focused on the former employees and executives. Five of the eight executives charged by the S.E.C. agreed to settle, including Mr. Laphen, who agreed to pay a $750,000 penalty. Computer Sciences will also take back about $3.7 million in his compensation.Lawyers for Mr. Mancuso and Mr. Laphen did not respond to requests for comment.In addition, the S.E.C. charged six former Computer Sciences finance employees, some who held relatively low-level positions overseas and others who appeared to be at the center of the scheme. Half of the former employees settled, while the S.E.C. sued the others.The agency’s former controller was conspicuously absent from the list of people charged. The S.E.C.’s enforcement division had sent him a so-called Wells notice, warning that it was planning to charge him, but his lawyers persuaded the S.E.C. to stand down.In recent weeks, to help sway the Democrats to approve the case, the S.E.C.’s enforcement division discussed charging the former controller, the people briefed on the matter said. Kara M. Stein, one of the Democrats, questioned whether enough high-ranking executives were being charged. The other Democrat, Luis A. Aguilar, has made individual charges a focus of his enforcement platform.Hoping to appease Michael S. Piwowar and Daniel M. Gallagher, the agency’s Republicans, the enforcement division discussed lowering the corporate penalty to about $100 million. Mr. Gallagher had already agreed to $190 million, while Mr. Piwowar was a holdout.But questions soon arose as to why commissioners would overrule the judgment of the investigators who handled the case. And eventually, Ms. Stein backed down. The final vote was 3 to 1, the people said; Mr. Piwowar dissented.But during that debate, before settling on the $190 million penalty, a legal deadline for filing a portion of the case expired because some of the misconduct took place more than five years ago.The missed deadline forced the S.E.C. to lower the fine against at least one of the individual defendants — not Mr. Mancuso or Mr. Laphen — whose misconduct took place partly outside the five-year deadline.Concerns also arose about the treatment of some lower-level defendants. As the S.E.C. ramped up its investigation, a lawyer for some of the former employees requested emails and other documents from Computer Sciences. The documents, in theory, would help the former employees mount a defense.But lawyers for Computer Sciences balked, inferring that S.E.C. investigators might deny so-called cooperation credit from Computer Sciences if it shared the documents. While doing so is not improper for the S.E.C., it is generally frowned upon in legal circles.S.E.C. officials dispute that they linked the cooperation credit to the company’s sharing of documents, noting that cooperation is not determined until the end of a case. The officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, argue that it is generally up to companies, not the S.E.C., to decide whether to withhold documents from former employees. Peter J. Henning contributed reporting.Advertisement