AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiFAYETTEVILLE, Ark. — Walmart’s board elected a new chairman on Friday, only the third chairman in the retail giant’s history. The post again passed on to a member of the founding Walton family.Greg Penner, 45, will replace Rob Walton, who has been chairman for 23 years and is a son of Walmart’s founder, Sam Walton.Mr. Penner has held several positions at Walmart, including senior vice president for finance and strategy for Walmart.com and chief financial officer in Japan. He is married to the daughter of Rob Walton, who will continue to serve on the board.“I’m deeply honored to follow in his footsteps and recognize the deep responsibility I have to our associates, all shareholders and the board,” Mr. Penner said, referring to his father-in-law.Oliver Chen, a retail analyst at Cowen and Company, the financial services company, said in a research note that Mr. Penner could probably use his background in e-commerce and finance to balance growth, investment and capital returns. “He brings a younger energy to Walmart, while continuing family tradition,” Mr. Chen said.Walmart’s board has been criticized for a lack of independence of its board from the company’s management, at a time Walmart faces questions over a bribery scandal in Mexico, executive compensation and slowing growth at its stores in the United States and overseas.Five of the 15 directors are either affiliated with the company or are insiders, according to Glass, Lewis & Company, a leading independent proxy advisory firm.“We believe this raises concerns about the objectivity and independence of the board and its ability to perform its proper oversight role,” the firm said in a proxy paper before Friday’s meeting.Shareholder resolutions submitted this year call for the board to be led by a chairman who is independent of family or business ties to Walmart and to allow shareholders to make board nominations. Another resolution calls for more transparency on management compensation plans and programs.“Tens of thousands of associates receive so little each year that they are eligible for food stamps. That’s a double standard and that has to stop,” said Mary Watkins, a Walmart employee, shareholder and member of the labor union affiliate group, Our Walmart, who presented the resolution on executive compensation at the shareholders’ meeting.As expected, the resolutions did not pass. The Walton family controls more than 50 percent of Walmart’s shares.Advertisement