
Retiring By                     
CONSTANCE GUSTKE

JUNE 5, 2015
A DIE-HARD community gardener and composter, David Conrad, 77, wanted to age in a retirement community that complemented his love of all things green. So seven years ago, he and his wife, Sally, moved to earth-friendly Wake Robin in Shelburne, Vt.Now Mr. Conrad spends his days managing the Wake Robin recycling campaign, along with working in the community garden and walking the community’s four miles of wooded trails. Other residents make maple syrup or tend beehives that produce honey, which is bottled and sold.“I wanted to live in a place that’s healthy,” says Mr. Conrad, who is a retired college professor. “So sustainability is very important. We like to think that we’re leading the way.”Green do-gooders like Mr. Conrad are indeed forging a new path for retirees. Though eco-conscious retirement communities are still rare in the United States (exact figures are scant), they are expected to grow in number as baby boomers age and seek healthier, greener alternatives.Advertisement“Moving forward, in the next 20 years, these green communities will become the standard,” said Andrew Carle, director of the senior housing administration program at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va.AdvertisementLots of green communities are in the development stage, said Jamie Hopkins, associate professor of taxation at the American College of Financial Services. But for now, there’s more need than supply, especially as baby boomers age. Some places even have five-year waiting lists, he said.These lush facilities offer lots of unseen benefits. Carbon footprints are reduced with energy- and water-saving initiatives, including geothermal heating and low-flow toilets. And older people can enjoy environmentally friendly buildings that typically offer airy spaces with more natural light and indoor furnishings that use far less toxic materials. These communities can also reap subsidies and incentives that might provide more motivation to make the upgrades, experts say.The biggest challenge, though, is wading through the gray policy areas of green standards.So Mr. Hopkins recommends making sure there’s enough evidence to back up actual claims. “Eco-friendly doesn’t mean a lot,” he said. “And some places just use buzz words.” For example, some so-called eco-friendly communities may have golf courses, which use lots of water.Two types of official green standards can serve as guideposts, though.The first, said Mr. Hopkins, is Energy Star ratings on appliances, which is a government label that designates energy efficiency.Second is a community’s LEED certification, Mr. Hopkins said. It’s a widely recognized program put together by the U.S. Green Building Council to create healthier, more energy-efficient buildings. There are four levels: certified, silver, gold and platinum, the highest rating. The higher the level, the greener the building. Most green retirement communities are silver certified, said Mr. Hopkins.However, any LEED certification is worth having. Getting this label requires lots of adjustments, and energy efficiency is only one of them. Others include choosing drought-resistant plants, using recycled materials and installing large windows that let in more natural light.LEED certification is a holistic view that includes lifestyle, said Scot Horst, chief product officer at the Green Building Council in Washington. “And it all impacts how people feel in the space. There’s also a greater connection to the outdoors.” For example, he says, air quality is important because mold might affect people with respiratory problems.AdvertisementOver 150 countries, including China, also have LEED-certified buildings. “We’re seeing countries like Holland and Germany doing a better job with certification,” added Mr. Hopkins. “So more people are moving overseas.”For now, green retirement communities are largely upscale and in the Northeast and Northwest.Take Atria Woodbriar Place, a gold LEED-certified senior campus in Falmouth, Mass., on Cape Cod. Appliances are Energy Star rated and solar panels generate some of the community’s electricity. Recycled materials were also used in its construction.Roberta Hendricks, an 81-year-old resident, says she likes Atria Woodbriar because it has resource efficiency that’s more difficult to create in an existing home, such as low-flow toilets and water-saving devices. “What better life could you have?” she asked. “Energy is saved in every way.” She added that there wasn’t a similar community in the area. “Also my kids were pleased about the community being green,” she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the Northwest, Timber Ridge, at the foot of Cougar Mountain in Issaquah, Wash., has silver LEED certification. Besides being energy-efficient, Timber Ridge has landscaping with lots of plants that need little water.Jean Bolliger, an 85-year-old retired community college administrator, also likes Timber Ridge’s large windows, good air quality and cleaner energy. Ms. Bolliger, an avid recycler, says that her peers are very slow to become aware of green communities. “But it’s important to ask about them,” she said.Not all green communities are stamped with the LEED label, though.Wake Robin, where Mr. Conrad lives, predates LEED certification — as do many retirement communities. But Wake Robin has added geothermal wells and other energy-efficient upgrades over the years.“Currently, 20 percent of Wake Robin’s electricity comes from a solar farm,” said Nancy Chiquoine, director of resident services at Wake Robin. Meat and produce are bought from local farms, she adds. Nontoxic chemicals are used in household cleaning, and the grounds are aflutter with Ladybugs, which are preferred to pesticides.Some Wake Robin residents with green agendas also pitch in. Mary Hoffman, 88, is chairwoman of the greens committee. She works with the staff to find more ways to conserve energy and encourage recycling. The committee also teaches residents how to recycle and save energy.“For some people, being green is a new concept,” said Ms. Hoffman, a lifelong environmentalist and hiker. “But we’re in a beautiful spot, and I want to protect it.”AdvertisementIn Portland, Ore., Rose Villa has turned itself into a sustainable community. It has a garden, where residents grow raspberries and grapes. The dining room gets some of its organic produce from local farms, along with having a large kitchen garden that grows herbs and squash. There’s also a vigorous composting and recycling program.But the community is not LEED-certified because making the changes that the certification requires can cost tens of thousands of dollars, said Vassar Byrd, chief of Rose Villa. Still, she says, there are many LEED-like features, such as low-emission materials and so-called naturescaping that forgoes ornamental plants that require lots of water. Beehives and a vineyard where residents can grow grapes to make wine are also planned.“There are so many ways to focus on green,” she said. “You have to decide what’s important to you.”Faith-based communities are also adding eco-friendly amenities. Kirkland Village in Bethlehem, Pa., one of dozens of Presbyterian Senior Living communities on the East Coast, is undergoing an expansion that includes geothermal wells, energy-efficient appliances and even sustainable woods like bamboo.“We’re slow to catch up,” said Rodney Fenstermacher, director of construction for Presbyterian Senior Living. “It takes a while to build momentum.” Still, he adds, more educated consumers are asking for green additions and using them as comparisons.To ferret out the green from the gray, Mr. Fenstermacher recommends asking lots of questions, such as about a community’s sustainability plans. “You can also develop your own green criteria,” he added. “But ask them to prove it.”For Mr. Conrad, who hikes, swims and snowshoes, being green is a necessity. “I want to leave the world a little better,” he said.Make the most of your money. Every Monday get articles about retirement, saving for college, investing, new online financial services and much more. Sign up for the Your Money newsletter here.A version of this article appears in print on June 6, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Living Green in Retirement, for Efficiency and Love of Nature .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »