AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Liz Rodbell, president of Lord & Taylor and Hudson’s Bay department stores, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Were you in leadership roles or doing entrepreneurial things when you were younger? A. I grew up in Springfield, Mass., and from a very early age, I was interested in fashion. As soon as I could get a job, I was working in stores, engaging with customers. My first job was selling shoes. I also sold jewelry and worked in some local department stores.How have your parents influenced your leadership style?My father started his career as an industrial engineer in the steel industry. His second career was in management consulting. My mother was a schoolteacher. I had this very strong culture of work and career at a very early age, and lots of room for independence for my brothers and me. We were taught to believe that if you put your mind to do it, you could do it — the world is your oyster, but you’ve got to make it happen.And they were always in our corner. That meant a lot to me, and I use that line a lot today with my team — “I’m in your corner.” We’re in this together to make things happen.Other lessons from your parents?My mother was always very prepared and knew her material for school. But at the same time, she was open to learning all the time, whether it was taking courses or learning from others. That’s something I pride myself on — I have a vision and a strategy, but at the same time, I always want to be open to learning from others.My father played football in college and was recruited by the Giants to play professionally. I learned how to catch a football before I rode a bike. But he really felt that he had a longer career opportunity using his math mind rather than playing football. I also learned from him the concept of playing to win and understanding the offense and defense of the business world. I also use a lot of football analogies. In retail, you can have a great long-term strategy, but you also have to have the ability to adjust in the huddle and redirect energy.Do you remember when you first became a manager?I was about 22 years old. I was right out of college, and I was managing associates who were twice my age. It was an interesting challenge — showing them respect but also coaching them to do more. So I tried to get to know them personally, rather than just coming in and expecting them to do what I say. I was always very driven, and I had a point of view of what salesmanship qualities I was looking for. But it was getting to know them personally that helped with the age gap.What were some other early leadership lessons for you?There are two things that came from my parents that have been reinforced over my career. The behavior seems so simple, but it’s the importance of saying “thank you,” and taking the time to recognize people’s successes. Saying thank you is not hard, but not everybody does it. It helps the whole team.When you mentor people, what advice do you typically give them?If I’m coaching somebody on how to have a challenging conversation with somebody on their team or a vendor partner, my advice is always to be honest and candid and direct. And you have to make sure people understand why you’re having the conversation, so they know where you’re coming from. And you have to ask questions of the person, too, so that you understand their point of view and it’s a dialogue.I also tell everybody that this is a very fast industry, and you have to make decisions and keep moving. But sometimes the right decision is not to decide right away. You can say, “My decision is to put that one to the side for now.” Take the moment to make a good judgment, then make the decision and move on to the next one.How do you hire?I want somebody who’s really smart but also very driven and can work with people. So I try to have the candidate tell me stories about themselves and their experiences of how they dealt with challenges. I want to know who their favorite boss was, and why. I also ask why they want to be here. That goes a long way in telling me why this is the right place for them and how committed they are.Do you have any pet peeves beyond the obvious ones?We’re in a lot of meetings, and they’re very purposeful and we have agendas. If somebody isn’t listening and following the trail of where we are in the conversation, I get annoyed. When we run a meeting, we expect people to speak up, and if they don’t understand something, they should ask about it. And sometimes new executives want to prove themselves a bit. But you’re on the team. You’re hired. You’re in. So you don’t have to do that.I also expect quick responses to email. If I don’t even get an “I’ll get back to you” or a “Got it” or something, I’m unsure if the message got through. So I do expect follow-up. I’m very busy and I want to be connected to make sure that we keep moving.What career and life advice do you give to new college grads?People should get out there and just get experience if they don’t know exactly what they want to do. Just try it on and see what fits. Be open to what the possibilities are and don’t close doors.Some people don’t think networking is as important as they should. But you can reach out to people and say, “How did your career start? What did you do? How did you find your way? How has it evolved?” People are very willing to help if you just ask them.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about the challenges of leading and managing. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice.This interview has been edited and condensed.Advertisement