AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad Bray, Mark Scott and Emily SteelThe British telecommunications company Cable & Wireless Communications said on Thursday that it was in takeover discussions with Liberty Global, the European cable and wireless operator controlled by John C. Malone.Cable & Wireless said it was discussing a possible bid by Liberty Global to acquire the company for cash and shares.The deal, if it is completed, would broaden Liberty Global’s presence in the Caribbean and Latin America.Cable & Wireless, in which Mr. Malone already has a 13 percent stake, was worth 2.6 billion pounds, or about $4 billion, based on its market capitalization on Thursday.“There can be no certainty that any firm offer will be made nor as to the terms on which any firm offer might be made,” Cable & Wireless Communications said in a news release on Thursday.Shares of the company rose more than 20 percent in London on Thursday, after media reports that Liberty Global might be preparing a takeover bid.On Thursday, Liberty Global confirmed that it was in talks with Cable & Wireless over a potential takeover, though said no deal had yet to be finalized. Under British takeover rules, the company has until Nov. 19 to decide whether to make a formal bid for Cable & Wireless.Cable & Wireless, based in London, provides pay television, broadband, mobile and traditional land line telephone services in the Caribbean, Monaco, Panama and the Seychelles.The company had about 6 million subscribers across its various services as of the end of March. It posted revenue of $1.8 billion in its last fiscal year, which ended in March.Cable & Wireless, which traces its roots to 1852, was formed in 2010, when its British and Caribbean businesses were separated into stand-alone companies. The British business was acquired by Vodafone in 2012.Last year, the company agreed to acquire privately held Columbus International, a telecommunications provider in Latin America and the Caribbean, for $1.85 billion, including the assumption of debt.The sellers of Columbus International included entities controlled by John Risley, a Columbus co-founder, and entities controlled by Mr. Malone.The potential takeover of Cable & Wireless Communications would mean a change of strategy for Liberty Global, whose operations are primarily in Europe.In recent years, the company has spent tens of billions of dollars to buy Virgin Media, a British cable operator, and Ziggo, a Dutch telecom provider. Liberty Global also held early-stage talks with Vodafone, the British wireless giant, over a potential asset swap, though both companies announced recently that the discussions had not led to a deal.Yet despite the European focus, Liberty Global may have become less interested in further acquisitions after Margrethe Vestager, the European competition chief, voiced concerns that future telecom deals might lead to higher prices for consumers.Such words of caution, analysts say, have diminished the appetite of many European cable and mobile providers, which had been eager to scoop up smaller rivals in national markets in efforts to create Pan-European telecom operations involving mobile, fixed-line, cable and pay-TV offerings.In July, Liberty Global announced that it was starting a new tracking stock called LiLAC to “exploit organic growth potential” for its operations in Latin American and the Caribbean.Since then, there has been much speculation that it would be a roll-up vehicle for assets in Latin America, which has been a fast growing market for pay television and broadband, said Amy Yong, an analyst with Macquarie.“It has been clear that he has ambitions to consolidate in the Latin American market, and this would facilitate that,” she said.Mr. Malone personally has a 13 percent voting stake in Cable & Wireless. That ownership came through an earlier deal in which Cable & Wireless paid about $1.9 billion in cash and stock for Columbus International, that was partly owned by Mr. Malone.Mr. Malone is behind another big deal pending in the United States, where he has pushed for industry consolidation for more than two years. Regulators in the United States are scrutinizing Charter Communications’ pair of deals for Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks. Charter Communications is backed by Mr. Malone’s Liberty Broadband, which is a separate company from Liberty Global.“He has been very active,” Ms. Yong said. “He has Europe and the United States. Now, it’s Latin America.”Advertisement