AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.08 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.02 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $527.6 million of debt securities. Competitive.TUESDAYGeorgia, $1.3 billion of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Maine, $89.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYAtlanta, $252 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Suffolk County, N.Y., $61.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYBerkeley Unified School District, Calif., $50 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Wisconsin, $90 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKBirmingham Public Schools, Mich., $50 million of school building and site bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Charlotte, N.C., $75 million of equipment acquisition and public facilities debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.Cleveland Municipal School District, $200 million of general obligation school improvement bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Corona-Norco Unified School District, Calif., $150 million in general obligation and refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Escondido Union School District, Calif., $60 million of general obligation bonds. William Blair.Farmington Public Schools, Mich., $79.8 million of school building, site and refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Maricopa County, Ariz., $185 million of certificates of participation. J. P. Morgan Securities. Miami-Dade County, Fla., $534.2 million of aviation revenue and refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Peoria, Ariz., Unified School District, $94.6 million of refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus. St. Paul Housing and Redevelopment Authority, $150.1 million of hospital facility revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. San Jose-Evergreen Community College District, Calif., $80 million in general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Spring Branch Independent School District, Tex., $53 million of debt securities. Jefferies.Virginia Port Authority, $58 million in revenue bonds. Raymond James.Advertisement