AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko Tabuchi“Primates of Park Avenue,” a memoir on the secluded lives of Upper East Side wives, set off a rush of skeptical commentary over what appeared to be the outré rituals, like “wife bonuses,” of New York’s wealthy elite.On Sunday, after a report that there were factual errors in the book, the publisher, Simon & Schuster, said it would append a note to future editions of the book, written by the social researcher Wednesday Martin, clarifying that some of the memoir’s details and chronologies were changed.“It is a common narrative technique in memoirs for some names, identifying characteristics and chronologies to be adjusted or disguised, and that is the case with ‘Primates of Park Avenue,’ ” said Cary Goldstein, vice president and executive director of publicity at the publisher.“A clarifying note will be added to the e-book and to subsequent print editions.”In her book, Ms. Martin claims to have spent six years living with her two children on the Upper East Side, conducting fieldwork for her memoir. But an article in The New York Post claimed on Sunday, citing property records, that she had lived in her Park Avenue apartment for only three years.The Post also noted other inconsistencies in the book’s chronology, including mentions of a fancy macaron store that, in fact, did not open in New York until after Ms. Martin had moved away from the upscale neighborhood.Ms. Martin could not immediately be reached on Sunday. Her agent, Miriam Altshuler, did not respond to multiple messages seeking comment. Ms. Martin’s publicist, Sandi Mendelson, also did not return a request for comment.To write her book, Ms. Martin, who has a graduate degree in comparative literature, and is a mother of two and the wife of an investment manager, said she immersed herself in the ways of the well-heeled women she met during her years on the Upper East Side.She describes a world where highly accomplished women trade in their business suits for a life of charity luncheons and elite gym sessions, defined by a strict social pecking order and an intense quest to get their children into top-tier schools.Among the more eye-catching details divulged in the book was the “wife bonus,” handed out by rich husbands to reward good home budget management, or a child’s acceptance into a prestigious school.And while Ms. Martin’s book is presented as a memoir, she has also suggested that her work process involves a degree of academic rigor and accuracy.“For many years I had immersed myself — through interviews, reviews of the anthropological literature and participant-observation — in the lives of women from the Amazon basin to sororities at a Big Ten school,” she wrote in an opinion piece published in The New York Times last month.“A social researcher works where she lands and resists the notion that any group is inherently more or less worthy of study than another,” she wrote. “I stuck to the facts.” Advertisement