
Political Economy By                     
HUGO DIXON

JUNE 7, 2015
What sort of man is Alexis Tsipras?The next few days will define Mr. Tsipras, Greece’s prime minister. He will have to choose between saving his country and sticking with a bankrupt far-left ideology. If he is smart, he can secure a few more concessions from creditors and a goodish deal for Greece. If not, he will drag the country into the abyss.For months, Mr. Tsipras has been trying to ride two horses simultaneously. He has wanted to stop Greece’s defaulting on its debts and quitting the euro, while increasing public spending and unwinding reforms that are making Greece more competitive.The prime minister continued this tricky double act in a speech to the country’s Parliament on Friday. He dismissed proposals from the eurozone and the International Monetary Fund — calling them “irrational,” “illogical” or “absurd,” depending on who was doing the translating to English — while also saying Greece was ready to compromise and was closer than ever to a deal with its creditors.On the same day, Athens failed to pay 300 million euros, or about $333 million, it owed the I.M.F. This did not constitute a default because Greece took advantage of a rarely used I.M.F. rule that allows debtors to pay all the money they owe in a particular month in a single chunk at the end of that month.AdvertisementThe new deadline of June 30 for paying a total of €1.6 billion means Mr. Tsipras will not be able to ride both horses much longer. He will soon have to decide whether to come to terms with his creditors. He can improve the “irrational” offer on the table a bit, but not by a lot.AdvertisementFirst, though, look at the consequences of both options.If he does a deal, he may split his leftist Syriza party. But he would be able to call a new election, kick out the rebels and probably win a fresh mandate with an increased majority.Although Greece would benefit and Mr. Tsipras himself would stay in power, he might balk at this option, because it would involve tearing himself away from his far-left intellectual home. He would have to redefine himself as center-left and face being called a traitor by erstwhile comrades.On the other hand, not doing a deal would result in bankruptcy, followed by capital controls and probably exit from the euro. Mr. Tsipras might see his popularity plummet and be ejected from office.It is possible that Mr. Tsipras himself doesn’t know which way he will jump. Both options must seem ghastly, which is presumably why he is still desperately seeking a better trade-off.One probably exists, based on the principle that Greece will accept structural reforms as long as the creditors ease up on austerity.In detail, this would mean that the creditors would no longer insist on two particularly unpopular measures: raising the sales tax on electricity to 23 percent from 13 percent; and cutting low-income pensions. In return, Athens would accept the rest of the creditors’ proposed sales tax and pension changes, which, among other things, would reduce tax evasion, increase retirement ages and make the pension system financially sustainable.Such a deal would, of course, leave a hole in Greece’s budget. About half of this could be filled by letting Athens aim at a primary surplus, before interest payments, this year of 0.6 percent of gross domestic product, as the government has suggested, rather than the 1 percent that the creditors want.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Greece would have to find alternative measures to close the remaining gap, ideally by cutting spending, or otherwise by taxing less vulnerable people.AdvertisementAthens would have to accept the other reforms on the creditors’ list: not just the ones Mr. Tsipras already advocates, such as an independent tax agency and a crackdown on corruption, but things that are harder to swallow, such as privatization of the electricity grid and creating a more efficient civil service.The prime minister would also have to withdraw his plan, announced on Friday, to restore collective bargaining rules unilaterally. Instead, he would agree to the creditors’ proposal to review the current program.The eurozone would dangle two more carrots. First, it would commit itself to relieve Athens’s debt burden when a third bailout plan is negotiated in the coming months, so long as the government sticks to the agreed deal.Mr. Tsipras’s own debt restructuring plans — which, among other things, involve eurozone countries’ writing off part of the debt and replacing another chunk with bonds whose principal is never repaid — is politically a nonstarter. But it should be possible to lighten the load by extending the current debt-servicing holiday and giving Athens longer to repay its debts.Second, the European Central Bank would provide liquidity directly to Greek banks so they would not have to rely on emergency liquidity assistance from the Greek central bank. It would also include Greek government bonds in its huge bond-purchase operation.It is not certain that Mr. Tsipras can negotiate such a compromise. But the basic philosophy of more reform in exchange for less austerity will appeal to some of his creditors, provided he can deliver the message with conviction. And to do that, the Greek prime minister will need to show what sort of a person he really is. This is his defining moment.Hugo Dixon is a freelance columnist and the author of “The In/Out Question: Why Britain Should Stay in the EU and Fight to Make It Better.”A version of this article appears in print on June 8, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »