
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

JUNE 7, 2015
Caroline Lim  is the global head of human resources and corporate affairs at PSA International, one of the world’s largest port operators, based in Singapore.Q. When did you first start managing a team?A. I started my career with Apple in Singapore; I remember being Employee No. 23. The Apple way was to empower people, and so already in my mid-20s I had a small team. I was in charge of compensation and benefits, running the “Apple Shop,” the employee gift store. I think that because I had a solid grounding in an organization that believes in empowering people, that has stayed with me throughout my career. I must add that Steve Jobs was an extraordinary leader and he replicated the U.S. structure and practices across the world such that I felt the impact even though I was many miles away from the headquarters.When people are empowered, they do more, not less. In the early days [at Apple], people would say, “If I have a wound, I’d probably bleed the six Apple colors.” People didn’t care if they worked long hours; they were making valuable contributions, they were happy. I think sometimes organizations have policies designed to regulate the 10 percent of employees who might exploit loopholes or break the rules, which becomes overly constraining on the other 90 percent of employees. At Apple, the philosophy was trust and empowerment. And people respected the trust that had been given to them and rose to the occasion.The culture there also made me realize that team effort is very important and it does not matter who gets the credit. That has made me very mindful of building team cohesiveness and ensuring strong working relationships among the members.AdvertisementQ. How do you achieve that?A. I strongly believe in the people philosophy that “brains can be bought, but hearts and minds have to be won.” From the onset, I always value building trust and gaining respect from team members, rather than instilling fear, which I believe is a short-term approach. To motivate the team I try to reinforce the positives — talk up the good stuff, show appreciation, give genuine praise.AdvertisementI also don’t sweep things under the carpet. I always address the negatives, and I don’t wait for performance appraisals. Negative feedback has to be specific, and timely. It can be hard to give negative feedback, but if you don’t, the person will never grow. What’s important is to do it one-on-one. Nobody likes to be talked down to in public, unless it’s so serious you need to present it to the whole team.Once I’ve given the negative feedback, I try to encourage the person to share their experience with the rest of the team so they can learn, too, but it has to be their choice to do so. If they’re not comfortable with it, that’s fine. And then we move on. The important thing is the learning.I also think it’s important to set high standards. I try to set a high bar for myself and my teams. It motivates people to stretch and excel towards their full potential.Q. What else can you do to motivate teams?A. In organizations there may be silos, and people sometimes hoard information and resources. But I think it’s important to share best practices and create synergies. When you share openly, you learn and you also come together as a team. You can achieve teamwork through trust and communication, but it’s important to cascade the information all the way down. Sometimes a leader will just talk to his or her senior team members, and if the information doesn’t cascade, people won’t understand what is the direction and purpose. So it’s not just about communicating but ensuring it’s cascaded. One way to do this is through video conferencing, creating a communications video or sending a global email. If people feel engaged, they will feel a sense of purpose and be more motivated.Q. How has your style of management changed over time?A. In the early days it was about managing for specific results or tasks, more about “control” than latitude and influence, with the strong desire to ensure a successful outcome in any delivery. Even though I’m still a perfectionist, over time I’ve learned to “let go” a little on the more trivial things.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I’ve also come to realize that there need not be a false dichotomy between “bottom-line first or people first.” Companies cannot achieve their bottom line without their people; neither can companies care for their people if the bottom line is not taken care of. So the right organizational culture should always be a strategic priority on the agenda of any leader seeking to make a lasting difference to the people and the enterprise.Q. Why is the right organizational culture so important?A. This can be very abstract, but I always say culture is about what people do when no one is watching. If the corporate culture is good, it doesn’t matter if the boss is there or not. People will go the extra mile and do more, not less. There is a multiplier effect on capacity, creativity, value and quality results. In a great culture you can have three persons doing seven persons’ jobs because they’re engaged. This will translate into a strategic competitive advantage.Q. In 2013, you wrote and illustrated “Wonderland,” a fairytale allegory with corporate leadership messages. You touched on H-A-T, three core leadership traits. How did you come up with these?AdvertisementA. When I was working on the book, I went around asking people what they thought was my own leadership style, because it’s easy to think you know your own style, but it’s another to see it through the eyes of others. Three things consistently came back to me.The first thing was “Heart.” They felt I was showing care and appreciation, I was always there for them even if something went wrong. I would assume the responsibility for my team with my own boss rather than put the blame on someone else.The second thing that came through was being “Authentic” — that I mean what I say and practice what I preach, walking the talk.And finally, I had shown “Tenacity” by cultivating the stamina to overcome challenges and stay the course.A version of this article appears in print on June 8, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »