AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: G-7 SummitBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — In the late 1950s, Günter Grass and other luminaries of German postwar literature chose a secluded stone-and-timber hotel in an Alpine valley for one of their invitation-only semiannual retreats. The novelists and poets, many of them disillusioned war veterans who called themselves Group 47, read their latest works to each other, argued and drank.There are no poetry readings on the agenda for the Group of 7 meeting in June, when President Obama, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and other leaders will gather at the same hotel — a castle-like structure called Schloss Elmau, located south of Munich, close to the border with Austria.But as they discuss economics, security and environmental issues, the leaders will be continuing the resort’s tradition as a sometimes quirky crossroads of culture and thought.Schloss Elmau, which opened in 1916, was built by Johannes Müller, a philosopher and theologian who urged his disciples to put aside their egos and embrace communal life. In the early days, princes and countesses came to hear Mr. Müller lecture on the spiritual benefits of nature, music and dance.Mr. Müller was a bestselling author in his heyday, but his reputation was later tainted by his support, albeit ambivalent, for Nazi ideology. Though Mr. Müller never joined the party or fought in the war, he made statements in praise of Hitler during the 1930s and Jewish guests were barred from Schloss Elmau.After Germany’s defeat, denazification authorities accused Mr. Müller of collaboration. He lost control of Schloss Elmau, which for a time served as a home for displaced concentration camp survivors. Mr. Müller died in 1949.Traces of the traditions Mr. Müller established have survived. His children, who regained control in 1951, turned Schloss Elmau into a spa hotel for affluent guests. The current owner, Dietmar Müller-Elmau, a grandson, has continued the transformation. Suites befitting heads of state now run $500 per night.Diplomats met at Schloss Elmau in the early 2000s to negotiate expansion of the European Union to the east. Ms. Merkel spoke at a Schloss Elmau event shortly before becoming chancellor in 2005.In what may be a kind of atonement for Johannes Müller’s transgressions during the 1930s, Schloss Elmau hosts annual symposia that frequently examine issues of Jewish history and culture.The dance that Johannes Müller considered so crucial to spiritual well-being is no longer a big part of the hotel’s regular program. But music remains important, with the program expanded to include jazz: Chick Corea and Brad Mehldau have played there.“It’s in a gorgeous setting where man and nature are still in harmony,” said Gerd Müller, the German minister for economic cooperation and development, whose parliamentary district is nearby.Advertisement