
JUNE 9, 2015

Related Article
The controversy surrounding Brian Williams has provided an opening for Mr. Lack to return to the place where he enjoyed the peak of his career, NBC’s news division. Mr. Lack becomes the head of CBS’s “West 57th.” The show, hosted by Meredith Vieira, among others, does not win huge ratings,  but is  a  precursor to the sort of TV magazine shows that became popular in the 1990s.NBC News is engulfed in scandal in February after it is discovered that “Dateline” staged a fake explosion in a segment on truck safety. Mr. Lack is hired to clean up the mess and becomes president of NBC News in April.In Mr. Lack's third year on the job, Tom Brokaw’s “Nightly News” becomes the highest-rating evening news show for the first time, beating "World News Tonight" with Peter Jennings. Bryant Gumbel steps down in January from the “Today” show and Matt Lauer steps in in a peaceful transition. Under Mr. Lack’s tenure, “Today” dominates in the ratings, setting off a 16-year run in first place. Mr. Lack leaves the news division and becomes the chief operating officer for NBC, making him the No. 2 executive in the company under Bob Wright.Mr. Lack leaves NBC in January for Sony Music. He is viewed as an outsider by the music industry, which is being rocked by plummeting sales. “It wasn’t viewed as a successful marriage because he didn’t understand the people he was dealing with,” says Jay Cooper, a veteran industry lawyer.Mr. Lack signs Bruce Springsteen to a $110 million contract, but is criticized for presenting the deal to the company's governing board as a fait accompli. The affair damages Mr. Lack's standing among the board members.Mr. Lack joins Bloomberg in October as chief executive of its multimedia group, tasked with reinventing its television station. He wanted the little-viewed channel to get a Nielsen rating by 2011, but that never happened. Mr. Lack leaves Bloomberg in September. Michael Bloomberg returns to the company he founded. Mr. Lack moves to the Broadcasting Board of Governors, which oversees government-supported international news media, including Voice of America.NBC suspends Brian Williams for six months for exaggerating an account of his role in a helicopter attack in Iraq. The network will make a decision on his fate in the coming weeks.Andy Lack returns to NBC in April with a cable network, MSNBC, that’s failing; a morning show that’s consistently beaten by ABC; and a nightly news program that’s trailing in the ratings . Advertisement