By EMILY STEELJUNE 8, 2015
As the big get bigger in the cable business, the small are trying to get a little bit bigger, too.On Monday, Atlantic Broadband announced a $200 million takeover of the regional cable operator MetroCast Communications of Connecticut, adding about 23,000 customers in Eastern Connecticut to the footprint of the country’s 13th-largest cable operator.The deal signals how the merger mania sweeping across the industry’s largest players is also infiltrating its more modest tier. Challenged to keep pace with new rivals and frenetic changes in technology, industry executives argue that consolidation will help companies compete.So far, megadeals like Charter’s pair of deals worth $67.1 billion for Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks, and AT&T’s $48.5 billion takeover of DirecTV have captured the headlines. But now, the smaller operators are entering the fray.The European telecommunications firm Altice, which announced its $9.1 billion acquisition of a controlling stake in the regional cable provider Suddenlink Communications last month, has hinted that it is on the prowl for more deals. Executives at smaller cable operators say they have been approached about potential deals. And Atlantic Broadband said it, too, was interested in pursuing more acquisitions, beyond its deal for MetroCast.Advertisement“We absolutely are interested in growing and increasing the size and scope of our business,” said David Isenberg, a president and the chief revenue officer for Atlantic Broadband, adding that the company does not believe that deals are “necessary for survival.”AdvertisementAtlantic Broadband now has 224,000 subscribers in Western Pennsylvania, South Florida, Maryland, Delaware and South Carolina. Mr. Isenberg said that even though the MetroCast systems were not physically contiguous to the systems it operates, the company can use the additional numbers to increase its technology offerings, which are growing increasingly complex both for television and Internet services. More scale allows the company to pool investments in innovations that it can deploy to a broader customer base.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some analysts said the wave of deal activity showed that cable operators were seeking growth through acquisitions as business conditions become more challenging. For the first time ever, the number of pay-television subscribers declined in the first quarter this year. And acquiring those subscribers is costing the cable companies more. For the Charter-Time Warner Cable tie-up, for instance, the price equates to about $3,681 per customer. For Atlantic Broadband’s MetroCast tie-up, the price is around $8,695 a customer.Big cable operators have argued that through consolidation, they will also gain more heft in negotiating with television companies over fast-rising programming rates. But consolidation among smaller cable companies does not typically have such a meaningful impact in negotiations with TV companies, Mr. Isenberg said.Despite a flurry of merger activity, the cable industry in the United States remains largely fragmented. The country has more than 660 cable operators and 5,208 cable systems, according to the National Cable & Telecommunications Association.“There is, as you know, significant in-market consolidation opportunities in the U.S.,” Dexter G. Goei, chief executive of Altice, said in a conference call announcing its deal for Suddenlink.“Everything below Comcast effectively is in consolidation mode, so it makes for a very interesting next six months to two years in terms of what is going to happen from a consolidation standpoint,” he added. “But we clearly expect to be right in the middle of that consolidation.”A version of this article appears in print on June 9, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline:  With Atlantic Broadband Deal, Smaller Cable Companies Join the Merger Derby .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.