AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningThe nasty fight between Dov Charney and the company he founded, American Apparel, over his firing in 2014 has been an endless source of fascination for many months.In what may seem galling to those who have followed the drama, Mr. Charney has filed a new lawsuit in the Delaware Chancery Court asking that the company be required to pay for his lawyers after American Apparel sued him, saying that he had violated the terms of an agreement. In essence, Mr. Charney is telling his former company: “Because you sued me, you have to pay for my lawyers.”Odd as that may appear, there is a reasonable chance Mr. Charney will be able to compel American Apparel to pay the upfront costs of his lawyers (and of course, pay for its own lawyers as well).This is only the latest skirmish between the two sides in a situation that Joe Nocera described in an Op-Ed column in The New York Times as “a case study in how not to run a company.” Among other things, Mr. Charney has a history of salacious behavior, including accusations of sexual harassment.In May, Mr. Charney filed a $30 million defamation lawsuit in California against American Apparel. The company replied in kind, suing him in the Delaware Chancery Court two days later, saying that he had violated a “standstill agreement” that he had agreed to in July 2014 after he was suspended. That agreement determined the composition of the company’s board and the terms by which he would remain an employee.Chancellor Andre G. Bouchard of the Delaware Chancery Court, who is overseeing the case filed by American Apparel, issued a temporary restraining order on June 1 that prohibited Mr. Charney from seeking to remove any American Apparel directors or making negative statements about the company or its employees.But that ruling does not necessarily mean that he is predisposed against Mr. Charney’s position that the company should be obligated to pay his legal fees.In another case, involving a former executive charged with a crime, Chancellor Bouchard lamented that it was “an all-too-common scenario” in which a company refused to pay legal fees in advance on behalf of its officers and directors when its own bylaws required it to do so. It is especially troublesome “when trial is approaching and it is needed most,” he wrote.That situation involved a criminal case. But what happens, as in the suit against Mr. Charney, when the company is suing its former chief executive in a civil matter after ousting him over allegations of misconduct?The first thing to remember is that virtually every large corporation promises its officers and directors that it will indemnify them for their costs, including legal fees, provided that the subject of an investigation or legal proceeding is related to their position with the company. Delaware law further authorizes that any expenses incurred “in defending any civil, criminal, administrative or investigative action, suit or proceeding may be paid by the corporation in advance of the final disposition.”Mr. Charney initially asked the company to advance him $100,000 to retain counsel so he could defend himself against the company-filed lawsuit in Delaware. American Apparel rejected that claim, asserting that its complaint was against him only in his personal capacity over a violation of the standstill agreement. Because the lawsuit does not involve his conduct as an officer or director of the company, the company says it has no obligation to cover his legal fees.But the line between those two is, as you might expect, a rather blurry one, leading to Mr. Charney’s latest lawsuit, which seeks advance payment to cover his legal costs. If successful, then Mr. Charney can also demand that the company pay for his lawyers in that lawsuit, known as fees on fees.Mr. Charney argues that the standstill agreement provides for him to continue as an employee of American Apparel after his suspension as chief executive in June 2014. Therefore, the agreement relates to his actions as an officer and director, bringing him within American Apparel’s indemnification and advancement obligations. The company takes the position that any violation of the agreement came well after his termination in December 2014 and arose from his subsequent efforts to remove directors from office.Often, it is unclear whether an executive’s conduct is personal or corporate, and each case has special facts that make it difficult to predict how a court will rule.A recent decision of the Delaware Chancery Court in Mooney v. Echo Therapeutics demonstrates how it can be hard to distinguish whether executives are acting in their capacity as company officials. That civil case involved claims that a former chief executive misused company money for personal purposes. The case raises the question of whether his actions were an abuse of his corporate authority, or whether it involved personal misconduct, which would not obligate the company to advance him legal fees to defend himself.The court sided with the former executive, finding that it was unlikely that he “would have been able to enter into improper contracts of the kind alleged unless he was a high-ranking corporate officer with the power to execute such contracts.” Thus, it ordered the company to pay a portion of his legal fees, even in a case in which the former executive was suing the company for claims related to his termination.The Delaware courts have often sided with former officers who seek payment of lawyers’ fees, because otherwise they would be forced to bear large legal bills to defend themselves. Chancellor Bouchard found that the Massey Energy Company improperly refused to advance $5.8 million in legal fees to its former chief executive, Donald L. Blankenship, after he was indicted on criminal charges related to a coal mine explosion that killed 29 miners in 2010. The chancellor pointed to “the public policy of Delaware, which supports resolving ambiguity in favor of indemnification and advancement” in support of requiring the company to keep paying for Mr. Blankenship’s lawyers — at least through the trial.Former employees are not always successful in making such claims, which can turn on fine legal distinctions. Sergey Aleynikov, a former programmer at Goldman Sachs who was convicted recently of improperly downloading computer source code related to a trading platform, will have to go to trial to prove he was an “officer” of the firm to receive indemnification for his legal fees.Mr. Charney’s fight with American Apparel to force it to pay for his lawyers reflects the type of battle that can arise when there is a falling-out between an executive and a former employer. The bad blood from a messy breakup, especially one involving claims of misconduct, can quickly spill over into a refusal to pay the lawyer for someone viewed as having caused the company great harm.The refusal by some companies to pay for a former employee’s lawyer often seems to reflect the attitude that “whoever has the gold, makes the rules.” Refusing to pay legal fees makes life much more difficult for a former officer, which may be the ultimate goal by forcing a legal fight that can drag out for months, if not years.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningAdvertisement