By PAUL TAYLOR | REUTERSJUNE 8, 2015
BRUSSELS —  Prime Minister Viktor Orban of Hungary took it as a joke, but his supporters at home were furious when the European Commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, saluted him with an audible “hello, dictator” before the world’s cameras last month.The unorthodox greeting at a summit meeting with the European Union’s eastern partners in Riga, Latvia, on May 22 was one of those rare moments when the underside of politics appears fleetingly on the surface. Banter aside, the European Union authorities have proved largely ineffective in curbing Mr. Orban’s drive to tighten his grip on Hungary.Mr. Orban, a conservative nationalist who espouses “illiberal democracy,” has mostly outfoxed efforts to restrain his reshaping of the judiciary, data protection, media and nongovernmental organizations, European Union and Hungarian officials say.He used his two-thirds parliamentary majority to ram through a new Constitution, shrugging off warnings from European Union colleagues against using his supermajority powers.AdvertisementHe relishes confrontation with his critics in the European Parliament, seizing the opportunities of debates on the situation in Hungary to flaunt his economic success, sweeping electoral mandates and contempt for the European Union’s migration policies.AdvertisementViviane Reding, who until last year spearheaded legal action against Mr. Orban’s government as the Union’s justice commissioner, is frank about what her activism achieved.“I prevented worse,” she said in an interview. “It did not change dramatically the nationalistic course of the Hungarian prime minister, but at least it stopped him dismantling the independence of the courts and the independent data authority.”The Hungarian government rejects accusations that it has taken authoritarian steps, saying its parliamentary majority and popular support allowed it to make constitutional changes.“Hungary can be regarded as the European Union member state which has been screened more than any other by the X-ray machine of constitutionality,” Mr. Orban told European Union lawmakers.The fact that his ruling Fidesz party sits in the European People’s Party, the biggest center-right group in the European Parliament, has shielded Mr. Orban from harsher condemnation over alleged breaches of human rights.“It was always the political parties which helped the prime ministers I was acting against — the Socialists with Ponta, and the E.P.P. when I acted against Hungary,” Ms. Reding said, referring to the Romanian prime minister, Victor Ponta, as well as to Mr. Orban. Ms. Reding herself is now an E.P.P. lawmaker. There has been informal discussion in the E.P.P. of suspending or expelling Fidesz, she said, but no action has been taken.An aide to Mr. Juncker said Fidesz’s E.P.P. membership gave leaders like Angela Merkel of Germany a lever to exert pressure in private and to keep Mr. Orban out of the arms of the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, with whom he has friendly ties.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Reding won two cases against Hungary in the European Court of Justice over the enforced mass retirement of judges at age  62 and the dismissal of the independent data protection supervisor. But the judges and the regulator were not reinstated.AdvertisementObjections from Brussels have led Hungary to amend other legislation, including parts of a law that critics say inhibits media freedom. Rights advocates are pressing the European Commission to take stronger action by utilizing a so-called Framework for the Protection of Fundamental Rights, created under Ms. Reding, that would entail an audit of civil rights in Hungary, a dialogue with Budapest and possible European Union recommendations.Iverna McGowan, the acting director of Amnesty International’s European Union office, accused Brussels of doing too little too late and of taking a technocratic approach. “Why have they not invoked Article VII of the treaty which allows sanctions to be taken in case of breaches of fundamental rights?” Ms. McGowan asked in an interview, adding that the Union was tougher with nonmember countries than with its own.Ms. Reding said Article VII, which can lead to the suspension of a state’s European Union voting rights, was a “nuclear option.” She also insisted that the Union needed a strong legal case before prosecuting a member state for rights abuses. European Union governments are haunted by  a French-led boycott of high-level bilateral contacts with Austria in 2000 after the far-right People’s Party of  Jörg Haider joined a ruling coalition.The snub backfired, bolstering public support for Mr. Haider, and was dropped after an expert panel said that the government had not taken any action that contravened European values.Mr. Orban’s European Union critics thought they had finally found an issue on which to nail him when he called last month for a renewed discussion of the death penalty, which was abolished under the charters of the European Union and the Council of Europe. But he quickly assured the president of the European Parliament, Martin Schulz, that he had no intention of restoring capital punishment.The sensitive task of trying to rein in Hungary now falls to the European Commission’s first vice president, Frans Timmermans, a Dutch Socialist who co-signed a 2013 letter by four foreign ministers calling for a more effective mechanism to safeguard fundamental values, including cutting off funds from the Union.Mr. Timmermans told Mr. Orban in the European Parliament: “You cannot use an electoral victory or economic success as a condition to say we don’t then have to observe the rule of law.”Campaigners say would-be autocrats in neighboring countries are watching how Hungary is treated. But experts say the European Union’s tools to influence members’ behavior remain weak.Paul Taylor is a Reuters correspondent. A version of this article appears in print on June 9, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.