By REUTERSOCT. 22, 2015
VALLETTA, Malta —  The European Central Bank is studying new stimulus measures that could be unveiled as soon as December and is prepared to cut its deposit rate deeper into negative territory if needed to fight falling prices, its president said on Thursday.The bank president, Mario Draghi, said falling inflation expectations, driven in part by lower-than-expected demand for oil, had led the central bank to consider a wide variety of possible measures to shore up inflation.“We are ready to act if needed,” he said, “and we are open to the full menu of monetary policy.”Mr. Draghi added: “The attitude is not wait and see but work and assess.”Consumer prices in the 19-country eurozone slipped 0.1 percent in September, prompting calls for the bank to expand or extend its 60 billion euros, or $68 billion, a month of asset purchases. The program began in March to help push inflation back to the bank’s target of just under 2 percent.AdvertisementMr. Draghi said the bank’s governing council, which includes the executive board and the heads of the bloc’s 19 central banks, would be in a better position to make a decision once it receives new inflation forecasts from its staff in December.AdvertisementHe highlighted a stronger euro, falling commodity prices and a deterioration of the economic conditions in emerging markets as the crucial risks that the European Central Bank would monitor. A fading of the base effect from 2014’s oil price plunge may also help push inflation higher by then.After stating a year ago that no further cuts to the deposit rate — already in negative territory — were in the cards, Mr. Draghi said that was one of the instruments the governing council had discussed and might use.The bank first pushed its deposit rate below zero in June 2014, effectively making banks pay to park funds overnight at the central bank. Two months later, it was trimmed to negative 0.2 percent, and Mr. Draghi said no additional rate cut was possible.He dismissed suggestions that this turnaround might dent the bank’s credibility in financial markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The credibility of a central bank is measured by its ability to comply with its mandate, and to this extent any instrument could be potentially used,” Draghi said. “Given the conditions prevailing a year ago, that was the statement. Today things have changed.”Before Thursday, financial analysts’ core view was that the bank would intervene in December or January to extend or expand its quantitative easing plan, while few expected a deposit rate cut.Mr. Draghi’s words strengthened those expectations but gave little away as to which tool the bank was likely to choose.Analysts have warned that increasing the pace of purchases may create a shortage of bonds later and that extending the buying may require the bank to change some of the rules of engagement to avoid hitting technical limits.AdvertisementThese issues, along with the bank’s failure to revive the market for asset-backed securities, have raised the prospect of an expansion in the range of assets that the bank can buy to include corporate bonds or even equities.But its direct involvement in private corporations could meet political and internal resistance.In a direct call to eurozone governments to add their weight to a still-tentative recovery in the region, Mr. Draghi stressed that structural reforms and fiscal measures to stimulate demand were also needed.“Monetary policy shouldn’t be the only game in town,” Mr. Draghi said. “We have to address also the structural component of this recovery so we can move from a cyclical to a structural recovery.”A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: With Inflation Anemic, European Central Bank Weighs a New Dose of Stimulus .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.