By HIROKO TABUCHIJUNE 9, 2015
As White House press secretary, Robert Gibbs was the public face of a powerful operation with a global reach. Now he is becoming the chief spokesman for another kind of global enterprise: McDonald’s.Mr. Gibbs, who left the Obama White House in 2011, will join McDonald’s as global chief communications officer, aiming to build “a more modern, progressive burger company,” the fast-food chain said in a statement on Tuesday.McDonald’s has been struggling to hold its ground in the face of rivals like Chipotle Mexican Grill, Shake Shack and Panera, which have appealed to a new generation with higher-end, fresher, seemingly healthier foods.Steve Easterbrook, who took over as McDonald’s chief executive in March, has said the chain needs to realign its marketing to keep up with attitudes toward food safety and health. The company has already made some big changes, announcing that it will begin using chicken that is free of antibiotics that are also used in humans, and tackling what executives say are misconceptions over its food in a series of web videos.AdvertisementMr. Gibbs, 44, joins McDonald’s as labor groups increase the pressure on the company to raise wages for its restaurant workers. In April, the company announced that it would increase wages to at least $1 over the local legal minimum wage for about 90,000 workers at restaurants under corporate control, to an average of $9.90 an hour by July 1, and to more than $10 in 2016.AdvertisementBut labor groups have said the raises do not go far enough, and they are waging a nationwide campaign for wages of at least $15 an hour. They have also pointed out that the higher wages do not affect employees who work at roughly 12,500 McDonald’s restaurants operated by franchisees around the country, about 90 percent of the chain’s American locations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The White House has been sympathetic to the workers’ cause, urging Congress to raise the minimum wage to over $10 an hour. In his State of the Union address in January, President Obama challenged members of Congress to try living on $15,000 or less a year, a typical income for fast-food workers.And while McDonald’s has been a favorite target of health advocates for its salty, fatty foods, the company won some praise from Michelle Obama for its decision over the years to add fruit and reduce the portions of the fries in its Happy Meals, which she has called progress in the fight toward reducing childhood obesity.Mr. Gibbs could not immediately be reached for comment. Since 2013, he has led the Incite Agency, a communications advisory firm that he helped found. He also served as senior campaign adviser during Mr. Obama’s re-election campaign. In 2011, after his two years at the White House, Mr. Gibbs was linked to a possible communications job at Facebook, but an appointment never materialized.Mr. Gibbs will replace Bridget Coffing, who announced her retirement this year after 30 years with the company, McDonald’s said.McDonald’s also named Silvia Lagnado, the force behind Dove’s widely noted “Campaign for Real Beauty” at Unilever, as the chain’s new global chief marketing officer. She was most recently the marketing chief at Bacardi.An article on Wednesday about the appointment of Robert Gibbs, a former White House press secretary, as chief communications officer for McDonald’s misstated the month of the State of the Union address in which President Obama challenged members of Congress to try living on the typical income of fast-food workers. It was January, not February.A version of this article appears in print on June 10, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Former Top Spokesman for the Obama White House Heads to the Golden Arches.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.