By JAMES KANTERJUNE 9, 2015
VERDEN, Germany —  Felix Kolb wears socks and sandals, and the occasional hoodie, around the office. It is the uniform of someone working in the countercultural tradition of German political activism but employing the digital tools of contemporary grass-roots movements.From a modest 19th-century brick building that once served as barracks for the Prussian cavalry, he is deploying a full arsenal of tactics: Rallying citizens with social media drives. Using online maps to leaflet towns and cities efficiently. Holding peaceful but visually memorable demonstrations.Mr. Kolb and his organization, Campact, are on the front line of a populist campaign against the trade negotiations underway between the United States and the European Union. His effort, along with others like it around Europe, is resonating with a public that has grown wary of the trade talks, which are taking place mainly behind closed doors and propelling suspicion that an agreement would favor big corporations and other special interests.Even a largely symbolic vote over the trade deal in the European Parliament was postponed on Tuesday after it was bogged down by amendments. Many lawmakers said the delay reflected the increasingly deep divisions in Parliament over the proposed pact.AdvertisementBy using digital technologies to bring together diverse groups of supporters, organizations like Campact can “sidestep the mainstream media” yet still “organize tens of thousands of people,” said Mr. Kolb, one of three executive directors of the activist group.AdvertisementCampact has a professional staff of three dozen people and a budget of less than 6 million euros, or about $6.8 million, a year. But it has 1.6 million members, and its tactics work as force multipliers.The efforts of Campact — the name combines “campaign” and “action” — have helped a European push that has support from hundreds of groups to collect two million signatures on a petition opposing the trade treaty. That campaign may be having the biggest effect in Mr. Kolb’s home country.Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany has long been one of the biggest supporters of the trade talks. Her country’s export-driven economy might be one of the main beneficiaries. But over the last year, polls have indicated that public opposition to a deal may be stronger in Germany than anywhere else in the European Union.Proponents of a deal — which include big businesses and corporate lobbyists on both sides of the Atlantic — promise it would strengthen a trade relationship already worth $3 billion a day by removing business barriers and bolstering the West’s power to chart the course of world trade. American and European negotiators are heading into their 10th round of talks on the proposed pact, the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, or TTIP.Europeans like Mr. Kolb see a darker side to the deal. They fear that the interests of consumers, local farmers and small businesses would be trampled by multinational companies made even more powerful by the pact.They also argue that the push to make United States and European regulations more similar would result in American-style rules they see as too lax on environmental protection, public health and personal privacy. In a protest this year in Berlin, Campact’s showpiece was a giant dragon puffing imitation herbicide, the beast’s body modeled after a spray bottle from Monsanto, the American agrochemical giant.Campact is “not against America but against the influence of big corporations,” Mr. Kolb said. The scale of opposition to the proposed trade deal, he said, shows that “political elites are totally out of touch with public opinion.”AdvertisementMr. Kolb’s approach aims to give citizens who feel they have little say in politics a more permanent platform to find one another through the Internet, and then channel their support into potent, colorful protests.Last year, before elections for the European Parliament, Mr. Kolb’s group gave supporters black placards printed with bright red and white anti-TTIP slogans to wave at campaign rallies.The group also sent 25,000 of its supporters a total of 6.5 million leaflets, to be dangled from doorknobs, that graded German political parties according to their policies on the trade deal. Participants could log on to a shared Google map managed by Campact, enabling them to select for themselves which parts of the country to canvass without duplicating one another’s work.Such techniques are comparatively widespread in the United States, through groups like MoveOn.org. But the decentralized approach is fairly new for European activists.While it is too early to know whether efforts like Campact’s might have an effect on the deal, the movement is gaining traction. The Europe-wide petition campaign called Stop TTIP has received support from more than 470 organizations, including the big environmental group Friends of the Earth Europe.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The protest organizers have set the tone of the trade debate from the start, and the deal’s backers have been playing defense ever since,” said Peter Sparding, a fellow at the German Marshall Fund in Washington. “Nearly all German politicians have faced protesters pressuring them to be skeptical about the trade deal and threatening them with a backlash from voters.”Mr. Kolb’s activist roots run deep.He moved to Verden, a northern German town, in the 1990s with friends from a youth environmental movement. They formed an association to buy the barracks in 1997. By 2000, Mr. Kolb was starting to focus on politics beyond Verden and helped set up the German branch of Attac, a global movement promoting a tax on financial trades to support poor countries.During that period, Mr. Kolb also worked on the doctorate he later received from the Free University of Berlin, studying the political impact of social movements. As part of his research, he spent a year as a visiting fellow at Cornell University, where he grew interested in harnessing the Internet to rally citizens behind progressive causes.Mr. Kolb watched from afar as antiglobalization protests in 2001 flared up violently in Europe. He said he learned from the failure of those protests to sustain enough momentum to sway political leaders.SWEDEN100 MilesDENMARKNorth SeaPOLANDVerdenNETH.BerlinGERMANYBELGIUMCZECHREPUBLICFrankfurtFRANCEAUSTRIASWITZERLANDIn 2004, after the German branch of Attac moved to Frankfurt, he and two friends approached MoveOn.org with the idea of founding a German offshoot. MoveOn.org turned them down, and they set up Campact in 2005. In a statement, MoveOn cited its focus on the United States for the decision.AdvertisementIn the last decade, Mr. Kolb said, Campact helped pressure the government in Berlin to phase out nuclear power, block authorization of biotech crops and close tax havens. The group identified the trans-Atlantic deal as “the next big thing,” a hunch borne out by a rise in membership, which grew 60 percent last year. Members make monthly donations averaging around €8 per person.Malte Weicke, 43, said he and his girlfriend made their first donation of €100 to Campact this year because political leaders were not addressing their concerns that the trade deal would pose a threat to democracy.“The influence of the public has already been diminished by the European Union,” said Mr. Weicke, a trained geologist who teaches kindergarten in Berlin. The trade deal would mean more “rules structured by corporate interests rather than states with functional institutions.”The backlash against TTIP has rattled political and business leaders concerned that Ms. Merkel will struggle to unite her citizens — let alone the rest of Europe’s fractious member states — behind a deal.“At the end, all countries have to agree, and of course, if the country that wins the most from TTIP doesn’t want TTIP, there’s nothing in the world I can do,” Cecilia Malmstrom, the European Union’s trade commissioner, said last month on her way out of a parliamentary hearing, referring to Germany.Trying to counter the grass-roots opposition, some European officials have suggested that Russia — which started hostilities in Ukraine after the government in Kiev signaled it would hew closer to Europe — is funding the activists.Moscow was backing “well-organized actions, propaganda, so-called NGOs” to oppose TTIP, said Donald Tusk, the president of the European Council, the body representing the leaders of the European Union member states. He was referring to nongovernmental organizations like Campact.AdvertisementSuch accusations, Mr. Kolb said, only showed “how desperate” the deal’s supporters had become to discredit the opposition. He said Campact took no money from any Russian sources and no longer gave interviews to Russia Today, a state-funded television network that has devoted extensive coverage to the activists.Michael Efler, 45, who coordinates the Stop TTIP campaign, said Campact had helped finance the European campaign. But just as important, he said, was Campact’s energetic involvement — which he said made it more likely that the trade deal could be stopped.Campact, he said, “will never touch a debate where they guess they’ll lose.”A version of this article appears in print on June 10, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Grass-Roots Force to Be Reckoned With.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.