AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GoughHONG KONG — Chinese stocks do not really need an extra boost. They have tripled in value over the last year to nearly $10 trillion — overtaking Japan, Hong Kong and Britain and coming in second only to the United States.But new overseas money may soon pour into the mainland, providing more fuel to the country’s already racing markets.On Tuesday, MSCI, a company that compiles indexes widely tracked by money managers around the world, said it could soon add China’s domestic shares to its benchmarks.Mutual funds and other global investments totaling about $1.5 trillion are pegged to MSCI’s emerging-markets index. A decision to include domestic Chinese stocks, or so-called A-shares, in the index means that billions of dollars will be channeled into mainland markets.MSCI, though, wants to make sure the Chinese markets are ready before the floodgates open. The Chinese have made it easier for foreign investors to buy stocks, but they still face significant barriers.MSCI said that in the coming months it would work with China’s main securities regulator to address its concerns and then make a final decision.The decision — and the waiting period — reflects the changing face of China’s financial system. While China’s markets and other areas of the economy have rapidly evolved in recent years, they still have not completely opened to the rest of the world.In its decision, the index company cited concerns over China’s cumbersome investment quotas, restrictions on money flows, and questions over the legal status of foreign shareholders. While “investors around the world are eager,” Remy Briand, a managing director and global head of research at MSCI, said in a statement, “we have a strong interest in ensuring that remaining issues are addressed in an orderly and transparent way.”In the last two years, China’s leaders have pledged sweeping overhauls to the country’s financial system.Progress in some sectors, such as reforming state-owned companies, has proved slow. But other areas have seen a steady drumbeat of changes, including overhauls of the banking system and measures to clean up local government finances.Perhaps nowhere has China moved faster — and with more immediate implications for global investors — than with its financial markets.In November, regulators started a groundbreaking link between the Hong Kong and Shanghai stock markets, giving overseas investors their most direct access yet to companies that are listed only domestically. A similar connection to the Shenzhen market is expected to follow soon.Last month, policy makers announced a new cross-border link with Hong Kong for investment funds, including mutual funds. The deal could give overseas money managers access to China’s trillions of dollars in domestic savings.Despite all the new channels into China, foreign investors have moved cautiously, in part because they continue to face challenges in gaining access to domestic markets.“The bigger story remains, are global institutions prepared to invest in the A-share market?” said Charles Salvador, the director of investment solutions at Z-Ben Advisors in Shanghai, a consultancy that specializes in overseas investment in China’s onshore markets.“To this day, it has been difficult for global institutional investors to get a clear understanding of the mainland capital markets, thus they have been inactive in pursuing exposure,” Mr. Salvador said. “The rapidly changing regulatory environment and introduction of accessing platforms in the last two years likely added to the confusion.”The hesitation has been evident in China’s tremendous stock market rally, which has nearly doubled the total value of the mainland’s A-shares in the year to date. Despite the surge, foreign investors have largely remained on the sidelines.The link between the Hong Kong and Shanghai markets caps the total amount of A-shares that overseas investors can buy at 300 billion renminbi, or roughly $50 billion. But only half of this quota has been used.The situation is similar for other, more established programs that give foreigners access to Chinese markets.For more than a decade, the so-called qualified foreign institutional investor scheme has allowed overseas investors to buy A-shares. The program has been expanded greatly over the years, and now allows for a maximum of $150 billion in investment. But as of the end of May, only about half that amount was used.Under a newer program for renminbi-denominated foreign investment, investors in a dozen countries can buy as much as 920 billion renminbi of Chinese stocks. Less than 400 billion renminbi is actually being used.Still, the broader trend of China’s markets opening up remains clear. MSCI may have delayed including A-shares for now, but other companies that compile such indexes have already made the switch.Last month, FTSE Russell said it would include China’s domestic stocks in its indexes of shares in emerging markets. Likewise, S&P Dow Jones Indices has said it may add A-shares to some of its benchmark indexes later this year.“It is clear from MSCI’s announcement today that it is only a matter of time before A-shares are added to global indexes,” Louis Lu, a portfolio manager at CSOP Asset Management, which invests in mainland shares, said in email comments. “This delay will likely prompt the Chinese government to accelerate the opening of its capital markets and provide greater accessibility to international investors in the near term to increase the chance of inclusion as soon as possible.”For MSCI, analysts estimate that a decision to add A-shares to its emerging market index would lead to several billion dollars of new investment in China initially. The figure, by many estimates, could rise to more than $200 billion over time.On Tuesday, MSCI said it may make a special decision to include Chinese stocks among its benchmarks before its next scheduled annual review, which takes place a year from now. The company added it had reached an agreement with China’s main securities regulator to work on addressing the foreign investment community’s outstanding concerns.“We look forward to a fruitful collaboration that will contribute to the further opening of the China A-shares markets to international investors,” Mr. Briand of MSCI said.Advertisement