AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinBy all appearances, Andrew Lack’s return to the top job at NBC News has gone smoothly.Last Tuesday night, at a Christian Science church doubling as an event space on Park Avenue, Mr. Lack and Steve Burke, NBCUniversal’s chief executive, sat shoulder to shoulder at a dinner honoring their colleague Bonnie Hammer. As the singer Sara Bareilles performed her hit “Brave,” dozens waved glass candleholders in the air.It was the second straight night together for Mr. Lack, the chairman of NBC News, and Mr. Burke. On Monday, they went to the Rainbow Room to celebrate the publication of Tom Brokaw’s new memoir. Mr. Lack recalled a time in the 1990s when he thought that Mr. Brokaw’s plan to write his first book, “The Greatest Generation,” was a distracting and terrible idea. The book was a huge hit, he pointed out, as were the ratings for Mr. Brokaw’s nightly news show. Everyone laughed.But for all the bonhomie, this is hardly a stress-free time for Mr. Lack and Mr. Burke. One person who went unmentioned was the elephant not in the Rainbow Room: Brian Williams.Sometime soon, Mr. Lack and Mr. Burke will make the critical decision on Mr. Williams’s fate. They could return him to the “Nightly News” anchor chair he was forced to vacate in February for exaggerating a war story. They could part ways with him or they could find another role for him at NBC. At this point, the likelihood of his return as anchor looks increasingly remote, according to two people with knowledge of the situation, and the network is trying to determine what else he might do if he remained at NBC.Mr. Williams has kept a low profile since he was suspended for embellishing his role in a helicopter episode in Iraq, and has mostly stayed out of the public eye. Exceptions include an appearance at a gala for his high school alma mater and a tabloid photographer snapping a picture of him walking with family members.For Mr. Lack, 68, Mr. Williams’s implosion provided an opening to return to the place where he enjoyed the most celebrated time of his career, when he guided the news division through its best days in the 1990s. In the 12 years since he left the company, he took executive roles at Sony, Bloomberg and, briefly this year, Voice of America, but hasn’t been able to recapture the same magic.As things have gone haywire at NBC News — ratings are plunging at MSNBC and “Today” has lost its grip on first place among the morning shows, not to mention the downfall of Mr. Williams — Mr. Lack “heard the fire bell ring, and wanted to jump back on the wagon,” said Walter Isaacson, a veteran journalist and friend of Mr. Lack’s.The controversy surrounding Brian Williams has provided an opening for Mr. Lack to return to the place where he enjoyed the peak of his career, NBC’s news division.“Almost all of us from that generation think back to the time when they were doing things that they really loved and knew,” Mr. Isaacson said in an interview. “I remember we’d play a game and ask, ‘If you could rewind the clock, where would you go?’ For Andy, it was network news. That’s the place that made his eyes wide.”Mr. Lack’s first prominent foray into TV news was as executive producer of CBS’s 1980s newsmagazine show “West 57th.” The show was a younger, slicker version of the network’s flagship news program, “60 Minutes,” and a precursor to the types of newsmagazines that would consume the prime-time lineup a decade later.Mr. Lack earned a reputation as a dynamic producer who had a big personality — so big that a rivalry arose between him and the “60 Minutes” creator Don Hewitt. Mr. Hewitt resented the insinuation that “60 Minutes” was run by past-their-prime veterans, whereas Mr. Lack’s show was filled with younger and more innovative producers.According to Peter J. Boyer’s book, “Who Killed CBS?” Mr. Hewitt tacked up signs in a shared elevator conveying a sarcastic, capitalized message: One read, “Eighth floor, video fluent people get off here,” referring to the floor where the “West 57th” staff worked. As for “60 Minutes?” “Ninth floor, yesterday’s people get off here.”“West 57th” was eventually canceled, and in 1993 Mr. Lack was appointed president of NBC News. He arrived at a tremulous time. The network’s own newsmagazine, “Dateline,” was embroiled in a scandal after it was discovered that producers had staged an explosion in a segment on truck safety. David Zaslav, the current chief executive of Discovery and a former executive at NBC, said that the scandal “really shook the company.”“There was a real question, and it wasn’t would ‘Dateline’ survive? It was, ‘Would this topple the credibility of the news division?’” Mr. Zaslav said. “Andy elevated the whole company and gave us a lot of confidence back when he turned around that news division.”Under Mr. Lack’s leadership, Mr. Brokaw’s “Nightly News” went from third place to the highest-rated evening news show. “Today” began a 16-year winning streak (which included a peaceful anchor transition from Bryant Gumbel to Matt Lauer). “Meet the Press” dominated on Sundays, the cable channel MSNBC made its debut (where Mr. Lack helped groom a young anchor named Brian Williams), and even “Dateline” went from a disgraced news program to a five-night-a-week prime-time juggernaut.“It became a huge profit engine for NBC,” said Neal Shapiro, the chief executive of WNET, who oversaw “Dateline” after the scandal. “Andy deserves a lot of credit for expanding it from one night. It was his idea. I remember saying, ‘Are you sure about this?’”Mr. Lack left the news division in 2001 and thus began a fitful period of his career where the big victories he enjoyed became increasingly elusive. He was briefly NBC’s chief operating officer, but clashed with the chief executive at the time, Bob Wright. He left in 2003 and joined Sony Music Entertainment, walking into the music industry at the worst possible time: The CD market was bottoming out and sales were plummeting.Mr. Lack oversaw a merger with the German company Bertelsmann, which most likely helped the music giant long term but which resulted, not indirectly, in his ouster: The Germans didn’t want him in that job.The close-knit music industry was also skeptical of Mr. Lack, an outsider.“It wasn’t viewed as a successful marriage because he didn’t understand the people he was dealing with,” said Jay Cooper, a veteran industry lawyer.But some argue that any executive at that time would have met a similar fate.“There was a lot of failure in that period,” said Steven Greenberg, founder of S-Curve records, who worked with Mr. Lack. “You look at Andy Lack and he took this job at the worst possible time and under the worst possible conditions. He inherited a bad hand, and there was nothing he could do with it.”Mr. Lack joined Bloomberg in 2008 with a principal mission: to take Bloomberg’s TV channel and make it a force. Mr. Lack is credited with updating the look of the channel, cutting losses in half and doubling revenue. But he had lofty goals, like making sure the little-viewed channel was rated by the data firm Nielsen by 2011. That never happened, and the channel still does not have a big audience.“He didn’t leave a great lasting legacy here,” said one Bloomberg executive who spoke on the condition of anonymity.As Mr. Isaacson put it: “Even with the Bloomberg thing, when he wasn’t able to reinvent financial TV journalism — and Bloomberg is a somewhat complex court — he was a happy warrior. I never got the feeling that he was defeated or depressed by it.”Mr. Lack left Bloomberg in 2014 and seemed buoyed by the prospect of going to the Broadcasting Board of Governors, which oversees government-supported international news media, including Voice of America and Radio Free Europe. But in his brief time there Mr. Lack’s New York executive sensibilities appeared at odds with the no-frills approach of a government agency. Some people there were surprised when Mr. Lack had a podium set up under a portrait of Edward R. Murrow so that he could address employees at a newsroomwide meeting.He spent only six weeks on the job. On Feb. 10, Mr. Williams was suspended for exaggerating an account of his role in a helicopter attack in Iraq. Engulfed in turmoil, the network brought Mr. Lack back in early March to run NBC News. Mr. Lack was going to find out whether it was possible to come back home.There are, of course, significant differences between Mr. Lack’s first tenure with NBC and his current one. Fewer people watch the evening network news, and digital media is disrupting every portion of the industry. If Mr. Lack walked into a buzz saw at Sony, is he about to do it again?“The problems that got NBC News in trouble are almost laughably retro in nature,” said Andrew Heyward, the former president of CBS News, who worked with Mr. Lack in the 1980s. “There is certainly nothing contemporary about the Brian Williams issues or even the ratings decline at MSNBC, or the leadership and ratings issues at ‘Today,’ or the clumsy transition at ‘Meet the Press.’ These are all issues of a nature that he’s confronted before.”Certainly, Mr. Lack is back in the big leagues. Mr. Zaslav and Jack Welch, the former chief executive of General Electric, threw him a surprise party at the Waverly Inn two weeks ago. The place was packed with media executives: Mr. Burke, Roger Ailes, Lorne Michaels, Jeff Zucker, Graydon Carter. It was, as one veteran TV executive described it, “a welcome back to the land of the living.”Mr. Zaslav, who would not comment about the dinner, saying that it was private, said Mr. Lack seemed re-energized by the move back to NBC. He thought back to a different meal to illustrate the point.“I remember being at dinner together when he was at the back end of Sony,” Mr. Zaslav said. “I looked at him and said, ‘You’ve never been happier than when you were running the news division. There’s a lot of stuff you can do but that’s what you were born to do.’ He said that’s when he felt most himself, that’s when he was his most comfortable. And happiest.”Advertisement