AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Peter Thal LarsenHSBC keeps going back in time.Four years after the bank’s chief executive, Stuart Gulliver, started pruning the global bank, he has unveiled plans to cut risk-weighted assets by a quarter and shed tens of thousands more employees. After he finishes, HSBC will have gone a long way toward reversing decades of international expansion.When Mr. Gulliver took charge in 2010, HSBC had more than 300,000 workers, almost $2.5 trillion in assets and a return on equity of 9.5 percent. After years of frantic cost-cutting and disposals, the bank has 50,000 fewer people but has added $180 billion in assets, while return on equity has slumped to 7.3 percent.True, the goal posts have shifted. Global interest rates have remained lower for longer than anyone expected, weighing on deposit-funded banks like HSBC. Like many rivals, it underestimated the cost of complying with new regulations and paying for past transgressions. Fines and settlements have lopped an average 1.4 percent off return on equity every year since 2011. Capital demands keep going up; the bank expects its equity Tier 1 ratio to rise as high as 13 percent, 2.5 percentage points above the level it expected in 2011.That means HSBC is under pressure to be more efficient, while showing that the $22 billion in revenue it received from its global network last year justified the extra costs. Mr. Gulliver is shedding units in Turkey and Brazil, investing in automation and redeploying risk-weighted assets from the investment bank to areas with better returns. HSBC expects to expand in China’s Pearl River Delta and in Southeast Asia. Leaving aside the weirdness of a bank founded in Hong Kong and Shanghai 150 years ago talking about a “pivot” to Asia, this makes sense. The aim is to get return on equity above 10 percent.Nevertheless, investors will have to be patient. HSBC shares are trading around the same level as when Mr. Gulliver announced his first overhaul in 2011. One factor weighing on the valuation is the bank’s decision whether to move its headquarters back to Hong Kong, the home market it left in 1994. Though HSBC expects to make a decision this year, the process could take until 2017. Nothing would better demonstrate Mr. Gulliver’s determination to wind back the clock.Peter Thal Larsen is Asia editor of Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement