By CHAD BRAYJUNE 9, 2015
General Electric said on Tuesday that it had agreed to sell the bulk of a division that finances leveraged buyouts to the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board in a $12 billion deal.The Canadian pension fund would acquire G.E.’s private equity lending unit in the United States, which is primarily made up of Antares Capital, as well as a $3 billion bank loan portfolio. News of the potential sale emerged this week.The sale represents the latest move in G.E.’s effort to retreat from banking and refocus on its industrial roots. G.E. said on Tuesday that it believed market conditions were favorable to pursue sales of a variety of its GE Capital finance arm assets over the next 18 months. In April, the conglomerate said that it planned to sell the bulk of GE Capital within two years.“This announcement is the next step in G.E.’s transformation to a more focused industrial company,” Keith S. Sherin, GE Capital’s chairman and chief executive, said in a news release. “The sale of sponsor finance aligns with our strategy to pair a smaller GE Capital with G.E.’s long-term industrial growth.”
            GE Capital has shrunk from 42 to 28 percent of G.E.’s overall revenue since 2008.        Revenues in billions$164.3$152.6OthersHealth careOil & GasThe rest ofGeneral ElectricAviation$68.5Power &Water$42.7GE Capital2008APRIL 10, 2015
The Canadian pension fund would retain the Antares Capital brand, which would operate as a stand-alone business and continue to be led by its managing partners David Brackett and John G. Martin.AdvertisementBased in Chicago, Antares has provided more than $120 billion in financing to middle-market private equity sponsors in the past five years.Advertisement“This acquisition exemplifies our strategy to achieve scale in key sectors through platform investments,” Mark Wiseman, the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board’s president and chief executive, said in a news release. “It secures a market-leading business that is exceptionally well positioned to deliver value-building investment flows.”Stuart Aronson, the chief executive of the G.E. lending arm, known in the company as the sponsor finance unit, would remain with GE Capital after the deal.The transaction is subject to regulatory approval and is expected to close in the third quarter.G.E. was advised by JPMorgan Chase and Citigroup and the law firm Sidley Austin. The Canada Pension Plan Investment Board was advised by Credit Suisse and Morgan Stanley.A version of this article appears in print on June 10, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: G.E. to Sell a Division as It Shifts Its Focus.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.