
JUNE 11, 2015

Related Article
From his roots in an Australian newspaper family, Rupert Murdoch has built a powerful international media empire that has considerably altered the journalistic landscape in many countries, including the United States.Mr. Murdoch acquires the Sunday tabloid News of the World in 1969. It is his first foray into British media after having made a name for himself in Australian media when he took over the family business. Sex scandals aside, the paper sets out to expose wrongdoing that results in dozens of criminal convictions. The Economist later proclaims that “he invented the modern tabloid newspaper — a stew of sexual titillation, moral outrage and political aggression.” In 1973, Mr. Murdoch enters the American newspaper business by purchasing two dailies in San Antonio, including The San Antonio News, which was transformed into a lurid tabloid. His News Corporation goes on to buy, and sell, a number of notable publications, including The New York Post, The Chicago Sun-Times, Village Voice and New York magazine. (He  buys back The New York Post in 1993.)Mr. Murdoch acquires the 20th Century Fox Corporation, laying the groundwork for what will become a dominant broadcast and cable media empire, including the Fox broadcast network, Fox News, Fox Sports and FX. News Corporation buys the website Myspace for $580 million. The purchase proves to be a notable misstep for News Corporation. A few years later, the long-suffering site will be sold for $35 million. News Corporation reaches an agreement to buy Dow Jones & Company, the publisher of The Wall Street Journal, for $5 billion. The deal makes Mr. Murdoch “the most formidable figure in business news coverage in this country, perhaps worldwide,” The New York Times reports. Allegations surface that the voice-mail account of a British schoolgirl, Milly Dowler, who went missing in 2002 and whose body was discovered six months later, was repeatedly hacked by News of the World. The report follows years of investigations into phone hacking by journalists in Britain and ignites a national outcry and official inquiry that harms Mr. Murdoch's operations and reputation.News Corporation withdraws its $12 billion bid to buy complete control of the satellite giant British Sky Broadcasting, a move intended to calm the torrent of derision directed at the company over the phone hacking scheme. The Murdoch family announces plans to close News of the World, the tabloid at the center of the phone hacking scandal. Mr. Murdoch appears before British lawmakers with his son James and other senior News Corporation officials and apologizes for the phone hacking scandal. A protester disrupts the hearing by trying to hit Rupert Murdoch with a paper plate full of white foam.British prosecutors bring criminal charges against eight of the most prominent figures in British tabloid journalism, including Andy Coulson, a former editor at a Murdoch paper and former aide to Prime Minister David Cameron, and Rebekah Brooks, one of Mr. Murdoch's top deputies. Andy Coulson is sentenced to 18 months in prison for his part in the phone hacking scandal, which exposed widespread wrongdoing at Mr. Murdoch's British media operation. Ms. Brooks is acquitted of all charges a month earlier.  Mr. Murdoch withdraws an $80 billion bid for Time Warner only a month after the bid becomes public, put off by Time Warner’s apparent hostility to the prospect of the deal and by the response of his own shareholders.21st Century Fox announced Mr. Murdoch’s two sons would assume new leadership roles in the company.James Murdoch, 42, will become chief executive at 21st Century Fox, succeeding his father, while Lachlan Murdoch, 43, will be executive co-chairman.Advertisement