By LESLIE PICKEROCT. 22, 2015
Lazard said Thursday that its third-quarter earnings jumped as fees for merger-advisory work outweighed weakness in asset management.Lazard is often seen as a bellwether for the merger industry as the largest of the so-called independent investment banks.Merger volume has skyrocketed in 2015, reaching levels just shy of this century’s record from 2007. In the year through September, more than $3 trillion worth of deals were announced, according to preliminary data by Thomson Reuters.“We feel good about the cycle right now,” Lazard’s chief executive, Kenneth M. Jacobs, said in a phone interview. “We feel it’s still intact and the long-term drivers are as strong now as they’ve been in a long time.”AdvertisementAs corporations seek to bolster revenue and productivity, given the slow-growth economic backdrop, they will continue to pursue M&A opportunities, he said.AdvertisementOn an adjusted basis, Lazard earned $124 million, or 93 cents a share compared with $89 million in the quarter a year earlier. Including a one-time benefit, the firm earned $399 million, or $2.99 a share, in the quarter. Lazard generated $594 million in operating revenue in the quarter.The results exceeded analysts’ estimates, according to a survey by Thomson Reuters, and its shares were up more than 1 percent in premarket trading.Lazard’s stock price has lately come under pressure, slipping about 13 percent this year and 23 percent during the quarter, over concern that the merger cycle had peaked and that market volatility would hurt the company’s asset-management business.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The financial advisory side of Lazard’s business made up a larger portion of revenue than a year ago, generating $331 million after Lazard participated in a number of hallmark deals. Financial advisers do not typically get paid until a deal is completed.Lazard advised on the combination of Heinz and Kraft, AT&T’s $67.1 billion acquisition of DirecTV and Lafarge’s 29.6 billion euro ($33.5 billion dollar) merger with the cement-maker Holcim during the quarter.Lazard is also working on several other large deals — including advising the brewer Anheuser-Busch InBev on its $106 billion bid for SAB Miller, and advising the Williams Companies in a $37.7 billion acquisition by Energy Transfer Equity. So far this year, Lazard is ranked seventh among its investment-banking peers for merger advisory work, according to data compiled by Thomson Reuters.In Lazard’s asset-management division, operating revenue was $262 million, down from the $288 million generated during the same period last year. A decline in the equity markets and currency fluctuations caused the company to report that assets under management – totaling $183 billion — were 8 percent lower during the quarter. About a third of Lazard’s assets are related to the emerging markets, which have been rockier lately amid a commodity slump and slowing growth in China.“We’re hoping the volatility diminishes a bit and we revert to the mean in terms of performance, and as we do, that should help us a lot,” Mr. Jacobs said.Lazard is the first of the independent investment banks to share its third-quarter results. Greenhill is set to report its third-quarter earnings after the market closes Thursday, while Evercore and Moelis are expected to announce their quarterly results on Wednesday.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.