AdvertisementSupported byBy Ian AustenOTTAWA — The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation abruptly fired the host of two prominent political programs on its television and radio networks, the latest in a series of embarrassments that have raised questions about how the government-owned broadcaster is managed. The host, Evan Solomon, was removed Tuesday evening from his positions as the host of a daily political program on the CBC’s news channel as well as a weekly political program on its main English radio network. The Toronto Star had earlier published an article saying that Mr. Solomon earned at least 300,000 Canadian dollars by introducing some of his influential and wealthy guests to a Toronto art collector. Mr. Solomon’s firing follows several other controversies, including the dismissal of two executives in April, and seems likely to increase scrutiny of the broadcaster by lawmakers whose votes determine its annual budget. Last year, the CBC received a government subsidy of about 1 billion Canadian dollars, or about $808 million. Declining government funds and advertising revenue, in part from its loss of National Hockey League broadcast rights, have forced another round of cuts and layoffs at the broadcaster. The CBC’s relations with both Liberal and Conservative governments have always been difficult. Prime Minister Stephen Harper, a Conservative, has been particularly critical of the network throughout his political career for what he has characterized as unbalanced journalism and because the CBC, with the benefit of government money, competes against private broadcasters for advertising and audience.Mr. Solomon’s move into the art business grew out of a longstanding friendship with Bruce Bailey, a wealthy businessman, prominent art collector and patron of the arts, The Star reported. Quoting from extensive email correspondence, the source of which it did not identify, the paper reported that Mr. Solomon agreed to introduce Mr. Bailey to well-known guests from his program and would be paid a 10 percent commission on any art sales that resulted.According to the newspaper, Mr. Solomon helped broker sales to Mark Carney, the Canadian who is the governor of the Bank of England, and Jim Balsillie, the former co-chief executive and co-chairman of BlackBerry. In a statement issued on Wednesday, Mr. Solomon said that he reported the relationship to management at the network earlier this year.“I did not view the art business as a conflict with my political journalism at the CBC and never intentionally used my position at the CBC to promote the business,” Mr. Solomon wrote.Chuck Thompson, a spokesman for the CBC’s English services, said that Mr. Solomon told managers in April that he had “a business partnership with his wife and Bruce Bailey and that he was not active in the business.” He added: “Senior management made it clear, at that time, that this business arrangement could not intersect with his work at CBC. Over the last two days, information surfaced that led to the decision we made yesterday.”The arrangement between Mr. Solomon and Mr. Bailey apparently soured earlier this year when Mr. Solomon wanted a commission of just over 1 million Canadian dollars on a sale but Mr. Bailey offered only 200,000 Canadian dollars, The Star reported.Mr. Balsillie, who could not be reached for comment, told The Star that he was not aware that Mr. Solomon was being paid commissions by Mr. Bailey. The Bank of England said in a statement that Mr. Carney “has no enduring professional relationship with Mr. Solomon.”Mr. Bailey did not respond to requests for comment.Mr. Solomon was considered an unusual choice to host “Power and Politics,” a popular political program on CBC, when he was appointed in 2009. Don Newman, whom he succeeded, was one of the deans of Canadian political reporting. But Mr. Solomon’s background before joining the CBC mainly involved cofounding and editing Shift, a popular culture and technology magazine. Despite Mr. Solomon’s lack of experience in politics, the network doubled down on him in 2011 and made him the host of “The House,” a radio program with a large following in political circles.“When you think of political coverage in Ottawa, you think of Evan Solomon,” said Christopher Waddell, a professor in the journalism school at Carleton University here.In April, the CBC fired two executives after a report commissioned by the CBC found that management at the network ignored “disrespectful and abusive conduct” by Jian Ghomeshi, the former host of a popular culture radio program who is now facing trial on several counts of sexual assault. Advertisement