AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — The budget deficit for the United States dropped sharply in May from the level a year ago, but much of the improvement reflected a calendar quirk.In its monthly budget report, the Treasury Department said on Wednesday that the May deficit dropped to $82.4 billion, down from a deficit of $130 billion in May 2014. But last year’s deficit was inflated because June 1 fell on a Sunday, requiring the government to mail out $35 billion in June benefit payments during May 2014.For the first eight months of this budget year, which began Oct. 1, the deficit totaled $365.2 billion, down 16.3 percent from the same period last year. This year’s deficit improvement has been helped by a stronger economy, which has pushed up tax receipts by 8.6 percent.The revenue increase pushed receipts to $2.1 trillion for the period October through May. Outlays were up at a slower pace, rising 4 percent to $2.47 trillion.The government has run a deficit in May for 60 of the past 61 years. The May deficit followed a $156.7 billion surplus in April, when a flood of tax payments pushed government receipts to a monthly high.The Congressional Budget Office is forecasting that the deficit for the full year will total $486 billion, little changed from last year’s deficit of $483.4 billion.The 2014 deficit was down from $680.2 billion in 2013. Before then, the United States recorded four straight years of annual deficits that topped $1 trillion. That reflected the impact of a severe financial crisis and the worst recession since the Great Depression of the 1930s.In the budget plan that President Obama unveiled for 2016, his final full year in office, the president is seeking authorization from Congress to spend $4 trillion and is projecting a deficit of $474 billion.Mr. Obama’s plan would increase spending on domestic and military programs, and seeks to raise taxes by $2 trillion by increasing levies on the wealthy, corporations and smokers.In other economic data released Wednesday, applications for home mortgages in the United States rose last week, the Mortgage Bankers Association said. The group’s seasonally adjusted index of mortgage application activity, which includes refinancing and home purchase demand, rose 8.4 percent in the week that ended June 5.Its seasonally adjusted index of refinancing applications rose 7 percent, and its gauge of loan requests for home purchases, a leading indicator of home sales, rose 9.7 percent. The refinance share of total mortgage activity was unchanged from the week before, at 49 percent of applications. The survey covers more than 75 percent of retail residential mortgage applications in the United States. Interest rates hit their highest level since November, the association also said.Advertisement