By CHAD BRAYJUNE 10, 2015
LONDON — The British government is ready to exit the banking business, even if it means that it will record a loss on some of its holdings.George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, said in a speech here on Wednesday night that the government would begin to sell down the 80 percent stake that it holds in the Royal Bank of Scotland.The speech was at the Lord Mayor’s annual banquet for the financial industry at the Mansion House in the City of London.The government is projected to sell some R.B.S. shares at a loss — at least initially. But selling some of its stake in the near future would improve the marketability of its remaining holdings in the bank. Thus, taxpayers would ultimately come out ahead from bailing out banks in Britain, Mr. Osborne said.Advertisement“It’s the right thing to do for British businesses and British taxpayers,” Mr. Osborne said. “Yes, we may get a lower price than Labour paid for it. But the longer we wait, the higher the price the whole economy will pay.”AdvertisementIn the midst of the financial crisis in 2008, R.B.S. received a bailout of 45 billion pounds (about $69 billion) from the British government, while its British banking rival Lloyds received £17 billion.In a report made public on Wednesday, the firm Rothschild, which is advising the Treasury, said that the British government could have lost £7.2 billion (about $11 billion) if it had sold all of its shares in R.B.S. all at once in early June.The government, however, could ultimately recoup its investment plus £14.5 billion from all of its bailouts of the banking sector through repayments and other stock sales, Rothschild said in the report.Initial estimates were that the British government could lose £20 billion to £50 billion from its rescue of the financial sector in the aftermath of the 2008 crisis.In its report, Rothschild advised the government to begin selling R.B.S. shares in hopes of increasing the marketability of those shares, particularly if the market continues to remain strong for financial stocks.Mr. Osborne has been eager to reduce the government’s holdings in R.B.S., the Lloyds Banking Group and other financial institutions that were bailed out during the financial crisis. But, the process has been more difficult than some had expected, particularly with R.B.S., which has struggled to turn around its business.R.B.S., which is based in Edinburgh, reported its seventh consecutive annual loss in February and announced plans to dismantle its investment bank. It will also reduce its geographic footprint to about 13 countries from 38 while cutting jobs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ross McEwan, who became chief executive in October 2013, has scaled back the bank’s global ambitions and is reshaping the lender into a British-focused retail and corporate bank.AdvertisementHe has said 2015 will be another “tough year” as the bank continues to restructure its operations and resolve inquiries into misconduct by its employees.On Wednesday, Mr. McEwan said the news of the share sale was a positive development.“I welcome this evening’s announcement from the chancellor and we are pushing ahead with our strategy to build a simpler, stronger, fairer bank that is totally focused on the needs of its customers and centered here in the U.K.,” Mr. McEwan said. “When the government starts selling its shareholding, it will be selling a bank determined to be the best in the country.”R.B.S. was among four global banks that pleaded guilty in May to a series of federal crimes related to a scheme to manipulate the value of the world’s currencies.By contrast, the government’s exit of its holdings in Lloyds has been much smoother. The government held as much as 40 percent of Lloyds after the bailout, but has pared its holdings since September 2013 as the bank’s finances have improved. Lloyds returned to an annual profit last year and in May, paid its first dividend since the government bailout.As of Wednesday night, the government had reduced its stake in Lloyds to just below 18 percent. It is also planning a sale of shares to retail investors in the next 12 months. The government has recovered about £11 billion of the bailout money given to Lloyds.Separately, the Bank of England announced the results of a yearlong review of the fixed income, currency and commodity markets following a series of inquiries into misconduct.The review, which included officials from the central bank, the Financial Conduct Authority and Treasury, made a series of recommendations to improve the public’s trust in the markets and impose stiffer penalties for wrongdoing.The report, known as the “Fair and Effective Markets Review,” recommended that criminal sanctions be applied to a wider range of financial instruments and the maximum possible sentence for those crimes be lengthened to 10 years in prison, from seven years.The panel also recommended creating new civil and criminal penalties for market abuse in the spot foreign currency market, which has been lightly regulated, and establishing global standards for conduct.Advertisement“This is a major opportunity for the industry to establish common standards of market practice that are well understood, widely followed and, crucially, that keep pace with markets,” Mark J. Carney, the Bank of England governor, said in his speech at Mansion House. “If firms and their staff fail to take this opportunity, more restrictive regulation is inevitable.”A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Britain to Start Selling Its Stake in Rescued Bank.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.