AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieTokio Marine may at last be learning some valuable lessons about value destruction.The 38 percent premium that Tokio Marine, a Japanese insurer, is paying as part of its $7.5 billion purchase of an American rival, HCC Insurance, is only half as absurd as premiums paid in its two previous stateside deals. Those extravagant forays, though, should give Tokio Marine scope to cut costs – perhaps even enough to make a deal stack up for a change.True, finding ways to reduce expenses after takeovers appears to be pretty far down the list of priorities for Tokio Marine executives. Cost-cutting did not come up in the presentation published on Wednesday – just as it was absent when the company paid an almost 80 percent premium for Delphi Financial in 2011 and Philadelphia Consolidated a few years before that.There’s more emphasis on how HCC will increase the share of Tokio Marine’s net income outside of Japan to 46 percent – the same spurious metric highlighted in the Delphi deal. The insurer, which is run by Tsuyoshi Nagano, also underlined how this latest United States acquisition should bolster return on equity by 1.5 percentage points. That sounds appealing, but Tokio’s return on equity for the financial year that ended in March was an unimpressive 7.8 percent.The lack of cost synergies in Tokio’s first stateside swoop, for Philadelphia Consolidated in 2008, was not surprising. That provided a toehold in the country, but at least some should have been possible from Delphi – though nowhere near enough to justify the exorbitant premium.Mr. Nagano should, though, be able to find some ways to cut costs by folding HCC into his existing platform. Excising 15 percent of the target’s $2 billion of costs, using last year’s numbers, would be worth $2 billion to shareholders, once taxed and capitalized. That would just about cover the premium. It wouldn’t excuse Tokio’s earlier profligacy, but a modicum of discipline is better late than never.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement