By BRETT COLEOCT. 22, 2015
SYDNEY, Australia — Santos, an Australian oil and gas explorer and producer, on Thursday rejected a $5.15 billion all-cash takeover offer by an investment firm backed by the ruling families of Brunei and the United Arab Emirates, saying the bid was “opportunistic” and did “not reflect the fair underlying asset value of the company.”The investment firm, Scepter Partners, offered to pay 6.88 Australian dollars, or $4.98, a share, a 26 percent premium to the closing price on Wednesday, to acquire all of Santos’s stock.“The Santos board has met to consider the proposal and decided to reject it,” Santos, based in Adelaide, said in a statement. Scepter’s New York office did not respond to requests for comment.Scepter’s bid is timed to disrupt a planned asset and share sale worth 3 billion dollars that may take place as soon as this month, according to a person familiar with Santos’s plans. The company has allowed a number of potential bidders for its assets to conduct due diligence. Santos has also been seeking to arrange a sale of new shares to pay off some of its 8.5 billion dollars in debt, said the person, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the company’s plans had yet to be made public.AdvertisementSantos has natural gas fields in Australia, Indonesia and Vietnam, and it has a stake in a liquefied natural gas project in Papua New Guinea. It has an L.N.G. plant in the northern Australian city of Darwin, and a similar project is about to come online in the eastern city of Gladstone.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Scepter’s headquarters are in Bermuda, and it has offices in New York, London and Beijing. According to its website, the firm was started to “sponsor the acquisition of large cap assets” that “are not restrained by traditional private equity models where there is a need for a more stringent time frame on exit and commercialization.”AdvertisementRayo Withanage, a lawyer trained in New Zealand, founded Scepter this year, based on the family office assets of BMB, another firm he founded to advise Brunei’s royal family and other clients with billions of dollars in assets. Scepter has a mandate to act both as a merchant bank and as a direct investment syndicate for its wealthy backers.Along with Mr. Withanage, who is Scepter’s chairman, the firm’s directors are Princes Abdul Ali Yil Kabier and Bahar Bolkiah, members of Brunei’s ruling family; Sheikh Juma al Maktoum, a member of the ruling family of the United Arab Emirates; Sir John R. H. Bond, a former chairman of HSBC; and Patrick Theros, a former United States ambassador to Qatar.Deutsche Bank and Lazard are advising Santos.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.