By SARAH MAXJUNE 10, 2015
When their first daughter was born in 2006, Jay Dorio gave his wife, Erika, a ring with an oval aquamarine to celebrate the occasion.Ms. Dorio was touched by the gift, but over the years, the ring got little wear. “I loved the stone, but the setting was a little too modern,” said Ms. Dorio, who lives in Southbury, Conn.This year, Ms. Dorio sent her ring to the online custom jewelry company Gemvara for a makeover. She shipped it to the company via insured mail, exchanged ideas with a Gemvara designer, and a few weeks later received her aquamarine in a classic setting surrounded by tiny diamonds. “I’ve been wearing it several times a week,” said Ms. Dorio, who paid about $630 for the new setting.The mantra of reduce, reuse, recycle seems to be finding its way into the jewelry box. When Gemvara, which was founded in 2010, began offering stone resetting in January, demand for the service was overwhelming. Within weeks, the company had a backlog of more than 200 orders. To accommodate demand, it added employees and fine-tuned the experience. Now, stone resetting accounts for 20 percent of the site’s traffic, and the company expects that share to continue growing.Advertisement“The American fine jewelry market is more than $60 billion a year, and it has to go somewhere,” said Matt Nichols, Gemvara’s chief executive. By his estimate, Americans have billions of dollars in baubles that they rarely wear.AdvertisementDecades after the De Beers Group, the world’s largest diamond company, started its “A Diamond Is Forever” campaign, the grandchildren and great-grandchildren of that slogan’s era are hoping to use those stones for their own engagements. And women in their 40s, 50s and 60s are looking for convenient and affordable ways to update their jewelry, or consolidate several stones into one piece.Although resetting is a new undertaking for Gemvara, Mr. Nichols said it was a relatively easy transition for the company, which lets customers design jewelry using hundreds of combinations of stones and settings. “Since the beginning, customers asked about using their own stone or just buying a setting,” Mr. Nichols said. “In about half of the business meetings I had, people would bring up a ring from an aunt or other relative that they wanted to reset.”Despite the interest, Gemvara chose to focus on the core custom design business before it branched into resetting. “We wanted to build some trust before we started asking people to send us their heirlooms,” said Mr. Nichols, a former member of Google’s corporate development team and a former principal at Highland Capital Partners, who joined Gemvara full time in 2011.The original idea for Gemvara came from a Babson College student, Matt Lauzon, who pitched it during an internship at Highland Capital, a venture capital firm in Boston. Though his business plan called for putting kiosks in jewelry stores, the idea quickly evolved into an online retailer. The company, which is based in Boston but houses its jewelry operations in New York’s Diamond District, now has 60 employees and is projecting $20 million in sales this year.“It was an idea to change the way a traditional age-old industry was run,” said Bob Davis, a general partner at Highland Capital, which initially backed the idea; all told, Gemvara has raised $51 million in venture capital. Unlike traditional jewelers, the company carries no inventory; everything is made to order.While the industry is ripe for a makeover, consumers have yet to embrace the idea of buying jewelry online, said Edahn Golan, a diamond industry analyst in Tel Aviv. “For most people there is a need to see the bling,” he added.United States sales for fine jewelry in 2014 were $68.8 billion, according to Mr. Golan, with the biggest slices going to specialty jewelry retailers — most of whom run single stores — and multiproduct retailers. “Walmart, at one point, was the largest seller of diamonds in the United States,” he said. Online jewelry sales are still a sliver of the market, he said. The largest online seller, Blue Nile, accounted for less than 1 percent of total fine jewelry sales last year, Mr. Golan said.AdvertisementThat is not to say that there is not opportunity, he said, particularly when it comes to younger buyers, who are comfortable shopping online and want a more customized experience.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“With something as permanent and personally meaningful as an engagement ring, it doesn’t make a whole lot of sense to pick from a limited catalog,” said Max England, 30. He used Gemvara to design an engagement ring featuring a moissanite stone, which is a diamond alternative, that he bought from another company.While other sites had some element of customization, he found the options too limited. As for a traditional jewelry store, “I didn’t want to deal with high-pressure sales tactics,” said Mr. England, who lives in the San Diego area. Two weeks before Mr. England planned to propose, the ring arrived in the mail, tucked in a black box lined with velvet. It was a hit with Chelsea Fontana, who is now Mr. England’s fiancée.When Gemvara was ready to offer stone resetting, Mr. Nichols volunteered to be the first customer. “I proposed to my wife 13 years ago with a traditional round-cut diamond in a basic setting,” he said. “She loved it, but I always had in my mind that I would get her another design.” In December 2014, he gave the program a test drive and presented his wife a new ring for Christmas.The company is now sending out an average of 50 insured shipping kits a day; customers use these to mail their jewelry or stones for resetting. Gemvara conducts a full appraisal and assigns an internal designer to look at the piece and suggest settings. From there, the customer can customize with different metals and additional stones and preview the creation online.Gemvara charges only for the cost of the new setting, which can range from less than $100 to several thousand dollars. The typical turnaround time is a few weeks.Some customers are, understandably, reluctant to put grandmother’s ring in the mail, even with insurance. Gemvara has gone to great lengths to show that shopping online can be less risky than the old-fashioned route. For one thing, the company offers a 101-day return policy — even for its reset stones. While technology is at the heart of the business, Gemvara personalizes the experience with its team of designers. “We wanted to let people self-serve, but we want to be as hands-on as people need,” Mr. Nichols said.That was relief for Christina Cain when she sent her grandmother’s circa-1920 engagement ring to Gemvara in April. “I was so nervous, but they were very reassuring at every stage,” said Ms. Cain, who lives in Pittsburgh and paid $320 to reset the diamond.“It’s a dainty little ring with a tiny gold band and bezel setting with two leaves,” she said of the redesigned version. “It still has meaning to me, but it’s more my style, and it doesn’t look like an engagement ring.”A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: An Online Jeweler Branches Into Resetting, With Sparkling Results.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.