AdvertisementSupported byBy Sarah LyallIt would be hard to overstate how bad James Murdoch’s reputation was in London when he left town some three and a half years ago. Humiliated in Parliament, abandoned by his important political friends, thwarted in a multibillion-dollar deal and forced out of his high-profile jobs in Britain in the wake of the phone hacking scandal, Mr. Murdoch no longer seemed to be the likely heir to his father’s global media empire. Instead, at least in Britain, he was persona non grata. “He left the country with his tail between his legs,” said Chris Bryant, chief spokesman for culture and media for the opposition Labour Party. “The best one could say of him was that he was utterly incompetent.” He added, “I wouldn’t employ him to run a bath.” But in hindsight, the departure of Mr. Murdoch and his removal from involvement with News Corporation’s British holdings can be seen as part of a calculated strategy to insulate him from the scandal there and resurrect him in the sprawling media company controlled by his father, Rupert. And with the news on Thursday that James, 42, was expected to replace the elder Mr. Murdoch as chief executive of 21st Century Fox, that resurrection seems to have happened with astonishing smoothness. “Things have moved on,” said Claire Enders, chief executive of the media research firm Enders Analysis in London. “His repatriation to the U.S. was a wise move because he became, in effect, a nonentity here, and he went off and did some very intelligent things.” Since moving to New York, James has helped lead several of Fox’s recent business deals. These included Fox’s partnership with Apollo Global Management to form one of the world’s largest television groups. He encouraged his father to take a small stake in Vice Media, which has become a force in online video. And he joined the board of TrueX, a digital ad technology firm that Fox later acquired. He also orchestrated a complex transaction in which the British broadcaster BSkyB acquired cable assets in Germany and Italy from Fox in a deal worth just over $9 billion. Fox owns roughly 39 percent of BSkyB.People who know James say he has matured under Chase Carey, president and chief operating officer of Fox. They describe him as hardworking, smart and with a pointillistic attention to detail. His vast experience in foreign markets is also viewed as a major asset, with international growth becoming increasingly important for media companies as they face challenges in the United States. “He has in the past been excessively impetuous, excessively aggressive, perhaps excessively unquestioning,” Ms. Enders said of James Murdoch. “All of these things may have been true in the previous decade, and may still be true at some levels, but he is a great strategist who has extraordinary long-term vision.” That was not true in the summer of 2011. When news first broke that reporters at The News of the World, the Murdochs’ down-market Sunday tabloid, appeared to have hacked into and listened to voice mail messages on the cellphone of a young murder victim, James Murdoch seemed utterly unprepared for what was coming at him. At the time, he was responsible for all of News Corp.’s holdings in Europe, Asia and the Middle East, and was said to be much more interested in broadcasting and other media than in newspapers, which were his father’s darlings. In a matter of several dizzying weeks, James Murdoch presided over both the closure of The News of the World and the humiliating withdrawal of News Corp.’s $12 billion bid to buy the portion of BSkyB that it did not already own. And having taken a pugilistically defensive stance in denying that hacking and other illegal activities were prevalent at the company’s papers, he was forced to stand by as British authorities arrested a number of high-ranking newspaper employees. These included Rebekah Brooks, a favorite of Rupert Murdoch and a close friend of Prime Minister David Cameron. The Murdochs, who still own a hefty portion of the British newspaper market, had long been feared and courted by the British political establishment. But now lawmakers were rising in Parliament to denounce them, and James had become a liability. Though he had been a mainstay of the so-called Chipping Norton set of influential media people and politicians, which included Ms. Brooks and Mr. Cameron, he found himself cut off from his old political friends. “He was seen very much as the face of the phone hacking scandal,” said Peter Jukes, the author of “Beyond Contempt: The Inside Story of the Phone Hacking Trial.” “He became toxic by association, especially for Cameron.” Things got worse when James Murdoch and his father were called to testify before various Parliamentary and other committees, and it became clear that phone hacking had been widespread at The News of the World and that its potentially disastrous legal repercussions had been clear to some executives at the company as early as 2008. Still, the Murdochs claimed to know nothing. Even when James was confronted with an email from that year asking him to authorize a $1.4 million payout to a phone hacking victim, James Murdoch said that he had not read the entire email chain and so was unaware of the context. In a scathing report, the House of Commons committee on media held James and Rupert responsible for “willful blindness” about the company’s malfeasance. “Their defense was that the company was too big and they had no idea what was going on, and that James couldn’t be bothered to read the relevant emails or to inquire about the company he was running,” Mr. Bryant, a member of the committee that produced the report, said in an interview. “That showed me they had no understanding of corporate governance.” No one ever pinned any direct knowledge of phone hacking on James. The consensus seemed to be that either he knew about it and was covering it up, or, more likely, that he did not know about it — either because he kept too loose a watch on the British newspapers, or because he deliberately failed to keep apprised of behavior he knew was wrong.With James safely out of London and back in his childhood home of New York with his wife and three children, he kept a relatively low profile. As he revived his career, his father moved to isolate his newspaper holdings from the rest of his empire, placing the British papers and The Wall Street Journal into a separate, smaller entity. Meanwhile, James’s older sister Elisabeth, who is said to have felt that her brother mishandled the phone hacking scandal and tarnished the family’s reputation in England, where she lives, has been sidelined from the family succession. But not James, and not his older brother, Lachlan, who is expected to become co-executive chairman of Fox with his father, according to people briefed on the company’s plans. “Rupert’s whole strategy was to protect his children,” Mr. Bryant said. “The thing about hereditary companies is that one of the sons ordinarily does succeed.”Emily Steel contributed reporting.Advertisement