AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — Americans increased their retail spending in May, especially for autos, clothes and building materials, in a sign that strong job growth has begun to lift store sales.Retail sales rose a seasonally adjusted 1.2 percent after a 0.2 percent gain in April, the Commerce Department said on Thursday. In the past 12 months, sales have risen a solid 2.7 percent.The upswing in shopping reflects greater confidence in an economy still shaking off the ravages of a recession that officially ended six years ago. Employers have added more than three million jobs in the past year. Yet until last month, many workers appeared to be saving as much of their paychecks as they could.“The whole package is looking heartier,” said Jennifer Lee, a senior economist at BMO Capital Markets. “Robust job growth, near decade-high auto sales, revolving credit rising at its second-fastest pace in eight years, and now, solid retail sales.”Other data reported on Thursday showed that more Americans were seeking unemployment benefits last week, but the figures still pointed to a healthy job market.The Labor Department said Thursday that weekly applications for jobless aid rose to a seasonally adjusted 279,000 applications, an increase of about 2,000. The four-week average, a less volatile measure, grew to 278,750 applications, up 3,750.Even with the increases, both figures remain at very low levels. The average fell to a 15-year low last month. “The pace of layoffs is now close to all-time lows as a share of payrolls,” said Ian Shepherdson, chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, in a note to clients.The retail sales report showed that, excluding the volatile categories of autos, gas, building materials and restaurants, so-called core retail sales — which factor into the government’s official measure of economic growth — rose a solid 0.7 percent in May.Spending at auto dealers and building materials stores jumped 2 percent in May, evidence that consumers are making longer-term investments in their homes and cars.Broader consumer spending — which includes services — was unchanged in April, the Commerce Department reported separately. On the whole, Americans chose to set aside a larger share of their paychecks. The savings rate reached 5.6 percent of after-tax incomes, the second highest level since December 2012.Economists watch the retail sales report closely because it provides a limited but early indication each month of the willingness of Americans to spend. Overall consumer spending accounts for 70 percent of economic activity. Retail sales account for about one-third of spending, with services like haircuts and Internet access making up the remaining two-thirds.Other data on Thursday suggested that consumer spending would remain strong. A report by the Federal Reserve showed that a rising stock market and climbing home prices lifted Americans’ net worth to a new high in the first three months of the year.The value of Americans’ stock holdings, real estate and other assets rose to $84.9 trillion from $83.3 trillion in the final three months of last year. Stock portfolios rose $487 billion, and home values by $503 billion. Some economists interpreted the solid retail sales as showing that economic growth was improving enough for the Fed to raise historically low interest rates as early as September. The Fed has kept rates near zero since late 2008 to try to raise spending and borrowing by businesses and consumers who were hurt by the recession.Gregory Daco, head of U.S. macroeconomics at Oxford Economics, predicted that growth would average an annualized 3 percent in the second half of the year, enough for the Fed to start lifting rates.Expectations for a pickup in growth were reinforced by a separate report from the Commerce Department, showing that United States businesses increased their stockpiles in April by the largest amount in nearly a year. Inventories held by businesses rose 0.4 percent in April compared with March, when stockpiles had risen a much smaller 0.1 percent. It was the largest increase since a 0.5 percent rise in May 2014.Total business sales rose 0.6 percent in April after a similar 0.6 percent rise in March. The March performance had been the first sales increase after seven monthly declines.The expectation is that further sales increases will bolster business confidence and encourage companies to increase their stockpiling. The rise in stockpiles will support production gains at factories and overall economic growth.Advertisement