By ANDREW POLLACKJUNE 11, 2015
A 29-year-old former hedge fund manager has pulled off what is perhaps the largest initial public stock offering ever in the biotechnology industry, creating a company with a market value approaching $3 billion on the basis of an unproved drug for Alzheimer’s disease that it acquired for $5 million.The successful market debut of the company, Axovant Sciences, renewed concerns that biotech stocks, which have outperformed the overall markets for several years, are now in a bubble.Axovant raised $315 million in its offering Wednesday, selling 21 million shares at $15 each. That was 3.1 million more shares than it had expected to sell and at the high end of the expected price range.The amount exceeds the $264 million raised in December by Juno Therapeutics, which at the time was believed to be the largest I.P.O. in biotechnology, at least in the United States.AdvertisementIn Axovant’s first day of trading on Thursday, shares nearly doubled to close at $29.90. .The 29-year-old founder of Axovant is Vivek Ramaswamy, who had previously managed a biotech hedge fund, when, he said, he got the bug to do it himself.Advertisement“I really was inspired by the possibility of more directly being involved in the development of drugs myself,” he said in an interview on Thursday.Last May, he started a company called Roivant Sciences, which in October created Axovant as a subsidiary to develop drugs for dementia. (Roivant still owns about 80 percent of Axovant after the I.P.O.)In December, Axovant paid $5 million to buy the rights to an Alzheimer’s disease drug that GlaxoSmithKline had given up on after testing it in numerous trials.Glaxo will be entitled to additional payments totaling tens of millions of dollars if the drug makes it to market, plus a 12.5 percent royalty on sales.So what does Axovant see that Glaxo did not?In Glaxo’s clinical trials, the drug, which Glaxo called SB-742457, did not work when used by itself. But in one trial, when it was tested in combination with the widely used drug Aricept, patients getting both drugs had a slower decline in certain measures of cognition and daily functioning than those getting Aricept alone.Axovant said that later this year it will start another trial testing the drug, which it calls RVT-101, with donepezil, the generic version of Aricept. It has said if the trial is successful it could file for approval as early as the end of 2017.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To some biotech watchers, this is a sign of easy money and overenthusiastic investors.“Given the fact that GlaxoSmithKline had a chance to take a look at this drug in the clinic, and concluded that they couldn’t do better than selling it for lunch money, the I.P.O. terms illustrate the kind of overnight riches a select few can find on Wall Street,” John Carroll, the editor in chief of the online news service Fierce Biotech, wrote on Thursday.Mr. Ramaswamy, who earned a bachelor’s degree in biology from Harvard and a law degree from Yale, said he did not consider his company’s offering a sign of a bubble.Advertisement“We have a potential best-in-class drug candidate” he said, that addresses “one of the biggest unmet medical needs.”Still, Harry Tracy, the publisher of a NeuroPerspective, a newsletter on neurology-related stocks, said that based on Glaxo’s trials, RVT-101 would delay the decline in cognition by only a small amount, rather than fundamentally affecting the course of the disease.“This is molehill territory,” he wrote.The drug, a once daily pill, works by inhibiting a receptor called 5-HT6, which affects the levels of certain brain chemicals. There are no approved Alzheimer’s drugs that work this way. Lundbeck and Otsuka Pharmaceutical are already in the final stages of testing such a drug, putting them ahead of Axovant. Their drug, however, has had side effects that RVT-101 might not have, Axovant said in its prospectus.Many companies seek to make a living on the drugs cast off by big pharmaceutical companies, and some succeed. One notable example was Questcor Pharmaceuticals, which paid only $100,000 to acquire a decades-old money-losing drug from the company now known as Sanofi. Questcor built that drug, called Acthar Gel, into a blockbuster by jacking up the price by several hundredfold and aggressively marketing it.Moreover, some existing Alzheimer’s drugs have had sales exceeding $1 billion a year, even though Alzheimer’s specialists say the medicines are only minimally effective. There is a great demand for medicines from the more than five million Americans with Alzheimer’s and their families.Other aspects of Axovant’s offering that have attracted attention after being reported by TheStreet.com are that Mr. Ramaswamy’s mother and brother were both given stock options exercisable at 90 cents a share, and that the company has its headquarters in Bermuda, a tax haven.Mr. Ramaswamy said that his mother and brother were both doctors and employees of the company, and that all employees were given stock options.A version of this article appears in print on June 12, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Biotech Debut.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.