By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJUNE 11, 2015
JPMorgan Chase has shaken up its technology, media and telecommunications team, elevating several top bankers while giving the current head of the team a new senior deal maker role.The firm announced in an internal memorandum on Thursday that the head of the group, Kurt Simon, would become global chairman of mergers and acquisitions, a nonmanagement position where he will work with the bank’s top clients across all industries.Mr. Simon, who has worked on some of the firm’s big tech and telecom deals in his 13 years there, will move to New York City and will report to Carlos Hernandez, JPMorgan’s global head of banking. Mr. Simon will work alongside Hernan Cristerna and Chris Ventresca, who co-lead the worldwide mergers team.With Mr. Simon’s move, the leadership of the tech, media and telecom group will effectively be split up among a number of his deputies, according to a separate memo by Eric Stein, the firm’s head of North American investment banking.AdvertisementThe North American technology investment banking team will be led by Michael Millman, who will keep his role as co-head of equity capital markets for the Americas. And the North American media and telecom teams will report to Fred Turpin, a longtime deal maker for telecom companies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Noah Wintroub, the bank’s top specialist on Internet and digital media companies, will become a vice chairman of investment banking, taking on a senior role. Mark Fiteny will become the head of the Internet and digital media group.AdvertisementAnd Jennifer Nason will remain global head of tech, media and telecom, serving as a top deal maker while taking on additional responsibilities.Mr. Turpin, Mr. Wintroub and Mr. Millman, in his role as head of banking, will report to Mr. Stein, according to the memo, while Ms. Nason will report to Mr. Hernandez. (As co-head of Americas equity capital markets, Mr. Millman will continue reporting to Elizabeth Myers, the global head of that group.)A spokeswoman for the firm confirmed the contents of the memos.Below is the memo from Mr. Hernandez about Mr. Simon’s move:I am pleased to announce that Kurt Simon will become Global Chairman of Mergers & Acquisitions. He will relocate to New York by August 1 and will report to me.In his new role, I have asked Kurt to help further strengthen our M&A franchise by focusing on senior coverage of our priority clients globally across all industries. Kurt will join the Strategic Advisory Council and be part of our market-leading M&A franchise, which is run by Hernan Cristerna and Chris Ventresca, the Global Co-Heads of M&A. Hernan and Chris will continue driving our M&A business globally, reporting to me, and each of the Council members’ reporting lines will remain the same.Kurt joined J.P. Morgan in 2002 and has more than 25 years of investment banking experience. Since 2009, he has been head of our North America Technology, Media and Telecommunications (TMT) Investment Banking franchise. During that time, Kurt has led some of the largest, industry-defining transactions across the TMT sector. Under his leadership, the group has significantly increased our Technology and overall TMT revenues and has established J.P. Morgan as the number-one ranked TMT franchise over the past six years.Kurt’s substantial business contributions have been coupled with a strong commitment to developing our top talent. In addition to serving on the global CIB MD Committee, he has helped to lead a number of development and training initiatives for executive directors and junior bankers as well as sponsoring the TMT group’s mobility agenda.Please join me in congratulating Kurt on his new role and wishing him continued success.And here is the memo from Mr. Stein about the rest of the tech, media and telecom team:Following today’s announcement that Kurt Simon will be relocating to New York to become Global Chairman of M&A, I am pleased to announce the following changes to the TMT group and the TMT management team.• Jennifer Nason will continue in her role as Global Chairman of TMT, with a focus on maximizing opportunities arising from the convergence of these rapidly developing sectors. She will maintain coverage of clients across the Technology and Media & Telecommunications groups, and will take on added responsibility to help drive a tightly coordinated client strategy across these sectors. Jennifer continues to report to Carlos Hernandez.• Noah Wintroub will be promoted to Vice Chairman of Investment Banking and will continue his focus on Internet and Digital Media (IDM) and disruption opportunities more broadly. He will partner closely with Mark Fiteny, who will become head of IDM, to drive our disruption strategy within the Technology group. Noah will also collaborate with our industry teams and lines of business across the firm to identify and drive emerging opportunities for our clients and J.P. Morgan. Noah will report to me.• Michael Millman will expand his responsibilities to become head of Technology Investment Banking, North America, while continuing as co-head of ECM Americas. Michael has been a key driver in the Technology franchise and has led numerous landmark transactions. He will remain based in San Francisco. He will report to me in his new role and continue to report to Liz Myers in his ECM capacity.Reporting to Michael will be Rick Diamond, head of Technology Services; Madhu Namburi and Curt Sigfstead, co-heads of Technology Infrastructure; Marek Biegluk, head of U.S. Software; and Mark Fiteny, head of IDM.• Fred Turpin will become head of Media & Telecommunications Investment Banking, North America, reporting to me. During 25 years in investment banking, Fred has played a significant role in building our Telecom Investment Banking practice, advising clients on a broad range of capital structure and financing issues as well as M&A and strategic advisory engagements. Fred will leverage his Telecom experience to help our Media & Telecom clients capitalize on the converging opportunities in today’s market.Reporting to Fred will be Paul Finger and Eric Menell, co-heads of U.S. Media.Please join me congratulating our colleagues and supporting them in their new roles.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.