
Breakingviews By                     
JEFFREY GOLDFARB

JUNE 11, 2015
Rupert Murdoch is propelling his family dynasty forward by taking a step back.The octogenarian mogul plans to hand off the 21st Century Fox media empire shortly to his two sons. Rupert is expected to designate Lachlan as executive co-chairman alongside him, and cede the chief executive role to James. The departure of the chief operating officer, Chase Carey, would crown the royal succession.Recent events may have contributed to Rupert Murdoch’s willingness to give up the throne. He miscalculated with an $80 billion offer to buy Time Warner last year. The rival conglomerate firmly resisted the advance, and forced a retreat. Over the last year, Time Warner’s stock has soared by a quarter and still trades higher than the $85 offer price long after the takeover bid’s withdrawal, as Fox shares tumbled by 7 percent.The decision not to raise the bid or go hostile against Time Warner, the owner of HBO and Warner Bros. studios, was a departure from the elder Murdoch’s aggressive past. That may be a credit to Mr. Carey, who has won over Wall Street by taming the company’s imperialist tendencies in favor of returning money to shareholders instead. Without his mustachioed presence in the corporate firmament – even if he sticks around for a while as a consigliere – there’s a risk the Murdochs could lose their newfound discipline.James Murdoch has at least proved himself to a certain extent, overcoming the cries of nepotism in 2003 when he was installed as chief executive of the British satellite operator BSkyB and slowly winning over its investors. He seems to have deftly shaken off the phone hacking scandal that broke while he was overseeing the British tabloid newspapers involved and owned by a sister company, News Corp. James Murdoch has even made some headway with Fox owners who are not named Murdoch and with Prince Alwaleed bin Talal of Saudi Arabia, who backs the family’s 39 percent control with his 6.6 percent stake.In 2013, a big majority of minority investors voted against the board nominations of the brothers. A year later, after James had been appointed co-chief operating officer and Lachlan co-chairman, the opposition shrank considerably. Not that the ballot count matters.As the forthcoming coronation orchestrated by Rupert indicates, Fox will be a fief overseen by the Murdochs.Jeffrey Goldfarb is United States editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »