AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiLululemon Athletica disclosed in a filing on Thursday that its founder, Dennis J. Wilson, may sell his entire stake in the yoga wear maker, paving the way for Mr. Wilson to end an association that had become contentious.Mr. Wilson, who founded Lululemon in 1998 with a shop that shared a space with a yoga studio in Vancouver, British Columbia, holds 14 percent of the company’s outstanding shares, a stake valued at about $1.2 billion. That stake includes shares held by his family and by LIPO Investments, a firm that Mr. Wilson controls.Lululemon shares were down 1.4 percent in early trading on Thursday after the sales possibility was disclosed in a company filing.Mr. Wilson made a fortune selling stretchy, $100 yoga pants as a symbol of an upscale, active lifestyle, a marketing effort that helped give rise to an “athleisure” boom in fashion that other labels have scrambled to join.But he stepped down as chairman in December 2013 after a public relations disaster set off by a recall of black yoga pants whose proprietary Luon fabric was too see-through. Women who tried to return the pants at Lululemon stores reported being told to put them on and bend over, so staff members could determine how sheer they were. Mr. Wilson fanned the flames by suggesting that some women were just too large to wear the pants.Mr. Wilson then engaged in a monthslong standoff with his own board, voting against the reappointment of two fellow directors. The dispute was resolved when Mr. Wilson agreed to sell half his stake to the private equity firm Advent and both he and Advent agreed not to wage a proxy fight for two years.Tensions remained, however, over Kit and Ace, a company started by Mr. Wilson’s wife, Shannon, and his oldest son, J.J., that sells a line of clothing that uses “technical cashmere” fabric. Though Mr. Wilson insisted that he was a mere adviser to his wife’s business, his role in the business, a rival to Lululemon that had a strikingly similar ethos and strategy and that was financed by the Wilson family, became a growing thorn in Mr. Wilson’s relationship with the company he founded. He resigned from the board earlier this year.Lululemon has since rebounded, with a stronger emphasis on street styles that appeal to women who wear athletic gear outside the gym. It has also made a push into men’s wear.This week, Lululemon raised its full-year revenue forecast to $2 billion after its total sales rose at a healthy 6 percent rate, led by a 31 percent surge in sales online.Advertisement