AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanTimothy L. Blixseth, a 65-year-old former billionaire, now sits in his eighth week of solitary confinement in a county jail in Great Falls, Mont., one of the few people being held accountable in connection with Wall Street’s profligate behavior in the years leading up to the 2008 financial crisis.He is not even a banker. Rather, Mr. Blixseth was a client of a group of Credit Suisse bankers who were rewarded handsomely from 2004 to 2006 for making $3 billion in aggressive senior secured loans to developers of luxury resorts in the West with little concern for how the money was going to be used.After making the loans, the Credit Suisse bankers, led by a managing director, David Miller, syndicated them to investors around the world, earning large fees for themselves. None of the loans remained on the bank’s balance sheet. Mr. Miller knew he had created a bonus machine for himself and his team. In an August 2005 email to a colleague that appeared in a 2011 court filing, Mr. Miller wrote, “These are aggressive deals and it is in all of our best interests that the investors are protected, because if one of them should blow up, you will see these investors pull out of this land development mkt and our gravy train will stop.”Mr. Miller was right about that. In the end, all of the loans blew up, including those made to resorts like the Tamarack Resort in Idaho ($250 million); Lake Las Vegas, a 3,592-acre golf community in Nevada ($540 million); Promontory, a 10-square-mile second-home resort outside Park City, Utah ($275 million); the Turtle Bay Resort in Hawaii ($400 million); and to Ginn resorts in Port St. Lucie, Fla.; Naples, Fla.; Boone, N.C.; and the Bahamas ($675 million). After each of the developments ended up in Bankruptcy Court, a federal bankruptcy judge admonished the Credit Suisse bankers by calling the loans “doomed to failure” from the outset.Mr. Miller and his team made one of their most aggressive loans to Mr. Blixseth, a land and timber baron who in the 1990s assembled a huge tract of mountainous land an hour outside of Bozeman, Mont. — including a land swap with the federal government that required an act of Congress — and built on it the highly exclusive Yellowstone Club, home to more than 500 wealthy members like Bill Gates, Peter Chernin, Tom Brady and Justin Timberlake. Each paid millions of dollars to build homes there and have access to the property’s private ski slopes, among other perks.Soon after Credit Suisse lent $375 million to Mr. Blixseth in 2005, he transferred $209 million to an entity he controlled and spent the bulk of the rest on resorts around the world, including a 14th-century chateau in France and Tamarindo, a golf resort on the Pacific Coast of Mexico, in an unsuccessful bid to create something he called Yellowstone Club World. He also bought a Gulfstream jet.Mr. Blixseth lost control of the Yellowstone Club during a highly public and acrimonious divorce, and the club itself filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in November 2008. In May 2009, CrossHarbor Capital Partners, a Boston private equity firm controlled by Samuel T. Byrne, a member of the club and a developer of some of the homes on the property, bought the business out of bankruptcy for the bargain price of $115 million, and another $100 million in capital expenditures.Credit Suisse said Mr. Blixseth owed it $286 million that he had taken from the Yellowstone Club for his personal use. In 2012, a Montana bankruptcy judge lowered that claim to $40.9 million, which Mr. Blixseth has not yet paid.But it was his involvement with Tamarindo that landed him in jail. As part of his buying spree, Mr. Blixseth paid $40 million for the resort. He later sold it for $13.8 million as his financial fortunes spiraled downward and said he no longer had the money. Brian Glasser, the trustee for the Yellowstone Club Liquidating Trust, told Bloomberg News in April that he thought Mr. Blixseth had spent the proceeds trying to maintain his once lavish lifestyle. Last December, Judge Sam E. Haddon of Federal District Court in Montana ordered Mr. Blixseth to account for the Tamarindo proceeds. Before arriving in court in Butte, Mont., on Dec. 18, Mr. Blixseth produced 1,000 pages of documents.But, as he later recounted in a 13-page unpublished essay, “Seven Days in December,” a copy of which was sent to me, he figured that Judge Haddon would not be satisfied. He was right. Judge Haddon said the documents were hearsay, found Mr. Blixseth in contempt and ordered him arrested.“It was like a slow-motion B movie being shot, but it was not quite like I had played it out a hundred times in my mind in the weeks leading up to that day,” Mr. Blixseth wrote. “They walked over to me and all I kept was my driver’s license. My hands were handcuffed behind my back,” he continued, writing that he was “escorted to a holding cell in the courthouse where they proceeded to pat me down. They then installed leg irons and body irons which connected to the handcuffs.”Mr. Blixseth said of his first night in jail that he thought he would have to sleep with one eye open, not knowing anything about his cellmate, Andy. “In fact I slept like a baby,” he wrote. “I slept for two hours and cried (inside) and went back to sleep. The bed was a combination of a 4 x 8 piece of plywood and a slab of concrete with no pillow. At that point I began to think that Credit Suisse had won in our six-year battle.”Mr. Blixseth survived by helping other inmates with their legal problems, by sharing his food with Andy and by speaking on the phone as often as allowed with his wife, Jessica. “I began to learn a lot about myself,” he wrote.On Christmas Eve, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ordered Mr. Blixseth released. He got back his street clothes and a check for $200.75, the amount of money he had with him before he was incarcerated, minus some purchases at the jail commissary.“The door was opened and I was greeted by the freezing Montana winter air,” he wrote. “A taxi was waiting for me and I asked him to take me to a bank to cash the check as I had no money. Afterward he dropped me at the Missoula airport and I went straight to the deli and bought a ham and cheese sandwich, a Coke and chips. I went downstairs to Gate 5 to wait for my flight back to Seattle.”Mr. Blixseth’s freedom was short-lived. On April 20, Judge Haddon ordered Mr. Blixseth back to jail in Great Falls, where he remains in solitary confinement for his own protection.On June 5, his lawyer, Phillip Stillman, turned over to the court a new set of 9,000 pages of documents related to the sale of Tamarindo that he said showed to the penny where the sale proceeds went. Mr. Stillman asked that Mr. Blixseth be released.Judge Haddon denied the request. Instead, he gave the plaintiffs’ lawyers until Friday to review the new documents and respond. Mr. Stillman filed an emergency request with the appeals court for Mr. Blixseth’s release, but it was denied. “There’s absolutely no justification for keeping him in custody another day,” Mr. Stillman told The Associated Press.In many ways, Mr. Blixseth and Mr. Miller deserved each other, just as every lender needs a borrower. Both were eager participants in the excess of the years leading to the 2008 financial crisis. Mr. Blixseth was only too happy to take Credit Suisse’s millions of dollars; Mr. Miller and his team were plenty eager to receive the big bonuses they knew would come their way from making these loans to the resort owners. But only Mr. Blixseth is being held responsible.Consider this: While Mr. Blixseth was in county jail the first time, a Dallas jury ruled against Credit Suisse in a case involving the Lake Las Vegas resort and agreed that it had used a faulty appraisal method to induce the plaintiff, Highland Capital Management, to refinance a loan to the project. The jury awarded $40 million to Highland.You would think this entire financing debacle would have spelled the end of Mr. Miller’s investment banking career. But you would be wrong. He remains co-head of global credit products at Credit Suisse, which continues to back him.“Mr. Blixseth is currently incarcerated and his false allegations and meritless lawsuits are well documented,” the bank said in a statement. “David Miller is a successful professional who has helped hundreds of companies access the U.S. credit markets during a long and distinguished career. Using Mr. Blixseth’s jail time to tarnish the reputation of Mr. Miller is ridiculous.”William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.” Advertisement