By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJUNE 11, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO — A veteran investor is making the rare leap from one top Silicon Valley firm to another.Menlo Ventures announced on Thursday that it had hired Matt Murphy as a managing director, months after he announced that he planned to leave his longtime perch at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers.Behind the unusual jump from one top-tier venture capital firm to another was simply a desire for change, said Mr. Murphy, 49. He said that he gave his fellow partners at Kleiner Perkins notice in January, then began talking with a number of other investment firms to find a new home.“The main thing was, I wanted something smaller and was ready for a change,” he said in an interview.AdvertisementBut he ultimately was drawn to Menlo, whose investments have included Uber and Siri, the voice-driven assistant in Apple’s iPhones and iPads. It also happened to be the home of friends and fellow investors like Mark Siegel and Venky Ganesan, both managing directors at Menlo.Advertisement“Obviously, people at the senior level don’t make these changes very often,” Mr. Siegel said in a separate telephone interview.While at Kleiner Perkins, Mr. Murphy rose through the ranks to become an investing partner, with close connections to Google through the technology giant’s initial public offering. And in 2008 he helped open the $200 million iFund, a venture capital vehicle aimed at helping develop apps for the iPhone.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Among the companies with whom he has worked closely as an investor are Shazam, the music identification app; Simplivity, a computer services provider for businesses; and Puppet Labs, which helps automate back-office technology software processes.But Mr. Murphy has also become known as the partner at the firm who fired Ellen Pao, a former junior partner who sued Kleiner Perkins, alleging gender discrimination by the Silicon Valley stalwart. (He was not one of the named defendants in Ms. Pao’s lawsuit.)Mr. Siegel said that he did not believe that the legal fight would affect Mr. Murphy’s work at Menlo.At Menlo Ventures, which recently raised $400 million for its latest fund, Mr. Murphy will serve as one of a handful of managing directors meant to guide the 39-year-old firm for the foreseeable future.He is expected to focus on early-stage investments in start-ups focused on mobile apps or on enterprise technology, both of which happen to be core focuses for his new professional home.“Aside from Matt being a friend and a great fit for our partnership at this time, please make no mistake — we hired him to bring home the bacon!” Mr. Siegel wrote in an email.A version of this article appears in print on June 12, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Venture Shift.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.