By SYDNEY EMBERJUNE 11, 2015
Michelle Obama has been on the cover of many magazines, including Vogue and Time. To go along with her latest appearance, she has also had a bigger role behind the scenes.In a first for a first lady, Mrs. Obama is guest-editing the July/August issue of More, a lifestyle magazine for women ages 30 to 65.“The idea of having Mrs. Obama serve as the first guest editor of More seemed like a crazy idea,” the magazine’s editor in chief, Lesley Jane Seymour, said in an interview. “But it was at the top of the list for me.”Mrs. Obama — who has been on More’s cover twice previously, in October 2008 and February 2012 — helped choose the columns and articles for the issue, many of which are connected to her wide-reaching initiatives. (She did not, however, mark up article drafts with a red pen.)AdvertisementIn one feature, Mrs. Obama describes her favorite photos in the White House, including one from Barack Obama’s inauguration in January 2009. Another column is connected to Mrs. Obama’s “Let’s Move” initiative, which is aimed at reducing childhood obesity. In the magazine’s travel column, Mrs. Obama highlights national parks and memorials, including Mount Rushmore, the Grand Canyon and the Brown v. Board of Education National Historic Site in Topeka, Kan. Another column, titled “The Feminine Mistake,” is written by the acclaimed author Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie.Advertisement“Everything is linked to Mrs. Obama,” Ms. Seymour said. “Every column was done from her point of view.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The 148-page issue, with several new advertisers, will be available on newsstands June 23.In an interview with More, Mrs. Obama called women “the ultimate multitaskers.”“We should never underestimate our abilities to effectuate change in the world and our own communities, and especially in our own lives,” she said. “So hopefully the readers will take a little bit of that away as they read through the issue.”More, which the Meredith Corporation introduced in 1998, competes with the likes of Real Simple and Martha Stewart Living for readers. Many of More’s articles are about style, beauty and health and touch on growing older.Ms. Seymour said the magazine was intended for accomplished women “who can have an impact on the world.” For those reasons, she said, Mrs. Obama was both the “ultimate More reader” and “the perfect guest editor.”“I call her my inspirer in chief,” Ms. Seymour said. “She really is such an inspirational figure. And that really is the mission of this issue.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.