By NELSON D. SCHWARTZ, PATRICIA COHEN and KATIE THOMASJUNE 12, 2015
As big a setback as Friday’s vote on Capitol Hill was for President Obama’s efforts to advance his trade agenda, it was an even bigger rebuff for the leaders of American business.While there are deep divisions over trade policy among Democrats, and to some extent among Republicans as well, corporate America has been nearly unified in its support of a deal that would lower various barriers to trade and investment between the United States and 11 other Pacific Rim nations.Though many sought to put the best face on the vote, business groups and chief executives were quick to voice their displeasure with the House’s rejection of aid to workers harmed by imports, which could doom prospects for eventual approval of a wider trade pact.“This is disappointing and discouraging,” said Todd J. Teske, chief executive of Briggs & Stratton, a 107-year-old manufacturer based in Wauwatosa, Wis. “We do business around the world, and free and fair trade allows the U.S. and our company to be competitive globally.”AdvertisementIn a classic strange-bedfellows-in-Washington moment, big-business lobbies swung into action Friday afternoon in a concerted effort to save a signature initiative of President Obama, a leader with whom they have rarely seen eye to eye.Advertisement“Manufacturers will not back down in this fight for expanded trade, for the future of our industry and our country,” the National Association of Manufacturers said in a statement.Manufacturers have been among the most vocal supporters of what is formally known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership, or T.P.P., but officials from other sectors also made their frustration plain on Friday. David French, senior vice president for the National Retail Federation, called the vote “a victory for those with a narrow agenda that puts petty politics ahead of people, while jeopardizing the futures of millions of men and women in America.”“It is nothing short of astounding that in the 21st century anyone would think it is in our country’s best interest to sit back and let foreign governments dictate our role in a global marketplace,” he added.After the vote, many trade associations representing consumer electronics, semiconductor manufacturers and Silicon Valley firms, as well as individual companies like the computer chip maker Intel, issued statements cheering on the president and urging Congress to reconsider its opposition to the piece of the legislation dealing with assistance to workers.Friday’s showdown on Capitol Hill makes the odds of a trade agreement before President Obama leaves the White House much longer, but some experts insist the fight is far from over.“I’m still hopeful,” said Gary Hufbauer, a senior researcher with the Peterson Institute for International Economics, who characterized the vote on Friday as a vehicle for Democrats to show their displeasure with aspects of the pact. “This was a way of them stomping their feet, but in the end I think the president will get his way.”Bill Lane, director of global government affairs for Caterpillar, echoed Mr. Hufbauer’s view that the door was not completely shut. “Even though the process is temporarily stalled, we are optimistic,” he said.AdvertisementMark Grayson, a spokesman for the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, an industry trade group, said that the group was hopeful “that the House will pass the bill so it can get to the president’s desk.”He declined to comment on the group’s position on the overall pact, saying it was still being negotiated. But he made clear that the pharmaceutical industry was hoping for what he called “strong” intellectual property provisions to be included in the trade pact.He dismissed concerns that the pact could limit access to generic drugs, noting that the overwhelming majority of prescriptions filled in the United States were for generic medications, despite strong intellectual property laws in this country.Generic drug industry officials hailed the vote, however.Heather Bresch, the chief executive of Mylan, a generic drug maker, applauded the defeat on Friday by the House, saying it would give her more time to lobby against the trade pact.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She and other leaders in the generic drug industry have argued that the pact goes too far in protecting the patents of the brand-name drug industry and would block access to generic drugs around the world.“I think it’s scary and dangerous that the president is looking for this kind of authority on a trade bill that I think has serious flaws in it,” she said. “It’s setting the global generic industry back 30 years.”“I’m thankful for this reconsideration, and I’m going to use this window to try and educate and let our voice be heard,” she said.Although certainly a minority, a few business groups oppose the trade pact. Unions, environmental groups and many liberals are also opposed. Many critics cited the job losses that followed the signing of North American Free Trade Agreement more than two decades ago.There was also some applause for the defeat from groups like the American Sustainable Business Council, a network of progressive business organizations.Advertisement“The T.P.P. would give multinational corporations unprecedented power to evade safeguards that protect consumers, workers and the environment. It would hurt smaller, innovative businesses,” said David Levine, the group’s co-founder.While most economists generally support the White House’s trade agenda, some on the left have kept up a steady drumbeat, warning that it has been structured primarily to advance the interests of Wall Street and major corporations doing business abroad.“The more you learned about the T.P.P., the less it sounded like a simple free trade deal and the more it sounded like a handshake between businesses and investors on all sides of the border,” said Jared Bernstein, a senior fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.Mr. Bernstein, who served as the chief economist to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. from 2009 to 2011, argued that voters were also suspicious about the benefits of trade agreements.“Many constituents were deeply uncomfortable,” he said. “Members from districts where there’s nervousness not just about trade deals but about the impact of globalization on jobs and wages had a hard time saying yes.”Many manufacturing giants have been pushing hard to create a broad set of trade rules across major Pacific Rim nations (not including China, however), in part because they already have a major presence in the region. These include companies like General Electric, Honeywell and Cummins. But even a company like Briggs & Stratton, which exports less than 10 percent of what it makes to Asia, stands strongly behind the pact being negotiated.If sales of the gasoline engines for outdoor power equipment that his company makes — along with Snapper lawn mowers, Simplicity tractors and other products — are to grow in the future, Mr. Teske, the company’s chief executive, said, new customers in Asia are vital.About 85 percent of Briggs & Stratton’s products are manufactured in the United States, with factories in Missouri, Kentucky, Nebraska and other states, Mr. Teske said, noting that his work force is efficient enough to be competitive with rival manufacturers in low-wage countries.“If we become isolated as a country,” Mr. Teske said, “that’s not to our advantage.”Dino Grandoni contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on June 13, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Leaders React With Dismay to Defeat of Trade Bill .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.