By HIROKO TABUCHIJUNE 12, 2015
Honda Motor on Friday confirmed that a rupturing airbag inflater fatally wounded the driver of a 2005 Civic in a crash in April. Counting this, at least seven deaths have been linked to defective airbags made by the Japanese supplier Takata.Kylan Langlinais, 22, died in a hospital four days after the Civic she was driving crashed into a utility pole in Lafayette, La., according to a lawsuit filed this week by her family. The airbag exploded and sent metal fragments into Ms. Langlinais’s car, severing an artery in her neck, the lawsuit said.The vehicle was included in what Honda called a “safety improvement campaign” announced in June 2014, but no notice was sent to the car’s owner at the time, the automaker said. Ms. Langlinais acquired the vehicle in October 2014.Honda finally sent a safety notice for the car on April 2, three days before Ms. Langlinais’s crash.Advertisement“Honda deeply regrets that mailed notification appears to have not reached Ms. Langlinais prior to her crash,” Chris Martin, a spokesman for the automaker, said in a statement.AdvertisementMr. Martin said the scale of the recalls and a lack of replacement parts prompted the automaker to prioritize servicing vehicles registered in “humid” regions like Florida, Hawaii and Puerto Rico, considered by Takata and federal regulators to be at highest risk of an inflater rupture.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Honda mailed out the first notifications to drivers in those areas in September. Notices to other regions, including Louisiana, were not immediately mailed out.At least seven deaths worldwide and more than 100 injuries have been linked to airbag inflaters made by Takata that can rupture violently. Takata last month said that some 34 million airbags must now be recalled, though that number does not account for cars that may be counted twice because, for example, both driver’s and passenger airbags may be affected.So far, automakers have identified and recalled fewer than 16 million cars, according to a New York Times tally.Both Takata and Honda were alerted to an airbag rupture as early as 2004, but the bulk of the recalls have come in the last two years. Takata did not declare the inflaters in question defective until last month.A version of this article appears in print on June 13, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Honda Links a Rupturing Takata Airbag to a 7th Death.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.