
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

JUNE 12, 2015
The hedge fund manager Edward S. Lampert is getting about $2.6 billion more to burn. Sears, the flailing United States retailer that Mr. Lampert has led since 2013, wants shareholders to exercise rights to capitalize a real estate investment trust that will buy 235 stores. The danger is that Sears will waste the cash.Mr. Lampert’s gambit looks like the equivalent of asking shareholders — including himself and his hedge fund, which between them own 48 percent of Sears — to inject $1.6 billion of fresh money into Sears, borrow more than $1 billion in addition, and then spin off the best of the company’s property portfolio with the new debt.Owning the REIT, Seritage Growth Properties, may be a decent bet. By Friday morning, as-yet-unpaid rights were changing hands for just over $6 a share, according to Thomson Reuters. That’s 20 percent above what exercising the rights will cost, potentially valuing Seritage’s equity at about $2 billion, or more than $300 million more than shareholders are being asked to pay for it.The new real estate entity will keep the properties out of reach of the retailer’s creditors, should Mr. Lampert fail to turn Sears around. Moreover, REITs have to pay out essentially all profit as dividends. Seritage will collect $140 million of annual rent from Sears alone, according to a regulatory filing. Dividends taken from that will make a nice change for shareholders of money-losing Sears, which doesn’t pay a dividend.AdvertisementThe problem, though, is what’s left for the 129-year-old retailer. The extra cash will be enough to buy Mr. Lampert two years or more at recent rates of operating cash burn. But in one role or another, he has been trying to turn the company around for a decade and hasn’t managed it yet.Since details of the Seritage transaction were unveiled along with quarterly earnings on Monday, Sears shares have lost about $1 billion in value, taking away more from shareholders than they have gained on their REIT rights. As it happens, that’s in the same ballpark as the capitalized value of the rent that Sears will have to start paying Seritage.AdvertisementBut the earnings report also showed slumping revenue. Investors may just be worrying that Sears will spend the cash and end up still losing money — and with its balance sheet hollowed out.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »