By JONATHAN MAHLERJUNE 12, 2015
“I’m pretty sure we have a revolution coming,” said Nick Denton, founder and chief executive of Gawker Media. “It’s not 100 percent guaranteed, but the existing corporate structure is looking pretty hollow.”It was a mild spring evening, and Mr. Denton, who is 48, was standing on the fire escape of his SoHo loft in a long-sleeve T-shirt and jeans, smoking a joint and drinking a glass of red wine with his husband, Derrence Washington; Tommy Craggs, the executive editor of his media empire; and me.As Mr. Denton eased into his soliloquy — “Look at those Midtown towers: What are those people doing all day?” — Mr. Craggs started cracking up.“What?” Mr. Denton asked.“You just wrote the lead of his story,” Mr. Craggs said, nodding toward me. “ ‘Midway through his first joint, Nick Denton said a revolution was coming.’ ”Advertisement“He can’t use that,” Mr. Denton replied. “You can’t use that — I mean, realistically, in The New York Times.”Mr. Craggs insisted that I could, and I would. They ended their argument with a bet.Go collect your $50, Mr. Craggs.Mr. Denton should have known better. After all, he has probably done more than any individual to loosen up the mainstream media. His various websites have stood for nothing if not the proposition that decorum should never stand in the way of entertaining readers. By Gawker’s definition, if it’s interesting, it’s news. As Mr. Denton himself has put it, what journalists put in their stories is inherently less interesting than what they say after work.Like when they’re standing on a fire escape, in a haze of pot smoke.Mr. Denton started Gawker Media 12 years ago in his living room. It was initially just two blogs, the snarky — though the term was not yet in popular usage — media gossip site Gawker, and a technology blog, Gizmodo. The company had two freelance bloggers who were paid $12 per post.Today, Gawker Media encompasses seven sites with 260 full-time employees. There’s the sports blog Deadspin — noteworthy journalistic coups include an investigative article revealing that the football star Manti Te’o had an imaginary girlfriend and the publication of photos said to show Brett Favre’s penis — and the feminist site Jezebel. For technology, there’s Gizmodo. For video gamers, there’s Kotaku. Mr. Denton’s personal favorite is Lifehacker, Gawker’s take on self-help.AdvertisementBy most measures, the company is doing fine. Gawker Media says it generated about $45 million in advertising revenue last year, and was profitable, earning about $7 million. It has outgrown the walk-up on Elizabeth Street that has been its home since 2008, and will move this summer into a vastly larger space in a proper office building in the Flatiron district. In a show of confidence about Gawker’s future, Mr. Denton signed a 10-year lease that will cost Gawker about $280,000 a month.At the same time, Gawker is going through something of an existential crisis. In a sense, Mr. Denton has been overtaken by the populist digital revolution he helped spur. The original new-media insurgent is now confronting the same challenges as a lot of establishment media companies. Like them, it has to distinguish itself in a crowded, frenetic ecosystem, and decide how much, if at all, to tailor its content to the various social media platforms that increasingly determine what people read and watch.And unlike some of its competitors — BuzzFeed, Vice, Vox — Gawker doesn’t have tens of millions of dollars in venture-capital money at its disposal. Until now, Mr. Denton has refused to bring in outside investors; he and his family own about 68 percent of the company, with the balance held by employees or former employees. But in the face of this new reality, he told me he’s thinking about selling a minority stake in the company.Gawker is also confronting a more immediate threat, one in the form of an angry, litigious 6-foot-7, 300-plus-pound ex-wrestler named Terry Bollea, a.k.a. Hulk Hogan. A few years ago, Gawker got its hands on a video of Mr. Bollea having sex with a woman who was then the wife of a friend — a radio D.J. named Bubba the Love Sponge — and posted a one-minute 40-second edit of it. Mr. Bollea forced Gawker to take the video down, and is now suing Gawker Media and Mr. Denton for violating his privacy. He is asking a Florida state court for $100 million in damages.Gawker has been sued plenty of times before; indeed, at any given moment, it’s fighting at least a few lawsuits. But every other case was either dismissed or settled. Gawker has not been able to reach an agreement with Mr. Bollea. And the judge has denied Gawker’s motion to dismiss. The trial is scheduled to begin on July 6 before a jury in St. Petersburg, close to Hulk Hogan’s hometown.People at Gawker tend to talk about “the Hogan case” in apocalyptic terms, suggesting that it could very well bring down Mr. Denton’s entire empire. Of course, hyperbole is baked into the company’s identity. The goal has always been to draw notice, which means framing everything in the most extreme manner possible. Even when the subject is the future of Gawker.“It’s a $100 million lawsuit,” Mr. Denton said when I asked later in the evening how concerned he was about the Hogan case. “We don’t keep $100 million in the bank, no.”On a rainy afternoon in late March, Mr. Denton, who is tall and thin, with close-cropped gray hair, gave me a tour of Gawker’s offices. Employees in sales, technology and the newsroom sat in tight rows at long tables. Above the receptionist’s desk on the third floor was the “big board,” a large screen displaying the company’s best-performing posts, which at that moment included a piece about a team of scientists who had put a common household product to an unlikely purpose — “Glow-in-the-Dark Tampons Are Being Used to Fix Broken Sewers” — and an investigation into whether the actress Katie Holmes had a secret entrance to her local Manhattan Whole Foods to avoid the paparazzi back in 2012.Advertisement“The Katie Holmes story was a total classic,” Mr. Denton said. “Come with me as I investigate this urban legend.”Mr. Denton grew up in the upscale London neighborhood of Hampstead. His mother, a Hungarian Jew who survived the Nazis and escaped the Soviet occupation at 18, was a psychotherapist, his father a professor of economics. Mr. Denton’s own career in journalism started conventionally. At Oxford, he edited the campus magazine and did internships at Tatler and The Evening Standard.After working as a stringer overseas, he covered the banking industry for The Financial Times in London. “In my day, people used to go to parties to get stories,” Mr. Denton told me at one point, complaining that his writers don’t get out enough. “They used to have to be charming to get a story — trade some information, do some dirty dealing.”Mr. Denton soon became enamored of technology. In 1998, after a stint in San Francisco with The Financial Times, he created First Tuesday, a networking group for members of the tech industry. Two years later, he and his three partners sold the company for millions of dollars. In 2002, he started Gawker Media.Gawker has evolved since its early days as tormentor of the Manhattan media elite. But Mr. Denton sees a thread through the years, and across Gawker’s disparate network of blogs. “Whatever information we have, whatever insight we have, whatever knowledge we have, our impulse is to share it as quickly as possible, and sometimes with as little thought as possible,” he told me after we had settled into a small conference room. “Before you can think about it too much, just put it out there, just share it out there. I think that’s the essence of who we are.”There has been another constant through Gawker’s history: an indiscriminate solicitation of clicks. Mr. Denton has long posted the number of page views alongside each item published on Gawker’s sites. If pride — or shame — did not provide a powerful enough incentive for writers to cater to the tastes of Internet surfers, they were paid bonuses based on how much traffic they generated.But in recent months, Mr. Denton’s once-straightforward relationship with traffic has grown more complicated. It seems to have occurred to him that the quest for eyeballs doesn’t always produce the highest-quality content.“A lot of our traffic last year came from stories that we weren’t ultimately proud of,” Mr. Denton said. He cited Gawker Media’s biggest traffic sensation in 2014, a video compilation of people messing up the Ice Bucket Challenge that has attracted more than 16 million views. “You’re going to get a spike from a story like that, but at the end of the year, what does it say about your brand, and are you measuring that?” Mr. Denton would prefer to see his brand associated with the Manti T’eo story, or Gizmodo’s iPhone 4 scoop (in 2010, it bought a prototype of the as-yet-unreleased phone), or the 2013 post by a Gawker writer who had watched a cellphone video of Rob Ford, the mayor of Toronto at the time, smoking crack.AdvertisementLate last year, Mr. Denton put some of his thoughts about the traffic chase into a Jerry Maguire-style memo to his staff. In excess of 4,000 words, it made the case that in its zeal for growth, Gawker had lost sight of its mission to put truths on the Internet. “Editorial traffic was lifted, but often by viral stories that we would rather mock,” he wrote. Above all, he bemoaned his company’s dependence on Facebook, which is responsible for about 25 percent of Gawker’s traffic. “We — the freest journalists on the planet — were slaves to the Facebook algorithm.”Facebook poses a dilemma for just about every ambitious publisher. All of them are desperate for the traffic that comes with being featured on a social media network with more than a billion users, but at least some are wary of publishing articles on a platform that they don’t control. They fear losing journalistic independence, not to mention ad revenue, and worry about the compromises that might be necessary to ensure that a post is given prominent play in Facebook’s news feed.It’s an especially pertinent issue for Gawker, a company whose identity is bound up in a particular voice and worldview. You can call it an unwavering commitment to truth-telling — or, less generously, a relentless cynicism. Either way, the Gawker sensibility that helped set the tone for an earlier generation of Internet journalism no longer really squares with the prevailing spirit of positivity on social media networks like Facebook. The Gawker writer Tom Scocca called this ethos “smarm” in a withering essay in late 2013: “Smarm aspires to smother opposition or criticism, to cover everything over with an artificial, oily gloss.”To understand the irreconcilability of these two impulses, consider a helmet-cam video two years ago of a fireman in Fresno, Calif., saving a kitten trapped inside a smoke-filled home. It was sure to be a viral sensation. The only problem was that the kitten ultimately died of smoke inhalation, which would make the post a lot less shareable on Facebook. An internal debate ensued at Gawker about whether or not to include this inconvenient fact. (It ultimately did: “This Cat Rescue Video Will Make You Very Happy, Then Really, Really Sad.”)Mr. Denton was an early proselytizer for Facebook, urging writers to join and promoting stories on his personal page. A couple of years ago, a former Gawker employee and viral Internet guru, Neetzan Zimmerman, gave an in-house seminar on how to tailor posts and headlines to maximize Facebook traffic.But Mr. Denton says he’s done with all of that. “If the newspaper industry wants to give up hundreds of years of passion and history and make themselves slaves to some 20-something in Silicon Valley who did the latest hot social network, well, that’s up to them,” he told me. “We choose not to.”Mr. Denton knows that Facebook is too powerful to ignore completely. He’s not planning to shut down Gawker’s Facebook page, for instance. But he says he will never allow Facebook to host content — something The Times has experimented with — rather than directing readers to a Gawker external site. More generally, he says he will no longer allow Facebook or any other social media site to influence Gawker’s newsroom direction.To prove the point, Mr. Denton put Mr. Craggs, the former editor of Deadspin and a widely respected journalist, in charge of all news content for Gawker Media. One of Mr. Craggs’s first moves was to change the bonus structure; writers are now rewarded not for clicks, but for what editors judge to be the quality of their posts.AdvertisementInstead of handing over articles and the ensuing discussions to Facebook, Mr. Denton wants to bring the conversation to Gawker by creating communities around its various sites. It’s an anachronistic idea: Between the rise of the smartphone and social media, many publishers are abandoning the idea of being destination sites. It’s also much easier said than done. Mr. Denton has already spent millions of dollars trying to build an internal social media platform, Kinja, with mixed results at best.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He is fighting not only the larger trends in media but also the inclinations of many of his writers, who aren’t accustomed to engaging with readers and don’t necessarily want to start now, especially given the hostile nature of the comments section on many of Gawker’s sites.When Mr. Denton articulated his vision for “communities built around the shared enthusiasms of writers and readers” at a recent staff meeting, a skeptical Gawker writer interrupted him.“We’ve had about 10 years of this acrimonious relationship — this reputation for snark — and then it’s, like, oh yeah, have a civil conversation with people who are coming into the fold, ready to attack anything,” the writer said. “And so civil conversation is by and large impossible, given those commenters and our reputation.”Earlier this month, the newsroom employees at Gawker Media became the first at a major digital media company to vote to unionize. The general idea was to give employees a voice in what many see as the company’s often arbitrary decision-making process (with Mr. Denton as the often arbitrary decision maker).Transparency is a compulsion at Gawker; in characteristic fashion, employees wrote posts about how they planned to vote and why. Responses ranged from unusually sincere — “I think we have a moral responsibility to make online media a fairer and more just place for its workers” — to dismissive (“i’m voting no. unions suck.”).For his part, Mr. Denton says he doesn’t see much point in unionization in a “competitive marketplace” like the news media. In keeping to his theme of revolution, he thinks it would make more sense for Internet writers to align themselves with the owners of digital media platforms “against the old business structure, against the old intermediaries.” Having said that, Mr. Denton has been respectful and supportive of his staff’s wish to unionize.People who know Mr. Denton say he would have reacted very differently 10, or even five, years ago. Mr. Denton has a history of firing employees without what many unions would define as just cause. And while he pays writers reasonably well now, it wasn’t so long ago that Gawker Media was a virtual sweatshop for freelance bloggers. Mr. Denton also recently reorganized the company’s leadership, empowering, in theory anyway, a group of executives to share authority with him. These may not be purely strategic decisions. We might be witnessing the mellowing of Nick Denton. Mr. Craggs calls it the “Great Unclenching,” and traces it to the beginning of Mr. Denton’s relationship with Mr. Washington, a performer.The two met at a party at Mr. Denton’s loft in 2011, moved in together the following year, and were married last summer at the American Museum of Natural History in a black-tie event chronicled at length in this paper’s Vows column. (The same Vows column that Gawker has mocked relentlessly.)Advertisement“For a long time, Nick almost felt a little unlovable just by virtue of this person he felt he needed to be — the monster media mogul who was out to ruin people’s lives on the Internet,” said A. J. Daulerio, a former editor in chief of Gawker. “And he embraced that role.”“He’s very warm now,” said Choire Sicha, another former Gawker editor. “Whereas he was this weird, cold, alien beast.”When I asked Mr. Denton about the Great Unclenching, he chalked it up to a variety of factors including therapy, meditation, marijuana and, above all, Mr. Washington. “It’s a pretty powerful force,” he said, “when you go from complete dependence on professional achievement for any sense of accomplishment to having a purpose, a meaning in life.”No one who knows Mr. Denton doubts the sincerity of his transformation, but few believe that he will stay “unclenched” forever. “I don’t think Nick is done working out his psychodrama with the company,” Mr. Sicha said.Gawker’s vote to unionize generated a fair bit of attention in the news media, but internally, at least, the news was quickly overshadowed by a post on Kinja by Joel Johnson, whom Mr. Denton removed as Gawker’s editorial director late last year.Mr. Johnson was writing, ostensibly, to congratulate Gawker’s staff. But his post quickly morphed into a bleak assessment of the company’s prospects and a scathing indictment of Mr. Denton’s leadership. Mr. Johnson wrote that Mr. Denton — “a comically inept product visionary, manager and technical mind” — had wasted as much as $20 million trying to build Kinja, which, by Mr. Johnson’s telling, “was mostly a bulwark against needing to pay writers to create content.”“This is the Denton you’re toiling for today: a man who wants to be better than he was before, both as a businessman, leader and (presumably) a human being, but who is fundamentally pessimistic about trusting other people,” Mr. Johnson wrote.After seeing the post, Mr. Denton called a companywide meeting to address some of the issues Mr. Johnson had raised. He assured his staff, which had packed into the fourth floor of Gawker’s offices, that the company was financially healthy, and defended his vision for Gawker’s future as a virtual salon for writers and readers.AdvertisementInevitably, the conversation turned to the Hulk Hogan case. Mr. Denton told his staff that the jury might be inclined to see them as “mean, bitchy Gawker bloggers run by someone who will probably be portrayed as a New York pornographer,” but that hopefully it would recognize that “we’re fighting for the truth.”When someone asked if employees should be prepared for layoffs, Mr. Denton said the risk was difficult to quantify, in part because cases like this are almost always settled or dismissed long before they reach a jury. He put the chances of a “disaster” — that he would need to sell a controlling interest in Gawker to keep it afloat — at one in 10. (Heather Dietrick, Gawker’s president and general counsel, told me later that the company had exceeded the cap on its insurance in the Hogan case and was now paying out of pocket for it.)Setting aside the lurid details, the Hogan case is actually pretty straightforward. Mr. Bollea’s lawyers are arguing that their client’s sex life is not a newsworthy subject, and thus the decision to publish the tape constitutes an invasion of his right to privacy.Gawker’s answer to this claim is that Mr. Bollea — or Hulk Hogan — has made his sexual proclivities a matter of public interest by talking about them in “exceedingly graphic” terms on his reality TV show, in his two memoirs and elsewhere, including Howard Stern’s radio show. (As for the lurid details, the filings are public, but read them at your own risk; among other things, you will never see Hulk Hogan’s trademark mustache the same way again.)It’s surprising that the suit has gone this far, given the wide berth that judges have historically granted the news media when it comes to covering the lives of public figures. “It’s in many respects a dangerous First Amendment precedent for the court to let a case like this go to a jury,” said Charles D. Tobin, an entertainment and media lawyer at Holland & Knight. “Newsworthiness should be decided by people who choose to look at Gawker or not look at Gawker, not by a jury.”Most executives would not consider commenting on a pending lawsuit. But Mr. Denton actually suggested that I ask him about the Hogan case that night on his fire escape.He told me that his first impulse had been to settle. “If it had been a reasonable amount, we would absolutely have tried to make this thing go away,” he said. But with the case now going to trial, Mr. Denton is clearly taking some pleasure in the opportunity to cast himself as a champion of the First Amendment.“We’re talking about a central issue of our time, which is the proliferation of marketing,” he told me. “We are being bombarded by marketing all of the time — marketing and self-promoters, people who wake up in the morning and get into character, whether they are Captain America or Hulk Hogan. If you want to be in the marketing haze, then be in the haze. But the Internet does give you the ability right now to go to Gawker and to find out what really happened.”If you believe the First Amendment is a sacred doctrine in our self-governing society, it’s pretty much impossible to side against Gawker. But Mr. Denton is engaging in some spin of his own here. What “really happened” is that Hulk Hogan was secretly videotaped having sex, and that Gawker leapt at the chance to publish the footage in a post headlined, “Even for a Minute, Watching Hulk Hogan Have Sex in a Canopy Bed Is Not Safe for Work but Watch It Anyway.” There was some accompanying text that tried to put the video into a larger context: “We watch this footage because it’s something we’re not supposed to see (sometimes) but we come away satisfied that when famous people have sex it’s closer to the sex we as civilians have from time to time.” But let’s be clear: This post was less about piercing a marketing haze than it was about tapping into the timeless appeal of celebrity voyeurism, the more prurient the better.AdvertisementWhatever the jury decides, the public has already voted with its eyeballs on the post’s newsworthiness. It has generated more than five million clicks.A version of this article appears in print on June 14, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Snark’s Moment of Truth .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.