JUNE 14, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.01 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.10 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $527.6 million of debt securities. Competitive.TUESDAYHuntsville, Ala., $61.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Lake County, Ill., $90 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYSouth Carolina, $155.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementONE DAY DURING THE WEEKArlington, Tex., Higher Education Finance Corporation, $106.1 million of education revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.AdvertisementBlaine, Minn., $54.6 million of senior housing and health care facility revenue bonds. BB&T Capital Markets.Broward County, Fla., $66.3 million of water and sewer utility revenue refinancing bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.California Pollution Control Financing Authority, $140 million of solid waste disposal refinancing revenue bonds. Bank of America.Florida Municipal Power Agency, $277 million of power supply project revenue and refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Houston, $150 million of combined utility system revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Idaho Housing and Finance Association, $157 million of grant and revenue anticipation refinancing federal highway trust fund debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Kentucky Turnpike Authority, $185.6 million of economic development road revenue and refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.AdvertisementLamar, Tex., Consolidated Independent School District, $211.6 million of unlimited tax schoolhouse refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Michigan State Housing Development Authority, $117.4 million of rental housing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Minnesota Higher Education Facilities Authority, $53.4 million of St. Olaf College revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.Monroe County, N.Y., Industrial Development Corporation, $300.6 million of University of Rochester project revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $73 million of Montclair State University revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.New York City Housing Development Corporation, $563.8 million of multifamily housing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York City Transitional Finance Authority, $750 million of revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Ochsner Clinic Foundation, La., $252 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Riverside County Successor Agency, Calif., Jurupa Valley Redevelopment Project Area, $62 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.St. Louis, $60 million of tax and revenue anticipation notes. Stifel Nicolaus.San Marcos Successor Agency, Calif., $238.5 million of tax allocation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.AdvertisementSnohomish County, Wash., $142 million of electric system revenue debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.South Lyon Community Schools., Mich., $64.4 million of school building and site bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Southwestern Community College, Calif., $125 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Wayne County, Mich., $186 million of general obligation limited tax notes. Bank of America.Wisconsin, $128 million of clean water revenue refinancing debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.A version of this article appears in print on June 15, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.