By BEN SISARIOOCT. 23, 2015
When Apple revealed this week that its new streaming service, Apple Music, had 6.5 million paying users, industry commentators debated whether that was a healthy or disappointing result for a company with such a giant reach.But on Friday, a more telling yardstick emerged as a measurement for Apple’s success: Pandora Media’s stock price.Shares in Pandora, the Internet radio service, fell by 35 percent in one day, wiping away $1.4 billion in the company’s market value. The stock closed at $12.39, its lowest price in more than two years.The plunge in Pandora’s share price was to some degree the market’s judgment on the company’s outlook in the increasingly competitive field of streaming music, as Apple, Spotify and numerous other players spar for customers in a growing market. This week, YouTube introduced a subscription plan including music and video.Advertisement“The fear from the investor world is that there is going to be a continued battle to fight for users,” said Richard Greenfield, a media analyst at BTIG Research, “and that will depress what is already is not much cash flow even further.”AdvertisementIn a conference call on Thursday discussing the company’s third-quarter financial results, Brian P. McAndrews, Pandora’s chief executive, played down the arrival of Apple Music in June, saying that the new service had only a “muted” impact on Pandora’s popularity. Mr. McAndrews is a director at The New York Times Company.But Pandora also downgraded its financial guidance for the rest of the year on Thursday, saying that it now expected its adjusted earnings to be in the range of $51 million to $56 million, down from the $75 million to $85 million it had predicted three months before. Its expected revenue for the year was lowered by about 2 percent, to a range of $1.153 billion to $1.158 billion.Those revised figures suggested a shrinking ability by Pandora to make money from its listeners, and some analysts reacted with alarm.“We are shocked by guidance implying monetization is hitting a wall,” wrote Robert S. Peck of SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, in a research report that decreased his company’s price target for Pandora to $18 a share, from $25.In another report, Barton Crockett of FBR Capital Markets wrote, “We expected a modest impact from the Apple Music launch, but it turned out to be more fundamentally challenging than we thought.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pandora declined to comment.Pandora has long been the largest Internet radio outlet in terms of users, and it has withstood challenges before, including the introduction of Apple’s iTunes Radio in 2013.Pandora, which makes about 80 percent of its revenue from advertising, has steadily increased the amount of money it makes from each listener. For the third quarter, the company’s revenue per thousand listening hours was $60.52, its highest, according to Mr. McAndrews.But after years of steady growth, Pandora’s lead has begun to erode. It number of active users — those who tune in to the service at least once a month — peaked at 81.5 million at the end of last year, and in its third quarter fell to 78.1 million.AdvertisementAt the same time, it is spending more to attract those listeners. Pandora’s sales and marketing expenses grew by 48 percent in its third quarter, compared with the same period last year, and in the conference call on Thursday, Michael S. Herring, the company’s chief financial officer, said that its marketing budget would increase further next year.The issue of competition has intensified as digital music services proliferate and their features overlap. Services like Spotify, Apple Music, Rdio and Google Play let users pick exactly what song to listen to, but also have radiolike features similar to Pandora, letting users listen passively by feeding them songs tailored to their tastes.“Historically, Pandora’s marketing was viral; it marketed itself,” Mr. Greenfield said. “Now because there is so much competition, to generate the same level of revenue, they have to spend more to get there.”Investors have also long been concerned about the cost of music licenses. That cost has gradually declined. But in its third-quarter report, Pandora revealed two significant expenditures.The company said that it had reached a $90 million settlement with the major record labels on royalties for songs from before 1972, an issue that has caused uncertainty for many companies. Pandora also said it was taking a $23.9 million charge for songwriting royalties.One of Pandora’s biggest costs will be set when the Copyright Royalty Board, a panel of federal judges, sets recording royalty rates for the next five years. A decision by the board is expected by the middle of December.A version of this article appears in print on October 24, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Pandora Shares Plummet as Competition Grows.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.