By JONATHAN MAHLERJUNE 14, 2015
John S. Carroll, a widely admired newspaper editor who restored the reputation and credibility of The Los Angeles Times in the early 2000s even as he fought bitterly with the paper’s cost-conscious corporate parent, died on Sunday at his home in Lexington, Ky. He was 73.Lee Carroll, his wife, said the cause was Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a rare neurological disorder.With a gentle demeanor that belied his passion for ambitious investigative stories, Mr. Carroll helped deliver 13 Pulitzer Prizes to The Times during his five-year run as its editor, which ended in 2005. It was the last of three daily newspapers he edited over more than four decades.Though he lacked the celebrity, and swagger, of The Washington Post editor Ben Bradlee, Mr. Carroll, like Mr. Bradlee, was regarded as one of the most influential newspaper editors of his era. “He was able to combine a genuine integrity with a passion for news, an ability to work well with talented and unruly journalists and the courage to do what he felt was the right thing to do,” Alex S. Jones, director of the Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy at Harvard, said in an interview.Outside the newsroom, Mr. Carroll was an eloquent and unapologetic defender of the ideals of journalism at a time of revolutionary change in the media industry. He saw editors and reporters almost as public servants and a free press as essential to a self-governing nation. In recent years, he watched with growing concern as the changing dynamics of the news business threatened basic journalistic values like deep reporting and patient persistence — rock-turning, as he called it.Advertisement“Today’s journalists are constantly being reminded that they are functionaries of business, yet they know in their hearts that the stock price is a hollow god,” Mr. Carroll said in accepting the National Press Foundation’s Editor of the Year award in 1998. “They sense that newspaper work can, and should, be a wonderfully satisfying and entertaining way to engage the world, and that in a free society there is no mightier sword than the written word.”AdvertisementJohn Carroll was born on Jan. 23, 1942, in New York City and raised in Winston-Salem, N.C., and the District of Columbia. His father, Wallace Carroll, was the news editor of the Washington bureau of The New York Times for eight years before becoming, in 1963, editor and publisher of The Winston-Salem Journal and Sentinel, where he had worked previously.That same year, John Carroll graduated from Haverford College in Pennsylvania and went right into the newspaper business. His first job, as a cub reporter at The Providence Journal-Bulletin in Rhode Island, was cut short when he was drafted into the Army. Discharged in 1966, he joined The Baltimore Sun as a reporter. The paper sent him to Vietnam the next year.It did not take long for Mr. Carroll to make his mark as a war correspondent. An article he wrote about a military base that American forces were quietly abandoning to the Vietcong infuriated the Pentagon, and when it revoked his credentials he became a cause célèbre among the press corps. After a brief stint in the Middle East, he returned to Washington to cover President Richard M. Nixon’s first term for The Sun.It was at The Philadelphia Inquirer in the 1970s that Mr. Carroll transitioned from reporter to editor. The paper, recently sold and unburdened of the whims and biases of its longtime owner, Walter H. Annenberg, had been freed to practice uncompromised and uncompromising journalism. Under the guidance of Eugene Roberts, the paper’s editor, Mr. Carroll helped strengthen its commitment to investigative journalism as he rose from night city editor to metropolitan editor.He got his first chance to run his own paper, the morning edition of The Herald in Lexington, Ky., in 1979. Several years into his tenure, Mr. Carroll published a series of articles that exposed widespread violations of N.C.A.A. rules by the University of Kentucky’s beloved basketball program.The series won the 1986 Pulitzer for investigative reporting but prompted a statewide backlash: The paper became the target of advertising and circulation boycotts and a bomb scare.“In marketing, the idea is to manage the number of complaints down to zero,” Mr. Carroll later reflected. “That’s fine if you’re making toasters, but a newspaper that gets no complaints is a dead newspaper.”AdvertisementHe returned to The Sun as its editor in 1991. Reframing the paper’s ambitions, he stressed the need to hold local officials accountable for the social ills plaguing the city in the 1990s, while also expanding the geographical boundaries of its coverage. With Mr. Carroll’s encouragement, an article about the dismantling of a ship in Baltimore Harbor led to a Pulitzer-winning series about the environmental dangers posed by the destruction of decommissioned ships around the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Carroll shook things up at The Sun, rankling some of its veteran staff members, including a talented police reporter named David Simon, who quit the paper and went on to pursue a career in television, notably as creator of “The Wire,” the HBO crime series that was set in Baltimore.Mr. Simon made no secret of the fact that Mr. Carroll was the model for the craven, prize-hungry editor of a fictional Baltimore newspaper in the show’s final season, in 2008. Many former Sun journalists who had worked under Mr. Carroll considered the portrayal unfair.Mr. Carroll cemented his reputation as an editor at The Los Angeles Times. When he arrived in 2000, morale in the newsroom was low. Months earlier, in a decision widely criticized as unethical, the paper had published a special edition of its Sunday magazine devoted to the opening of Staples Center, a new sports and entertainment arena, and split the advertising revenue with it.Mr. Carroll raised the paper’s sights, aggressively covering the war in Iraq while doubling the size of its investigative staff. In 2004 The Times won five Pulitzers, a record for the paper.Despite these triumphs, Mr. Carroll was facing declining circulation and an increasingly hostile economic climate for newspapers in general. He was in a constant battle with the paper’s ownership, the Tribune Company, which wanted him to reduce the size of his newsroom to improve profitability.In 2005, weary of the battles, he resigned, turning the paper over to the managing editor, Dean Baquet, who is now the executive editor of The New York Times.“He believed big newspapers should take on the biggest subjects,” Mr. Baquet said. “Bad hospitals. Bad airplanes. International slavery. Nothing was too ambitious for John’s newsrooms.”Mr. Carroll is survived by three siblings, Margaret Carroll, Posie Carroll and Patricia Carroll; two daughters, Maggie Vaughan and Katita Strathmann; and three stepchildren, Huston Powell, Griggs Powell and Caroline Powell.AdvertisementAfter leaving The Times, Mr. Carroll moved back to Lexington. The next year, he delivered an address to the American Society of Newspaper Editors, “What Will Become of Newspapers?”“Our mission is more daunting than that of our predecessors,” he said. “It is to ensure the existence, long into the future, of a large, independent, principled, questioning, deep-digging cadre of journalists in America, regardless of what happens to our newspapers.”At his death he was working on a book about the Kentucky basketball scandal that The Herald exposed while he was its editor.A version of this article appears in print on June 15, 2015, on Page A17 of the New York edition with the headline: John Carroll, Editor Who Reinvigorated the Los Angeles Times, Is Dead at 73.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.