By ALISON SMALEJUNE 10, 2015
BERLIN —  Horst Brandstätter, owner of the company whose finger-high Playmobil figures can be found in playrooms around the world and who brought the Hula-Hoop to Europe in the 1950s, died on June 3. He was 81.His company, the Brandstätter Group, announced his death.Mr. Brandstätter epitomized one of Germany’s most successful business types: the so-called Mittelständler, who own the thousands of small and medium-size family-run enterprises on which much of Germany’s engineering, technical and design acumen are based.In Mr. Brandstätter’s case, the decision to enter the family firm came at age 19, as an apprentice, after a scattershot childhood marred by the death of his father when the son was just 6 and by World War II.Born on June 27, 1933, in Zirndorf, near Nuremberg in northern Bavaria, Mr. Brandstätter saw his path forward in joining the firm, founded in the 19th century and then run by two uncles. He became a full joint shareholder once he turned 21 and eventually took control of the company from his relatives and ran it for most of the next six decades.AdvertisementMr. Brandstätter repeatedly adapted his company to the changing conditions of global manufacturing, switching from metal to plastic toys in the 1950s. Like many Germans of his generation, he got ideas from America, which helped rebuild West Germany as a democracy and a flourishing market economy after World War II.AdvertisementIt was after a visit to the United States that, in 1958, he introduced the Hula-Hoop to Germany and then Europe.His greatest business success, the Playmobil models, came from what his son Conny depicted in an interview as his father’s extreme frugality.Although a billionaire by the end of his life, “he was a world champion in economizing,” the younger Mr. Brandstätter said, citing as an example his father’s insistence on using cheap packs of cards for his favorite card game.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mindful of his cash flow as the world oil crisis drove up the cost of plastics in the 1970s, Mr. Brandstätter summoned his chief designer, Hans Beck, and asked him to come up with toys that would use less plastic than Hula-Hoops and other large toys.Mr. Beck came up with Playmobil, whose miniature models and environments are said to have been inspired by children’s drawings and the figurines of traditional Christmas crèches. At about three inches high, the figures have round faces, movable arms and legs, and hands that can grasp a pirate’s sword, a carpenter’s saw or a firefighter’s hose. The first three models — an American Indian, a construction worker and a knight — were scarcely a hit when introduced at a national toy fair in 1974.But children across the globe embraced them. Even in today’s digital world, Playmobil sells: Mr. Brandstätter’s enterprise recorded sales of 595 million euros, about $671 million, last year and has 12 subsidiaries, including one in the United States. There are 2.8 billion Playmobil toys in circulation worldwide, the company said.“He was a brilliant businessman,” Conny Brandstätter said, but a difficult man to have as a father. The younger Mr. Brandstätter said his father had lived by the motto “Preserve the firm, provide for the family,” proving adept at amassing money but less so at providing the affection that had been lacking in his own wartime childhood, which was spent in a series of boarding schools, remote from his mother.For more than 20 years, the elder Mr. Brandstätter spent his winters in Jupiter Island, Fla., playing golf. Tiger Woods was a neighbor.Mr. Brandstätter was married twice. His first wife, Eva, the mother of his two sons, Klaus and Conny, died in 1995. His second marriage, to Sabine John, ended in divorce. Besides his sons, he is survived by two grandsons and two granddaughters.Katarina Johannsen and Jesse Coburn contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on June 15, 2015, on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: Horst Brandstätter, Owner of Playmobil, Is Dead at 81.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.