By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 23, 2015
The chief executive of the American Egg Board, Joanne Ivy, has stepped down earlier than planned after the release of emails indicating she had tried to stop the sale of a vegan mayonnaise at Whole Foods. Ms. Ivy retired at the end of September. Before the release of the emails, the egg board said she would retire Dec. 31. Ms. Ivy and representatives of the egg board, which promotes the industry, did not respond to a request for comment. The Agriculture Department, which oversees the board, confirmed her retirement but declined to comment on the reason. She departed during an Agriculture Department investigation of the egg board’s actions related to Hampton Creek, a San Francisco start-up that makes the eggless mayonnaise alternative Just Mayo. On Sept. 2, The Associated Press reported on emails in which Ms. Ivy told a consultant that she would “like to accept your offer to make that phone call to keep Just Mayo off Whole Foods shelves.” The request, made in 2013, was not successful; Whole Foods still sells Just Mayo. But the emails raised regulatory questions because the egg board is one of about 20 “checkoff” programs overseen by the Agricultural Department, making them quasi-governmental bodies. The programs are financed by producers and are supposed to be promotional. In a statement on its investigation, the Agriculture Department said it was “committed to establishing a level playing field that protects and promotes all appropriate agricultural endeavors.” Hampton Creek’s chief, Josh Tetrick, said the company was to speak with agriculture officials on the matter within weeks, and that he hoped to “find some common ground” with the agency. The Food and Drug Administration has warned Hampton Creek that the name Just Mayo violates the federal standard of identity for mayonnaise. The agency said that “mayo” is often understood to be mayonnaise, which is defined as having eggs. A representative for the F.D.A. said on Friday that there was no update on the matter.A version of this brief appears in print on October 24, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Egg Board Chief Retires Early After Move On ‘Mayo’ .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.