By RACHEL ABRAMSJUNE 15, 2015
For consumers, figuring out which canned foods and plastics contain the controversial chemical known as BPA can be nearly impossible. But determining whether newer alternatives are any safer may be even more difficult.Some food giants like General Mills and the Campbell Soup Company have shifted away from using bisphenol A, or BPA, a chemical commonly used in the coatings of canned goods to ward off botulism and spoilage. But in many instances, some health advocates say, companies do not disclose which products are now BPA-free.More worrisome, these advocates and scientists say, is a lack of information about alternatives, and a growing body of evidence suggesting that some newer options may not be any safer.“We do want to push companies away from it, because it is a known toxin,” said Renée Sharp, the director of research for the nonprofit Environmental Working Group. “At the same time, we are also definitely worried about the chemicals coming on the market and we don’t have a lot of good information about a number of them.”AdvertisementStudies linking BPA to developmental and reproductive health problems go back decades, and researchers, health advocates and even the federal government have voiced concerns about the chemical for years. But an enormous body of conflicting evidence has slowed efforts to regulate BPA more tightly.Advertisement“There’s just a morass of claims and counterclaims,” said Richard Denison, the lead senior scientist with the nonprofit Environmental Defense Fund. “It’s a battle over all kinds of fundamental parts of toxicology.”The transition away from BPA has not been swift. Food, chemical and metal packaging players point to the Food and Drug Administration’s position that BPA is safe at the current levels in food, and grumble that unjustified fears have threatened sales and forced them to act.“Although there are some companies that have moved to alternative coatings, to date I’m not aware of any of those companies that have done so on the basis of safety or concerns about BPA, but more on customer and consumer preference for alternative coatings,” said John M. Rost, the chairman of the North American Metal Packaging Alliance, a trade group.General Mills has removed BPA from its Muir Glen line of organic canned tomato products, but not from its Green Giant, Old El Paso and Progresso brands, according to a report released by the Environmental Working Group earlier this month. Target, one of the country’s largest retailers, ranked among the Environmental Working Group’s list of worst offenders because its Market Pantry line continues to use BPA.In a statement, Target said that product and food safety were a “top priority” and that the company complied with all safety standards.Of 252 brands that the Environmental Working Group surveyed, 31 percent continued to use BPA exclusively, while 12 percent used only cans without it. Fourteen percent used BPA-free cans for at least one of their products, and the remaining 43 percent gave ambiguous or incomplete answers, or did not respond to the group’s questions, the report said.“The premise of the whole report is based on a misleading statement that BPA is toxic when that’s just not true,” Mr. Rost said.AdvertisementThe F.D.A. said its conclusions about BPA were based on a “thorough review” of more than 300 studies, which included both long-term and short-term exposure. Kathryn St. John, a spokeswoman for the American Chemistry Council, the chemical industry trade group, praised the research, calling it the most “in-depth” toxicology study conducted yet.But BPA, also used in some plastics, is a tricky chemical to evaluate, Mr. Denison and others say, in part because it produces some effects at low doses but not at high doses.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The F.D.A. and other regulatory agencies have typically relied on studies examining high doses of BPA, which showed few adverse health effects except at the highest doses, according to Dr. John R. Bucher, the associate director of the National Toxicology Program, a part of the United States Department of Health and Human Services.“Predicting long-term health effects from early life exposures to BPA has been difficult because until now studies capable of showing both subtle early changes and health effects later in life simply haven’t been done,” he said.Jason Aungst, the co-chairman of the F.D.A. panel that is studying BPA, disputed criticism that the agency did not look at low-dose studies.“I think it’s a false argument,” Dr. Aungst said. “It’s going back to trying to play on people’s fears that the government only uses industry-funded studies.”He also said that because the chemical is difficult to study at very low levels, results could be difficult to replicate accurately.The F.D.A. is also collaborating with the National Toxicology Program on a long-term rodent study that will most likely not produce definitive answers for at least two years. The Environmental Working Group has criticized the agency for declaring BPA safe before the completion of its study, and the F.D.A. has said it will “update its assessment if warranted.”In its report, the Environmental Working Group also criticized companies like General Mills for not disclosing which chemicals, specifically, are being used as replacements. (In an email, General Mills said it used a “vinyl-based lining that has been safely used for decades.”)AdvertisementReformulating products to remove objectionable ingredients is often expensive and time-consuming. Muir Glen’s alternative lining didn’t work for other General Mills products, the company said, while Campbell’s has tested a “wide range of alternatives” as it tries to move away from using BPA in its canned foods, said Carla Burigatto, a company spokeswoman.“As we’ve always maintained, the transition will occur over a long period of time, due to the complexity of the challenge,” Ms. Burigatto said.BPA is also commonly used as a coating on receipts, where health advocates say it can easily rub off onto the skin and leach into the environment. The Environmental Protection Agency has added BPA to its “work plan” chemical list, which marks it for further study. But the agency will not get to it until 2018 or later, said Wendy Cleland-Hamnett, the E.P.A.’s office director for pollution prevention and toxics.In the meantime, however, scientists have raised concerns about some of the alternatives.One such alternative, bisphenol S, or BPS, has attracted particular scrutiny. According to a study co-written by Hong-Sheng Wang, an associate professor in the pharmacology department at the University of Cincinnati’s medical school, BPS had effects similar to those of BPA.“This is a good case study showing that the fact that something is BPA-free does not necessarily mean that it’s safer,” Mr. Wang said in an interview. “Those alternatives, their biological effect and the potential adverse effect need to be evaluated.”A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Facing Consumer Pressure, Companies Start to Seek Safe Alternatives to BPA.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.