
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

JUNE 15, 2015
The Securities and Exchange Commission may soon be confronting the adage “be careful what you wish for.”A federal district judge has for the first time found that the agency’s use of an administrative judge to hear an insider trading case is unconstitutional. The decision could hurt the agency in a number of administrative enforcement actions, including cases against prominent defendants like the financier Lynn Tilton.The issue arose from a change made by the Dodd-Frank Act that gave the S.E.C. the option to pursue most cases seeking penalties before one of its administrative judges instead of filing a civil case in a federal district court.Since then, the agency has become much more aggressive about filing administrative charges for cases involving insider trading and other types of fraud. Andrew J. Ceresney, the director of the enforcement division, defended the shift, saying that the “use of the administrative forum is eminently proper, appropriate and fair to respondents.”AdvertisementDefense lawyers protested that the new approach gave the S.E.C. a “home court” advantage. Unlike a federal court case, an administrative proceeding allows for little discovery of evidence. It also does not involve a jury to determine whether a defendant committed a violation.AdvertisementJust as important, the initial decision at an administrative hearing is made by a judge hired by the S.E.C., which is being contested in court as a violation of the Constitution. The Appointments Clause of the Constitution provides that “the Congress may by law vest the appointment of such inferior officers, as they think proper, in the president alone, in the courts of law, or in the heads of departments.” Last week, a United States District Court judge, Leigh Martin May in Atlanta, found that procedure used by the S.E.C. to appoint its judges was unconstitutional, and she issued an order stopping an administrative insider trading case against a self-employed real estate developer, Charles L. Hill Jr., whom the S.E.C. said had been tipped off a tender offer for Radiant Systems.Mr. Hill is one of a number of defendants in cases who have filed lawsuits in federal district courts challenging the S.E.C.’s authority to choose the administrative forum. They argue that administrative proceedings violate their right to have a jury decide the case, and that the appointment of the administrative judges violates the Constitution.None of those challenges had succeeded until Judge May issued her order in Mr. Hill’s case. Most defendants lost on the preliminary issue of whether a federal court could even consider the case.Relying on the statute governing S.E.C. administrative cases, judges have concluded that any challenge claiming a violation of the defendant’s rights has to be considered first by the administrative judge and then the five S.E.C. commissioners before it goes before a federal appeals court for review.But Judge May found that she could reach the merits of Mr. Hill’s claim, determining that the S.E.C. could not adequately review the constitutionality of the status of administrative judges. The next question involved whether an administrative judge is an “officer” of the federal government under the Appointments Clause, and therefore must have been appointed by the president or a department head, rather than an employee of the agency.In Buckley v. Valeo, the Supreme Court said that “any appointee exercising significant authority pursuant to the laws of the United States is an ‘Officer of the United States.’” Judge May found that the S.E.C.’s in-house judges had significant authority because “they take testimony, conduct trial, rule on the admissibility of evidence, and can issue sanctions.”The administrative judges are not appointed by the S.E.C. commissioners, but instead are hired by the agency’s personnel office, just as average employees are. Therefore, Judge May found that the process of appointing them was most likely unconstitutional, requiring that the administrative proceeding against Mr. Hill be stopped until she could fully review the constitutional question. In response to her decision, an administrative judge postponed Mr. Hill’s insider trading case, which was set to begin on Monday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Needless to say, this first breach in the S.E.C.’s defense of its use of administrative judges has drawn other defendants like moths to a flame. An investment firm in Georgia, Timbervest, and its four owners filed a lawsuit on Friday in Federal District Court in Atlanta that relies on Judge May’s ruling in asking for an order stopping the S.E.C. from reviewing a decision last year by an administrative judge that found that they had violated the Investment Advisers Act.AdvertisementMs. Tilton, the founder of Patriarch Partners, cited the decision in the Hill case in her lawsuit in Federal District Court in Manhattan, which is seeking to stop the S.E.C.’s administrative case against her over the agency’s claims that she and her firm misstated the value of distressed investments. In response, the S.E.C. filed a letter arguing that Mr. Hill’s case was “wrongly decided” because the administrative judges have no independent authority and everything they do is subject to review by the full commission – and thus they are not subject to the Appointments Clause.Judge May’s decision involves an obscure point of constitutional law, but it effectively calls into question how the S.E.C. can proceed in all of its administrative cases, including those that could have been filed before adoption of the Dodd-Frank Act in 2010.There may be an quick fix that Judge May stated in her decision: The administrative law judges could be “easily cured” by the S.E.C. commissioners directly appointing the judges.Of course, Judge May’s suggested fix may engender more problems for the S.E.C. The commission could simply reappoint all the administrative judges to comply with Judge May’s view of their role as “officers” of the United States, but that only corrects the situation for pending cases.For cases in which an initial decision has been issued by an administrative judge, like the charges against Timbervest, reappointing the judge does not change the fact that the proceeding was heard by an official without the proper constitutional authority at the time to render a decision. But the question remains whether a new hearing would have to be held for past cases or whether a judge could simply affirm that the decision would be the same after a proper appointment.There is also the question whether proceedings that have been resolved would even need to be reopened. There is the potential that every administrative case that took place before a judge whose appointment was unconstitutional, and therefore any sanction or penalty was improper.The S.E.C. could claim that cases in which the commissioners reviewed the administrative judge’s initial decision were properly decided despite the violation of the Appointments Clause, essentially a “no harm, no foul” argument. Whether that would solve the problem is questionable, however, because courts are generally loath to ignore constitutional errors that question the judge’s power to decide a case. This is a bell that will not be easy to un-ring if the S.E.C. decides to reappoint its judges to address the issue in Mr. Hill’s case.Another alternative is to fight Judge May’s decision in the appeals court, but that could take months before any resolution is reached, and there is no guarantee that the S.E.C. will prevail. In the meantime, other courts may find that the S.E.C.’s administrative procedures involved other constitutional violations, which could throw the entire process into chaos.A greater problem for the government may be the effect of Judge May’s decision on other agencies. There are more than 1,300 administrative judges employed by 31 federal agencies, and many of them may be hired in much the same way as those at the S.E.C. If any of them qualify as “officers” under the Constitution, then the same question of whether administrative proceedings took place before a judge who was appointed unconstitutionally will have to be addressed. So it does not look as if there is any quick fix if Judge May is right.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »