
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT COLE

JUNE 15, 2015
Hudson’s Bay was originally set up in 1670 by British royal charter and headed by a German cousin of the reigning Charles II. Lately, it has existed as a Canadian company with a North American presence.Now, though, Hudson’s Bay has found a way back to its roots with a $3 billion deal to buy the retailer Galeria Kaufhof, based in Cologne, Germany.The enterprise value of the transaction, Hudson’s Bay said on Monday, is equal to 8.6 times Kaufhof’s earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, last year. The Canadian group trades on an equivalent multiple of about 12 times, Thomson Reuters data shows. That helps the financial consequences of the deal look benign for Hudson’s Bay.The company has also agreed to sell 40 or more Kaufhof stores to a joint venture it operates with Simon Property. Assuming the venture can raise the money it needs to buy them and other conditions are satisfied, this second deal will largely finance the Kaufhof purchase for Hudson’s Bay. It’s a neat two-step that pleased investors sufficiently to add 8 percent to Hudson Bay’s market capitalization, raising it to around $4.7 billion.AdvertisementMetro, Kaufhof’s current owner, has come off second-best to Hudson’s Bay, at least if a 5 percent drop in its stock price is anything to go by. Sure, the disposal is at a premium to its own enterprise value-to-Ebitda multiple, and it allows Metro to focus on its supermarket, cash-and-carry and electrical retailing businesses.A sale to a rival like the owner of Karstadt, Germany’s second-largest department store behind Kaufhof, could, however, have been worth more because of the potential for cost cuts. Metro instead opted for certainty, avoiding a tough discussion with German trade unions and perhaps competition concerns. Also, a local deal might not have come with the same real estate-related sweetener.AdvertisementHudson’s Bay expects higher operating cash flow and a reduction in its debt-to-Ebidta ratio as a result of the Kaufhof purchase and subsequent real estate sale. Although it expanded into high-end department stores in the United States with the purchase of Saks two years ago, it has been a while since the company had to serve customers in the Old World. The financial cushion may prove useful against the risks involved in rediscovering Europe.Robert Cole is assistant editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »