By BROOKS BARNESJUNE 15, 2015
The Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “Jurassic World.”LOS ANGELES — A monster hit, indeed: “Jurassic World,” as it turns out, took in $208.8 million at the North American box office over the weekend, 2 percent more than estimated on Sunday and enough to enter Hollywood’s record books as the biggest opening ever, Universal Pictures said on Monday.The previous record-holder was “Marvel’s The Avengers,” which took in $207.4 million over its first weekend in 2012. (A bit of cold comfort for Marvel: “The Avengers” still ranks No. 1 after adjusting for ticket price inflation, with $213.7 million. But Hollywood record keepers do not make such adjustments.)Universal said “Jurassic World” sold an additional $315.3 million overseas, or 3 percent more than estimated on Sunday. The film was directed by the relative newcomer Colin Trevorrow, with Steven Spielberg as executive producer.A couple weeks ago, box office analysts were predicting initial domestic sales of roughly $100 million. The unexpectedly huge opening total continues a hot streak for Universal, which has roared to life under its relatively new chairwoman, Donna Langley, after a long stretch as a Hollywood also-ran.AdvertisementBox office analysts say the turnout may also demonstrate pent-up demand for Mr. Spielberg’s more populist side; in recent years, as Universal waited for him to push forward with a fourth “Jurassic Park” installment, he focused on more cerebral pictures like “Lincoln” and “War Horse.”“Jurassic World” cost an estimated $300 million to make and market worldwide; Legendary Pictures contributed about 20 percent of the production budget.AdvertisementThe question now is how “Jurassic World” will perform next weekend. Second-weekend ticket sales for “The Avengers” totaled $103 million, a 50 percent weekend-to-weekend drop. If “Jurassic World” has the same “hold,” to use Hollywood parlance, it could take a bite out of Disney-Pixar’s “Inside Out,” which arrives on Friday.A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘Jurassic World’ Thunders Into the Box Office.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.