By SAM ROBERTSOCT. 23, 2015
In 1985, Thomas G. Stemberg was looking for a new business venture, having just been fired as vice president of a supermarket giant. That Fourth of July weekend, he was also looking for a printer ribbon. A computer chain had none in stock. Most stationery stores were closed. The one that was open offered only an overpriced replacement.For want of a ribbon, a retailing behemoth was born.Not long afterward, Mr. Stemberg and a former grocery industry archrival, Leo Kahn, teamed up to found Staples, which would become the world’s largest discount supplier of office products. They opened their first store in Brighton, Mass., in May 1986, using money from a venture capital firm, Bain Capital, co-founded by Mitt Romney.Two decades later, when Mr. Stemberg retired as chairman, Staples had nearly 1,780 stores around the world, almost 70,000 employees and sales of $16 billion.He died on Friday at 66 at his home in Chestnut Hill, Mass. The cause was stomach cancer, his son William said.Advertisement“I envisioned a Toys ‘R’ Us or Home Depot for office supplies,” the elder Mr. Stemberg told The New York Times in 2004. “That’s how Staples was born.”AdvertisementThrough his dealings with Bain Capital, Mr. Stemberg also forged a long personal relationship with Mr. Romney. When Mr. Romney went into politics, Mr. Stemberg became a financial supporter and an adviser. He was credited with persuading Mr. Romney, as governor of Massachusetts, to create an affordable health insurance program.“He came to me and said, ‘If you really want to help people, you’ve got to get everybody health insurance — you can find a way,’” Mr. Romney recalled in a telephone interview on Thursday. “He was insistent. He pushed me.”Mr. Stemberg applied the same zeal when, at 39, he teamed up with Mr. Kahn, a marketing master who was 70 at the time and had competed with Mr. Stemberg in Boston’s supermarket wars. (Mr. Kahn was also a fellow Harvard alumnus.)The new partners did not immediately settle on office supplies in their hunt for a specialty retailing opportunity. First they combed New England shopping centers to discover which niches were most underserved and offered the greatest potential.They considered telephones, pantyhose, orthopedic products and pet provisions before deciding on office supplies — inspired in part by that pivotal Independence Day weekend, by Mr. Stemberg’s account — and selling them for as little as half the price that local stationers charged.“I’m thinking about names,” he recalled in an interview with Fortune Small Business in 2002. “Pencils? Pens? 8 ½-by-11? Staples? Staples! Staples the Office Superstore. That was it. The bad thing about the name was that when we started out, we had to explain to everybody what it was.”In its first two years, Staples opened 16 superstores in the corridor between Boston and Washington, which has the nation’s highest concentration of office workers.AdvertisementStaples spawned imitators, but the partners dominated through skillful marketing. They discounted prices for Staples cardholders to reward customer loyalty. They built mammoth warehouses to cut distribution costs. They charged for delivery to keep cash-and-carry customers from subsidizing shoppers who ordered from home or businesses. And they seized the opportunity presented by the Internet to woo online buyers.Mr. Stemberg was nothing if not adaptable, and ever the nonconformist. He majored in organic chemistry at Harvard but decided to pursue something else after managing only a C+ average. He considered law school and took a course but fell asleep in his first lecture. In the end, he decided on a business career. When his fellow students shaved their beards for job interviews, he grew one.Mr. Stemberg thought so far outside the box that after bypassing wholesalers, he even persuaded office supply manufacturers to repackage their stock so that consumers in his self-service superstores would not have to search through identical cartons to find, say, a particular variety of paper clips or envelopes. (Before big-box stores, those supplies would typically be shipped in bulk from a retailer to an office manager’s stockroom.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thomas George Stemberg was born in Newark on Jan. 18, 1949, the son of Austrian immigrants who had fled Europe as the Nazis rose to power before World War II.His father, Oscar, a Jew, managed the restaurants in Vienna’s Hotel Imperial. His mother, the former Erika Ratzer, was a Roman Catholic who had been disinherited by her father for marrying a Jew.To obtain visas, the couple persuaded the authorities that Oscar Stemberg was a vital employee of a Canadian insurance company. They moved to Orange, N.J., where he opened a restaurant named Zig’s.After the elder Mr. Stemberg died when Thomas was 11, he and his mother returned to Vienna, where he attended the American International School and was junior all-Austria in basketball — “probably the only place in the world I could have been all-anything,” he later recalled.He won a scholarship to Harvard, graduated in 1971 and got a degree from Harvard Business School. He supplemented the scholarship by washing dishes; later, he endowed scholarships for Harvard students who had lost a parent, and he became an avid supporter of the university’s basketball team.After school, he was hired by the Jewel Companies, a Chicago grocery chain, where he became a vice president when he was 27 and introduced no-name generic brands.Advertisement“My mother was incredibly offended that her son was trimming lettuce while learning how to help run the operation,” he told The Times. “She hadn’t spent all that money sending me to Harvard so that I’d end up in the produce section.”His first two marriages ended in divorce. He is survived by his wife, the former Katherine Chapman; six sons, William, Michael, Clyde and Thomas McDermott Stemberg, as well as Rylan Hamilton and Darrell Williams; three stepdaughters, Madison Eisler and Meghan and MacKenzie O’Gara; and three grandchildren.Mr. Kahn, his Staples partner, died in 2011.Before starting Staples and becoming chairman and chief executive, Mr. Stemberg was president of the eastern division of First National grocery stores. He was fired after he objected to the sale of the warehouse division, which he headed. It was sold to the Supermarket General Corporation, of which Mr. Kahn was chairman at the time.“His prior employer said he was fired because he was too bullheaded,” Mr. Romney said of Mr. Stemberg, “but he said he would invest in him because he was brilliant and would go through walls.”After leaving Staples, Mr. Stemberg founded the Highland Consumer Fund, which invested in start-ups, including Lululemon Athletica and David’s Tea.Mr. Stemberg, though a consummate salesman, was unable to persuade the Federal Trade Commission in 1996 to approve a proposed merger with Office Max, which briefly overtook Staples as the industry leader in 1993.He urged young entrepreneurs to find growing markets in which they could distinguish their new ventures, but he also urged them to learn people skills and management fundamentals, like motivating their employees, from a well-run company.“There are the rare birds like Bill Gates who have the talent to succeed without experience,” he told Inc. magazine last year. “But they’re like the guys who go straight to the N.B.A. out of high school. Works for some, but for the vast majority, it doesn’t.”An obituary on Saturday about Thomas G. Stemberg, a founder of the office-supply retailer Staples, misstated the number of sons who survive him. The six named in the obituary are the only ones; there are not seven.A version of this article appears in print on October 24, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Thomas G. Stemberg, Who Joined a Rival to Found Staples, Dies at 66.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.