By CHAD BRAYJUNE 15, 2015
LONDON — The United Technologies Corporation said on Monday that it planned to either sell or spin off Sikorsky Aircraft, the maker of the Black Hawk helicopters favored by the United States military.The announcement follows a review of strategic alternatives for the 90-year-old Sikorsky business that United Technologies conducted this year. A decision on whether to spin off or sell the business is expected by the end of the third quarter and is subject to the approval of the company’s board of directors.“Our strategic review has confirmed that exiting the helicopter business is the best path forward for United Technologies,” Gregory J. Hayes, the United Technologies president and chief executive, said in a news release.Gregory J. Hayes, the chief executive of United Technologies, said that the manufacturer planned to either sell or spin off its Sikorsky Aircraft unit, the maker of Black Hawk helicopters.“Sikorsky is the world’s premier helicopter company, and through a series of strategic wins is well positioned for long-term growth,’’ he said. “However, separation of Sikorsky from the portfolio will allow both United Technologies and Sikorsky to better focus on their core businesses. Over the coming weeks, we’ll determine whether a spinoff or direct sale is the best way to enhance Sikorsky’s long-term success and create the most value for customers and shareholders.”AdvertisementThe announcement was made on Monday in conjunction with an investor day hosted by United Technologies at the International Paris Air Show in Le Bourget, France.AdvertisementIt came after Sikorsky said on June 2 that it planned to cut up to 1,400 jobs, or about 9 percent of its work force.Founded on Long Island in 1925, Sikorsky manufactures and services military and commercial helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft. It was acquired by the predecessor of United Technologies in 1929.In addition to Black Hawks, Sikorsky makes a range of commercial and military helicopters, including the S-76 and the S-92 commercial helicopters and the Seahawk for the military. It is also developing the CH-53K heavy lift helicopter for the Marine Corps and the HH-60W combat rescue helicopter for the Air Force.Last year, it won the contract to build the next generation of Marine One helicopters, which are used to transport the American president.The Sikorsky business has more than 15,000 employees at the end of 2014, and it posted net sales of $7.5 billion for that year.United Technologies, based in Hartford, manufactures technology systems and services for the building and aerospace industries. The company posted net sales of $65.1 billion and had more than 211,000 employees in 2014.Its brands include the elevator maker Otis, Carrier industrial refrigeration, and Pratt & Whitney, a maker of air conditioning products and aircraft engines.A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Spinoff Plans.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.