AdvertisementSupported byItinerariesBy Nicola ClarkLONDON — Early in a May conference call with journalists to discuss easyJet’s first-half results, Carolyn McCall, the low-cost airline’s chief executive, seemed puzzled to find herself being grilled about toilets.Was it the case, several reporters were keen to know, that a planned shift of easyJet’s lavatories toward the tail section would make the ceilings too low for some male passengers to, you know, stand up?“We don’t believe customers will notice it,” Ms. McCall said of the change in easyJet’s fleet of Airbus A320s, which had just been announced that morning as a way to make room for a row of passenger seats. “We’re not going to do something that reduces customer satisfaction.”Maybe a sitting-only toilet would cut down on “spraying”? another reporter — male — persisted, provoking nervous laughter.“I couldn’t speculate,” Ms. McCall said, deadpan.Five years after taking the helm of easyJet, as a rare woman among airline chief executives, Ms. McCall seems unfazed by such locker-room banter. “I don’t think of the gender issue — I’ve never thought like that,” Ms. McCall, a 53-year-old mother of three, said in an interview shortly after that conference call.Nor to her was there any evident handicap in having never worked in the aviation industry, which is the case with Ms. McCall, who had built a long career in publishing and was previously chief of the Guardian Media Group, owner of properties that include The Guardian newspaper.EasyJet, based near London, is second to the Irish airline Ryanair among Europe’s budget airlines in number of passengers carried. Together, the two airlines have led the democratization of European air travel, making the sun-drenched beaches of Spain and Croatia or medieval gems like Prague or Florence accessible to people of relatively modest means.Ms. McCall has made her mark by turning easyJet from a company in chaos into one with steadily rising profits in Europe’s fiercely competitive airline industry. Part of that earnings growth has come from her efforts to expand easyJet beyond tourism into the more lucrative European business-travel market.While many European airlines have consistently lost money since the onset of the 2008 financial crisis, easyJet has reported record annual profits for the last four years, nearly doubling revenue during that time. Net income for the 2014 financial year came to 450 million pounds, or about $690 million, on revenue of more than £4.5 billion.Ryanair also generates healthy profits, though revenue growth has been slower, rising 39 percent since 2011.With the recent decline in oil prices leading to stiffer competition from its full-service rivals heading into the peak summer travel season, easyJet’s shares have slumped in recent weeks after hitting a high of more than £19 in mid-April.But analysts say those are short-term issues, unlikely to slow easyJet’s momentum, which has come largely at the expense of Europe’s established full-fare carriers.At a growing number of the 140 airports where easyJet flies, its A320s, with their distinctive orange tails, outnumber the jets of incumbent full-fare carriers like Air France, Alitalia, Lufthansa or Swiss. As easyJet has become the dominant carrier at major airports like London Gatwick, Geneva and Berlin Schönefeld, even some non-European fliers are starting to see easyJet as a kind of Eurail with wings.While leisure travelers still represent the bulk of easyJet’s customers, one key to its success in recent years has been its ability to pull a growing number of higher-spending business travelers into its passenger mix.“What Carolyn has done is to correctly recognize where the biggest market opportunity was given that they already had a certain cost base,” said Chris Tarry, an aviation consultant in Britain. “To drive greater returns, you need to look at improving the quality of the revenue. So appealing to more business passengers and everything that goes with that — better network, better frequency — has turned out to be a virtuous circle.”When Ms. McCall joined easyJet in July 2010, the airline was in turmoil. Having expanded at a breakneck pace for several years, easyJet was struggling to mend a reputation for frequent delays — more than a third of its flights were late — and poor customer service.Air traffic controllers’ strikes, volcanic ash clouds and other weather disruptions that year added close to £100 million, or about $153 million, in unanticipated operating costs.In the months leading up to her arrival, Ms. McCall’s predecessor, Andrew Harrison, as well as the airline’s chairman, chief financial officer and several other top managers had all resigned in the face of public criticism from the airline’s billionaire founder and largest shareholder, Stelios Haji-Ioannou.“She inherited a very difficult situation to align the commercial aspirations with the operational realities,” said Rob Bishton, who was head of operations for easyJet at the time and is now a senior official at Britain’s Civil Aviation Authority. “She was very clear about seeing things from a passenger perspective.”Since her first days at the airline, Ms. McCall has made a habit of speaking with the pilots and assisting the cabin crew whenever she flies, which is generally several times a week. It is not uncommon for passengers to see the chief making her way through the center aisle with a plastic bag to gather the trash.“Because they are so busy on the flight, it’s the easiest way to talk with the crew,” Ms. McCall said.When she was hired, some rivals dismissed Ms. McCall as unsuited to such a complex, competitive industry.In a remark that appeared to take aim at both her gender and her résumé, Michael O’Leary, the chief executive of Ryanair, dismissed her as “some old media luvvie.”Ms. McCall said she had found the O’Leary gibe “quite interesting, because I had honestly never really thought about” her professional background as a liability. “I feel that operationally, I was able to bring a fresh perspective.”(Asked recently if he had revised his opinion of Ms. McCall’s management skills, Mr. O’Leary declined to comment.)For an airline that at the time was just 15 years old, “quite a lot of things had become sacred cows,” she continued. “There were quite a lot of things that had not been reviewed or reassessed. So it didn’t bother me that there was skepticism.”Ms. McCall set to work first on addressing operational and crew scheduling issues that had been the source of easyJet’s punctuality problems.“Customer satisfaction is very correlated to on-time performance,” she said, “so it’s a really instrumental thing to get right.”Among the changes introduced by Ms. McCall that were considered radical for a budget airline then: assigned seating, which it turned out passengers strongly preferred to free-for-all boarding. Online seat selection and flexible ticketing options soon followed, as did ticket distribution agreements with third-party travel companies.These moves, and others, have been devised, primarily, to bolster the appeal of easyJet to Europe’s legions of business travelers. The results have been striking. EasyJet has an on-time performance rate of close to 90 percent across its network, narrowing the airline’s punctuality gap with Ryanair. Passenger numbers have jumped by 43 percent to 65 million a year, of which more than 12 million are now business travelers, up from eight million in 2010.Ms. McCall estimated that easyJet’s average business traveler pays 10 to 15 percent more than someone flying for pleasure. “That’s definitely worth having,” she said.Having grown up in India and Singapore as the only child of expatriate British parents — her father was an executive for an American textile company — Ms. McCall said she developed a taste for travel and a talent for adaptation at a young age.“Moving house, moving country, it makes you more independent and open-minded,” she said.But despite her willingness to challenge airline industry conventions, Ms. McCall said she was unlikely to follow some of her rivals into budget long-haul flying. Norwegian Air Shuttle started flights to the United States and Asia last year and Lufthansa plans to test out the model as well this year.Instead, Ms. McCall said, easyJet remained focused on scaling up its presence in its core European market. The airline is looking to increase its fleet of Airbus A320s to more than 300 by the end of the decade and has purchase options for as many as 100 more.Beginning in 2016, they will all start to be fitted with that extra row of seats — and those refitted toilets — bringing capacity up to 186 seats per plane from 180.Asked about the potty humor, Ms. McCall rolled her eyes.“I prefer to think about what we have to do, what’s coming up, what bases we are opening, what routes we’re launching,” she said.“We are very paranoid about competition,” Ms. McCall said. “We can’t be complacent.”Advertisement