By CHAD BRAYJUNE 15, 2015
LONDON — Europcar, a French rental car company, said on Monday that it planned to sell 854.5 million euros, or about $963 million, in shares in an initial public offering in Paris this month.Europcar said it hoped to price its shares between €11.50 and €15 and to begin unrestricted trading on the Euronext exchange on June 26. The company announced in May that it was seeking permission from regulators to pursue an I.P.O.The rental car company expects to sell €475 million of newly issued shares. Existing shareholders, including the French investment firm Eurazeo, expect to sell €379.5 million of shares in the offering.“This I.P.O. marks a major milestone in our growth strategy,” Philippe Germond, the chief executive of Europcar, said in a news release. “We see many new opportunities on the horizon; the I.P.O. will let us take advantage of those opportunities.”AdvertisementEuropcar expects to sell shares to institutional investors internationally and in France, and to retail investors in France. If there is sufficient interest, a minimum of 10 percent of the offering will be sold to retail investors, it said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company said it planned to use the proceeds to reduce its debt and to increase its financial flexibility for future development.AdvertisementEuropcar, which is based in Voisins-le-Bretonneux, France, traces its roots to the creation of the car rental company L’Abonnement Automobile in 1949. Europcar was acquired in 2006 by Eurazeo from the German automaker Volkswagen.The company provides auto rentals in more than 140 countries, with the bulk of its revenue coming from operations in Europe. Europcar posted revenue of €1.98 billion and a net loss of €111.7 million in 2014.Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs and Société Générale are acting as global coordinators on the offering, and Rothschild is acting as Europcar’s financial adviser.A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Rental-Car I.P.O.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.