By IAN AUSTEN and CHAD BRAYJUNE 15, 2015
Richard A. Baker has been a master at skillfully using real estate to revive retail brands. He did just that with the Hudson’s Bay Company, a department store whose long history traces back to the New World era of fur trading. It was that panache that allowed him to snag the venerable brands of Saks Fifth Avenue and Lord & Taylor when they were up for grabs.Now, Mr. Baker is plying his magic touch to expand into Europe. On Monday, the Hudson’s Bay Company, based in Canada, announced that it had agreed to purchase Galeria Kaufhof, the leading department store chain in Germany and Belgium, from the Metro Group for 2.85 billion euros, or about $3.2 billion, including debt.Although the new properties are department stores, the move could prove challenging. Retailing in Europe does not mirror the formats in North America, particularly in Germany, where Walmart left the market in 2006 and was forced to sell its 85 stores there after a mountain of losses.Mr. Baker’s track record, however, may give him a fighting chance. Mr. Baker, a New Yorker, is governor and executive chairman of Hudson’s Bay, which bills itself as North America’s longest continually operated company, having been established in 1670. He defied widespread expectations in Canada that he was interested in the chain only for its property when he took over in 2008. That also gave several analysts confidence that he would succeed in his effort to significantly expand Hudson’s Bay across continents, a model with few precedents in the full-line department store business.Advertisement“They’re covering new territory here, but we don’t really have examples of global department stores,” said Oliver Chen, a retailing analyst with Cowen & Company. “The industry’s characteristics are such that consolidation makes good sense.”AdvertisementIn an interview, Mr. Baker said that he began exploring the purchase of Kaufhof almost two years before he acquired Hudson’s Bay.“I have had teams of people coming and going, studying every single store, every single market, all of the competition since late 2006,” he said. “So we are experts and highly educated on the German retail market.”Unlike Hudson’s Bay, Kaufhof faces comparatively weak direct competition. It has well-maintained stores that have received money for upgrades and improvements, and is strongly profitable.By adding 103 Galeria Kaufhof stores in Germany, 16 Sportarena stores and 16 Galeria Inno department stores in Belgium, Hudson’s Bay will have a total of 464 outlets as well as additional logistics centers, warehouses and other properties, including the Galeria Kaufhof head office in Cologne, Germany.If the transaction is completed, Hudson’s Bay will have combined annual sales of 13 billion Canadian dollars, or about $10.6 billion, with a third of its sales coming from Belgium and Germany. Investors seemed to be betting that the deal would result in a stronger company; Hudson’s Bay stock rose nearly 8 percent on Monday in trading in Toronto. Shares in Metro, by contrast, fell 4.7 percent in trading in Frankfurt.After the sale, Metro intends to focus on its wholesale business, Metro Cash & Carry, and its consumer electronics business, Media-Saturn, and the Real grocery store and retail chain (it was the Real chain that acquired Walmart’s stores when it left Germany).Gerald L. Storch, chief executive of Hudson’s Bay, said that the expansion would allow the company to spread the cost of new technologies, particularly related to online sales, over a larger base. The European deal, he added, would also give the chain more influence over vendors, particularly when it comes to offering exclusive products.Gerald L. Storch, the chief executive of Hudson’s Bay, the owner of Saks Fifth Avenue, on the deal for the Galeria Kaufhof department store chain in Germany and its Belgian subsidiary.“When you’re large you can say ‘I want all of it’ or ‘I want a line that’s only sold in our stores,’ ” Mr. Storch said. “That’s true both with our branded vendors as well as our own labels, it gives us greater opportunities.”AdvertisementExecutives do not expect to revamp Kaufhof, which was founded in 1879, and its other brands into a model similar to the high-end Saks. Both Mr. Storch and Mr. Baker emphasized that the German chain would continue to operate under its own management and brand names and would retain its head office in Cologne.Mr. Baker said that there would be no layoffs related to the acquisition, indicating instead that he hopes to enlarge the European company, perhaps through further acquisitions on the Continent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Howard Davidowitz, a retail consultant in New York, said Hudson’s Bay may succeed where Walmart could not because Walmart tried to create its German outlets in its own image. He said that Mr. Baker was unlikely to make the same mistake, based on his history with Hudson’s Bay.“This guy, up to now, has been pretty smart,” Mr. Davidowitz said, adding that unlike Hudson’s Bay, which he said was in “rough shape” when Mr. Baker took control, Kaufhof “has pretty good market share and is in good shape.”While Mr. Baker said that he always assessed acquisition targets from their likelihood of operating success first, he is once again using underlying real estate to finance the deal. That will ensure that Hudson’s Bay does not significantly increase its debt or require it to raise equity.Hudson’s Bay has entered into an agreement in which a United States real estate joint venture between Hudson’s Bay and the Simon Property Group will purchase at least 40 of Kaufhof’s owned or partly owned properties for at least €2.4 billion. The proceeds from that deal would, in turn, be used to finance the overall Kaufhof acquisition.Mr. Chen, the analyst, said that both in North America and now Germany, Hudson’s Bay must develop strategies to lure younger shoppers to its stores. In Canada that has included integrating stores from Topman and Topshop of Britain into its larger stores.Mr. Baker has made many savvy real estate moves with his other properties. He eventually sold most of the leases of the company’s Zellers discount chain to Target (although Target’s foray into Canada ultimately failed). Target paid 1.8 billion Canadian dollars for those properties, about 700 million dollars more than Mr. Baker spent to acquire Hudson’s Bay.AdvertisementLast year, Mr. Baker sold the Hudson’s Bay flagship store in downtown Toronto to Cadillac-Fairview for 650 million Canadian dollars. The store, which is undergoing a major renovation to include a Saks outlet, remains a tenant.And after paying $2.94 billion in cash and assumption of debt for Saks in a deal announced in 2013, Hudson’s Bay said late last year that the flagship store in Manhattan had been independently appraised at $3.7 billion, making it one of the most valuable retail properties in the country.Maureen C. Atkinson, a senior partner at J. C. Williams, a retail consulting firm in Toronto, said that Mr. Baker had substantially invested in Hudson’s Bay since acquiring it to successfully expand the business again. She added that with Europe, however, he will face a very different market on a wide variety of fronts, including labor practices.“But he’s been far more successful in Canada than we thought he would be, so maybe he’ll pull this off,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Hudson’s Bay to Pay $3.2 Billion for European Retail Chain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.