By DIANE CARDWELLJUNE 16, 2015
For years, automakers have looked for ways to reuse the batteries from electric cars, which retain significant storage capacity even after they are no longer useful for transport.Now, those efforts are beginning to bear fruit. On Monday, Nissan executives announced a partnership with Green Charge Networks, an energy storage provider, to sell stationary systems built around used Leaf batteries to businesses. And on Tuesday, General Motors said it had a similar setup using Volt batteries that is helping to make a testing campus in Milford, Mich., practically energy independent. The company said it planned to sell its systems eventually.“This system is ideal for commercial use because a business can derive full functionality from an existing battery while reducing upfront costs through this reuse,” said Pablo Valencia, senior manager for battery life cycle management at G.M. The batteries can retain as much as 80 percent of their storage capacity after coming out of the cars.The announcements follow Tesla’s closely watched entrance into the stationary storage market last month with Elon Musk’s presentation of a line of battery packs aimed at homes, businesses and utilities, and a similar product line from Mercedes-Benz announced this month.AdvertisementBut those moves were focused on new batteries. Nissan’s and G.M.’s efforts are a reflection of the importance for manufacturers to find a way to harvest used batteries because batteries are expensive to produce and difficult to recycle or dispose of properly, said Karl Brauer, an analyst at Kelley Blue Book.Advertisement“The rest of the car can be recycled relatively easily, but that battery is going to be a much bigger deal to try to break down and turn into something else,” he said. By repackaging it as a stationary storage system, he added, “you’ve found a very effective, efficient secondary use of batteries that doesn’t require recycling.”Still, he said, because sales of electric vehicles remain low, it is not clear when the supply would be large and consistent enough to create a significant market.For the moment, the two car companies are focused on storage for themselves. In Michigan, G.M. is using five Volt batteries to help run a data center that is part of its testing facility, which has achieved net zero energy use on an annual basis, the company said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A solar array and two wind turbines produce electricity while the batteries are available to either store or feed energy as needed, with excess power going into the grid. The batteries can hold four hours’ worth of backup power for use in a failure.The energy project grew from a partnership with ABB, a leading power and automation technology company, and is intended as a lab to help G.M. understand and develop storage systems for other businesses as well.Nissan has embarked on a similar endeavor with Green Charge that the companies say is ready for the commercial market. They plan to install the first system, involving four car batteries, at a Nissan facility late this summer to help offset peak electricity demand.“That really is a new development in this space where we’re able to bring the Nissan Leaf E.V. into a role where it continues to deliver a sustainability component even though the vehicle and the battery have now been separated,” said Brad Smith, director of Nissan’s 4R Energy business in the United States.Nissan estimates 80,000 Leafs are on the road in the United States, and plans to work with lessees to make sure there are enough batteries, which are guaranteed for eight years or 100,000 miles, to supply its potential second-life customers, executives said.The companies predict that offering the batteries with intelligent systems management will prove particularly attractive for helping smooth out fluctuations in solar output at a lower price than is now available.Advertisement“This partnership is ultimately about power efficiency: reducing our carbon footprint, stress on the grid and energy,” said Vic Shao, Green Charge’s chief executive.A version of this article appears in print on June 17, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: G.M. and Nissan Reusing Old Electric Car Batteries .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.