AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — This is not the moment the Federal Reserve will start to raise interest rates. But that day is coming, and investors are getting nervous.Karissa McDonough, director of fixed-income strategy for People’s United Wealth Management, the investment arm of a Connecticut bank, said her firm had chased higher returns in recent years by amassing assets like emerging-market debt and high-yield bonds that it would not have considered a decade ago.She thinks “all the time” about selling those assets and heading for safety. The firm sold some in January. But she does not want to retreat too soon.“We’re all looking at each other to figure out who’s going to blink first,” Ms. McDonough said. “You don’t want to give up while the market is still strong and supportive. You’d be giving up on a significant amount of income.”The Fed and the central banks of the major European and Asian economies have presided over an extraordinary period of low interest rates and minimal volatility, seeking to increase economic growth by encouraging risk-taking.Now the Fed is poised to become the first of its peers to head for the exit. Fed officials, who are meeting here Tuesday and Wednesday, have said they would like to start raising short-term rates later this year, lifting the Fed’s benchmark rate from its hibernation near zero for the first time since December 2008. (Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, will discuss the Fed’s latest thinking at a news conference Wednesday afternoon after the Fed wraps up its conclave.)Fed officials have portrayed these plans as a testament to the progress of the economic recovery, and they have emphasized they plan to raise rates slowly — more slowly than the Fed’s past practice — so that they do not put the brakes on growth too soon.Not everyone is worried. Richard Davis, chief executive of U.S. Bancorp, based in Minneapolis, argues that raising rates could actually help encourage growth, at least for a while, by spurring companies and individuals to borrow money ahead of higher rates in the future, just as potential home buyers often plunge into the market only after mortgage rates start to rise.But whatever the impact on the economy, Fed officials have emphasized that they expect rate increases to disrupt financial markets, increasing volatility after a long period of tranquility.“My own view is that there likely will be some turbulence,” William C. Dudley, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said earlier this month. “After all, lift-off will represent a regime change after more than six years at the zero lower bound.”Bond markets do not respond predictably to interest rate increases. There have only been a handful of tightening cycles in the Fed’s 100-year history, and on the whole, the differences have outweighed the similarities. “Events unique to the particular period appear to be much more important” than the Fed’s actions, analysts at Bank of America Merrill Lynch concluded in a recent report.In the present case, some Fed officials have suggested investors are behaving with too much complacency, for example by keeping the yields of rate-sensitive securities at levels that indicate they do not think the Fed will raise rates this year. If the Fed does what it says, they could be taken by surprise.Investors also continue to gobble up new corporate bonds that carry very low interest rates, which are likely to lose value when rates start to increase. American corporations issued $757 billion in debt from January through May, a record volume 12 percent higher than during the first five months of last year, according to the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, a trade group.And there is concern that changes in financial markets since the crisis have reduced liquidity, or the ability of sellers to find buyers. The International Monetary Fund warned in its Global Financial Stability Report in April that central banks, by pumping money into markets, were concealing the decline of private participation in those markets. “Markets could be increasingly susceptible to episodes in which liquidity suddenly vanishes and volatility spikes,” it concluded.Ms. McDonough said she worried particularly about the flight of investors who have entered new markets since the crisis, and have never experienced the kind of volatility that disrupts trading even during periods of normal activity.“My fear is that the junkiest investors will no longer have access to capital and that all of that money is going to fly out and exacerbate this tightening,” she said. “I’m not worried about the Fed moving too early in terms of the U.S. economy. I am very concerned about the market impact.”Gibson Smith, chief investment officer for fixed income at Janus Capital Group, said his firm was positioning itself to take advantage of the fire sales that might result as sellers cut prices to attract scarce buyers.Mr. Smith said Janus was reducing its holdings of high-yield debt and its exposure to the mortgage market, and instead was accumulating easy-to-sell short-term Treasuries.“There is a high level of complacency among investors right now,” he said. “In their quests for yield they are really turning their heads to some of the risks that exist.”Mr. Smith said Janus would make less money than rivals if the Fed continued to postpone rate increases, or if the market reaction was relatively calm, but he said the foregone opportunity was small compared to the risks.“There are times when it is very important to be defensive and cautious, and that’s what we’re doing with our portfolios right now,” he said.Others, however, are standing pat, regarding the fears of disruption as overstated.John Bellows, a portfolio manager at Western Asset Management, said that he did not regard investors as overly complacent. He said current prices largely reflected economic conditions, and he did not think the Fed would seriously disrupt markets by modestly increasing its benchmark interest rate.“It doesn’t represent a sea change,” he said. “It wouldn’t surprise me to see a little volatility, but even over a month or a few months’ time frame I think the economic fundamentals will drive markets. Inflation is quite low, growth is not accelerating and central banks around the world are easing.”Mr. Bellows said the greatest risk to market stability was that investors would ignore the Fed’s insistence that it intended to raise rates slowly. In past periods of policy tightening, as in the mid-1990s, investors reacted to the Fed’s initial moves by driving up rates in the expectation that the Fed was just getting started.But he said here, too, he saw reason for confidence.“The Fed losing credibility in terms of their hiking pace is the real risk,” Mr. Bellows said. “But I don’t think that’s going to happen in the coming cycle. They’ve been clear that they intend to hike slowly and moderately.”Advertisement