AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew Ross SorkinRobert Wiesenthal, the chief operating officer of the Warner Music Group and a longtime entertainment industry executive, is planning to resign to lead a start-up company that promises to be the Uber of helicopters.Mr. Wiesenthal, who had been the chief financial officer of the Sony Corporation of America, will become the chairman and chief executive of Blade, a company he co-founded as a side project while at Sony.Blade is an on-demand service that shuttles customers by helicopter and small plane to the Hamptons and Nantucket using an app. The service has become popular, with more than 22,000 customers chartering and crowdsourcing flights.Blade is expected to begin offering services in other parts of the United States as well as abroad by the end of the year. It seeks to disrupt the small but growing helicopter and small-aviation industry by lowering the cost of flights through technology similar to what Uber and Lyft have done to the taxi and limousine industry.The company has attracted the attention of prominent investors including David Zaslav, chief of Discovery Communications; Eric Schmidt, chairman of Google; Barry Diller’s Ranger Investments; Bob Pittman, chairman and chief of iHeartMedia; and Raine Ventures, which has stakes in media companies like Vice.In a memo to Warner’s staff Tuesday afternoon, Stephen Cooper, the music company’s chief executive, said, “I respect Rob’s desire to concentrate his energies in the entrepreneurial world and Blade will clearly benefit from his digital and commercial expertise.” He added, “Ever since he joined WMG in January 2013, Rob has led the effort to broaden our deal-making universe, helping us to forge new models with established players as well as to build what he calls a ‘digital nursery’ of partnerships with innovative start-ups.”Mr. Wiesenthal, who declined to comment, started his career as an investment banker. He was hired to work at Warner Music in 2013 by the company’s controlling shareholder, the Russian-born billionaire Len Blavatnik, to help with strategy and deals. He helped push Warner to enter a series of alliances and deals with Clear Channel and Shazam as well as technology companies like Snapchat, Interlude, Vessel and SoundCloud.Perhaps Mr. Wiesenthal’s most successful deal was one he made while at Sony with Michael Jackson in a Dubai hotel room in 2005. The deal he struck prevented Mr. Jackson from filing for bankruptcy. As part of the deal, however, Sony took operational control of Sony/ATV, the joint venture owned by Sony and the Jackson estate. That music publishing business is now worth billions.Now with Mr. Wiesenthal at the helm of Blade, there is speculation about whether he will seek to forge deals with companies like Uber, which has run several partnership promotions with Blade.“Rob has built Blade into a contemporary culture brand from scratch. He is clever and savvy in driving the Blade brand, customers and sales through new media,” Mr. Zaslav said. “Blade is scalable and can be a big business.”Advertisement