
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

JUNE 16, 2015
Goldman Sachs may get lost on Main Street.The investment banking powerhouse plans to meander off Wall Street and start lending money to average Joes and Joannes next year, The New York Times reported on Monday. Healthy returns probably await. A broader constituency of customers also could come in handy. It’s a big strategic change, however, and one with many distractions and risks.The bank, with its $860 billion balance sheet, is considering making personal loans of up to $20,000. Goldman also may extend the service to small businesses. Both are potentially ripe opportunities. Traditional lenders are gun-shy these days and have left many borrowers behind.Helping people refinance credit card debt at a lower rate, for example, is potentially a $400 billion market. That’s why a number of newer companies are jumping in, from online matchmakers like Lending Club to Internet-based lenders like Affirm.These areas can be plenty profitable. OneMain Financial, the subprime lender that Citigroup recently sold to Springleaf Financial, generated a return on assets last year of 6.7 percent, or almost seven times as much as most big banks can manage.AdvertisementBuilding better technology is a big advantage, too. It can obviate the need for branches, which keeps costs low. It also has the power to speed service for customers. Bond Street, for example, which lends to small companies, has reduced its application and approval process to two days, compared with two months at traditional banks.For Goldman, there may be one other significant element of the endeavor. Its public image arguably suffered during the last crisis because it is exclusively a wholesale bank, with virtually no sizable, public constituency with a vested interest in its survival. One of the bets made by Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive, may be that building a base of everyday consumers could help change that next time around.AdvertisementIt’s a business that can be punishing in a downturn, however. OneMain sold for just 7.7 times earnings. Goldman would also be inviting still more oversight, this time from the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. And the business is unlikely to be big: OneMain’s $10 billion of loans may yield less than $600 million this year, little more than 6 percent of Goldman’s bottom line. Goldman may not find Main Street as welcoming as Wall Street.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »