By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINJUNE 16, 2015
Maurice R. Greenberg, the former chief executive of the American International Group, did not name the big New York law firm Davis Polk & Wardwell as a defendant in his lawsuit challenging the terms of the federal government’s bailout of his company during the financial crisis.But at times, it might seem that way from reading the ruling in the case issued on Monday by Judge Thomas C. Wheeler of the United States Court of Federal Claims.The name Davis Polk comes up 36 times in the 75-page ruling — more than any other outside adviser that worked with the United States government in putting together the hastily arranged bailout of A.I.G. in September 2008.Judge Wheeler, who sided with Mr. Greenberg on the law but awarded him no damages, described the lawyers from Davis Polk as working in tandem with the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to deny Mr. Greenberg and other A.I.G. shareholders an opportunity to vote on the bailout plan that totaled $185 billion and kept the insurer out of bankruptcy.AdvertisementThe judge said the “carefully orchestrated” bailout that gave the government a nearly 80 percent equity stake in A.I.G. was done with the blessing of Davis Polk, even though a lawyer for the firm expressed private doubts about the plan’s legality. Judge Wheeler cited an email from a Davis Polk lawyer in which he said the government “is on thin ice and they know it.”AdvertisementThe damaging email surfaced during post-trial discovery after Judge Wheeler ruled that the federal government had waived its attorney-client privilege by putting several Davis Polk lawyers on the stand to testify about the advice they gave the Treasury Department and Federal Reserve in drafting the bailout.The decision to put two senior lawyers from Davis Polk on the stand may have been a tactical mistake by the Justice Department because it opened the door to the plaintiffs to require the firm to produce internal communications that otherwise would have remained private. Several legal scholars said putting lawyers on the stand to testify is often risky, and it clearly backfired in this case.“Lawyers are difficult witnesses, and they are hard to control,” said Ellen Yaroshefsky, executive director of the Jacob Burns Ethics Center at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law.W. Bradley Wendel, a professor at Cornell Law School, who specializes in legal ethics, said it was fair to question whether the Justice Department had adequately prepared the Davis Polk lawyers. “Whoever was handling those witnesses needed to be more careful,” he said.A spokesman for the Justice Department was not immediately available for comment.In fairness to Davis Polk, the law firm also turned over emails in which other lawyers took a position on the legality of the Fed’s action that differed from the view expressed in the “thin ice” email.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In his ruling, Judge Wheeler said the testimony from the Davis Polk lawyers necessitated “a waiver as to any previously privileged documents relating to the government’s economic rescue of A.I.G.” Before the trial, the judge had already ruled that the government had waived some of its attorney-client privilege by the nature of the defense arguments it was raising.Other legal and business experts said the waiver of the attorney-client privilege raised uncomfortable questions about Davis Polk’s representation of the government during the A.I.G. bailout negotiations. These experts said an argument could be made that Davis Polk had an ethical obligation to stop representing the federal government agencies if its lawyers truly harbored private doubts about the legality of forcing A.I.G. to give the government an equity stake in return for what was an initially an $85 billion loan.“I think what irritated the judge is the sense of the government throwing its weight around and Davis Polk was coming up with a way to do it,” said Erik Gordon, a professor at the University of Michigan Ross School of Business. “Your client could be gung-ho to want to do something, but in the course of representing a client it is part of the canon on the ethics you need to exercise independent judgment.”AdvertisementPeter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School and a DealBook columnist at Times The New York Times, said if lawyers within Davis Polk firmly concluded that the government’s decision violated a provision of the Federal Reserve Act, the firm might have had an ethical obligation to cease its representation. “You could make a reasonable argument that Davis Polk should have quit,” he said.But others are willing to give Davis Polk lawyers the benefit of the doubt, especially because they were dealing with an unprecedented situation and having to render legal advice in the face of a rapidly unfolding financial crisis. The experts said one way to look at what Davis Polk was doing was simply trying to find a creative solution for its client.“One of the things lawyers are paid for is to be problem solvers,” said Professor Wendel, who added that clients do not like it when lawyers say something cannot be done without offering another possibility.Then again, Mr. Wendel said he could understand why Judge Wheeler might have had some issues with Davis Polk.“I get the judge’s tone,” Mr. Wendel said. “There does seem to be a little talking out of both sides of their mouths.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.