By JAD MOUAWADJUNE 16, 2015
United Airlines said on Tuesday that it would move out of Kennedy International Airport in October, after failing to make a profit there for seven years, and will shift all of its flights to Los Angeles and San Francisco to its hub in Newark.The change will allow United to provide its premium services — which it calls “p.s.” — for business travelers in Newark for all of its West Coast flights. Those premium cabins, installed on about a dozen Boeing 757s, are currently available only out of Kennedy.United said it had not made a profit on the West Coast routes partly because its passengers had no options to connect once they landed at Kennedy. It has also faced increasing competition from JetBlue Airways, Delta Air Lines and American Airlines battling over the busy transcontinental market.All major carriers have introduced new amenities on those routes in the last few years — including lie-flat beds and better dining options — in a bid to attract the three highly lucrative markets of Wall Street, Hollywood and Silicon Valley.AdvertisementUnited said that by moving its West Coast operations to Newark, it could offer its passengers service similar to what they get if they connect to flights bound for Europe.Advertisement“We believe this makes us more competitive in New York,” said Megan McCarthy, a spokeswoman for United. “We are putting our best product where are customers are flying. We have a hub in Newark that can connect to points all over the world.”The airline is the dominant carrier in Newark Liberty International Airport, which it inherited after merging with Continental Airlines.United currently has 14 daily flights to Los Angeles and 15 daily flights to San Francisco from Newark airport. It has six daily flights to Los Angeles and seven to San Francisco from Kennedy Airport.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As part of the move, which is planned to start on Oct. 25, United said it had agreed to sell takeoff and landing slots at Kennedy to Delta, and will buy some slots from Delta in Newark. The airline did not release the details of the transactions, which will require approval from regulators.United first introduced its “p.s.” flights to the West Coast at Kennedy in 2004 and made a big effort at building the operation as a stand-alone business. But it has been facing tough competition from other carriers, particularly since JetBlue introduced its “Mint” business class cabin last year.“Mint was a real game-changer for the industry, and for United it was probably the straw that broke the camel’s back,” said Robert W. Mann, an aviation consultant. “This has very difficult economics, and despite the premium traffic on the route it is just difficult to absorb all the facility costs. And with American and JetBlue and Delta having all upped their game, it made it all that much harder for United.”American Airlines flies its newest Airbus A321s with three classes of service, including first class and business class to Los Angeles and San Francisco. Also flying Airbus A321s, JetBlue Airways has also introduced semiprivate first-class cabins to those routes. Delta, which has been vying for the mantle of New York’s biggest airline, has brought in bigger planes typically configured for international routes.United also has dozens of daily flights out of La Guardia Airport to its various hubs, including 15 dailies to Chicago O’Hare, eight to Houston Intercontinental, and six each to Denver and Cleveland. But all flights out of La Guardia face a 1,500-mile perimeter limit, which the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is considering lifting.To accommodate the higher frequency of transcontinental flights from Newark, United said it would move several of its Boeing 757s that are currently flying to Europe and replace those with larger Boeing 767s.A version of this article appears in print on June 17, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: United Is Moving West Coast Flights to Newark From J.F.K.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.