By JACKIE CALMESJUNE 16, 2015
WASHINGTON —  As large as the nation’s postrecession debt is, American taxpayers could catch a break for years to come from continued abnormally low interest rates, which hold down the cost of financing that debt and in turn limit the debt’s growth, congressional analysts said on Tuesday.Still, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, in its annual long-term budget outlook, projected that by the fiscal year 2040 the government’s debt would be equal to 107 percent of the country’s annual economic activity — up from the current 74 percent of gross domestic product. Last year the budget office projected the 2040 debt level would reach 111 percent of G.D.P.The current level of public debt — exceeding $13 trillion and in large part a hangover from the 2007 to 2009 recession — is higher as a proportion of the economy than at any point in United States history except for seven years during and after World War II. Debt growth to the projected levels would be unsustainable, as the budget office warned, in what has become a regular feature of its reports.The favorable projections on interest rates provided the most significant and positive news. The effect of interest rates in tamping down or, conversely, worsening the growth of government debt underscores why market and government analysts pay such close attention to those rates. It also suggests how quickly taxpayers’ costs could pile up if economic conditions change, altering the current projections for low rates.AdvertisementWhile acknowledging “enormous uncertainty” about long-term projections, the budget office said its review of economic models and market analysts’ work strongly “suggests that participants in financial markets expect low interest rates well into the future, and the paths that they anticipate have fallen notably in the past year.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That downward revision in expectations for already low interest rates, while small, has a significant effect on the 25-year outlook for the cost of financing the government’s borrowing. Those interest payments on the debt are an expanding share of federal spending, squeezing allocations for domestic and military programs. But the budget office shaved a half-percentage point from its forecast of last year, putting the cost of interest on the debt at 4.2 percent of G.D.P., down from a projected 4.7 percent last year.AdvertisementBy comparison, interest costs in this fiscal year are 1.3 percent of G.D.P.The budget office projected that real, inflation-adjusted interest rates on Treasury notes would average 2.3 percent in the next 25 years, down from a projected average of 2.5 percent in last summer’s annual report. Similarly, interest rates for all government debt would average 2 percent, down from 2.2 percent, the budget office projected.The budget office projected that the economy would grow on average 2.2 percent a year over 25 years, down slightly from the 2.3 percent projected last year — a forecast that continues to suggest an unimpressive contrast with the average 3.1 percent growth of the period of 1970 to 2007.The slight reduction in the economy’s predicted growth is “primarily because of the slowdown that C.B.O. anticipates in the growth of the labor force,” the office said, as “the fraction of the population that is of working age shrinks.”A version of this article appears in print on June 17, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Budget Office Says U.S. Debt Is Being Muted by Low Rates.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.