By CHRISTINE HAUSEROCT. 23, 2015
Jared Fogle, the former pitchman for the Subway sandwich chain who pleaded guilty to sex acts with minors and distribution of child pornography, has paid $1 million total in restitution to 10 of his 14 victims, a prosecutor said on Friday.The prosecutor said the payments were drawn from $1.4 million put aside under the terms of a plea agreement. The remaining four victims will also each receive $100,000 before a sentencing scheduled for Nov. 19, said the prosecutor, Steven DeBrota of the United States attorney’s office in Indianapolis.Mr. Fogle gained fame after losing more than 200 pounds by eating Subway sandwiches and exercising. He first appeared in ads for Subway in 2000. He founded a nonprofit organization, the Jared Foundation, in 2004 to combat childhood obesity.In July, investigators raided Mr. Fogle’s home in the suburbs of Indianapolis after his name was associated with a case related to the former executive director of the foundation, Russell C. Taylor.AdvertisementMr. Taylor was charged in May with seven counts of production of and one count of possession of child pornography. Acting on a tip, the authorities found more than 400 videos of child pornography in Mr. Taylor’s home office in Indianapolis.AdvertisementSubway suspended its relationship with Mr. Fogle that month. On Aug. 19, Mr. Fogle notified a federal court that he had agreed to plead guilty to two charges. One was related to distributing and receiving images of minors engaging in sexually explicit conduct. The other charge involved Mr. Fogle traveling across state lines to engage in commercial sex with minors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The authorities say Mr. Fogle knew that Mr. Taylor had produced pornography of young children, including a group of 12 minors who were secretly filmed at Mr. Taylor’s home.The other charge involved Mr. Fogle’s traveling across state lines to engage in commercial sex with minors. He is accused of using websites to arrange sex acts with at least two minors.Under the terms of the agreement, the $1.4 million was put in a trust account for the victims, four of whom are now adults.“What was innovative is we required those funds to be impounded so they could not be dissipated,” Mr. DeBrota said. He added that the money would be used to help victims receive counseling and noted that one victim was homeless.Mr. Fogle faces a possible sentence of five to 12 years in federal prison.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.