AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedWhen Fitbit begins trading on the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday, it will do so at a healthy valuation.The company, which sells popular wearable fitness-tracking devices like the Fitbit Surge bracelet, priced its initial public offering at $20 a share on Wednesday, a dollar above its already heightened price range of $17 to $19 a share.At that level, the company will raise $732 million for itself and its selling stockholders after increasing the number of shares to be sold to 36.6 million from 34.5 million. The price values Fitbit at $4.1 billion.The shares will begin trading on Thursday on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol FIT.Now Fitbit, which has grown since its inception in 2007 into one of the most popular makers of health-tracking devices, must prove that it can perform in an industry that has also drawn in Apple and Google.Its market debut is a bet that consumers will continue to buy fitness bands as other, more complex smartwatches like the Apple Watch and various Android competitors hit stores. In addition to tracking users’ heart rates and steps, the newer devices offer access to email, text messages and other applications.Fitbit faces another challenge in the form of legal fights from a rival, Jawbone, which filed two lawsuits over the last month. One accuses the company of patent infringement, which could lead to a ban on importing Fitbit devices or important parts. The other accuses Fitbit of poaching employees who then illicitly stole confidential information from their former employer.Fitbit has denied those accusations.Investors for now appear undaunted by those challenges. Last year, Fitbit earned $131.8 million, reversing a nearly $52 million loss in the previous year. Its sales more than tripled during that same period, to $745.4 million.That trend appears to show few signs of slowing in the near term. The number of fitness wearable devices used by customers is expected to triple by 2018, to more than 70 million, according to a report by Juniper Research in November.In its prospectus, Fitbit claims an 85 percent share of the activity tracker market in the United States, citing data from the NPD Group. As of March, the company has sold nearly 21 million devices. However, surveys have shown that about a third of fitness-tracking users leave their devices in drawers after about six months.The stock market has generally been receptive to popular consumer electronics companies. Among the strongest debuts last year was that of GoPro, the maker of action video cameras, which as of Wednesday was trading at more than double its initial public offering price.Though investors have expressed serious interest in owning Fitbit shares, those new stockholders will not have much sway over the future of the company. Fitbit will have two categories of stock, with Class B shares holding 10 times the voting power of the Class A shares being sold in the offering. In effect, insiders will keep control of the company.The stock sale was run by Morgan Stanley, Deutsche Bank and Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Advertisement