
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING and


STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

JUNE 17, 2015
A judge’s tone and harsh words in his ruling this week related to the taxpayer bailout of the American International Group seems to have put the government on notice that its tactics in rescuing the insurer during the 2008 financial crisis were improper and illegal.For starters, the opinion of Judge Thomas C. Wheeler of United States Court of Federal Claims paints the government’s actions as akin to those of a voracious loan shark, stealing control of the company in the guise of offering assistance. The colorful portrayal has made for good press, but the tactics used by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Treasury Department are hardly novel in corporate law, and largely reflect how a distressed company is forced to accept the terms offered by a lone suitor driving a hard bargain.In reality, Judge Wheeler’s A.I.G. opinion is not only based on a cramped view of what happens in the real world, but is also likely to have little impact on any future rescues of companies or institutions.Judge Wheeler reaches some incredibly broad conclusions, pinpointing the causes of the financial crisis and painting A.I.G. as a relative saint.AdvertisementHe contrasted the treatment of A.I.G. to that of big banks like Bank of America and Citigroup, finding that “the government treated A.I.G. much more harshly than other institutions in need of financial assistance.” To support his theory, he pointed to the high interest rate charged for the $85 billion loan and how the government took control of 79.9 percent of the company’s stock, as well as the number of misconduct charges brought against other banks but not A.I.G.AdvertisementThe judge also seemed to believe that the government had a vendetta against one of A.I.G.’s largest shareholders, Starr International, as well as other shareholders. Another part of the opinion points out that the government, aided by its outside lawyers from Davis Polk & Wardwell, “carefully orchestrated the A.I.G. takeover so that shareholders would be excluded from the process.” The government did so by making sure that no vote was held on having the shares issued to the government or on converting them into common stock.The judge viewed the government’s treatment of A.I.G.’s board as further proof of how it abused its power in forcing the company to acquiesce to its terms or go into bankruptcy. He questioned whether the board’s vote in favor of the deal “was voluntary, or whether acceptance of the government’s terms was the only realistic choice.”Yet none of the government’s conduct toward A.I.G. is particularly special. It is hard to argue that, in the depths of the 2008 financial crisis, A.I.G. did not have adequate legal counsel. In fact, three leading New York law firms – Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, Sullivan & Cromwell and Weil, Gotshal & Manges – helped the company’s board evaluate the government’s offer.In 2008, A.I.G. really had only two alternatives: bankruptcy or accepting the government’s rescue, no matter how onerous the terms being offered by the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department were. Any company that is in desperate straits can expect that it will have to face off against an opponent ready to play hardball. Indeed, taxpayers would have expected the government to act as tough as any other bidder would, especially when it was the only viable alternative.Moreover, the government’s move to avoid a shareholder vote is not unusual. During the famous takeover battle in the late 1980s between Time and Paramount, Time purposely restructured its acquisition of Warner Communications to keep its shareholders from having a vote on the deal.The Delaware Supreme Court was hardly troubled by that decision, finding that it was a permissible exercise of the board’s authority to manage the transaction. Both New York State and Delaware courts refused to find that JPMorgan Chase had acted inappropriately when it restructured its 2008 acquisition of Bear Stearns to take control of the company and avoid a shareholder vote on the transaction.The government also had a good reason to avoid a shareholder vote. As A.I.G. struggled in the wake of the shocking bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers Holdings, there was no time to go through the lengthy process of seeking a shareholder vote on the bailout. That process would have taken months, and there was less than 24 hours to prop up the company or run the real risk that the financial system would collapse.AdvertisementJudge Wheeler’s ruling turns on how broadly you read Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, which provides that “in unusual and exigent circumstances,” the Federal Reserve can make loans to any company as long as any they are “secured to the satisfaction of the Federal Reserve Bank.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The judge interpreted that provision as authorizing the Federal Reserve only to make loans. Thus, he said that the government could not take A.I.G.’s stock in exchange for making available $85 billion to support the company. In his view, putting the stock in a trust as a means to secure the loans violated the statute because it effectively meant the government received the shares through an acquisition of the company, not as interest on a loan.One can accuse the judge of elevating form over substance in reading the law to permit only transactions that look like typical loans with interest payments. It is arguable that as long as the Federal Reserve is satisfied that its loan is secured by whatever means it chose to effect the transaction, such as a large stake in A.I.G., then that is sufficient to come within the statute.The government did not help its case by calling two of its lawyers from Davis Polk to testify at trial about the legality of the bailout terms. That led Judge Wheeler to find that the government waived the attorney-client privilege for communications with its counsel, and he ordered the law firm to turn over its emails regarding the deal. One Davis Polk email said that the government “is on thin ice and they know it” regarding the authority to take A.I.G.’s stock. That wasn’t going to stop the deal, however, because the lawyer noted, “Who’s going to challenge them on this ground?”If the government own legal counsel thinks a broad reading of Section 13(3) is problematic, then it was easy for Judge Wheeler to reach the same conclusion.Still, Judge Wheeler’s decision is a victory for the government. He found that there were no damages since A.I.G. was effectively bankrupt at the time of the government bailout. That aspect of the decision parallels the approach outlined in a law review article by Prof. David Zaring and one author of this article.Maurice R. Greenberg, the former chief executive of the American International Group who brought the suit on behalf of A.I.G. shareholders, said that his firm would appeal Judge Wheeler’s ruling that the government need not pay any damages. The government is likely to challenge Judge Wheeler’s reading of the statute (although it probably just wants the case to disappear).It is hard to see the appeals court ruling in Mr. Greenberg’s favor on the damages claim. Even if the court did side with Mr. Greenberg, there would have to be a new hearing on damages before Judge Wheeler, dragging the case out even longer.The impact of the decision on the wider world will be minimal. The scope of the authority under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act was eliminated by the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010. There is now a bailout mechanism governed by the Financial Stability Board to deal with any company whose collapse would have serious implications in the financial markets. Whether this authority will ever be put to use is uncertain, although some of us in academic circles have speculated it will never need to be invoked.AdvertisementThe more likely situation in the next crisis is that the government will do all it can to save the financial system. If push comes to shove, it will again maneuver with any legal tool it can to save the economy and institutions, just as it did so in the 2008 crisis. This type of regulatory deal-making will be driven by expediency in emergencies. But the government will also remember that it took nearly seven years to decide whether the A.I.G. bailout was improper.As for the companies, the government will be even less likely to take a gentle approach. Instead, the government will know how to structure any bailout as a loan, or just let the company go into bankruptcy, meaning that the shareholders lose everything.Come to think of it, that has already happened. Do you remember “Government Motors”?Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningSteven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »