AdvertisementSupported byBy Mary Williams WalshThe Treasury Department said on Wednesday that it had named Kenneth R. Feinberg to oversee a new program to allow certain pension plans to cut retirees’ benefits if that is the only way to keep them from running out of money.The program signals an important break with the federal pension law, which until now has allowed companies to cut back active workers’ retirement plans but has shielded retirees from pension cuts. Congress amended the pension law last December as a provision of the omnibus federal budget bill.The change seems likely to widen the gulf between have and have-not retirees. The federal pension law applies only to workers and retirees from the private sector, and the amendments apply only to part of that group. Cities, school districts and other government bodies are also struggling with unsustainable pension promises in many places, but the new program does not appear to offer them any tools.“It has nothing to do with public pension plans,” Mr. Feinberg emphasized in a news conference.Mr. Feinberg said he was accepting the appointment on a pro bono basis.“I expect no compensation for this very, very challenging assignment,” he said.Mr. Feinberg previously served as a special master for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, sorting out disputes over whether bailed-out financial institutions were improperly rewarding their executives with taxpayer dollars. He also oversaw compensation programs for people harmed by the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, the Boston Marathon bombings and the 2001 terrorist attacks.The new pension program is for a class known as multiemployer plans, which are operated by groups of companies together with officials of a union that represents their workers. Such plans are common in sectors like the building trades, where the workers move from job to job, taking their benefits with them. The trucking, retail and mining industries also have many multiemployer plans.The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, or P.B.G.C., estimates that about 10 million Americans are earning or receiving multiemployer pensions. It has been warning that about 10 percent of that group are in severely troubled plans that are at risk of running out of money. Multiemployer pension benefits are often modest, but the plans’ pooled resources can still come up short, especially in sectors like trucking, where one company after another has gone bankrupt. When that happens, the bankrupt employers generally drop out of the pool but leave behind their retirees, who by law must be picked up by the remaining employers.Treasury officials said they had not yet received any requests from pension plans to cut benefits under the new program. But there are indications that the Teamsters’ Central States pension fund is planning to submit an application. With more than 400,000 active and retired workers, it is large enough to wipe out the federal multiemployer pension insurance program if it failed. If that happened, insurance payments from the government could stop for the retirees from other troubled industries who already rely on the government.Anticipating looming disasters like that, proponents of the new program said it would be better to pare back retirees’ benefits than let their pension funds exhaust their cash. That would not only take pressure off the P.B.G.C., but it would also spare some retirees from even bigger benefit cuts. When the P.B.G.C. takes over paying multiemployer plans’ benefits, its insurance is limited to just $12,870 a year, a fraction of what retirees receive if a single-employer pension plan fails. The single-employer insurance is currently limited to $60,136 a year for a worker who is at least 65 when the government steps in.Advocates for pensioners had argued that it would be better to pump new money into the P.B.G.C. so that its multiemployer program could absorb the coming big losses. The federal guarantor is financed with premiums from companies with pension plans, and there have been concerns that raising these too much would discourage companies from offering their workers any pensions at all.Some unions, like the Teamsters, initially said they would support the program last year but then withdrew their support after members criticized the move.The Treasury also issued the regulations on Wednesday that will govern the program. The rules include making the pension trustees who apply for help prove that they have already taken other measures — like obtaining bigger contributions from their companies and workers — and that their plans are still running out of money. The workers and retirees must also be notified of the benefit cuts and have a chance to vote on them.The program also gives the P.B.G.C. authority to “partition” troubled pension plans so that a bankruptcy at one company does not cause a domino effect with the others.Mr. Feinberg said the trustees would have to demonstrate that by cutting retirees’ pensions, along with other changes, they would be able to keep the affected plans solvent for at least 30 years. If he does not think the changes are acceptable, he will send the applications back for more work. If workers and retirees vote against the cuts, however, he will still have the power to carry them out if he can see no other alternative and the plan has been defined as “systemically important,” meaning that taking it over would cost the P.B.G.C. more than $1 billion.“Ken has a proven track record of approaching these matters in an evenhanded and thoughtful way,” Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew said. “He will oversee an open and balanced process for reviewing these applications.”Advertisement