By JACKIE CALMESJUNE 17, 2015
GREENVILLE, S.C. —  South Carolinians know something about civil wars, but the latest one within the Republican Party over the federal Export-Import Bank has a couple of the state’s Republican brothers in Congress battling each other, reflecting the national party’s deepening divide over the role of government in the economy.Senator Lindsey Graham, a recent entrant into the race for the Republican presidential nomination, has taken a lead in Congress to reauthorize the 81-year-old bank, created during the Depression as a lender of last resort for American exporters and their foreign customers, and now copied in most nations competing with the United States.The biggest beneficiaries are two of his state’s biggest employers, Boeing and General Electric. So with the bank’s charter expiring on June 30, absent congressional action, the issue came up quickly when Mr. Graham spoke last week to a friendly coalition of 13 local chambers of commerce. Just as quickly, he identified their enemy.“Conservatives have declared war on the Ex-Im Bank: It’s been ideologically ‘unpure,’ ” said Mr. Graham, himself a conservative by any measure other than the Tea Party’s. “But until you get the Chinese, the Germans and the French out of the ex-im business, I’m not going to unilaterally disarm,” he added.Advertisement“It is a bank that makes money,” he said, “and allows us to sell products made in South Carolina to the developing world in a competitive fashion.”AdvertisementAfter the moderator noted that Mr. Graham was at odds with “people in your own party,” Mr. Graham shot back, to loud applause, “And I’m going to win!”Among those Republicans standing against him, and for free-market principles, is Mr. Graham’s South Carolina colleague Representative Mick Mulvaney. Mr. Mulvaney, the vice chairman of the House subcommittee responsible for the bank, recently drew notice for piquantly dismissing the idea that House Republicans would be pressured into following suit if the Senate approved a bill reauthorizing the bank.“Just because the Senate votes” for an unsavory piece of legislation, Mr. Mulvaney told reporters, “doesn’t mean we have to vote for it.”Never has the Ex-Im Bank, as it is commonly known, seen such opposition, certainly not from the party of business — further evidence of Republicans’ populist shift to the right. For decades until this one, Congress’s numerous votes to reauthorize the bank were unanimous or lopsidedly bipartisan.On Friday, House Democrats prevented passage of a free-trade bill backed strongly by President Obama that they said would destroy American jobs. But most Democrats still back the Ex-Im Bank as an institution that supports jobs, while Republicans have splintered with the influx of antigovernment conservatives like Mr. Mulvaney, elected in the Tea Party wave of 2010 and since.This summer’s showdown follows skirmishes within the party in 2012 and 2014, and Tea Party lawmakers and conservative groups backed by the billionaires Charles G. and David H. Koch have stepped up their campaign against the bank as the epitome of big-government “corporate welfare” and “crony capitalism.”People on both sides of the issue say Congress eventually will reauthorize the bank — a test vote in the Senate last week showed wide support — but not before June 30. After that date, the bank would be unable to provide new loans, insurance or guarantees.AdvertisementSupporters warn that even a temporary interruption would cost sales, prompt foreign rivals to raise doubts about the bank’s future and, at home, promote the sort of economic uncertainty caused in recent years by Congress’s brinkmanship over budgetary issues. Last week, Standard & Poor’s Rating Service cited the standoff as a worrisome development in its otherwise upbeat analysis of fiscal policy.The legislative muddle is extraordinary, especially given the bipartisan support that the bank still enjoys. Confronted by conservatives’ organized opposition, nearly all Republican leaders of Congress and its relevant committees are opposed to reauthorizing the bank, including former supporters like Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Senate majority leader, and Richard C. Shelby of Alabama, chairman of the Senate banking committee, who faces re-election next year and does not want to provoke Tea Party hostility.The House’s banking committee chairman, Representative Jeb Hensarling of Texas, is defying Speaker John A. Boehner’s demand to produce a bill to either reform the bank or wind it down, knowing that Congress’s simple inaction would shutter the bank, as he wants. He recently called the debate a defining one for Republicans: “Do we stand for free enterprise interests and its hope, its fairness and its opportunity? Or do we stand for business interests? Because those two are not identical.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Boehner, in response, has said the House will take up whatever the Senate might pass. Senate approval of a pro-bank measure was all but clinched in late May, when Mr. McConnell promised Mr. Graham and other bank supporters that if they voted that day for a free-trade bill — a McConnell priority and similar to the one later derailed by the House — they could offer a pro-bank amendment to other legislation certain to reach Mr. Obama. A highway finance measure next month is their most likely vehicle.Opponents are faring better with the many Republican presidential contenders coveting conservatives’ votes and the Kochs’ money. Former Gov. Rick Perry of Texas recently withdrew his support, leaving Mr. Graham and former Senator Rick Santorum as the bank’s only backers in the 2016 field. The Democratic front-runner Hillary Rodham Clinton, on the other hand, said in 2010, “I’d like to put the Ex-Im Bank on steroids.”Mr. Graham, in remarks here, suggested that his rivals’ opposition could hurt them in South Carolina, which holds an early presidential contest following Iowa’s and New Hampshire’s.“Boeing and G.E. and all their suppliers have changed the economy of South Carolina,” Mr. Graham said. While state leaders for years fought policies promoting trade, led by a protectionist textile industry, now most embrace globalization — and the Ex-Im Bank — including the technologically transformed, export-dependent textile industry.Greenville is home to a G.E. facility that uses Ex-Im Bank financing to export gas turbines made by several thousand workers. Boeing, in North Charleston, employs about 8,000 people to build its 787 plane; seven out of 10 airplanes are sold with bank help, Mr. Graham said. Local suppliers to Boeing and G.E. also support the bank, along with other small businesses that benefit from the bank’s programs.Jay White is president of Morrison Textile Machinery Company in Fort Lawn, which employs 90 people and, with Ex-Im assistance, exports 90 percent of its products to places including Turkey, Bangladesh, India and Ethiopia. A lifelong Republican, he called opposition to the bank “mind-bending.”Advertisement“The Tea Party has made Ex-Im sort of a poster child for excessive government. It’s not true,” Mr. White said. Private banks “do not want to take this foreign risk on. They really can’t. Governments all over the world do a certain amount of country risk coverage, and make money at it.”The American bank has returned $6.9 billion to taxpayers over the last 20 years from fees, premiums and interest.Mr. White visited his congressman, Mr. Mulvaney, in March. According to both, Mr. Mulvaney said opponents of the bank would like to help small businesses, which are 90 percent of the bank’s clients, but not giants like Boeing that should be able to get private financing. Mr. White called Mr. Mulvaney’s views unrealistic.“I didn’t get into the broader discussion of what a federal government ought to be doing,” Mr. White said. “That’s what this thing always gets down to is a couple of sound bites instead of the reality of what has to be done in the business world day after day.”But Mr. Mulvaney, in an interview at his Capitol office, said his position was “not a knee-jerk, Tea Party, right-wing, reactionary vote. I’m coming at this as somebody who has studied the issue very, very closely for two and a half years.” His biggest concern, he said, was for taxpayers’ liability, and avoiding bailouts like those after the 2008 financial collapse.He and two other South Carolina conservatives, Representatives Trey Gowdy and Jeff Duncan, also met recently with Dirk R. Pieper, president of Greenville-based Sage Automotive Interiors, which exports fabric for auto seats made by 900 employees at four plants in South Carolina.Mr. Pieper, who is also vice chairman of the South Carolina Manufacturers Alliance, extolled the bank’s help for small exporters. But Mr. Mulvaney said he had countered that such federal aid was unfair to a rival American business that makes the same products but sells only in the United States.Mr. Pieper, a Republican, said the meeting was cordial. But, he added, “From our perspective as businesspeople, it’s a shame when politics gets in the way of business.”A version of this article appears in print on June 18, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Im Bank Pits Right vs. Far Right .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.