AdvertisementSupported byBy Jackie CalmesATLANTA — Trade ministers for 12 Pacific Rim nations, including the United States and Japan, on Friday neared agreement on an array of differences covering automotive, pharmaceutical and dairy exports, and decided to extend the negotiations into Saturday in hope of concluding the biggest regional pact in history.The willingness to continue talks, which began in a hotel here on Wednesday, fueled optimism among the participating nations — and apprehension among critics hovering in its halls and monitoring the negotiations from afar — that the elusive Trans-Pacific Partnership was within reach after years of discussion.Negotiators for the United States and Japan neared a compromise over the length of a phase-out of tariffs on cars and trucks made in Japan and sold in this country. Yet sticking points persisted, including over compromise language from the American side on protections for drug makers, an issue that stymied previous talks in July in Hawaii. It remained unclear whether President Obama would be able to claim an achievement central to his efforts to reorient the United States toward its fast-growing Pacific neighbors (rather than Europe and the Middle East), or whether the negotiators would once again pocket the progress made here and eventually stagger through another round of talks as Mr. Obama’s presidency wound down.If a deal is reached, Congress would not render its verdict for months, well into a presidential election year in which anti-trade rhetoric is loud among Republicans and Democrats.From Washington, Mr. Obama continued to lend his influence to his trade representative here, Michael B. Froman. On Thursday, the president called Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of Australia, who took power less than three weeks ago in a party shake-up, to confirm their mutual interest in signing an agreement.But differences between their two nations — over protections for American drug makers and Australia’s desire to sell more sugar to the United States — are among the remaining obstacles. These differences led some observers to suspect an emerging trade-off on drugs and sugar. On Friday, seven Democrats on the Senate Agriculture Committee sent Mr. Froman a letter warning against concessions that could harm domestic sugar and dairy industries.The talks also involve Canada, Mexico, Vietnam, Malaysia, Singapore, Brunei, New Zealand, Chile and Peru. Together, the 12 nations account for about two-fifths of global economic output.By Friday, it seemed clear than any agreement would include provisions for autos that would phase out tariffs between the participating countries, require autos to have a certain share of parts made in treaty nations, lift nontariff barriers that effectively keep American autos out of Japan and create a process for settling disputes between governments over suspected violations of the agreement.The large auto section in the Trans-Pacific Partnership presented substantive complications for the Obama administration, as well as domestic carmakers and unions, when Japan entered the trade talks in 2013, several years into the negotiations. Industry and union officials have been on site here, along with one member of Congress — Representative Sander Levin of Michigan, the lead Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee, which has jurisdiction over trade.A major issue for these industry and union officials has been how soon tariffs would be phased out on Japanese auto imports. The trade agreement will call for phase-out periods longer than those the Obama administration negotiated several years ago with South Korea, which is not a party to these talks. That separate bilateral pact ended tariffs in the fifth year for autos from South Korea, and phased out tariffs for its light trucks over a longer period.While Japan has no tariffs on American-made autos, the emerging agreement would ease its other barriers to exports from the United States, like Japanese emission regulations and parts mandates that are difficult and costly for American carmakers to meet.Also under the agreement taking shape, the process for settling auto-related disputes would include a “snapback” provision that the United States sought, which would allow it to revive tariffs if Japan violated the trade terms.On another knotty issue — which pitted Japan against Mexico and Canada, even more than against the United States — the four countries were said to be nearing agreement on the so-called rules of origin to require that autos include a certain percentage of parts made by the countries in the Trans-Pacific Partnership to qualify for duty-free treatment.The percentage would be higher than Japan wanted, but lower than the target pressed by Canada and Mexico. However, the trade agreement would also redefine what qualifies as locally made parts, in a way that Japan favors. By Friday, negotiators were down to haggling over rules of origin for axles, suspensions, belts and other parts.Yet as important as any auto trade provisions are to American automakers, unions and their Democratic supporters, they were more concerned by a separate question over how the 12 nations would address currency manipulation that could give one country’s exports a price advantage over other nations. Japan has, in the past, artificially deflated the value of its currency to make its exports cheaper and United States imports more expensive. Mr. Levin said the trade pact would allude to currency manipulation, but language addressing it would be in a side agreement to the Trans-Pacific Partnership.“We’ve learned in the last 15 years that currency is a critical part of trade,” Mr. Levin said, calling the proposed side agreement negotiated between the Treasury Department and Japan “a fig leaf.”Mr. Levin said, however, that the issue was not the sole determinant of his support for a trade agreement. “It’s one factor,” he said.Mr. Froman was particularly embroiled on Friday in trying to settle the pharmaceutical drug issues. The most vexing question was how long drug companies can have exclusive rights to data related to their development of so-called biologic drugs (products made from living organisms and considered promising for cancer treatments) before they must share the information with generic manufacturers.The United States, which had insisted on 12 years to ensure drug manufacturers have incentives to innovate, recently proposed an eight-year provision as a compromise. It would give companies five years of exclusive rights followed by a three-year period of limited market sharing. But countries like Australia and Peru balked, and outside groups in the hotel corridors were quick to object again on Friday.Peter Maybarduk, director of a program of the social advocacy group Public Citizen that seeks to expand global access to medicines, called the language put forth by the United States “an illusion, not an improvement. It is a repackaging of the same harmful idea already rejected by many countries.”Small groups of protesters continued on Friday to try to interrupt the closed-door meetings throughout the hotel, shouting “No T.P.P.! No Secrecy!” At least two women were handcuffed and dragged away by security officials.Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.Advertisement