AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter EavisIt is the current doomsday scenario for Europe.Greece’s bailout talks break down for good, and the country defaults. The European authorities sever life support to Greece’s banking sector, forcing the country to take drastic steps to stem an exodus of capital. Greece decides to drop the euro as its currency.Greece’s unwinding sends shock waves through the global markets. Investors and policy makers have to quickly assess whether the storm is going to pass or gather strength.Although Europe is better positioned to deal with a crisis than it was a few years ago, when Greece last teetered, there is simply no precedent for a country’s leaving the eurozone. And the big test may be only weeks away.Relations between Greece and its lenders have descended into a bitter standoff. The impasse is increasing the chances that Greece and its creditors will fail to forge a deal by the end of the month, when a pile of debt comes due and its current bailout expires.Many in Europe still believe that some sort of agreement will be reached at the last minute, unlocking fresh aid for the debt-burdened country and preventing a painful default.But the war of words — and the apparent distance between both sides’ positions — is reducing hopes for a breakthrough. Instead, global financial firms and policy makers are asking what else might break down if Greece were to pull out of the eurozone. On Wednesday, the Greek central bank said “a manageable debt crisis” would “snowball into an uncontrollable crisis, with great risks for the banking system and financial stability” of the country.Many analysts agree that a Greek shock, for a few days, would stoke the sort of confusion and fear that prompts investors to pare back holdings of riskier stocks and bonds and instead pile into assets they see as havens. “U.S. Treasuries will explode in price as people flee to safety there,” said John M. De Clue, a chief investment officer at U.S. Bank. “It will be the largest risk-off trade that we’ve seen in some time.”But there is less agreement over how bad things might then get.Optimistic analysts contend that markets would soon steady themselves after the initial shock of Greece’s crashing out of the euro. Much has changed, they say, since 2011 and 2012, when Greece’s problems spilled over into other countries.Back then, the fears surrounding Greece’s debt load caused the government bonds of countries like Italy and Spain to plunge in value and helped push the Dow Jones industrial average down more than 2,000 points in a few months. Europe’s problems even contributed to the crash of MF Global, a United States financial firm.“It is more manageable now,” said Frank Oland Hansen, chief strategist at Danske Bank’s private bank. “I am not so concerned that we will have major contagion through the bond market.”There are grounds for such confidence.Private investors and banks no longer have large holdings of Greek government debt, meaning their losses would be minimal if the country were to default. Instead, Greece’s debt is now mostly owed to other governments and official entities.Analysts also point out that in comparison with 2011, Europe’s banks are on steadier ground, after the regulatory stress tests of last year and efforts to bolster their capital. In their stronger state, the banks are more likely to keep lending through the sort of stress that might follow an event like a Greek default.Perhaps the biggest difference between the last Greek crisis and now is the stance of the European Central Bank. It has a huge bond-buying program in place that appears to be stimulating growth across the Continent. Mario Draghi, the central bank’s president, suggested on Monday that it was ready to step in if declines in bond prices were undermining its stimulus efforts.“We are closely monitoring conditions to detect signs of an unwarranted tightening of our stance, to which we would need to react,” he said.Still, vulnerabilities lurk in the system.Years of ultralow interest rates have set off a stampede of buying that has helped push stocks and bonds higher in recent years. At these levels, the markets are more susceptible to an unpredictable event like Greece’s exiting the eurozone.The blistering rallies have not taken place just in the government bond markets of countries like Spain, Portugal and Italy. They have also occurred in speculative assets like United States junk bonds, and there has even been a resurgence in Russia’s stock market, which has risen 24 percent this year, in dollar terms.“At certain moments in financial markets, when things have been good, smaller catalysts can matter,” said Steven Wieting, global chief investment strategist at Citigroup.Some European bonds have showed signs of stress in recent days. The yield on Italy’s 10-year bonds, which moves in an opposite direction to its price, is now 2.33 percent, considerably higher than 1.79 percent a month ago. But its latest yield is still far below the levels it soared to during the last period of major stress in Europe.Some analysts are looking beyond the immediate financial repercussions of Greece’s leaving the eurozone. Their bigger concern is that an exit could cause a slower-burning type of contagion. If Greece were to fall out of the eurozone, it would establish a dangerous precedent — and show that the euro is only for certain countries.Ashwin Bulchandani, chief risk officer of the investment firm MatlinPatterson, puts it like this: “You had this thing that was a rock-solid monetary union, but now you’ve got a cool currency club.” He said that he would not be surprised if a Greek departure prompted investors to question whether countries other than Greece had the strength to stay the course in the currency zone.If such pressure caused lasting declines in the markets of certain countries, the European Central Bank would no doubt try to intervene in defense. But even then, the stress could damp the tentative economic recoveries taking place in Europe’s peripheral nations. And it is quite possible that Europe’s most indebted countries, Portugal and Italy included, could suffer from anemic growth for years to come.Anytime one of those nations gets into fiscal trouble, memories of Greece’s dire problems will resurface and investors will speculate about its ability to stay in the eurozone. “Obviously, Portugal is a sitting target if there is a Grexit,” said Edward Hugh, an economist and the author of “Is the Euro Crisis Really Over?” using a term that describes a Greek exit. “It may not happen in one or two years, but in five years, they could force Portugal out.” Advertisement