AdvertisementSupported byBy John Koblin and Emily SteelAfter four months of twisting in the wind, Brian Williams can finally get back to work at NBC, but not without a humbling blow. Mr. Williams’s return includes a demotion, a lower salary and an apology tour that began on Thursday with NBC News staff members in New York and Washington, and will continue on national television with an interview on the “Today” show on Friday.The broadcaster announced on Thursday that Mr. Williams, 56, would not return as the anchor of “NBC Nightly News,” but as an anchor of breaking news and special reports at the cable network MSNBC. He starts in mid-August. Lester Holt, 56, an NBC veteran who has been filling in for Mr. Williams, will become the permanent anchor of “Nightly News.” He is the first African-American to serve as the solo anchor of a weekday evening newscast.Mr. Williams will earn less money in his new role than at his previous job at “Nightly News,” according to two NBC executives with knowledge of the agreement, who spoke on condition of anonymity. One person characterized his pay as “substantially” less, but would not be more specific. Under a contract Mr. Williams signed in December, he was reported to be making at least $10 million a year over five years. His return also comes with restrictions. Mr. Williams will not be allowed to appear on the “Nightly News,” according to another executive briefed on the plans, even though he will otherwise be allowed to fill in on breaking news stories on NBC when Mr. Holt is unavailable. When Mr. Williams’s exaggerated story about a helicopter trip was revealed in February, NBC followed with an internal investigation into other instances of his reporting. While it did not make its investigation public, the network said in a news release that Mr. Williams had “made a number of inaccurate statements” about his experiences in the field.Mr. Williams was suspended for six months in February after acknowledging that he exaggerated an account of a helicopter attack in Iraq. One NBC executive characterized the helicopter incident as the “one significant mistake” that occurred during his news broadcast. Another incident in question was a statement Mr. Williams made in 2011 on “Nightly News” about flying into Baghdad with U.S. Navy Seal Team 6 at the start of the war, this person said, but added that the investigation into this matter was inconclusive.Otherwise, Mr. William’s embellishments happened “for the most part” on late-night programs and in other public appearances, the network said, suggesting that since the inaccuracies mostly did not appear on NBC, there was leeway for Mr. Williams to return. NBCUniversal’s chief executive, Stephen B. Burke, said the decision was “extensively analyzed and deliberated on by NBC.”Mr. Williams has kept a very low profile for the last four months and hasn’t strayed far from his Manhattan and Connecticut homes, spending a significant amount of time in the gym, according to two people with knowledge of his routine. He reported to NBC headquarters on Thursday to attend meetings and apologize to the “Nightly News” staff, one NBC executive said.In a statement included in the news release, Mr. Williams expressed his regret publicly. “I’m sorry. I said things that weren’t true,” he said. “I let down my NBC colleagues and our viewers, and I’m determined to earn back their trust. I will greatly miss working with the team on ‘Nightly News,’ but I know the broadcast will be in excellent hands with Lester Holt as anchor. I will support him 100 percent as he has always supported me. I am grateful for the chance to return to covering the news. My new role will allow me to focus on important issues and events in our country and around the world, and I look forward to it.”He will continue his public rehabilitation on Friday when he appears in an interview taped over the last two days with his colleague Matt Lauer, host of the “Today” show. The interview will be broadcast on “Today” Friday morning and on the “Nightly News” Friday evening. It is not clear whether the programs will broadcast distinct parts of the interviews or if they will overlap, according to one NBC News executive.Mr. Williams’s return to the news division was once seen as untenable, given his transgressions and the fact that some of his own colleagues had pointed investigators toward reporting of his that they viewed as suspicious. Some employees said that the network’s Washington bureau was particularly vocal about their opposition to his return, according to a staff member. Mr. Williams, along with the NBC News chairman, Andrew Lack, and its president, Deborah Turness, went to Washington late Thursday afternoon to personally apologize to the news staff there. In a way, Mr. Lack’s adventure as chairman is just beginning. Determining the fate of Mr. Williams is just one of many problems facing the news division. “Solving the Brian Williams ‘Nightly News’ issue was absolutely necessary, but far from sufficient,” said Andrew Heyward, the former president of CBS News and an adviser to media companies. “There’s more money at stake in the morning shows. And there’s a big rebuilding job to do with MSNBC.”“Ironically, the one that’s getting the most publicity, the Brian Williams thing, was the easiest one to address,” Mr. Heyward added. “You make a decision and you move on; you’ve done it.”Mr. Williams will be returning to a much smaller stage. He was the No. 1 nightly news anchor and attracted close to 10 million viewers a night. MSNBC has a fraction of that audience and ratings have declined significantly. Installing someone with star power at MSNBC also might fit well with Mr. Lack’s determination to revitalize the sagging cable network. In the season to date, MSNBC has attracted an average of about 525,000 prime-time viewers, down about 18 percent from 639,000 during the same period last year, according to Nielsen. Among viewers 18 to 49 years old, MSNBC has attracted about 105,000, down about 30 percent from the same year-earlier period.Mr. Williams will soon be a significant part of the beleaguered cable network, which will retool with more hard news in the daytime hours, a departure from the opinion-based programming the network has relied on for years. It is not yet clear whether Mr. Williams will report only on breaking news stories or will be given a dedicated time slot during MSNBC’s daytime hours.Whether MSNBC can make a transition from a left-leaning cable network to a newsier presentation during the daytime will be a challenge, which will most likely require a significant investment.Staff members at MSNBC had some sense that a big move for the network was imminent, including a shift to hard news, but they did not know that Mr. Williams would be assigned there, current and former employees said. There is also some sensitivity to having MSNBC viewed as a kind of dumping ground, these employees said, with the addition of a damaged news anchor re-emerging on their network on the heels of a monthslong scandal. They spoke anonymously to discuss private matters. Despite the diminished role and the pay cut, his supporters point out, Mr. Williams did manage to get a second chance at the network that he has long called home, and where he became a celebrity. His return in a breaking news role at MSNBC is also seen as a trial period before he could potentially take on an expanded role at the cable network, a person with knowledge of the situation said.“Brian now has the chance to earn back everyone’s trust,” Mr. Lack said in a statement. “His excellent work over 22 years at NBC News has earned him that opportunity.”Ravi Somaiya contributed reporting.Advertisement