By JONATHAN MAHLERJUNE 18, 2015
In the end, NBC decided that it couldn’t bring him back or let him go.So it did neither — or maybe both — keeping Brian Williams inside the organization, but moving him to a new role that will primarily involve reporting on breaking news at MSNBC, the functional equivalent of sending him down to the minors.For those looking for a clear statement on the network’s attitude toward the scandal that knocked Mr. Williams out of the anchor chair, this was anything but. It represented a practical solution more than a principled one, a carefully considered compromise, hashed out over weeks of conversations inside NBCUniversal and drawn-out negotiations with Mr. Williams’s lawyer.And it leaves some basic questions unanswered. Do the tall tales that Mr. Williams told about his time in a war zone — and, apparently, about a number of other stories he covered — make him fundamentally untrustworthy, and thus unfit to report the news? If they don’t, why not put him back in the job that he did so well and so successfully? If they do, why is it O.K. for him to land at MSNBC? Are its standards of truth somehow lower?NBC’s handling of Mr. Williams suggests that the network is still clinging to an increasingly anachronistic vision of the anchor’s chair as a sacred throne, and the anchor as the voice of moral authority. It’s a response that seems in many ways tone-deaf to the striking changes in the way we consume information — changes that are reshaping the relationship between newscasters and consumers. The news anchor is no longer the embodiment of reason and truth; his voice is now just one of many. And network TV is just another platform.AdvertisementFrom the vantage point of NBC’s management, at least, the logic of the decision is difficult to refute. The network didn’t have to fire an Emmy Award-winning journalist and television star who was America’s No. 1 nightly news anchor as recently as five months ago, with some 10 million viewers a night.Advertisement“In terms of mop-up duty, I think NBC has done a very deft job,” said Jonathan Klein, a former president of CNN/U.S. “Get him back in front of an audience and let’s see how the audience reacts.”A compilation of Brian Williams’s television appearances shows how his accounts of a 2003 episode on military helicopters in Iraq gradually became more perilous.Mr. Williams’s reputation may have been badly damaged by his misleading statements about having been aboard a helicopter that came under enemy fire in Iraq in 2003. But his popularity was real, hard-earned, over years of anchoring “NBC Nightly News,” not to mention numerous entertainment appearances, like hosting “Saturday Night Live” or slow-jamming the news with Jimmy Fallon.There is no reason for NBC to think that he won’t eventually reclaim it, once his penance is complete. People have recovered from far worse. NBC fired the sportscaster Marv Albert after he pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor assault and battery charge in a sex case in 1997 — and brought him back less than two years later.It also would have been expensive for NBC to cut Mr. Williams loose altogether. Shortly before the news of his embellishments broke in February, the network had awarded him a five-year contract reportedly worth $10 million a year.Now he will add some star power to the struggling MSNBC, along with the ratings-driving spectacle of a fallen hero returning to the air. In the process, he will try to regain the public’s trust, or at least rehabilitate his image, one at-bat at a time. (Of course, Mr. Williams’s most eagerly anticipated appearance will be a one-off in the big leagues: He will “break his silence” Friday morning in a pre-taped interview with Matt Lauer on the “Today” show. Yes, NBC has landed the exclusive on its own scandal.)It’s not going to be easy for Mr. Williams, who as a volunteer fireman and aspiring TV journalist in New Jersey could only have dreamed that he would one day succeed Tom Brokaw at “NBC Nightly News.” Remaining at NBCUniversal may constitute a victory for him, but in this diminished capacity, it also represents a humiliating defeat, particularly as the presidential campaign heats up.Mark Feldstein, a professor of broadcast journalism at the University of Maryland, said he was shocked by the decision. “If they had hired him at NBC to host a talk show, I could maybe understand that. But to be the face of breaking news? I didn’t think he could recover his credibility and I’m still not convinced that he can.”Another baseball metaphor may be useful here. The closest analogy might be to a ballplayer returning to the field after a suspension. Alex Rodriguez comes immediately to mind. “It’s going to be a combination of his performance and what the fans have to say,” Andrew Heyward, the former president of CBS News, said of Mr. Williams.AdvertisementSince Mr. Williams’s implosion, two other scandals have broken at the anchor’s table. Both played out very differently.Last month, Politico reported that George Stephanopoulos, a top strategist in Bill Clinton’s first presidential campaign and administration and now the chief anchor of ABC News, failed to let his viewers or his employers know that he had donated $75,000 to the Bill, Hillary and Chelsea Clinton Foundation over the last three years.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Stephanopoulos promptly apologized for the mistake on “Good Morning America,” and in a far more direct manner than Mr. Williams, who claimed, unconvincingly, to have conflated events in his memory. Despite criticism from some Republicans that Mr. Stephanopoulos could no longer report objectively on the presidential race, ABC stood by him. Mr. Stephanopoulos said he would not moderate the next presidential debate, but he remains the network’s chief anchor, and he will continue to cover the 2016 election.It seems fair to wonder whether his blunder was really less material than Mr. Williams’s. If Mr. Williams has lost the moral high ground to call out a politician on a lie, it could be argued that Mr. Stephanopoulos has similarly compromised his own credibility as an unbiased interviewer.Before Mr. Stephanopoulos, there was Bill O’Reilly. In the weeks after the Williams scandal, the magazine Mother Jones reported that Fox News’s most popular anchor had engaged in some self-aggrandizing rhetoric of his own, in his case about his coverage of the Falklands war. There was no apology from Mr. O’Reilly. He called one of the authors of the article “an irresponsible guttersnipe” and even used his nightly show to fight back against his accusers. He had the full support of his bosses at Fox News, including the network’s chief executive, Roger Ailes. The handling of that controversy said a lot about how the network saw itself and Mr. O’Reilly: as ideological warriors and entertainers, above all.It was a far cry from the way NBC News viewed Mr. Williams. But what NBC failed to grasp is that today the “moral authority” of the anchor has no more practical value, and quite possibly less, than his or her “relatability.” Mr. Williams understood this, which is partly why he spent so much time working on his persona outside the anchor’s chair. Now he won’t be reading the news or riffing off it. He’ll be reporting it.A version of this news analysis appears in print on June 19, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: On Williams, NBC Clings to the Past.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.