AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben Protess and Benjamin WeiserIf Preet Bharara’s office were adapted for a Hollywood script, Richard B. Zabel’s character would probably be akin to Dr. John Watson or perhaps Mr. Spock, a trusted lieutenant to a prominent leading man.But now, Mr. Zabel’s prosecutorial story line is fading to black.Mr. Zabel, the deputy United States attorney in Manhattan under Mr. Bharara, is stepping down to become general counsel at Elliott Management, one of Wall Street’s biggest hedge funds. The departure, announced by Mr. Bharara in an internal email on Thursday, caps a tenure of nearly six years in which Mr. Zabel helped oversee a sweeping crackdown on political corruption and the prosecution of international terrorists and insider trading in the hedge fund industry.It might seem strange for a hedge fund prosecutor to join a hedge fund, but in some ways, Mr. Zabel’s move through the revolving door signals a return to his hedge fund roots. As a private sector lawyer, Mr. Zabel built a practice on counseling the hedge fund industry.His move also reflects a broader shift on Wall Street, where hedge funds and private equity firms, rather than law firms, are increasingly recruiting federal prosecutors, enticing them with the promise of Wall Street riches. Steven A. Cohen’s Point72 Asset Management — the successor to his SAC Capital Advisors, which pleaded guilty to insider trading charges in an investigation overseen by Mr. Zabel — recently hired a former United States attorney for Connecticut.The hiring spree is premised on the hope that the former prosecutors, while lending the hedge funds a measure of credibility, will help them better handle a heightened regulatory landscape as federal authorities scrutinize everything from insider trading to activist investing.Elliott, which was not linked to Mr. Bharara’s insider trading investigation but faced an inquiry in France, is known for its activist stances. And even within the world of sharp-tongued investors, Elliott stands out for its audacity, firing shots at huge companies like Hess and suing Argentina, where images of vultures are plastered on city walls alongside references to the firm.Many of the efforts have paid off. Since Elliott was founded in 1977, the firm has made a return of 13.7 percent a year for investors, and the firm’s flagship fund gained 8.2 percent last year, compared with an average return of 3 percent across the hedge fund industry. The firm, founded by the billionaire investor Paul Singer, manages some $26 billion.“Elliott has a long record of success and relies on the rule of law as a pillar of its investment philosophy,” Mr. Zabel, who will leave his prosecutorial job at the end of June, said in an interview. He will join Elliott in September and serve on the firm’s management committee, according to an internal firm announcement. Mr. Zabel’s move suggests that Mr. Bharara, in the sixth year of his tenure, will stay put for now. In the past, other deputies have stayed on and served as United States attorney in Manhattan after their bosses left that post.But at the same time, Mr. Zabel’s departure comes at a moment of transition for the United States attorney’s office, which has lost a number of prosecutors to private firms as the economy gathers steam. The office, which has experienced particularly high turnover in its Wall Street task force, is also grappling with losing a critical appeal of an insider trading prosecution and with recent criticism from a handful of judges.Mr. Zabel is the highest-ranking member of Mr. Bharara’s inner circle to leave recently. Mr. Bharara is the face of the office, but Mr. Zabel provides counsel on everything from the legal — he was the one to suggest revoking the pensions of politicians convicted of corruption, colleagues say — to the comical: When BNP Paribas pleaded guilty, it was Mr. Zabel who wrote Mr. Bharara’s memorable quip that the French bank committed a “tour de fraud.”“Rich has been my consigliere and my closest friend,” Mr. Bharara said in the internal email.The departure of Mr. Zabel will prompt a modest reshuffling at Mr. Bharara’s office. Joon H. Kim, the criminal division chief, will succeed Mr. Zabel. Daniel L. Stein, Mr. Bharara’s chief counsel, will take over the criminal division and hand the counsel position to Joan Loughnane, a senior prosecutor in the office.Mr. Zabel initially joined the office in 1991, serving as a prosecutor for eight years, including as chief of the narcotics unit. He then joined Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld before returning to the prosecutor’s office in 2009 as head of the criminal division under Mr. Bharara, becoming his deputy in 2011.During his time in private practice, Mr. Zabel was co-author of two prominent reports issued by Human Rights First that made a case for the use of the federal courts to prosecute terrorism cases. In the office, Mr. Zabel has overseen a string of successful terrorism cases, including the prosecution of the only former Guantánamo detainee to be tried in the civilian system.Mr. Zabel, a graduate of Harvard Law School, comes from a family steeped in the law. His mother, Eleanor B. Alter, is a well-known matrimonial lawyer who represented Mia Farrow in her custody fight with Woody Allen. His father, William D. Zabel, is a trust and estates lawyer who co-founded Schulte, Roth & Zabel. His grandfather was Charles D. Breitel, chief judge of the New York Court of Appeals.Mr. Zabel, whose squash team at Princeton won two national championships, is also an avid sports fan. He and his father share unlikely allegiances: They root for the long-losing Chicago Cubs in baseball and the championship Blackhawks in hockey.“I got him interested in four things,” his father said. “Princeton, Harvard Law School, the Cubs and the Hawks.”Matthew Goldstein and Alexandra Stevenson contributed reporting.Advertisement