AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiHonda Motor confirmed on Friday that an airbag rupture killed the driver of a rented 2001 Civic in September 2014, making it the eighth death linked to faulty airbags made by the Japanese supplier Takata. Jewel Brangman, 26, died after the driver-side airbag inflater in her rental car ruptured in a crash on Sept. 7 in Los Angeles, Honda said in a statement. Takata has recalled about 34 million airbags because of a defect that could cause their inflaters to explode, sending metal fragments into the cabin. Over 100 injuries have been linked to the defect, which affects 10 automakers in the United States. Both Takata and Honda issued statements expressing condolences to Ms. Brangman’s family. Ms. Brangman’s death was the first linked to Takata’s airbags involving a rental car, and it underscored the holes in safety regulations for used or rental cars. Though the car had been under recall since 2009, its owners never got it fixed, Honda said. According to a lawsuit filed in April by the victim's family, the car was rented to Ms. Brangman by Sunset Car Rental of San Diego.Companies are not required to repair used or rental cars that are under recall before they sell or rent them. They are also not required to disclose to customers that a vehicle has been recalled.Lawmakers in Congress have introduced legislation that would require dealers and rental companies to fix recalled cars before they are put into public use. But those measures, opposed by many auto dealers, have stalled. Most major rental companies say that they voluntarily fix recalled vehicles.Honda has acknowledged that it was first alerted to the airbag defect in 2004, but started recalling a small number of cars only in 2008. Most of the recalls have come in the last month.The 2001 Civic, was part of a driver-side airbag recall July 2009. But despite four recall notifications mailed to registered owners of the Civic, starting in August of that year, the vehicle was never serviced, Honda said. The car was again recalled in April 2013 for its passenger-side airbag, also made by Takata. But the owner, the San Diego rental car company, never had the repairs made, according to Honda.Advertisement