AdvertisementSupported byBy Patricia Cohen and Nelson D. SchwartzIt’s the economists’ version of social networking.For months now, many in the ever-growing legion of Republican presidential hopefuls and their staffs have been quizzing a sprawling web of economists — who have, in turn, been auditioning the candidates.The contenders have shopped for wave-your-magic-wand economic ideas and alternatives to the Affordable Care Act. They have asked the experts, arrayed along the conservative spectrum, for information on their colleagues and even guidance about which Democrats they can consult.This do-si-do is particularly intense along a circuit that runs primarily through Washington, crowded with right-leaning research and advocacy organizations like the American Enterprise Institute and the Heritage Foundation. But it extends up through Ivy League bastions like Harvard and Columbia and across to Northern California at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University. And like teenagers at a school dance, most contenders have yet to pair off with anyone in particular.“A lot of the candidates are still trying to figure out who they’re comfortable with and who they want in their circle,” said Michael R. Strain, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, who has met with a handful over the past year. “We’re still in the phase of broad discussions where I think the candidates are trying to talk to a whole lot of people with a wide range of views.”But some of the candidates “are much more insistent on monogamy,” said Lanhee Chen, a research fellow at the Hoover Institution and former policy director for Mitt Romney’s 2012 presidential campaign. “They pretty much require it.”One of those is Jeb Bush, who officially entered the race this week. His family ties provide him with a much deeper bench of experienced economic hands than any of his competitors. According to several people consulted by the campaign, he has already locked in Glenn Hubbard and Kevin Warsh, two prominent conservatives whose résumés include close ties to Wall Street, previous presidential campaigns and stints in George W. Bush’s White House.“There is no one more in the middle of a network of great advisers than Hubbard,” said Kevin A. Hassett, director of economic policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute and a veteran of several campaigns. “Whatever they want to talk about, Glenn can get the best people, even Democrats.”More important than having any single economist on staff is someone who knows precisely whom to call when a question is raised about, say, how the international banking system works, or which regional Federal Reserve presidents get to vote, and then get those experts in a room with the candidate. The ultimate campaign economist, beyond his or her own expertise, is a walking, talking version of Facebook.Beyond the party’s traditional triumvirate of economic concerns — tax reform, looser government regulation and free trade — candidates are also looking for help in developing proposals that can help them stand out, be easily understood by voters and withstand the volley of assaults that their opponents are sure to lob.“There is such a small set of people who can actually do what has to be done,” Mr. Hassett said. After five campaigns, he said, he is sitting this one out so that he can offer advice to anyone who comes knocking.Another economist likely to remain unaffiliated is Arthur Laffer, whose famed curve inspired Reaganomics.Many mainstream economists have pointed to the failures in Mr. Laffer’s supply-side promises that lowering top tax rates will lift economic growth and lead to more federal revenues. But he holds a venerable position among Republicans and is frequently sought out — as much to pay homage to as to receive advice.He has met with nearly all of the top Republican hopefuls, he said, including the long-shot Tea Party hero Ben Carson (“a rock star,” Mr. Laffer said), and Jeb Bush, with whom he served as a pallbearer at the funeral of the Cuban-born millionaire Jorge Mas Canosa, who created a powerful anti-Castro lobbying machine in Miami.Politicians aren’t experts, Mr. Laffer said. “They give a speech and if anyone boos, they change their speech,” he explained. “They’re living, breathing polls and that’s the way it should be.”Signing up with any one campaign is unlikely, he said. “I’m pretty old and pretty inflexible.”Still, Mr. Laffer has helped preside over a series of small dinner parties where candidates like Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin and Rick Perry, the former Texas governor, have gotten a primer in supply-side economics and the opportunity to meet with wealthy potential donors, including John Catsimatidis, the billionaire supermarket owner, who picks up the checks.The latest, with Gov. Bobby Jindal of Louisiana, took place Thursday night at the Four Seasons restaurant in Manhattan.Mr. Laffer’s co-hosts include Larry Kudlow, a former Reagan adviser and a CNBC commentator, and Stephen Moore, a flat-tax champion at the Heritage Foundation. Mr. Moore has been working closely with Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky on a new tax proposal, a 14.5 percent flat tax, which he unveiled on Wednesday in an op-ed article in The Wall Street Journal. The dinners are partly meant to encourage candidates to adopt three ideas: lower tax rates, more open trade and pro-immigration policies. The group is concerned about the party embracing policies that hearken back to the “fortress America” ideas espoused by the onetime presidential candidate and conservative commentator Patrick J. Buchanan in the 1990s, Mr. Moore said.They also, no doubt, want to push back against some younger and more moderate conservative voices — so-called reformicons — who have argued that the party should focus less single-mindedly on tax cuts and pay more attention to other issues like inequality, middle-class wage stagnation and the costs of higher education.James Pethokoukis, a reformicon economist at the American Enterprise Institute who has met with several campaigns, has advised against a narrow focus on cutting tax rates.“They think the country is in bad shape, and they want big change, not incremental change,” he said of the candidates. “Everyone wants faster economic growth. I’ve said the best way to do that is through a number of initiatives, and not try to find a magic bullet.” He mentioned fewer government regulations and investments in education and infrastructure as examples of his suggested initiatives.Mr. Pethokoukis said he was not planning on joining any particular campaign: “I give my 2 cents to all comers.”Tim Kane, an economist at the Hoover Institution, said he had met with four campaigns, primarily to discuss his specialty, immigration. He added that there was a recognition that Republicans were vulnerable to Democratic charges that they didn’t care about inequality. What they want to know, he said, is: “How do you combat it?”As the campaign heats up, some experts are signing on with specific candidates. Abby McCloskey, former program director of economic policy at the American Enterprise Institute, for example, is now policy director for Mr. Perry.Senator Marco Rubio of Florida has the backing of Wayne Berman, a veteran of several Republican presidential campaigns who is now a top official at the Blackstone Group. Though not an economist, he can provide Mr. Rubio with ties to Wall Street money as well as policy advice. Mr. Rubio also consulted with reformist economists before releasing his tax plan, which included a child tax credit.Mr. Paul has also gone beyond the traditional fraternity of economists to name Mark Spitznagel, a prominent hedge fund manager and critic of the Federal Reserve, to serve as a senior economic adviser.Mr. Bush is perhaps furthest along in putting together his economic team. As Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics and an adviser to the McCain campaign in 2008, said: “He has more support from mainstream economists and establishment economists.”Both Mr. Warsh and Mr. Hubbard, who is dean of the Columbia University business school, declined to talk about the campaigns. When asked about the generation-long stagnation on middle-class incomes, Mr. Hubbard argued that “compensation didn’t stagnate,” citing large increases that employers have paid out in health and pension benefits. “Global changes in the market make it difficult to get wage gains,” he added. One challenge for Mr. Bush, unlike the other Republican candidates, is that memories of the housing bust and the ensuing financial crisis at the end of his brother’s second term are still fresh.“Both Jeb Bush and Hillary Clinton have relationships and history they will have to overcome,” said Tony Fratto, a longtime G.O.P. strategist who is backing Mr. Bush. “He has to make his own case for his background and ideas, but she has a more complex challenge, namely explaining and differing from the sitting administration that she was part of.”Newcomers to the political circus, like Mr. Carson, a retired neurosurgeon, don’t have such baggage, but they also lack ties within the Republican establishment, compelling them to reach beyond the usual suspects. Laurence Kotlikoff, an economics professor at Boston University who ran for president himself as a third-party candidate in 2012, said Mr. Carson called him to talk about the size of the deficit.Mr. Kotlikoff was disdainful of the network that presidential candidates of both parties tend to rely on. “The problem with politicians,” he said, “is that they hire economists who instantly become politicians.”Advertisement