JUNE 20, 2015
In “The Dangers of a Student Data Clampdown” (The Upshot, Economic View, June 14), Prof. Susan Dynarski of the University of Michigan said that pending laws to tighten the security and privacy of student data could block use of such data to assess and improve education. She cited one congressional proposal, by Senator David Vitter, that she said “would effectively end the analysis of student data by outside social scientists.”The article drew 23 comments on nytimes.com. The following have been edited and condensed.The author has it backward. Blocking access to personal data on students makes it more difficult to do frivolous research. When data is hard to get, more thought must be given to framing the experimental hypotheses and justifying the intrusion into people’s lives.Andrew, N.Y.C.Ms. Dynarski tries to alarm with the assertion that we wouldn’t know that smaller classes and better teachers benefit students without big data studies. Nonsense. We’ve known this since Aristotle. We don’t need more studies. We need to pull families out of poverty. We need to develop, recognize and reward good teachers, who do more for advancing our society than stock analysts or education researchers. We need schools that are equipped to promote learning as a rewarding process. That’s it.Robert Morris, WashingtonSorry, you can do your research without invading privacy. Most of the info gathered isn’t necessary to the supposed goal, anyway. There is never a reason to ask for a Social Security number.AdvertisementEjzim, 21620Two things come to mind. Without data, we would probably not know what works and what doesn’t work to educate students. Second, many questions can be answered without knowing anything other than the demographic information of the subjects. No Social Security numbers, no names, no addresses, etc. As to making privacy claims, I strongly suspect the opposition is more concerned that research and facts may point out errors in the current policies and processes (e.g., Senator Vitter).Tom, MidwestWhy, I ask, must every little interaction in a classroom be so meticulously documented and scrutinized and processed and cast into some pie chart for lab coats to show off? Students aren’t guinea pigs and don’t deserve to be stalked by trackers and analytics software.AdvertisementKel, Long IslandA version of this letter appears in print on June 21, 2015, on Page BU6 of the New York edition with the headline: Studying The Students .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.