AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Jim Dolce, chief executive of the mobile security firm Lookout, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Were you in leadership roles when you were younger?A. I wasn’t in a leadership role until well after college. I went to school to become an engineer, and this was around 1984, so the field of computer engineering was just starting. A lot of high school students going into college don’t really know what they want to do when they get out. I knew exactly what I wanted to do. I envisioned myself sitting in a cube every day designing things. But, ironically, I didn’t do it for very long.What happened?I kept getting pulled out into the field, engaging with sales guys. A product I had developed became popular, and the sales folks would ask me to go on calls with them. I liked sitting in front of customers, and that pushed me to the sales and marketing side of the business.And tell me about your life before you went to college.I played sports. I lived in a small town in Rhode Island. You got home from school, and you went out and played ball. In winter, the ponds would freeze and you played hockey.And what about your parents?My parents got married very young, right out of high school. My mother was a housewife; my father was a salesman. He spent 40 years at the same job, working for a public utility in Rhode Island called the Providence Gas Company. That’s how I learned respect and admiration for the profession of sales.What were some early leadership lessons for you?I thought that the more time and effort I put into something, and the harder I worked myself, the better it was going to be and the more I would accomplish. Over time, you learn to work smarter and work through others. I’m also a lot more patient now.Mobile security is a fast-paced business. Can you talk more about the art of being patient in that kind of environment?It takes discipline. You can’t get things to change as fast as you would like them to change. You can’t work serially; you have to work in parallel. You have to attempt to work multiple changes at the same time and then, over time, you’ll begin to see the results, and things will begin to converge.When you’re impatient, you attempt to get something done so that you can then, in serial fashion, go to the next thing. Instead, you have to go wide and work multiple issues at the same time and be patient on each of them. Sooner or later, they will converge.What do you consider the most important value of your corporate culture?Accountability is very important, and that’s something that has to continue to be reinforced, especially when you have a culture where you’re empowering people. If we’re pushing down responsibility into the organization and empowering people to make decisions, then there has to be accountability. Otherwise, you’re just delivering the empowerment into a black hole.You were brought in to be C.E.O. of Lookout, but you’ve also started a number of companies. What are some of the lessons you’ve learned from being a serial entrepreneur?The difficulty in starting companies is not just about finding the right technology, but also getting the timing right. It’s easier to predict what might happen in the future; it’s harder to predict when the future is going to happen. When you’re working in a venture-funded start-up, time is of the essence. Investors get impatient. So the lesson there is that real breakthrough innovation is best achieved a step at a time. Technology is something that can be consumed in small bites. You don’t have to take a big bite all at once.How do you hire?I like to turn the conversation around and do an “ask me anything” kind of exercise. What do you want to know about the company? I will tell you anything you want to know. That gets a bunch of discussion threads going. It tells me what you’re looking for. I can figure out what your interests are and what they’re not.And just by the nature of the questions you ask, I can tell whether you’ve done your homework on the company and the industry, and whether you have a genuine interest in working here. If you’re going to make a decision to spend the next four or five years of your life working here, you better be inquisitive and have a lot of questions about us.What other advice do you give to would-be entrepreneurs?A lot of people today think every start-up succeeds. I don’t know where it comes from. Maybe it’s just because they read about the very big successes, and everybody wants to be the next Zuckerberg. What they don’t realize is that in a typical venture capital portfolio of 18 investments, there will probably be, after 10 years, 12 zeros. Of the six that are left, there will be a few singles. If you can get yourself a home run and a triple and a double, then you’ve got a successful fund. Any venture capitalist will tell you that, but for the kid walking down the street in San Francisco, all he sees are the home runs. So there’s a view that if you do a start-up, then you will succeed.So my advice is to make sure you know what you’re getting yourself into and know that this is going to be hard and there’s going to be a lot of heavy lifting and there’s going to be a lot of disappointment. There’s going to be times that are just great, but there are going to be just as many disappointments. Make sure you’re ready for that.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about the challenges of leading and managing.Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice.Advertisement