AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberWhen Microsoft wanted to promote its Surface Pro 3 tablet during the last holiday season, it turned to NBCUniversal for help. Together, the companies came up with a sweeping marketing campaign, with pieces showing up across NBCUniversal’s broadcast and cable channels, social media platforms, websites and within the company’s shows.Andy Cohen — who is the host of a nightly talk show on Bravo, one of NBCUniversal’s cable channels — appeared in spots during the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade on NBC with the tablet, which he used to solve various holiday-related problems. The tablet made appearances during NBC’s “Today” show and “The Soup,” a show on the company’s E! channel.For several years, NBCUniversal and its parent, Comcast, have been giving their own television shows and movies this kind of corporate cross-promotion. But in the last 18 months, the media conglomerate has quietly opened the marketing strategy, which it calls Symphony, to outside advertisers like Microsoft. The idea is to give marketers the ability to use Comcast’s broad range of assets — which include television channels, websites, theme parks and talent — for ad campaigns. An internal creative agency of sorts, called the Content Innovation Agency, helps marketers create the content for the promotion.In addition to Microsoft, NBCUniversal has teamed up with 20th Century Fox to market the movie “Night at the Museum 3,” with Disney to promote “Frozen,” and with Chase bank as well. The media company hopes to sign up two marketers this year and plans to promote the cross-promotion strategy at the annual advertising festival in Cannes this week.Marketers said Symphony allowed them to leverage NBCUniversal’s size to reach the millions of consumers who watch its programming, go on its websites and visit its theme parks. But industry analysts say the real appeal for both the advertiser and NBCUniversal may be much simpler: money. Advertisers may be getting a discount to sign up for the multiplatform strategy.“To be as blunt as possible about it, the advertiser feels that they’re getting a better deal,” said Brian Wieser, a media analyst at Pivotal Research. “It’s really about getting more for less. If you’re the buyer or you’re the seller, it’s about getting more than you otherwise would have seen in terms of revenue.”NBCUniversal and marketers declined to disclose the cost of a Symphony promotion. (“I would say it is an increased investment for our company with our partners,” Linda Yaccarino, the chairwoman of advertising sales and client partnerships at NBCUniversal, said in a recent interview.)It is unlikely that concepts like Symphony will become huge factors in the advertising game for NBCUniversal — and the industry as a whole — partly because NBCUniversal has limited resources for such big campaigns.“It’s a big commitment for our company to engage our creatives to partner with a client to do these campaigns,” Ms. Yaccarino said. “We don’t have enough supply to answer the demand.”Industry experts also say that, for marketers, focusing advertising spending with one vendor does not necessarily make sense at a time when advertising and consumption habits are so fragmented.Creating synergies is hardly a new idea for NBCUniversal and other media companies. But when Stephen B. Burke became chief executive of NBCUniversal in 2011, he made the Symphony initiative one of his big priorities. The strategy has had some flops — the game show “The Million Second Quiz,” for example, which got the “symphony” treatment in 2013 but sagged in ratings. But the marketing approach has also been credited at the company for helping revive its broadcast network, NBC, and for turning movies like “Despicable Me 2” and more recently “Jurassic World” into huge hits.Ms. Yaccarino said she began discussing with Mr. Burke ways to offer Symphony to outside marketers after seeing how it worked internally. The approach, she thought, could help extend NBCUniversal’s relationships with marketers and also help increase the company’s ad revenue.Marketers spoke favorably about Symphony, highlighting the attention they received from NBCUniversal and the scale of the campaigns.“The promise of the whole thing is you don’t just put an ad in those properties, you get content integration and access to talent,” Kathleen Hall, corporate vice president for global advertising and media at Microsoft, said about Symphony. The Symphony effort for the Surface Pro 3 got 1.5 billion impressions and generated significant excitement on social media, she said. Holiday sales, which she said the campaign helped drive, were robust, though she did not provide specifics.Julie Rieger, the executive vice president for media at Fox films, also said she was satisfied with the results. Fox introduced a trailer for “Night at the Museum 3” on “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon.” The movie was promoted during NBCUniversal’s shows including “The Biggest Loser” on NBC and “The Real Housewives of Atlanta” on Bravo.“The movie did extraordinarily well through its run, and I think they helped us elevate that,” Ms. Rieger said.Symphony also holds the potential for delivering a trove of data that could be valuable to marketers, but Ms. Yaccarino referred to that as “icing on the cake.” Marketers seem focused much more on the creative aspects of a Symphony treatment.“We don’t lose the art in the science or math of it all,” Ms. Yaccarino said.Advertisement