JUNE 21, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.01 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.05 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $227.6 million in turnpike revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $300 million in debt securities. Competitive.Shakopee Independent School District, Minn., $90.4 million in general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYAdvertisementEast Carolina University, N.C., $61.5 million in revenue bonds. Competitive.Seattle Municipal Light and Power, $164.3 million in revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementSan Francisco County Transportation Authority, $66.9 million in general obligation bonds. Competitive.East Side Union High School District, Calif., $100 million in general obligation bonds. Competitive.Pennsylvania Infrastructure Investment Authority, $65 million in revenue bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYEdina Independent School District, Minn., $119.9 million in general obligation bonds. Competitive.Winchester, Mass., $61.8 million in general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAlaska Railroad Corporation, $96 million of refunding bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Arlington Independent School District, Tex., $212.6 million of school building bonds. Raymond James.Buckeye, Ariz., $55 million of excise tax revenue obligations. Stifel, Nicolaus.California Health Facilities Financing Authority, $100 million of Stanford Health Care revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.California Statewide Communities Development Authority, $186.6 million of revenue bonds. Ziegler.Connecticut Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $200 million of Yale University bonds. Barclays Capital.AdvertisementCoopersville Area Public Schools, Mich., $63.6 million of refunding bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Corpus Christi, Tex., $148 million of utility system revenue refunding bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.FirstEnergy Nuclear Generation Corporation, $296 million of pollution control revenue refunding bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Houston Community College System, $69 million of fee revenue and refunding bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Industry Public Facilities Authority, Calif., $64 million of refunding bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Industry Public Facilities Authority, Calif., $250.2 million of tax allocation refunding bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Industry Public Facilities Authority, Calif., $235.9 million of debt securities. Stifel, Nicolaus.Klein Independent School District, Tex., $235.9 million of schoolhouse and refunding bonds. Raymond James.Los Angeles, $1.4 billion of tax and revenue anticipation bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Los Angeles County Redevelopment Refunding Authority, $88 million of tax allocation revenue refunding bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Los Angeles County Redevelopment Refunding Authority, $78 million of tax allocation revenue refunding bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $263 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Massachusetts, $939 million of general obligation and refunding bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.AdvertisementMcKinney, Tex., $52.3 million of general obligation bonds. Coastal Securities.Miami-Dade County, Fla., $219.2 million of public facilities revenue and refunding bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Miami-Dade County, Fla., School Board, $240 million of certificates of participation. Citigroup Global Markets.Michigan State University, $192 million of general revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Mississippi Home Corporation, $58 million of revenue refunding bonds. Morgan Stanley.Modesto Irrigation District, Calif., $93 million of electric system revenue refunding bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Monroe School District. Wash., $51.4 million of general obligation bonds. D. A. Davidson.Murrieta Valley Unified School District, Calif., $76 million of general obligation refunding bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.New York State Environmental Facilities Corporation, $216.9 million of water revolving funds revenue bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Northshore School District, Wash., $97.5 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Northside Independent School District, Tex., $75 million of school building bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Northside Independent School District, Tex., $50 million of school building bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.AdvertisementNorthwest Independent School District, Tex., $137.6 million of refunding bonds. Bosc.Philadelphia, $127.6 million of general obligation bonds. Wells Fargo.Philadelphia Authority for Industrial Development, $273 million of Temple University revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District, $60 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.South Texas College District, $88.7 million of limited tax bonds. Estrada Hinojosa.Union County Higher Educational Facilities Financing Authority, Pa., $72 million of Bucknell University revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.United Independent School District, Tex., $52.9 million of refunding bonds. Frost Bank.University of Vermont, $168 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Washington Health Care Facilities Authority, $78.4 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Winchester, Va., Economic Development Authority/West Virginia Hospital Finance Authority, $121.7 million of hospital revenue refunding bonds. Ziegler.A version of this article appears in print on June 22, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.