AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesNational leaders from eurozone nations are expected to come together in a summit meeting Monday evening to tell Greece to come to terms or face the prospect of becoming the first country forced out of the single-currency union. Donald Tusk, the president of the European Council, who organized the emergency meeting in Brussels, warned Athens that it faced a critical choice on terms that had already been clearly outlined. Finance ministers from the 18 other countries in the eurozone are expected to hold another round of talks with Greece on Monday, before the meeting.But Mr. Tusk’s decision to hold the meeting is still something of a victory for Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras of Greece, who had sought for months to move the discussions to the highest political levels. The spotlight will also shine on Monday on the European Central Bank, which is expected to confer for the third time in less than a week on whether to provide beleaguered Greek banks with more emergency assistance.The government in Athens has so far resisted economic reforms demanded by creditors in exchange for a payment of 7.2 billion euros, about $8.2 billion, from a bailout program that is due to expire on June 30. The same day, Greece faces a debt repayment to the International Monetary Fund of €1.6 billion, which most experts say the country cannot afford without fresh aid. —James KanterA Senate committee will hold a hearing on Tuesday about the recall of nearly 34 million vehicles with defective airbags manufactured by the Japanese company Takata. The airbags can deploy violently, shooting metal shrapnel at passengers. Mark R. Rosekind, the head of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, will appear before the committee, along with Calvin L. Scovel III, the Transportation Department’s inspector general. Representatives from Takata, Fiat Chrysler and Honda Motor will also testify. Lawmakers are expected to ask about the progress of the auto recall, which is the largest in American history and involves 10 carmakers in the United States, and about the role that the safety agency will play in making sure that drivers are notified and that cars are fixed quickly. —Danielle IvoryThe Advisory Committee for Aviation Consumer Protection, part of the Transportation Department, is meeting on Tuesday in Washington to discuss the fees that airlines are charging to check bags, change tickets or reservations, and cancel flights, as well as hotel resort fees. The meeting is a response to the growing list of charges that airlines have come up with in recent years and the sometimes confusing policies, particularly the bag fees when passengers fly with a carrier’s international partner. The committee was created by the 2012 Federal Aviation Administration funding bill and is composed of four members: a representative from a state consumer protection office, a consumer, an airport representative and an airline representative. It provides advice about the Transportation Department’s consumer policies. —Jad MouawadThe Cannes Lions International Festival of Creativity takes place this week on the French Riviera. Thousands of people working in media and marketing gather for a week of panels, speeches and events that celebrate and award creativity in advertising. Over the last several years, an influx of ad technology companies, media companies and big brands has turned the festival into what many participants describe as an extravagant fete. Most of the formal activity takes place in the Palais des Festivals, but there are also rosé-fueled dinners, meetings in beach cabanas and late-night parties on yachts. For the first time this year, two days have been set aside to focus on data and technology, reflecting how the industry increasingly revolves around analytics, ad platforms and products that are changing the way advertising is created, bought and sold. —Sydney EmberSeveral economic data points will be released this week, showing, if the consensus holds, that the economy is continuing on its slow crawl toward righting itself after the recession. The Commerce Department will report on Tuesday on orders for durable goods for May, which many economists expect to have fallen somewhat. On the same day, the department will release figures for home sales last month, with the expectation from many analysts that sales of both newly constructed and existing homes edged up, keeping in line with recent trends in the housing market. On Thursday, the Commerce Department will report on personal spending. Many economists expect that it rose slightly in May. —Dionne SearceyThe Royal Bank of Scotland will hold its annual shareholders’ meeting in Edinburgh on Tuesday. The bank announced a major restructuring in February after reporting its seventh consecutive annual loss. It has shed its ambitions of being a global investment bank as it tries to transform into a British-centric corporate and retail bank. The annual meeting also comes soon after the British government announced plans to begin selling off its 80 percent stake in the lender. —Chad BrayYahoo will hold its annual shareholders’ meeting on Wednesday. While there are no particularly controversial items on the Internet company’s ballot, Marissa Mayer, the chief executive, is likely to face questions about the biggest strategic move of her tenure: the proposed tax-free spinoff of the company’s $33 billion stake in Alibaba to Yahoo shareholders. The Internal Revenue Service has said it is contemplating changing the rules surrounding such transactions. While Ms. Mayer reiterated last week that she expected the spinoff to occur in the fourth quarter, as planned, some investors and analysts are worried that the I.R.S. will block it. —Vindu GoelA class-action suit against Petrobras, the Brazilian oil giant facing accusations of widespread corruption, will begin in Manhattan on Thursday. Judge Jed S. Rakoff of Federal District Court in Manhattan will hear from a group of shareholders, including pension funds for public employees in Hawaii, Idaho and Ohio, seeking damages against Petrobras, a state-run oil company, for making false and misleading statements as part of a multibillion-dollar bribery and money-laundering scheme. Dozens of executives have been indicted in Brazil for price-fixing, political kickbacks and bribery in a case that has knocked tens of billions of dollars off the company’s market value. Petrobras, which produces more than 90 percent of Brazil’s petroleum, owns all the country’s refineries and the largest chain of service stations, has contended that it was also a victim of the scheme. Universities Superannuation Scheme, the trustee of a British pension fund, is the lead plaintiff in the suit. —Alexandra StevensonAdvertisement