AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicola ClarkPARIS — Days after two gunmen burst into the offices of the French satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo on Jan. 7, slaughtering nearly a dozen of his colleagues and friends, Laurent Sourisseau propped himself up in his hospital bed and began to draw.A bullet shattered Mr. Sourisseau’s right shoulder blade during the attack, immobilizing his drawing arm. But as police guards stood watch outside, the cartoonist, who goes by the pen name Riss, scratched out a series of shaky caricatures with his left hand.The drawings — two of which were published in a “survivors’ issue” that appeared a week after the attacks — may have looked tentative in their execution, but their tone was characteristically irreverent.“Twenty-five years of work to become a cartoonist at Charlie Hebdo,” Mr. Sourisseau’s caption read. “To be a terrorist takes 25 seconds.” It then labeled terrorists as lazy “branleurs,” an off-color word for jerk.In the more than nine months since then, Mr. Sourisseau, 49, has regained most of the use of his arm. He is drawing right-handed again, and though he tires easily, he has succeeded his slain friend Stéphane Charbonnier as editorial director. But for him and his surviving colleagues, healing from the attack’s physical wounds has been, in many ways, the easy part.The more bewildering challenge, Mr. Sourisseau said in a recent interview, has been adapting to Charlie Hebdo’s instant transformation from a relatively obscure, parochial French publication to an international symbol, celebrated by free-speech advocates. Its two dozen cartoonists and writers, who previously enjoyed some degree of anonymity, moved this month to a new, heavily fortified newsroom with bulletproof windows, a panic room and a labyrinth of safety doors — security measures that cost 1.5 million euros, or $1.65 million. They live furtively, under 24-hour police protection.Perhaps more troubling, the solidarity that once bound Charlie Hebdo’s close-knit staff has cracked under the trauma of the attacks and discord over how to divide the publication’s newfound wealth. A surge in subscriptions and newsstand sales from supporters has brought millions to the newspaper’s coffers but has also led to bitter internal squabbling over how — and how much — money should be reinvested in the paper and distributed to the families of the victims.“It was a bit of a double punishment,” Mr. Sourisseau, a soft-spoken former railway worker, said of the upheavals that have shaken Charlie Hebdo in recent months. “When I left the hospital, I thought naïvely that we would all go back to working together as before. I had no idea that there would be so much chaos.”While Mr. Sourisseau, who now owns 65 percent of Charlie Hebdo, has worked to contain the tumult, emotions continue to run high among staff members. Some have publicly called for him and the newspaper’s other shareholder, the financial director, Éric Portheault, to renounce their right to future gains from their holdings and to transform Charlie Hebdo — which has always been owned by a handful of employees — into a kind of nonprofit cooperative. Others have chosen to leave the paper, saying that carrying on in the absence of their fallen friends had become too difficult.Rénald Luzier, a cartoonist known as Luz, whose drawing of a weeping Prophet Muhammad holding an “I Am Charlie” sign appeared on the paper’s first cover after the attack, left in late September. “Spending sleepless nights summoning the dead” was exhausting, he told the French newspaper Libération in May.Patrick Pelloux, a columnist for more than a decade, said this month that he would also resign, at the end of November.“I feel very diminished. Worn out,” Mr. Pelloux said in an interview. “The newspaper that I knew is finished,” he said. “I respect those who have the strength to continue. But for me, it is no longer possible.”For Gérard Biard, Charlie Hebdo’s 56-year-old editor in chief, the loss of so much of the newspaper’s talent at once has been wrenching, as has been the experience of trying to regroup and rebuild in the full glare of France’s mainstream media, which he said was like being on “reality TV.”The paper’s staff, he said, has always been made up of strong personalities. “Charlie Hebdo is a newspaper where people scream at each other,” Mr. Biard said. “What changed was the violence, the collective trauma we experienced, to which every person reacts very differently.”Added to the violence and the public spotlight was another thorny element: money.Since its inception in 1970, Charlie Hebdo had struggled financially. Because it rejects outside financing and spurns advertising, it is wholly dependent on its readers for revenue. A bankruptcy in 1981 shuttered the newspaper for decade before it was revived in 1992.Readership had been slipping steadily in recent years. Facing losses of about €100,000, Charlie Hebdo resorted to soliciting donations from readers in late 2014, a campaign that brought it close to breaking even by Dec. 31 — a week before the attacks.“We were living day to day,” said Mr. Portheault, 51, who has managed Charlie Hebdo’s accounts since 1997. “Then we came into a financial windfall because some bastards took out our friends.”For a paper the size of Charlie Hebdo, the sums are huge. Readership this year has jumped to roughly 300,000, a tenfold increase from previous years, Mr. Portheault said. The first edition published after the massacre sold eight million copies. Revenue from subscriptions and newsstands so far this year stands at roughly €15 million — about three times annual sales for 2014.In addition, the newspaper received close to €4 million in donations from scores of individuals, corporations and institutions. That money, however, has been earmarked for distribution among the families of all the victims of the terrorists’ three-day rampage across Paris: the 12 people, including two police officers, who were killed at or near Charlie Hebdo’s headquarters; four who were murdered at a kosher supermarket; and another police officer killed in a suburb.That has still left millions under the control of Charlie Hebdo’s surviving shareholders, Mr. Sourisseau and Mr. Portheault. Yet despite their formal commitment in June to reinvest 100 percent of this year’s proceeds into the newspaper — and as much as 70 percent in future years — many staff members remain ill at ease with an ownership arrangement that could, in theory at least, allow some of their colleagues to profit personally from the tragedy.A visual timeline of the attack and the events that followed.In March, 15 staff members — including Mr. Luzier and Mr. Pelloux — signed an open letter in Le Monde calling for a revamping that would distribute ownership and decision-making power among the entire staff. Mr. Sourisseau and Mr. Portheault have dismissed such proposals as unworkable but vowed to gradually open Charlie Hebdo’s shareholding to a small group of employees, beginning next year.“We obviously have to expand the capital to include others,” Mr. Portheault said. “But this might come as a shock to some people: Just because you cheated death does not, in my eyes, automatically entitle you to become a shareholder. Rather, it creates a responsibility — to remember, to carry on the work of our pals, to carry on living for ourselves and for them.”The rifts in Charlie Hebdo’s shellshocked staff remain deep, several employees said.“We were torn apart,” said Corinne Rey, a cartoonist known as Coco.Referring to the flood of money Charlie Hebdo has received, she said, “I honestly would have preferred to carry on in financial difficulty than to have to go through this.”Nonetheless, those who remain share a fierce determination to press on, to sustain Charlie Hebdo not only as a symbol of resistance but also as a forum for engaging in unfettered political debate and confronting social and religious taboos.Key moments in the lives of Chérif and Saïd Kouachi, based on accounts from thousands of pages of legal documents obtained by The New York Times.Yet even producing the paper and housing its staff have become a new kind of challenge.This month, Charlie Hebdo moved into rented office space after squatting for more than six months in an improvised space carved out of the newsroom of Libération. The new address, in Paris’s working-class 13th Arrondissement, is not public. On top of its expensive new security system, the newspaper expects to spend an additional €500,000 a year on armed guards.“All that, just to be able to work,” Mr. Portheault said.Mr. Sourisseau, who is protected by a five-officer police retinue, bristles at the diversion of resources to security, but he said: “We cannot reasonably go back to functioning the way we used to. That would not be responsible.”With the anniversary of the attacks approaching — and the expectation that many of those who took out a subscription this year may not renew — Charlie Hebdo anticipates that its readership could drop by at least one-third, to perhaps 200,000 in 2016. Last week, the newspaper introduced a revamped website, which offers a mix of free and paid content — including selected articles and cartoons in English — and it plans new mobile apps as well. A 34-page special issue is in the works for January.Charlie Hebdo’s journalists are well aware that their particular brand of in-your-face humor will not always resonate with its newfound readers. Mr. Sourisseau shrugged at the recent social media storm provoked by one of his cartoons, which mocked Europe’s muddled response to the migrant crisis with an image inspired by a photo of a drowned Syrian boy.“When you draw a cartoon, it’s like throwing a message in a bottle,” he said. “You never know how it’s going to be received.”The whole point of satire, Mr. Sourisseau said, was to destabilize in order to enlighten people about often uncomfortable truths. Publications like Charlie Hebdo, he and his colleagues said, provide a necessary antidote to what they described as social-media-driven public discourse filled with sanitized images and commentary divorced from context.“It’s worrying to hear people tell us, ‘You’re the only ones who can say such things,’ ” Mr. Sourisseau said. “We don’t want to be alone in seeing the world the way we do. It’s a bad sign if we become just a symbol of something that’s slowly fading away.”Julie Carriat and Christian Haimet contributed research.Advertisement