By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and REED ABELSONJUNE 21, 2015
The world of American health insurance may soon become even smaller, with the biggest companies seeking to become even bigger.A scramble has broken out within the industry as various providers jockey for position and make overtures to rivals. Anthem made the first public move, unveiling a $47 billion takeover bid for Cigna on Saturday after months of negotiations had stalled. On Sunday, Cigna fired back, rejecting the bid as “inadequate and not in the best interest of Cigna’s shareholders.”But others have been quietly maneuvering as well. UnitedHealth Group, the biggest American health insurer by revenue, recently made a preliminary approach to Aetna, a person briefed on the matter said.And a number of companies have indicated their interest in buying Humana, one of the smaller major insurers but one with a valuable Medicare franchise. Among those companies that had expressed interest is Anthem, though the bigger insurance provider is currently focused on combining with Cigna, people briefed on the company’s plans said. Another is Cigna.AdvertisementThe Affordable Care Act has been driving the flurry of merger discussions. Passage of the law in 2010 transformed the health insurance industry by expanding the government Medicaid program for low-income people in many states and giving insurers access to millions of additional customers through state marketplaces.Other parts of the health care industry, from drug manufacturers to device makers, have seen enormous amounts of merger activity. But the insurance sector has lain relatively dormant for the past three years, after a brief flurry of deals by the big insurers.Government programs like Medicare and Medicaid are increasingly turning to private health plans to offer coverage, and insurers view these markets as potential growth areas.“There’s a huge revenue opportunity,” said Ana Gupte, an analyst who follows the industry for Leerink Partners.But as insurers shift to these new markets, they are under more pressure to reduce their costs. Consumers who buy individual coverage through the marketplaces are extremely sensitive to price, and government programs like Medicare and Medicaid are heavily regulated. These markets tend to be less profitable.AdvertisementThe combinations offer insurers the ability to reduce their administrative costs as well as to strike better deals with health systems, Ms. Gupte said. By having more customers in a specific geographic market, the insurer is better able to negotiate with local hospitals and doctors. “They need more market share locally to do that,” she said.Playing with the strongest hand in terms of resources is UnitedHealth, whose market capitalization as of Friday stood at $114.5 billion and which reported $130 billion in revenue last year. Both Anthem and Aetna carried market values of roughly $43 billion, though Anthem collected more in sales last year with $73.9 billion versus Aetna’s $58 billion. Humana was the smallest in terms of market capitalization at $30 billion.It is unclear how long it will take for the potential frenzy of consolidation to come to fruition. Humana is in the midst of weighing its deal options, aided by the investment bank Goldman Sachs, and is not expected to come to a decision for some time, according to people briefed on the insurer’s intentions.Anthem has offered $184 a share for Cigna — about 18 percent above Cigna’s closing price Friday of $155.26 — with about 31 percent in stock and nearly 69 percent in cash.Considerations other than price tags may hamper potential deals. Cigna has balked at Anthem’s takeover approaches in large part because of corporate governance issues, and, in particular, who would run the combined insurer. In a statement published on Saturday, Anthem said that Cigna had pushed for its chief executive, David Cordani, to lead the merged company immediately, even though the smaller insurer would effectively be acquired in the contemplated deal.“We were stunned that the Cigna board continues to insist on a guaranteed C.E.O. position for Mr. Cordani over choosing to allow its stockholders to realize the significant premium being offered,” Joseph R. Swedish, Anthem’s chief executive, wrote in a public letter to Cigna’s board.Cigna responded forcefully on Sunday, citing numerous reasons for ending its dialogue with Anthem. In addition to raising concerns about Mr. Swedish’s future role, the company said it was worried about a “lack of a growth strategy,” possible regulatory hurdles and the data breach Anthem experienced earlier this year.In a letter written by Cigna’s board chairman, Isaiah Harris Jr., and Mr. Cordani, the two described themselves as “deeply disappointed” in Anthem’s decision to make its offer public and accused its executives of choosing “to delay and avoid an open and transparent dialogue.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Investors are likely to support the brewing round of consolidation, with many shareholders owning stock in several of these insurers.AdvertisementA chief issue facing these companies is which transactions will be viewed most favorably by government regulators, which have not hesitated to block deals in other industries. Since many of these insurers are already large companies, competing with regional or local nonprofit organizations, the Obama administration is likely to look askance at any deal in which the number of sizable players in a specific market is reduced to only two companies, said Ms. Gupte of Leerink Partners.UnitedHealth, for example, is a major presence in the Medicare Advantage market, offering private plans as an alternative to standard Medicare. It would most likely face significant regulatory hurdles if it combines with Humana, another larger player in the Medicare market.The Federal Trade Commission would most likely scrutinize the deals to make sure that there was not too much concentration in a given geographic market. At an extreme, regulators could block a deal, but it may be more likely that they would insist that one of the companies sell specific businesses.But some are less sanguine that regulators will approve these combinations. “These deals are going to face headwinds,” said David A. Balto, an antitrust lawyer and former regulator. Consumers could suffer, and large employers, which may not be able to turn to a state-based or regional insurer, could have their choices significantly limited by mergers, he said.Moving too late to secure a merger partner could cost any of these insurers the chance to become bigger.The deal overtures by Anthem, UnitedHealth and others represent attempts by the insurers to diversify their businesses. In the case of Anthem, which operates Blue Cross plans in 14 states, the acquisition of Cigna would build upon its presence in the individual and small-business markets by adding expertise in handling insurance for large national employers that self-insure but rely on an outside entity to pay claims and contract with hospitals and doctors.Aetna, which acquired Coventry Health Care in 2013 as a way to offer more coverage to lower-income people, has become a major presence in the marketplaces. Acquiring Humana would allow Aetna to build on Humana’s strong presence in the Medicare Advantage market.But the prospect of larger, more powerful insurance companies is not welcome to the hospitals and doctors negotiating with them over price and possible partnerships.Advertisement“Bigger insurance companies mean increased leverage and unfair power over negotiating rates with hospitals and physicians,” Dr. Reid B. Blackwelder, the chairman of the American Academy of Family Physicians, said in a statement this month. The academy also raised concerns over whether the mergers would lead to higher costs as a result of less competition in the market.Hospitals and doctors are also worried about how the mergers would affect the development of so-called narrow networks, where insurers offer plans that limit consumers’ choices to a smaller group of hospitals and doctors.With a smaller number of larger insurers, hospitals and doctors fear they would have little choice but to join these networks.A version of this article appears in print on June 22, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Cigna Rejects an Overture From Anthem.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.