AdvertisementSupported byGlobal ManagerBy Sonia Kolesnikov-JessopInga Beale  has been chief executive of Lloyd’s since January 2014.Q. You started work in the insurance industry in the early 1980s as a reinsurance underwriter. What do you remember of those days?A. The industry was completely male-dominated. I was the only female out of 35 underwriters, and to fit in you had to be quite male in your behavior: You would go to the pub and drink pints along with the men. I had to be conscious about what I was wearing, because in those days you couldn’t get inside the Lloyd’s building as a woman wearing trousers.At one point I realized it wasn’t me. I was behaving in a way that wasn’t completely natural, and I couldn’t stand it anymore. So I took a year off in 1989 and went backpacking around the world. At that point I really wasn’t interested in a career at all; I was doing a lot of rowing and that was all that mattered to me. I would leave the office at 5 p.m. and get to the river to train.Q. When did you take on a managerial role and did this come naturally?A. I joined G.E. in 1992, and four years later they offered me a managerial position. I actually turned down the offer because I didn’t think for a moment I could do a manager’s role. I was completely under-self-confident. I just didn’t think I was equipped. I don’t actually know why.My refusal must have set off some alarm bells somewhere, because a female leader suddenly swooped in and took me out to dinner to understand why I’d said no. I then went on a week’s course called “assertiveness for women.” I doubt they still do that these days. There were eight women on it, and we learned primarily about how we were perceived. It gave me some confidence, and I went back and asked for the job.Over the years, I’ve often been in a position where I wanted to promote a woman and she said no, and because I went through it, I understood where she’s coming from.Q. What are your arguments to persuade her to say yes?A. I tell them about my experience, and I also spend time listening, trying to work through with them what they are concerned about. Usually they are just really nervous, they don’t think they’ve got all the skills they feel they need. But you’re never fully skilled to do the next role, it is nearly always in a stretch role.Q. Did you enjoy the managerial responsibilities?A. Quite honestly, once I got the confidence, a lot of it came naturally and I realized I was getting lots of satisfaction seeing my team succeed. Then one day, a broker came in and remarked that we looked like the Spice Girls, and then it dawned on me that we were now five women and it seemed to have happened unconsciously without me really trying. It’s interesting how quickly and easily you can fall into this.This has made me very aware of unconscious bias. It’s all very well to say, you’ve got to make sure you hire the best person for the job, of course, but if you don’t leave your unconscious bias outside, you may not be hiring the best people. You only have to look at the stats around the hiring of musicians in orchestras; as soon as they do it anonymously behind a screen, they hire double the amount of women.In our line of work, you can’t interview someone anonymously, but you can still do a lot in terms of anonymizing C. V.s in terms of no name, no gender, no age. There are things that you can do as an organization to try to minimize this unconscious bias. We have a new H.R. director at Lloyd’s and we hope to start having more “modern” practices on that front.Q. How important is it to have diversity in a team?A. It’s very important. I think you often get those homogenous teams not because it’s gender-driven, but because it’s character-driven. It’s just easier to manage a team that behaves like you, talks like you. Over the years I have had to manage very diverse teams, mainly geographic-wise, and that’s when you realize how difficult it is to bring all these cultures together.There might be a very loud Latin character and the very formal Nordic person, and as a manager you have to make sure they all contribute equally so you learn quite quickly that you have to manage each individual differently. When you’re facilitating a discussion you have to shut up the loud mouth and bring in the quiet person. Then you start seeing the benefits of that diversity.Q. You’ve worked in the United States and in different European cities. What has been your experience managing across these cultures?A. When I made my first move from London to the United States, I thought it would be easy because we spoke the same language and I didn’t for a moment understand there would be huge cultural differences. When I was in London, G.E. was always talking about teamwork, and I was a bit bemused by these messages because I felt we always did. Then you go to the U.S. and you realize that they talk all the time about the team, but it’s still very much about the individual rather than team achievement; it’s so very individually competitive that you have to force people to work as team. It’s a different mind-set than in Europe. I actually was unprepared for these cultural differences.Since then, every time I’ve moved around I’ve made sure I got some cultural training about how people work. Once you realize that, you know how to temper your behavior and work well with different cultures.Q. Give me an example of a cultural difference that surprised you?A. Before I moved to France, I didn’t appreciate how much the French need to talk things through. It was a standing joke that I would leave them talking, go off for a few hours and come back to get the result, because I couldn’t bear going around and around, discussing the ins and outs. I wanted to be much more dynamic and make decisions quickly. But it’s a very important part of the process and of the way they work.Q. What do you think are keys to a successful career?A. P.I.E. — performance, image and exposure.You have of course to do a good job, but that’s not enough. Most people think they will get on in their career if they do a good job, and then they get annoyed if they don’t get the promotion. That’s probably because they were sitting quietly doing a good job. You also have to think about your image. It’s very important that you are being perceived as appropriate for the role you want to take on.Q. Do you think women can have it all, or do they have to give up something?A. Frankly, I don’t think that it’s any different for men. Men don’t have it all, either. They also have to make choices, they have to make compromises.Q. What advice would you give to your 30-year-old self?A. Really believe in your own abilities.Advertisement