AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelWhen Lester Holt was a young broadcast journalist, he dreamed of one day sitting in the chair of the renowned news anchor Walter Cronkite.That grand ambition faded over the next three decades, even as Mr. Holt’s career took off. He worked a string of local jobs across the country — in Sacramento, Los Angeles, San Francisco, New York and Chicago — before landing at MSNBC, and then, in 2003, at NBC.By that time, Mr. Holt said in an interview on Monday, the anchor’s chair was “something that I hadn’t thought about for many, many years. It was part of a young guy’s dream.”On Monday evening Mr. Holt, 56, ascended to the position he had all but given up on, delivering the NBC “Nightly News” broadcast for the first time as its permanent anchor.Mr. Holt had been serving as “Nightly News” anchor on a temporary basis since February, when Brian Williams was suspended for fabricating a story about his experience during a helicopter attack in Iraq.As the controversy swept through the newsroom and captured headlines, Mr. Holt said, he tried to avoid the gossip cycle and do his job night after night, aiming to hold steady in the ratings.“This was a very awkward situation I was put in,” Mr. Holt said in his office at 30 Rockefeller Plaza. “I was basically — under what was difficult circumstances — handed a successful broadcast. I just wanted to make sure I didn’t let anybody down.”NBC announced last week that Mr. Holt would assume the anchor chair permanently and that Mr. Williams would not return to his previous position after having made what it said were a number of “inaccurate statements.”Mr. Holt said that he was informed of the news before leaving for a vacation in Paris last week and that the first word out of his mouth was, “Wow.”With the perch comes the responsibility to lead a news organization that is not only trying to repair its reputation, but also striving to keep pace with a rapidly evolving digital landscape, where the moral authority of a network news anchor has faded.Mr. Holt said he did not think that NBC News was “damaged at all” by the crisis involving Mr. Williams, pointing to the fact that the audience largely stuck with the network over the last several months. NBC is in a neck-and-neck race with the ABC evening newscast, with both networks drawing about 7.8 million total viewers during the week of June 8, according to Nielsen data.“I don’t think we’ve missed a beat,” Mr. Holt said, adding that viewers should not expect any major changes to the nightly broadcast.“We are not unaware that there are a lot of eyeballs on us right now, and there will be,” he added. “We are going to try to deliver every day.”Mr. Holt said he had not been aware that Mr. Williams was exaggerating stories. He said that he “had no issues” with Mr. Williams staying at NBC News, called Mr. Williams a friend and said he wished him well. He said that the two men had spoken since Mr. Holt was named anchor and that Mr. Williams expressed his support.“From the very beginning of this, I told myself that I am not his judge,” Mr. Holt said.While Mr. Holt previously made cameo appearances on the NBC comedy “30 Rock” and played bass with the Roots on “The Tonight Show,” he is not expected to become a regular on the entertainment circuit, which ultimately became an issue for Mr. Williams.Most of Mr. Williams’s embellishments, NBC has said, came on late-night and other entertainment shows, not on his newscast.With the permanent assignment, Mr. Holt becomes one of the few African-Americans to serve as the solo anchor of a weekday evening newscast — at a time when racial tensions are erupting across the country. Two of the stories the “Nightly News” team was following on Monday included the latest developments with the Charleston church shooting and the comments President Obama made about race.While it is important for television news to reflect its audience, Mr. Holt said, his race does not define him. “I don’t walk around calling myself an African-American anchor,” he said. “The African-American part is pretty obvious.”When he first started filling in for Mr. Williams after the suspension, Mr. Holt said, he received advice from several in the television business, including Tom Brokaw, who anchored NBC nightly news for 21 years until 2004.In a telephone interview on Monday, Mr. Brokaw said he had been a fan of Mr. Holt’s from the beginning, calling him a nose-to-the-grindstone journalist who is not afraid to take on tough subjects. His advice to Mr. Holt was to be proactive, jump on breaking news and energize the broadcast.“He did not need me to tell him to jump on the airplane,” Mr. Brokaw said. “I’m very confident that he is going to do well. His values are very much in my wheelhouse.”Mr. Brokaw declined to comment on Mr. Williams’s troubles, saying “there has been too much said about that. We need to let it go and move forward.”Advertisement