By JAD MOUAWADJUNE 22, 2015
Dozens of flights of Poland’s national airline, LOT Airlines, were grounded for several hours on Sunday, stranding thousands of passengers at Chopin Airport in Warsaw, after what the airline described as a computer attack by unidentified outsiders.The airline said the attack lasted about five hours and disrupted the system that LOT uses to establish its flight plans. The airline said it canceled 10 domestic and international flights and delayed about a dozen others until it fixed the problem. Flights headed to Warsaw landed safely. Operations returned to normal on Monday.LOT did not provide a detailed explanation of how outsiders might have penetrated its computer systems. A company spokesman said the attack might have been a denial of service attack, which typically floods a system with requests, causing its overload and failure. If confirmed, the attack would be one of the first instances in which flights were canceled or delayed because of a malicious hacking.It is not clear, however, how such an attack might have compromised LOT’s flight operations system. Denial of service attacks typically take place over open communication networks like email, while flight operations are generally built as private networks.AdvertisementDuring a news conference on Monday, however, the airline’s chief executive said that other airlines needed to think about such risks in the future.Advertisement“This is an industry problem on a much wider scale, and for sure we have to give it more attention,” said Sebastian Mikosz, the chief executive, according to Reuters. “I expect it can happen to anyone anytime.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The possibility of hacking is causing greater concern in the industry as digital systems increasingly replace traditional ones. Airlines are increasingly connecting their planes, dispatch operations, airports and other systems. This interconnection makes airlines more efficient and allows a better flow of passenger and flight information. But it might potentially make the airlines more vulnerable if not properly secured.A report by the Government Accountability Office in April found that the Federal Aviation Administration in the United States should devote more resources to cybersecurity as it moved the air traffic control network away from radar to satellite-based systems.The report noted that airplanes were increasingly connected to the Internet and cautioned that this connection could “potentially provide unauthorized remote access to aircraft avionics systems.”Computer problems are nothing new. This month, United Airlines grounded about 150 flights because an unidentified computer problem prevented pilots from getting their digital flight plans. And in April, American Airlines said that dozens of its flights were delayed because a bug in its company iPad software meant that pilots did not have accurate airport maps.A version of this article appears in print on June 23, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Hacking Grounds Flights of Poland’s National Airline.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.