By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJUNE 22, 2015
LONDON — Nearly four years ago, the Williams Companies and Energy Transfer Equity battled to take over a rival oil and gas pipeline operator.Now Williams is trying to fend off another bid by Energy Transfer — for itself.Williams said on Sunday that it had rejected a $48 billion takeover bid from an unnamed suitor, and Energy Transfer confirmed hours later that it had made the approach.The move highlights what some analysts describe as likely consolidation in the sector of moving oil and gas. Though pipeline operators have largely been shielded from the plunge in oil prices that has battered drillers, many in the industry say the path to success lies in increasing size.Among the proponents of that philosophy is Kelcy L. Warren, the billionaire who built Energy Transfer into a powerhouse of shuttling oil and gas through a pipeline network that stretches about 71,000 miles.AdvertisementMr. Warren last triumphed over Williams when Energy Transfer succeeded in buying Southern Union Company for $5.7 billion after a bidding war. Now he is setting his sights on the 107-year-old Williams itself.Yet Williams, which announced in May it was absorbing a subsidiary in a nearly $14 billion deal, said the Energy Transfer offer was priced too low. The takeover proposal, which required abandoning the transaction for the subsidiary, “would not deliver value commensurate with what Williams expects to achieve on a stand-alone basis and through other growth initiatives,” the company said in a news release.AdvertisementBringing the subsidiary, Williams Partners, back into the fold would lead to lower costs, higher dividends for shareholders and more money to expand into new projects, Williams has said.The company said in its statement that it had hired Barclays and Lazard as advisers on potential moves, which could include selling itself or staying independent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Our board and management team remain committed to acting in the best interests of shareholders,” said Alan S. Armstrong, the chief executive of Williams. “And in light of the unsolicited proposal, our board believes it is in the best interest of shareholders to conduct a thorough evaluation of strategic alternatives.”In its own statement, Energy Transfer said it had first approached Williams in May and that it had followed up twice, to no avail. Its offer was valued at $64 a share, or 32 percent above Williams’s closing price on Friday.“I believe that a combination of Williams’ assets with E.T.E. will create substantial value that would not be realized otherwise,” Mr. Warren said in a news release. “I am truly excited at the prospect of bringing together these two businesses under a common platform, and creating additional value for every stakeholder.”In addition to Barclays and Lazard, the law firms Cravath, Swaine & Moore and Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher are advising Williams. The law firm Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz is counseling Energy Transfer.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.