
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
OCT. 23, 2015
One bad corporate apple, it seems, can spoil a whole bunch.That’s the conclusion of a fascinating academic study that examined accounting restatements by thousands of corporations over a 12-year period. After one company was found to have misstated its earnings, the study determined, others in its industry often followed suit and began massaging their own numbers, ultimately resulting in their own restatements.Equally intriguing were the exceptions. When companies playing accounting charades faced regulatory action, shareholder litigation or prominent news reports about their practices, the researchers found that their corporate peers declined to mimic their conduct. This shows the importance of highlighting and punishing bad behavior.Three academics conducted the study, which will appear in the November issue of The Accounting Review, published by the American Accounting Association. They are Simi Kedia of Rutgers University Business School, Kevin Koh of Nanyang Business School in Singapore and Shivaram Rajgopal of Columbia University Business School.The study, “Evidence on Contagion in Earnings Management,” looked at the restatements of 2,249 companies from 1997 through 2008. It found that earnings manipulation at companies was strongly related to the percentage of firms in the same industry or the same region that had announced restatements in the previous 12 months.AdvertisementThe study did not identify specific companies. But when bigger and more visible companies did the book-cooking, it found that the misconduct was more likely to be copied. The extent of a company’s initial restatement also had a bearing on whether it would be mimicked. Extreme restatements involving significant manipulation apparently were viewed as too risky to be imitated, the study found.It turns out that copycats abound in corporate America. Companies emulated their peers with remarkable precision, the study found. Follow-on misstatements often occurred in the same corporate accounts that the initial case involved, like revenue manipulation, expense account fudging and massaging of inventory, assets or restructuring accounts.“In a sense, restatements serve as handbooks of trickery,” Mr. Rajgopal said.Of course, companies in troubled industries might cook their books because of financial or operational challenges, not in response to peers’ earnings reporting practices. Recognizing this, the academics eliminated cases of what they called “contemporaneous adoption” from their study. That way, they could be confident their results pointed clearly to companies engaging in copycat earnings manipulation.To some degree, Mr. Rajgopal said, the study confirms other behavioral research showing the contagious effects of leaving bad behavior unchecked.“I’m a big believer in this notion of contagion because I come from India, where littering is a huge example,” he said in an interview. “Everyone litters because everyone else litters. People don’t know what is acceptable, and they look to authorities for what would be reasonable social norms of what you can get away with.”AdvertisementOn the issue of deterrence, the study showed a significant reduction in copycat earnings manipulations immediately after the passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley law in 2002. That legislation, enacted after the accounting scandals at Enron, Tyco and Worldcom, required top executives to take responsibility for the integrity of their financial statements. The law also gave the Securities and Exchange Commission the right to recover compensation improperly earned by executives as a result of misleading earnings statements and increased the criminal penalties associated with white-collar crime.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For the three years after Sarbanes-Oxley went into effect, contagion in earnings misstatements disappeared, the academics found. But memories are short. The study provided evidence that the copycat behavior resumed in 2005 and continued through 2008, when the research concluded.Class-action lawsuits and news reports critical of manipulative conduct reduce the likelihood that other companies will mimic the behavior, the study found. By contrast, restatements disclosed in a news release that receives little attention tend to encourage others to follow suit.“One of the biggest problems in this research is that we can’t observe people who get away with this” and never disclose misconduct, Mr. Rajgopal said. “If Firm A is subject to an S.E.C. action or class action or if the press shows them in a bad light, this behavior goes down. You see less of this contagion if one of these things happens.”The academics say their study is unusual in its documentation of the deterrent effects of policing by the S.E.C. and class-action lawsuits.Mr. Rajgopal said that he and his colleagues believed that their research could help the S.E.C.“By definition, deterrence is far more important than enforcement,” he said in the interview. “The S.E.C. has limited policing dollars: It can go after 60 or 90 criminals, but the more important issue is to stop the thousands of others.”The same goes for the Justice Department, whose pursuit of criminal wrongdoers in the mortgage crisis was so undistinguished.On Thursday, the S.E.C. said it brought a record 507 independent actions for violations of the federal securities laws in fiscal 2015, which ended in September. Of those, 134 were in the financial reporting and audit area, up from 96 such actions brought in 2014.That is all to the good. But what this study hammers home is this: Accountability counts. Whether it comes from a regulator, a shareholder lawsuit or a journalistic enterprise, our capital markets and our investors need more of it, not less.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Cooking the Books in Bunches.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »