AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedA federal judge on Tuesday ordered a preliminary injunction to halt Sysco’s proposed merger with US Foods, dealing a potentially fatal blow to what would be a union of the country’s two biggest food distribution companies.The decision is a victory for the Federal Trade Commission, which sued in February to block the deal on the grounds that it would lead to higher prices and worse service for customers like restaurants and schools.The Obama administration has asserted itself in a number of high-profile antitrust cases of late. It successfully fought to block the mergers of both Comcast and Time Warner Cable and of AT&T and T-Mobile US, and also threatened to oppose a union of Sprint and T-Mobile US.Tuesday’s ruling, by Judge Amit P. Mehta of the Federal District Court for the District of Columbia, may prove to be insurmountable for Sysco and US Foods, which announced their plans in December 2013. In a statement, Sysco’s chief executive, Bill DeLaney, said he was “profoundly disappointed” with the outcome. The company said it would review its options, but a person briefed on its internal discussions said that the food service giant would most likely walk away from the deal.Putting together the two companies would have created a big food service distributor with some $65 billion in annual revenue. The F.T.C., however, argued that the $3.5 billion deal would significantly reduce competition in 32 markets.Sysco had declared that it would fight the lawsuit, spurred in part by how closely split the regulator’s own governing commission was in pursuing the lawsuit.But Tuesday’s order means that the two companies may now have little room left to maneuver. US Foods had already said in court that it would abandon the merger if the federal court handed down a preliminary injunction.In his two-page order, Judge Mehta made clear that he believed the F.T.C. had shown the deal was not in the public’s interest.“The F.T.C. has shown that there is a reasonable probability that the proposed merger will substantially impair competition in the national customer and local broadline markets and that the equities weigh in favor of injunctive relief,” he wrote.Shares of Sysco fell 2.7 percent in after-hours trading on Tuesday, to $36.60. US Foods is privately held by the investment firms Clayton, Dubilier & Rice and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company. Advertisement