By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINJUNE 23, 2015
A man suspected of being the mastermind of a $300 million penny-stock trading scheme is in federal custody because the international flight he was traveling on from Canada to Mexico made a brief stop in Phoenix.The layover on Tuesday at the Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport gave F.B.I. agents enough time to arrest Gregg R. Mulholland and charge him with overseeing the manipulation of numerous penny stocks and then laundering the profits through accounts at no fewer than five offshore law firms.Mr. Mulholland’s arrest caps a federal investigation that lasted more than two years and first came to light last September with the indictment of four men and an offshore investment firm in Belize, Legacy Global Markets. Federal prosecutors contend that Mr. Mulholland was the secret owner of Legacy Global.One of the stocks Mr. Mulholland is charged with manipulating is Cynk Technology, a little-known company based in Belize that claimed to be in the social network business and whose market value soared briefly to $6 billion last summer. The spectacular and bewildering rise of shares of Cynk, a company with no revenue and a single employee, was the buzz of Wall Street last July. Securities regulators halted trading in the stock, suspecting it was being manipulated. The shares of the company plummeted 85 percent when trading resumed on July 25.AdvertisementFederal authorities contend Mr. Mulholland, who is a citizen of both Canada and the United States, concealed his ownership interest in Legacy Global and fled the United States after the firm was indicted last summer. The criminal complaint contends that he used a complex array of offshore entities to mask his activities.Advertisement“He concealed his leadership role in this fraudulent network, which included stock promoters, lawyers and broker-dealers by using aliases and sham companies,” Kelly T. Currie, the acting United States attorney for Brooklyn, said in a statement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a related move, the Securities and Exchange Commission, which has been investigating the possible manipulation of a number of so-called penny stocks by Mr. Mulholland for several years, charged him with civil securities fraud on Tuesday. The criminal complaint against Mr. Mulholland was signed by Vera Scanlon, a United States magistrate judge in Brooklyn, on June 18. The sealed complaint and arrest warrant gave the federal authorities, which were monitoring his movements, the ability to move quickly and apprehend Mr. Mulholland once he landed in the United States.Federal prosecutors will appear on Wednesday before another magistrate judge in federal court in Phoenix to seek to have Mr. Mulholland extradited to New York.Prosecutors contend the stock scheme orchestrated by Mr. Mulholland began in May 2011 and ended in September 2014, when Legacy Global was indicted. The complaint describes a series of highly successful so-called pump-and-dump schemes, in which Mr. Mulholland and his associates are accused of artificially raising the price of ordinarily worthless stocks by persuading stock promoters to issue misleading news releases and then selling the shares they owned before the stocks crashed.The investigation, according to the complaint, was aided by an unidentified cooperating witness who pleaded guilty to securities fraud charges. The complaint describes the cooperating witness as a lawyer with offices in Utah who was also a former chairman of Legacy Global. The investigation was also aided by court-approved wiretaps, which captured a conversation during which Mr. Mulholland was said to be discussing trading in shares of Cynk. Mr. Mulholland became involved with Legacy Global in 2010, moving money away from Gibraltar Global Securities, a brokerage firm based in the Bahamas that ultimately collapsed after it was sued by the S.E.C. in 2013. Eventually, he became the biggest customer of Legacy Global and later bought the firm for $1 million, a move that the authorities said helped him conceal his group’s activities.A version of this article appears in print on June 24, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Layover Ends in Penny-Stock Scheme Arrest.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.