By DIONNE SEARCEYJUNE 23, 2015
The crackdown on retailers that sell liquid nicotine used in e-cigarettes escalated Tuesday as the New York attorney general reached a settlement with four businesses that failed to secure the potentially toxic substance in child-resistant packaging.The move by Attorney General Eric T. Schneiderman came a year after the state passed a law requiring retailers of liquid nicotine to better secure the substance, which was blamed in the death of an 18-month-old boy in New York last year. Poison control centers across the country have received hundreds of calls after children have come in contact with the liquid, which can lead to serious illness or death if swallowed or absorbed through the skin, health officials said.Liquid nicotine, a key ingredient in e-cigarettes, is taken from tobacco and infused with flavors, colors and chemicals. Health officials worry that the resulting products, sometimes packaged like candy, can appeal to children.Many state legislatures have acted or are considering action to rein in the sale and marketing of e-cigarettes, a growing business that has been largely unregulated despite the serious health concerns associated with it. Last year, after the Food and Drug Administration proposed regulations for e-cigarettes, Mr. Schneiderman and 29 other attorneys general called on the agency to restrict companies from marketing and selling e-cigarettes to minors and to ban flavored e-cigarettes.Advertisement“Today, we are taking action against four companies, and putting others on notice: Stop selling liquid nicotine in anything but child-resistant containers, or we will come after you,” Mr. Schneiderman said in a news release.AdvertisementThe settlement requires two retailers in Manhattan and two online retailers that sell products to New Yorkers to pay $95,000 in penalties as well as provide proof of testing of containers to make sure they are safe, to allow customers to exchange bottles that lack protections and to conduct employee training.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The retailers included in the settlement are Henley Vaporium, which has headquarters in Manhattan; Beyond Vape, a California-based seller with three stores in New York; Rocket Sheep, a manufacturer; and ECig Distributors, an online retailer. The attorney general’s investigators found the retailers selling flavors such as Vaperlicious Passion Peach, Vaporboy Berry Peached Tea and Cosmic Charlie’s Chalk Dust without proper packaging.Many manufacturers of liquid nicotine say they have begun to use child-resistant packaging, but the proliferation of e-cigarettes and the fact that the substance is not federally regulated makes it hard to track. A survey from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported e-cigarette use among middle and high school students tripled from 2013 to 2014.Peter Denholtz, chief executive and owner of Henley Vaporium, said he thought the action was unfair because investigators arrived at one of his shops without his realizing that the new law was in effect. Most of his bottles of liquid nicotine were sealed in child-resistant packaging that the company now ensures its manufacturer uses, he said, but a handful of older bottles lacked it. He said he wished the attorney general had notified retailers about the law.“Instead,” Mr. Denholtz said, “they sent us a subpoena.”A version of this article appears in print on June 24, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Attorney General Faults Liquid Nicotine Retailers for Improper Packaging.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.