
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
OCT. 22, 2015
For Lesa France Kennedy, C.E.O. of the International Speedway Corporation and vice chairwoman of Nascar, inheriting the family business was no easy task.This interview with Lesa France Kennedy, chief executive of the International Speedway Corporation and vice chairwoman of Nascar, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Your grandfather, Bill France Sr., started Nascar, and you grew up in the family business. What are some early memories for you?A. My brother and I did a variety of jobs, starting when we were 10 years old. I was in the ticket office. I had the chance to interact with customers. They were all characters. It was a really neat job to have at that age.I worked a lot with my grandmother. All our family members have very strong personalities, and she was very particular with the details, and that was very important in the business, especially starting out from scratch.AdvertisementShe was a penny counter. My grandfather was a visionary. He knew from the very beginning what his passion was and what his vision for the sport was. At the time, it was very disorganized, and it needed someone to wrap their arms around it and say, “Let’s get this headed in the right direction.” They were a great match for each other.The Times’s Corner Office columnist, Adam Bryant, speaks with women executives about leadership, management and success in a business. Updated MAY 14, 2015My grandmother even kept two sets of books. One was the real set for the business. And then she kept a second set of books to show my grandfather, because she knew if there was any money in the bank, he would be looking to spend it quickly, and she was more of a rainy-day type of a person.AdvertisementAfter every race, she would go to the back room and count with the bankers and make sure that every dollar got right into the bank. She would sit there and count dollars and wrap them herself.Do you see their influence in your leadership style today?You’re always looking to do new things with the business and think about what people really want, and that’s a lesson that all of our family members took away from my grandfather. My grandmother always kept things in check, and we have to remind ourselves to do that. The pace of change in the world of motor sports is so fast and furious that you have to make sure you’re headed in the right direction and at the right speed.Moving up through the ranks in a family business has its unique challenges. How did you handle them?My father had some very specific expectations, and I admire him for it, even though it was a little bit painful at the time. He let us find our own way. A lot of the senior executives at the time were a little bit leery of new ideas from my brother and me, and we’d have to fight for those quite a bit.It would have been easy for Dad to step in and say, “No, no, let the kids try this out.” But instead he would really make us work for it and prove those ideas, and also to convince the other people. It was a great learning experience. He could have made it easier, but in the long run, I don’t think that would have been the way to go.Any particular challenges you faced as a woman working in Nascar?Early on, especially in the ’80s when I came back from college, it was about getting the invitation.
                Four chief executives describe the importance of taking stands, and of making sure they’re heard.            What do you mean?Meetings would occur, and you might not actually be invited, and you would think that you should be there or that you would like to contribute. I found the best way to get invited was to add value and find out what their challenges and their struggles were.AdvertisementSo I would visit with one of the senior managers and make myself invaluable to him or her. I’d go out and do all the work for them and let them take all the credit, and over time, they start accepting you. They would say, “Well, I guess it’s O.K. if she comes to this meeting.” So I would listen and figure out what their biggest challenges were, and I would try to help out from behind the scenes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I’d also ask questions: “Was there a meeting today? I would love to hear about it sometime. Maybe you could share something with me about it, as I’m really interested in that subject.” If you’re just persistent, eventually they accept you. It took time. There were different approaches, but I like for it to be their idea.Any changes you’ve noticed in how people treat you now that you’re the chief executive?I had always been part of the “solve-it team,” and when you become C.E.O., people often come to you with the problem already solved. If you’re used to being in the middle of things, it takes time to step back a little bit and let them work it out and say to yourself that they will involve me when it makes sense, and you don’t feel like you have to be in the middle of everything.How do you hire?First impressions are so important in terms of fitting in on the team. The moment you walk in the door, you’re being observed. You may not know that, and it’s not anything formal, but I’ll get feedback. You can read the body language of some of the people they’ve met, like a receptionist, and you can pick up very subtle cues about how they felt about that person. Was the person respectful?In the interview, I like to know who they are as a person and how they’ve come to be where they are. I love to listen to their background. I like well-rounded people, too. Some people are so skilled at one thing, which is terrific, and you need that expertise, but I like to see a well-rounded person who can contribute in different areas.And if they can do that, you usually find that they’re not going to pigeonhole themselves into one area and that they’ll be willing to help when it’s needed. Our business moves so fast; you have to be willing to jump in and do whatever job needs to be done. If we have a rainout, you may be out in the rain giving people information. The people in our building know that, and they all are a part of it. They understand that culture.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Taking the Lead in the Family Business.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »