
Breakingviews By                     
ROB COX

JUNE 23, 2015
Everyone in the auto industry knows Sergio Marchionne’s views on consolidation. For years, Mr. Marchionne, the Italian-Canadian executive who welded former laggards Fiat and Chrysler into a coherent whole, has shouted from the rooftops that the only way to ensure long-term viability for manufacturers like his is to crunch them together and take out capacity.Yet Mr. Marchionne’s public campaign wouldn’t be happening without the backing of John Elkann, the 39-year-old Agnelli family scion who leads Exor, the investment group that owns a controlling stake in Fiat Chrysler. The soft-spoken Mr. Elkann may not project the stylish swagger of his grandfather, the Italian business legend Gianni Agnelli, who once crashed a Ferrari going 120 miles an hour into a meat truck on the Corniche above Monte Carlo. It would be a mistake, though, to underestimate his resolve.Exor’s aggressive bid for the reinsurer PartnerRe may offer a glimpse of what General Motors and others can expect as Mr. Marchionne intensifies his coercive charm offensive. For the first time in his career, which began with a stint at General Electric and a seat on Fiat’s board at 21, Mr. Elkann is pursuing a big unsolicited takeover – and trying to derail an agreed deal between PartnerRe and Axis Capital with an all-cash $6.8 billion offer.G.M.’s leadership, which rebuffed an approach that Mr. Marchionne made in March about a potential tie-up, would be unwise to think that’s the end of it. True, Fiat Chrysler, with a market capitalization of just $20 billion, is a lot smaller than the $58 billion G.M. It’s also less profitable and has $9 billion of net debt. But Mr. Marchionne’s thesis, bluntly articulated in his manifesto-cum-investor presentation in April titled “Confession of a capital junkie,” is nearly irrefutable. As one large G.M. investor put it to me: “The guy is totally right.”AdvertisementMr. Marchionne’s basic argument is that there is too much capital being deployed by too many carmakers. The time to act is while the car business is booming – annualized sales in the United States hit a decade high in May — not during one of its inevitable cyclical troughs. Even now, the return on investment by mainstream carmakers is barely 8 percent, below their cost of capital, according to Mr. Marchionne. This results in valuations – around four times earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda – for the whole sector that are lower than for most other industries.AdvertisementBy sharing research and development, powertrain, transmission and engine portfolios, Mr. Marchionne argues, Fiat Chrysler could squeeze out as much as $5 billion in savings in a merger with a rival, a process that would raise returns on capital above 12 percent, and warrant a valuation of around seven times Ebitda. Though deals in the industry have tried to capture these benefits (think Daimler’s ephemeral ownership of Chrysler), they failed because “it is ultimately a matter of leadership style and capability,” Mr. Marchionne says.The subtext, of course, is that Mr. Marchionne is a different class of leader. Fiat’s extraordinary turnaround and integration of Chrysler suggests that may be true. At any rate, it’s easy to see why Mr. Elkann and the 70-odd other members of his extended family who have their wealth tied up in Exor have confidence in the man. Since 2009, when Mr. Marchionne took Chrysler out of bankruptcy, Exor’s stock price has surged to 45 euros a share, from just under 6 euros, valuing his family’s 51.4 percent stake at around 5.6 billion euros today.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The experience convinced Mr. Elkann – an admirer of Warren E. Buffett and Jorge Paulo Lemann, the aggressive Brazilian entrepreneur behind 3G Capital - that the car industry needed to continue consolidating. As he wrote in his 2014 letter to Exor shareholders: “Hopefully, this will be driven by reason and common sense rather than by crisis and will take into account the importance of identity and culture, as we have done, avoiding the all too typical divisive trappings of a takeover and creating instead a shared transnational culture.”As much as that sounds like a pitch for G.M. to absorb Fiat, the Agnellis aren’t looking to sell out. Cars are their bloodline. In a no-premium all-stock merger with G.M., the Agnellis would, of course, see their 29.2 percent stake in Fiat Chrysler diluted, to around 7.5 percent of the merged entity. That would still make the Agnellis the largest shareholder, ahead of the health care trust of the United Automobile Workers union.The benefits of owning a smaller piece of a larger canvas on which to apply Mr. Marchionne’s brushwork would be sizable. Max Warburton, an analyst with Bernstein Research who sparred with Mr. Marchionne over his treatise on capital, suggests a combination could credibly promise cost savings of $10 billion. “These kinds of numbers are not insane, at least in theory,” he wrote.The net present value of those synergies could be worth something close to $60 billion for shareholders, with the Agnelli family’s stake alone reaching almost $5 billion, nearly equal to the value of its current interest in Exor.Getting G.M. to play ball is understandably proving tricky: A reverse takeover by Mr. Marchionne is hardly at the top of the to-do list of G.M.’s chief executive, Mary Barra. But the logic for a transaction is sound. Mr. Marchionne, who turned 63 last week, isn’t getting any younger. And Mr. Elkann is developing an appreciation for the art of the deal. Don’t discount Exor’s determination.Rob Cox is editor of Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »