AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberCANNES, France — Snapchat is teaming up with the advertising conglomerate WPP and the Daily Mail website to form a new company, called Truffle Pig, that will create social content for brands.The venture, announced Tuesday on the Daily Mail yacht during the Cannes Lions advertising festival here, is the latest attempt to capitalize on a desire among marketers for campaigns that reach young consumers and look less like traditional ads. Truffle Pig aspires to appeal to brands by offering a combination of WPP’s advertising expertise, Snapchat’s social reach and The Daily Mail’s news coverage.“It is creating the content, understanding mass audience, which Daily Mail brings, and what it’s like to be fluent in millennials, which is what Snapchat is,” Alexander Jutkowitz, the chief executive of Truffle Pig, said in an interview. “This is the only place where we’ve been able to bring all of this together in one place.”Mr. Jutkowitz is also the managing partner of Group SJR, a digital consulting firm that WPP acquired two years ago, which works with companies to create social content for brands.Truffle Pig will introduce its branded content on DailyMail.com; Elite Daily, which is owned by Daily Mail; and Snapchat, but will push it onto other digital properties based on the client’s strategy.Jon Steinberg, the chief executive of Daily Mail North America, said in an interview that the partnership means he does not have to build an internal brand agency at Daily Mail from scratch.“I didn’t want to have to build an agency alone,” he said. “This is a unique prototype for an agency to work in a way where, at the very start, everything is influenced by the idea that it’s not just creativity in a vacuum.”Snapchat, which is attending the advertising festival for the first time this year, has already managed to generate significant publicity.There is an enormous banner with the Snapchat logo on the Palais des Festivals, a convention hall where much of the festival’s formal activity takes place. On Monday, the company’s chief executive, Evan Spiegel, spoke on stage during a keynote interview with Joanna Coles, the editor in chief of Cosmopolitan magazine.Also on Monday, Imran Khan, Snapchat’s chief strategy officer, spoke with Ben Winkler, the chief digital officer of the agency OMD, at an intimate event at OMD’s beach cabana. Under the hot afternoon sun, Mr. Khan talked about the future of messaging and Snapchat’s advertising strategy.Ad executives generally say they view Snapchat as having potential as a marketing platform, but many also say they are trying to figure out how to use the service effectively. On the one hand, Snapchat users are the kind of young, engaged consumers that marketers want to reach. But Snapchat started accepting advertising only recently, and its products can be confusing.Advertisers also yearn for better targeting capabilities and more analytics that can show the effectiveness of campaigns. There have also been murmurs that advertising on Snapchat is too expensive for what it delivers. (During a question-and-answer session during his talk, Mr. Khan declined to comment on the cost of advertising on Snapchat.)Snapchat has claimed success on a number of new ad products, including geofilter digital stickers, which people can use to tag their location. McDonald’s recently signed on to sponsor a geofilter, so users at a McDonald’s in the United States can add images related to McDonald’s to their photos.Advertisement