AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinThe legal woes continue to mount for Joshua B. Newman, the serial entrepreneur charged by federal prosecutors with defrauding investors in high-intensity training ventures. Now, a former business partner is suing him.The former partner, John Franklin, filed a lawsuit late Monday in Federal District Court in Manhattan. It accuses Mr. Newman of misappropriating more than $400,000 from their joint business venture to open several CrossFit training centers in New York and New Jersey.The accusations in Mr. Franklin’s suit mirror some of the claims made by federal prosecutors in New Jersey against Mr. Newman, who was charged on May 21 with defrauding more than a dozen investors out of at least $2 million. Mr. Newman and prosecutors are engaged in preliminary plea negotiations on two counts of wire fraud.Priya Chaudhry, a lawyer for Mr. Newman, said in an email statement that the preliminary talks with federal prosecutors about a potential plea “are not indicative of anything.”Mr. Newman, who is 35 and graduated from Yale in 2001, positioned himself in recent years as something of a local spokesman for the high-intensity fitness movement known as CrossFit. He was the co-founder of a big independently owned CrossFit center in Manhattan. Last year, he teamed up with Mr. Franklin, who operates two CrossFit centers, and formed a company called Northstar that was supposed to operate a network of CrossFit centers nationwide.In his suit, Mr. Franklin said that Mr. Newman had misled him about efforts to raise money from investors and where the money that did come in was being deployed. He said Mr. Newman had told him he was closing an account that Northstar had at Bank of America and opening a new one at JPMorgan Chase. Mr. Newman did open a second bank account, but Mr. Franklin said he had also kept the earlier account at Bank of America open and had the statements mailed to Mr. Newman’s apartment on the Upper West Side.Mr. Franklin said he eventually learned about Mr. Newman’s deception and confronted him earlier this year. Mr. Newman, the complaint said, admitted he had gotten himself into “deep trouble” and needed the money to pay off some old investors.“Newman said that he needed to pay off these old investors so that they could start fresh with Northstar,” the complaint said.“At one point, my client considered Mr. Newman to be a mentor,” said Caroline Polisi, Mr. Franklin’s lawyer. “Unfortunately, he ended up becoming an unwitting victim in Mr. Newman’s massive fraudulent scheme.”In April, The New York Times reported on the long list of disgruntled investors in Mr. Newman’s ventures, which included a now-defunct film production company.CrossFit Inc. provides technical assistance to people looking to operate centers using the CrossFit brand name. The centers are run as independent businesses.A lawyer for Mr. Newman could not be reached for comment.Advertisement