AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill VlasicWASHINGTON — Takata, the Japanese auto supplier, returned to Capitol Hill on Tuesday to try to alleviate fears about its airbags that have killed at least eight people and injured more than 100 others.Instead, the company, in its fourth appearance before Congress, met with more skepticism and harsh criticism from lawmakers about its products, including new airbags it is making to replace about 34 million that have been recalled.And the company is now losing support among at least one of the 11 vehicle manufacturers involved in the mushrooming airbag replacement program, the largest in American automotive history.An executive of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles told the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation that it would no longer use Takata products to replace the recalled airbags in 4.1 million of its cars. The executive, Scott G. Kunselman, said the automaker would instead use airbags made by the firm TRW to ensure the safety of vehicle occupants.At the heart of Fiat Chrysler’s concern, Mr. Kunselman said, was Takata’s use of ammonium nitrate as a propellant — an ingredient that Takata continues to use despite a mounting toll of deaths and injuries.“You want a safe propellant so you’re going to a company that doesn’t use ammonium nitrate?” Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, asked.“That is accurate,” Mr. Kunselman replied.It was one of many dramatic moments at the hearing, which included a call by Mr. Blumenthal for Takata to start a compensation program for victims of faulty airbag inflaters, which can explode after prolonged exposure to high heat and humidity and spray metal debris onto drivers and passengers.Lawmakers were also sharply critical of the performance of federal regulators overseeing auto safety, citing government investigations that found the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration had mishandled inquiries about Takata airbags, as well as the long-delayed recall at General Motors last year of defective cars tied to at least 117 deaths.One committee member, Senator Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri, sharply criticized the safety agency for seeking more government funding while it tries to overhaul its recall and investigative processes characterized as “broken” in a report by the inspector general of the Transportation Department.“This isn’t about resources,” Ms. McCaskill said of the agency’s request for more money. “This is about blatant, incompetent management.”About 32 million cars are subject to recall for potentially defective airbags, and the problem has been blamed for at least eight deaths and more than 100 injuries. This list is of known recalls as of June 19.Mark R. Rosekind, who took over in December as the head of the safety agency, has vowed to upgrade the agency’s personnel and procedures, even in the absence of additional funding.“We will continue to look at every place possible to make changes,” Mr. Rosekind said.But he acknowledged that the agency was currently unable to adequately screen some 80,000 consumer complaints it receives each year about possible vehicle defects. “You have too many complaints and not enough people,” he said.Some of the lawmakers conceded that the agency had at least, under Mr. Rosekind, begun to improve defect investigations. But that did not dispel the sense of urgency about the troubled Takata recall.“Now is the time for accountability,” said Senator John Thune, Republican of South Dakota and the committee’s chairman.The committee’s ranking minority member, Senator Bill Nelson, Democrat of Florida, confronted an executive from Takata, Kevin M. Kennedy, to explain why the company continued to use ammonium nitrate in its airbags when other suppliers do not.“Instead of this airbag saving lives, it is killing people,” Mr. Nelson said.Former Takata engineers have said that they raised concerns over a  decade ago about the company’s use of the compound, but that the company chose to use it for cost reasons. And the company’s patent applications show that its engineers have tried for nearly two decades to make ammonium nitrate more stable. Mr. Kennedy, who heads Takata’s North American operations, spent most of his testimony defending the use of ammonium nitrate. It is effective and safe, he said, if properly treated with stabilizing chemicals.He said that one type of inflater used chemicals that were found to degrade over long periods of time in regions with high heat and humidity.Mr. Kennedy said that particular inflater, nicknamed a “bat wing” because of its shape, had been discontinued by Takata, and said that all such inflaters had been recalled. “All of the fatalities and most of the injuries involved bat wing inflaters,” he said.But he expressed confidence that different inflaters using ammonium nitrate are safe if the chemical is properly stabilized, particularly new airbags being produced to replace recalled ones. “Alternate designs have not had issues,” he said.One former N.H.T.S.A. official said that Takata probably had little choice but to stick with the ammonium nitrate.“It’s probably a matter of economic survival,” said Allan Kam, who served as a senior enforcement lawyer for the N.H.T.S.A. for more than 25 years before he retired in 2000.And even if Takata wanted to switch, Mr. Kam added, it would require extensive testing and, particularly after all that has emerged about the airbag defect, automakers and Takata officials “wouldn’t want to blindly accept something.”Indeed, Mr. Kennedy, in prepared remarks provided to the committee, said that, for certain types of inflaters in certain vehicle models, there is “currently no available alternative.”Takata has produced about five million replacement bags, Mr. Kennedy told lawmakers. While not all of those replacements use inflaters with ammonium nitrate, Takata would not specify how many use the compound.The company’s position, however, did little to dispel concerns on the Senate panel. “Nevertheless, questions exist about whether the currently available replacements are truly safe,” Mr. Thune said.Even as Mr. Kennedy defended the use of ammonium nitrate, he tried to assuage senators’ concerns by saying that about half of the replacement airbags do not have that chemical because they are made by other manufacturers like TRW. By December, that figure is expected to reach 70 percent, he said.“Most of the replacements are alternate propellant designs,” he said.Mr. Kennedy also balked at a request by Mr. Blumenthal to have the company establish a compensation fund for victims of defective airbags.G.M., for example, set aside $600 million to compensate victims of defective ignition switches in 2.6 million small cars it recalled last year, and hired the lawyer Kenneth Feinberg to administer the fund. So far, settlement offers have been made to the families of 117 people killed in accidents linked to the faulty switches.Mr. Kennedy said he did not have authority to approve such a fund at Takata, but promised to bring the issue up to the company’s top management in Japan and have an answer within two weeks.He also said that Takata continued to vigorously test its airbags and seek improvements, as part of the Japanese practice known as “kaizen,” or continuous improvement.Mr. Blumenthal, for one, was skeptical, saying, “Kaizen sounds like a euphemism for trying to avoid exploding airbags.”Hiroko Tabuchi and Danielle Ivory contributed reporting from New York.Advertisement