AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Michel Demaré, the chairman of the agricultural and chemical giant Syngenta, took to the Internet on Tuesday to outline the criteria necessary for the company to consider a takeover offer from Monsanto as “serious.”Syngenta, based in Basel, Switzerland, has rejected two recent takeover approaches from Monsanto, its American rival, to acquire the company for about $45 billion, citing in part regulatory concerns and saying the offers undervalued its future prospects.The company also called a $2 billion breakup fee added to Monsanto’s proposal this month “wholly inadequate” if the merger proved unpalatable to regulators.“A serious proposal to buy Syngenta has to be made at full and fair value,” Mr. Demaré said in a video on the company’s YouTube channel. “It has to recognize for shareholders the inherent combination benefits.“And it has to provide a high degree of certainty that the transaction will be closed, including compensation in case the deal fails be it for antitrust reason or any other reasons,” he added. “Absent these parameters, I think the board would be irresponsible to even accept to negotiate under such terms.”Mr. Demaré added that Monsanto was trying to buy the company “on the cheap.”Monsanto first offered in May to pay 449 Swiss francs, or about $488, for each share of Syngenta; 45 percent of the payment would be in cash. It added a $2 billion breakup fee to its offer this month.The deal, if consummated, would create an agricultural behemoth, combining Monsanto, the world leader in seeds and genetically engineered traits, such as herbicide resistance, with Syngenta, the largest producer of agricultural chemicals.Monsanto has said that it would sell Syngenta’s seed business and other overlapping businesses.In the video, Mr. Demaré said that the company’s external legal counsel had met with Monsanto on three occasions to share its antitrust concerns, but that Monsanto had failed to come back with solutions to address its concerns.“The fact is that this is a very complex transaction which is being proposed. It will take a long, long time to be solved,” Mr. Demaré said. “And as a result of it, there is a lot of uncertainty and no guarantee of completion. And so it is clear that it would be totally irresponsible for the board to engage on the current proposed terms of this transaction.”Syngenta manufactures insecticides, fungicides, herbicides and seeds. The company reported sales of $15.1 billion in 2014 and employs more than 28,000 people in more than 90 countries.Based in St. Louis, Monsanto manufactures seeds and chemicals used in crop protection, including insecticides. It reported sales of $15.9 billion in 2014 and employs more than 21,000 people in 66 countries.Advertisement