AdvertisementSupported byBy Dino GrandoniOnline publishers have learned that when explaining a complicated subject, like an economic crisis or health care reform, simplicity is often the best route for attracting readers. One way of doing this: Write a post that promises everything can be understood “in one chart.”Perhaps no publication has taken that lesson to heart as much as Quartz, the business news website of Atlantic Media. On Tuesday, Quartz introduced a new section of its site, a search engine for the thousands of bar and line charts that Quartz journalists have made since its introduction in 2012.“I’d say we’ve been thinking about doing this for two years now,” said Kevin J. Delaney, editor in chief of Quartz. “Our aspiration is that this becomes the home for charts and data on the Internet.”The new section, Atlas, is a bet that its readers will want to search through, share on social media and download data from the charts in Quartz’s archive. Last year alone, Mr. Delaney said, the site published 4,000 charts.Among the charts that an Atlas search will pull up are ones built or paid for by advertisers, which are known as native advertisements, or ads designed in part to appear like the journalism they are near. General Electric, Samsung and UPS are among the companies that have made or sponsored charts on Quartz.For now, only the line and bar charts made by Quartz’s own journalists, along with the native ads, will populate Atlas. (Despite the name, there won’t be any maps on Atlas to start.)Eventually, the publication wants to allow anyone to publish charts there, at which point Quartz will have to decide how much it should manage charts it is not making itself. Quartz has already opened up Chartbuilder — a tool that, like the name suggests, helps editors builds charts — to the public.Increasingly, media outlets are dipping into their archives to find ways of repurposing, and profiting from, content they have already created. The New Yorker sells collections of articles as coffee table reads and, more recently, as e-books. Last year, The New York Times published a cooking app that repackaged old newspaper recipes for tablet and smartphone users.Usually, the publications that take advantage of their archives are older and have more content to draw upon. But Quartz is exploiting the resiliency of charts in a social media environment where news moves swiftly.“Writing ages pretty quickly,” said Jeremy J. Littau, a journalism professor at Lehigh University. “One of the nice things about charts is that they have a little bit more staying power.”Quartz, itself a spinoff of the company that publishes The Atlantic magazine, has tried featuring niche areas of coverage. For four months last year, Quartz broke out its coverage of the television business into its own website, called Glass, before shutting it down “in order to put our focus elsewhere,” said Zachary M. Seward, vice president for product and executive editor at Quartz.Advertisement