AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersSHANGHAI — China’s factory activity showed signs of stabilizing in June, with two nongovernment surveys suggesting that the economy might be regaining some momentum, while many analysts expected further policy support to ensure a more sure-footed recovery.The preliminary purchasing managers index for China published by HSBC and compiled by Markit, a data analysis firm, edged up to 49.6 in June. It was the survey’s highest level in three months but still below the 50 mark, which would have pointed to an expansion. The final reading for May was 49.2.“The pickup in new orders” — which returned to positive territory at 50.3 in June — “was driven by a strong rise in the new export orders subcomponent, suggesting that foreign demand may finally be turning a corner,” Capital Economics analysts wrote in a research note. “Today’s P.M.I. reading reinforces our view that the economy has started to find its footing.”But companies stepped up layoffs, the survey showed, shedding jobs at the fastest pace in more than six years.Annabel Fiddes, an economist at Markit, said: “Manufacturers continued to cut staff. This suggests companies have relatively muted growth expectations.” She said that she expected Beijing to “step up their efforts to stimulate growth and job creation.”A much rosier picture was painted by a separate survey, a quarterly report by China Beige Book International, a data analysis firm, describing a “broad-based recovery” in the second quarter, led primarily by China’s interior provinces.“Among major sectors, two developments stand out: a welcome resurgence in retail — which saw rising revenue growth despite a slip in prices — and a broad-based rebound in property,” said the report’s authors, Leland Miller and Craig Charney. Manufacturing, services, real estate, agriculture and mining all had year-on-year and quarterly gains, they said.Mr. Miller has recently argued that stimulus cannot solve China’s economic challenges and would be unlikely to have the desired effect on investment, given weak demand.China cut interest rates for the third time in six months in May in a bid to stoke a sputtering economy that is headed for its worst year in a quarter of a century.Markets expect Beijing to step up policy support. A major headache is the reluctance of Chinese executives to invest in expansion or productivity because of low returns and higher long-term borrowing costs.“Real interest rates are double digits, 11 or 12 percent,” said Zhou Hao, economist in Shanghai for the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group. “This is the real issue for the economy. You can cut nominal rates to zero and you are still seeing real rates around 5 percent. The profit margin is only around 3-4 percent.”“We are still seeking new engines for the economy,” he said. “Basically we need to deleverage first.”Advertisement