AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Reynolds HoldingAn antitrust food fight threatens to hamper America’s merger boom.The Federal District Court in Manhattan has at least temporarily halted  Sysco’s $3.5 billion purchase of US Foods, saying that the merger, which would combine the nation’s largest food-service companies, would probably harm competition despite the existence of some local rivals. A similar argument may affect other deals in the works, and one already in process: Staples’ $6.3 billion takeover of Office Depot.For now, the merger of Staples and Office Depot, the two biggest office supply chains, looks like a financial winner. Staples and Office Depot say they expect annual cost savings of $1 billion by the third year after the stock-and-cash transaction closes. That’s worth about $6 billion to investors today, assuming a 35 percent tax rate. No wonder Office Depot shareholders approved the transaction on Friday.Trustbusters may be less enthusiastic, though. Staples and Ofifce Depot are, respectively, the No. 1 and No. 2 brick-and-mortar retailers of office needs like printer cartridges, binders and, well, staples. The Federal Trade Commission rejected a proposed deal between them in 1997.Amazon and other online retailers have since taken away consumer business, and companies like Walmart offer cheaper offline options. That’s why the F.T.C. approved Office Depot’s 2013 acquisition of OfficeMax without requiring store closures.More worrisome are nationwide businesses and government customers that make bulk purchases over several years in exchange for deep discounts. The merger could soften that competition. Amazon has a site catering to businesses, but sellers like Costco aren’t national distributors that can ensure the consistent delivery of products the way Staples-Office Depot could.A similar issue seems to have tripped up Sysco. It argued that merging with US Foods would reduce costs while stiff local competition would keep prices down. The F.T.C. countered, however, that only those two companies could serve sprawling hotel and restaurant chains, and eliminating one would cut national competition. The regulator even refused to accept Sysco’s offer to sell distribution centers with nearly $5 billion in sales.The court’s reasons for blocking the deal pending further review won’t become clear until it releases its full opinion on Friday. Its brief order suggests that the food transaction is a goner, though, and that Staples and Office Depot have a problem. The economics of their merger may still look tasty, but the legal precedent has soured.Reynolds Holding is law editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement