
Advertising By                     
 BROOKS BARNES
 
OCT. 26, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  Move over, Flo. Make room, Most Interesting Man in the World. Here comes Miles Mouvay, an ascot-wearing, butter-scented mascot that Fandango hopes will help consumers see it as more than a ticket seller.Fandango on Monday will unveil the character — an eccentric movie buff played by the comedian Kenan Thompson of “Saturday Night Live” — in a multimillion-dollar campaign stretching across the web and including television, billboard and in-theater ads. The branding effort, the largest in Fandango’s 15-year history, is intended to reinforce the company’s evolution into a full-fledged entertainment hub.Fandango, for instance, now offers seven original video series, including the awards-focused “FrontRunners,” hosted by Dave Karger. Last year, it bought Movieclips, which produces movie-related video snippets.Fandango, which is owned by Comcast, continues to experience rapid growth; it has sold 58 percent more tickets so far this year compared with the same period in 2014. (At the same time, there has been a 5.6 percent increase in industrywide box office revenue.) But ticketing competition has grown, in part because theater chains like AMC Entertainment Holdings have become more aggressive in selling their own tickets online, and Fandango has decided that it must deepen its relationship with consumers to continue to thrive.Advertisement“The macro goal is increased moviegoer engagement,” said Paul Yanover, a former Disney executive who took over as Fandango’s president in 2012. “The earlier we can get involved in moviegoing decisions, the more we can grow ticketing.”AdvertisementMascots have been used to create affection and loyalty for brands since at least 1898, when the Michelin Man began selling tires. But mascots — or “brand ambassadors,” as the advertising industry now calls them — have become more widespread in recent years, helping in particular to cut through the online clutter. The quirky Flo has appeared in more than 100 commercials for Progressive insurance; the husky-voiced Most Interesting Man in the World has sold Dos Equis beer for about a decade.Miles Mouvay, created in partnership with Mr. Thompson and the Los Angeles advertising agency Stun Creative, wears oversize black glasses and an orange smoking jacket (Fandango’s signature color). The character is a fervent movie fan. “My mama birthed me in a movie theater,” he says in one spot. “In fact, she loved movies so much, she waited until the credits rolled and then carried me home in an extra-large popcorn bucket.”The Miles Mouvay story will play out in eight 30-second commercials, running on both cable and broadcast networks, and 18 digital videos, according to Adam Rockmore, Fandango’s marketing chief. “We wanted someone who could span younger, older, male, female, different ethnicities,” Mr. Rockmore said, referring to the selection of Mr. Thompson. Certain spots will cross-promote coming films, including “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” from Disney, and “Sisters,” from Universal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Noting that he once reviewed movies as a 12-year-old cast member of the TBS series “Real News for Kids,” Mr. Thompson said in an email that he had always been a cinephile. “I guess you could say I’ve been practicing for this gig since I was a kid,” he said. “I use Fandango all the time, so I jumped at this opportunity.”Fandango sells tickets to roughly 27,000 screens in the United States. A rival company, MovieTickets.com, which is owned by a consortium that includes Time Warner, Viacom and Regal Entertainment Group, has access to about 23,000 domestic screens, with a fair amount of overlap, according to a spokesman. MovieTickets.com has a substantial international business, selling tickets to an additional 5,000 screens overseas.For years, Fandango grew in bursts by signing up new theaters to represent, often exclusively. But it has now reached near-ubiquity in the United States, representing roughly 95 percent of the theaters that offer online and mobile ticketing.So Fandango, which attracts as many as 38.9 million monthly unique visitors to its desktop and mobile platforms, according to comScore, has begun to expand overseas for the first time. Last month, the company bought Brazil’s largest film ticketing service, Ingresso.com, for about $71 million.Mr. Yanover is also pushing to increase the percentage of tickets that are bought digitally. Americans still predominantly reserve movie seats the old-fashioned way, by standing in line at theater box offices. Analysts believe that only about 13 percent of the 1.3 billion movie tickets sold annually in the United States are purchased using the web or mobile apps.So Fandango has been allowing Twitter users to buy tickets by clicking on a button. The company is also testing a system in which a smartphone image serves as a digital ticket — no need for an usher to scan the phone.A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Fandango’s Buttery New Face.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »