AdvertisementSupported byBy James KanterBRUSSELS — A meeting of eurozone finance ministers, hoping to end the impasse in Greece’s bailout negotiations, unexpectedly broke up Wednesday after only about an hour.The quick ending to what had been billed as a make-or-break meeting highlights the acute challenges to keeping Greece from going bankrupt and potentially becoming the first country to be forced out of the eurozone.“Unfortunately we have not reached an agreement yet,” Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the head of the Eurogroup of finance ministers, said after that meeting broke up. “But we are determined to continue work.”Dogging progress at this critical stage was the inability of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras of Greece to have resolved anything in earlier meetings with crucial deal brokers: Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund; Mario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank; and Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission.The night still could be a long one for Mr. Dijsselbloem. Officials said he could restart meetings before midnight or early tomorrow morning with Mr. Tsipras, Ms. Lagarde, Mr. Draghi and Mr. Juncker.Alexander Stubb, the Finnish finance minister, wrote on his Twitter account that eurozone ministers would meet again at 1 p.m. Brussels time on Thursday. That makes it likely that the latest crisis over Greece will dominate a summit meeting of all 28 European Union leaders scheduled to begin later that afternoon.From a small island to the capital in Athens, here is a glimpse into some of the lives of Greeks as their country struggles to repay billions in debt.A key sticking point was that, according to creditors, the latest Greek proposals did not go far enough. Mr. Tsipras has proposed measures that rein in pensions and raise taxes as a way to meet creditors’ budget targets.The Greek proposals could potentially deliver savings of about €8 billion, in part by shifting tax burdens to higher earners and companies. But Greece has a spotty record of collecting taxes, and carrying out the plan could pinch economic growth, raising additional concerns for creditors.Further complicating matters, Mr. Tsipras has insisted that the creditors grant some debt relief to Greece. A win here could help Mr. Tsipras head off a potential rebellion in the Greek Parliament. But Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, Greece’s biggest eurozone lender, indicated on Monday night that Athens must make concessions first.In reply to Greece’s proposals, creditors sought further tightening of pensions and higher value-added taxes. Mr. Tsipras and his top advisers said those revisions were unacceptable.By midday Wednesday, Mr. Dijsselbloem said there was still much work to do, as the later breakup of the finance ministers’ meeting made obvious.Financial markets, which had been buoyant in recent days in hopes of a deal in the long-running crisis, lost momentum on Wednesday. U.S. indexes slid back, European stocks were mixed, and Greek shares fell sharply. Interest rates on Greek government bonds, a measure of the government’s borrowing costs, rose slightly.The creditors’ new demands included further tightening of Greece’s pension payouts. They also called for an increase in annual revenue equal to 1 percent of gross domestic product from changes to the value-added tax system — compared with the figure of 0.74 percent of G.D.P. that Greece had offered.The creditors also demanded that Greece increase the value-added taxes in various ways, including raising the sales tax in restaurants to 23 percent, from the current 13 percent. That would be a strong blow to the tourism sector.The I.M.F. is seen as the main proponent of tougher measures. The Washington-based fund’s involvement in eurozone bailouts is a source of frustration for the Greek government, which would prefer to deal directly with European institutions that promote a more flexible approach.But in any case, Greece owes the I.M.F. money from the current bailout program — including a €1.6 billion, or $1.8 billion, payment due on June 30, the same day the European part of its bailout program expires. And eurozone lenders like Finland and Germany have insisted on a continued role for the I.M.F. as a way to ensure adherence to the bailout terms and a hard line in negotiations.For the government in Athens, the urgent goal is to unlock frozen payments from the eurozone and the I.M.F. that are worth €7.2 billion before the end of the month.But for any deal to stick, Mr. Tsipras must be able to convince Greek lawmakers that he has not abandoned his election pledge to end the grinding austerity that Greeks have endured since their economy imploded at the start the decade. Persuading the more radical members of his leftist Syriza party is proving difficult.For powerful creditors like Germany and the I.M.F., a deal must force Greece to make far-reaching changes to its sclerotic economy so the country can return to growth and pay back its debt.The leaders of smaller eurozone countries like Ireland, Lithuania and Portugal are particularly wary of a deal, because their citizens have already weathered years of austerity and could punish their governments for making too many concessions.Niki Kitsantonis contributed reporting from Athens.Advertisement