AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinIn January 2014, Henry Louis Gates Jr. was over the moon.Mr. Gates, a Harvard professor and public intellectual, had just finished an interview with the actor and director Ben Affleck for the second season of his PBS show, “Finding Your Roots.” The show investigates the ancestries of celebrities like Robert Downey Jr., Samuel L. Jackson and Jessica Alba, and Mr. Affleck was apparently a dream guest. “We filmed him Tuesday morning, and it was brilliant!” Mr. Gates wrote in an email to his friend Michael Lynton, chief executive of Sony Pictures Entertainment, on Jan. 15 last year. “In fact, he enjoyed it so much that he is getting Matt Damon to do it, too, so that we can start the series (if this works out) with the two of them as the first guests. But it went very, very well.”Mr. Damon did not appear on the show’s second season, and six months later, those good feelings were a distant memory. Mr. Affleck became frustrated that his interview on “Finding Your Roots” included a discussion about a slave-owning ancestor of his named Benjamin Cole. Mr. Gates worried that if they cut that detail, it would be perceived as censorship.By the time WikiLeaks posted a trove of hacked Sony emails two months ago, Mr. Gates’s correspondences were revealed, and his worst fears came true. Mr. Affleck had lobbied Mr. Gates to omit the part about the slave-owning ancestor. Mr. Gates had chosen not to include it. And one blatant omission had managed to hurt the reputations of a prominent academic, a Hollywood superstar and an esteemed public television broadcaster. On Wednesday, PBS said that an investigation into the controversy showed that Mr. Affleck had exerted “improper influence” over the editorial process and that the producers of the show, Mr. Gates included, had erred by not informing the network of the actor’s “efforts to affect program content.” PBS said it would postpone the third season of the show until a fact-checker was hired and an “independent genealogist” was added to the show’s staff. PBS also will not show Mr. Affleck’s episode anymore and removed it from its online archive.In a statement released on Wednesday, Mr. Gates said he regretted not informing PBS about his conversations with Mr. Affleck. He did not apologize for omitting the detail in the broadcast. Mr. Gates said in April that other relatives of Mr. Affleck’s were more interesting, such as an occult enthusiast and a relative from the Revolutionary War.Mr. Gates still contends the omission was an editorial decision, his spokesman said on Thursday. That assertion is in stark contrast to opinions he expressed in emails to Mr. Lynton last July, in which he expressed exasperation over how Mr. Affleck “asked us to edit something about one of his ancestors — the fact that he owned slaves.” He said that it was in “violation of PBS rules” and that “once we open the door to censorship, we lose control of the brand.”If it became known that he cut that part of the interview with Mr. Affleck, Mr. Gates wrote, it would embarrass Mr. Affleck and “compromise our integrity.” Mr. Affleck said in a Facebook post in April that he was embarrassed to learn about his relative and that he “lobbied” Mr. Gates, who also goes by Skip, about what should go into the show. He said it was Mr. Gates’s decision alone.“To clarify, because I see this story being framed as ‘censorship’ on some sites, when I told Skip I was uneasy about the slave owner, he told me he had not included it in his preliminary cut because there wasn’t much detail — a name and no details, so he wasn’t going with it to begin with,” Mr. Affleck wrote on Facebook.While PBS treated this as a violation of standards, Mr. Affleck was quick to point out in April that the program “isn’t a news program” and that the celebrities voluntarily provide information about their family history.Mr. Affleck declined to comment on Thursday. PBS also declined to comment further. The investigation that it conducted will remain private, a spokeswoman for PBS said. The show has featured other celebrities who have had slave-owning ancestors, including Derek Jeter, Ken Burns and Anderson Cooper. In a statement released Wednesday, PBS’s chief programming executive and general manager, Beth Hoppe, said that “improved editorial and production processes will ensure that all future projects will adhere to PBS’ editorial guidelines.”Advertisement