By EMILY STEELJUNE 25, 2015
Charter Communications, in an attempt to distinguish itself from Comcast and its failed takeover of Time Warner Cable, promised federal regulators on Thursday that a pair of deals totaling $67.1 billion would pose no threat to the growing market for online video because the combined company’s future depended more on broadband than on its legacy video business.In a filing with the Federal Communications Commission, Charter also said that the new company created by its purchases of Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks would have no incentive to hurt online or traditional programmers because it would not own any broadcast or cable outlets other than local news, sports and public affairs programming.When Comcast tried to take over Time Warner Cable, regulators concluded the company would have had both the power and the incentive to harm online video competition with control of nearly 60 percent of the country’s high-speed Internet market. Another concern was Comcast’s ownership of the entertainment group NBCUniversal and its stake in the streaming video service Hulu.Pending regulatory approval, Charter’s proposed merger would create the second-largest cable operator in the country behind Comcast, with 24 million customers in 41 states. The company would control close to 30 percent of the country’s high-speed Internet market and 17 percent of video customers.AdvertisementThe deal, announced last month, is expected to face scrutiny by the F.C.C., which is reviewing whether it would be in the public interest, and the Justice Department, which is considering whether the deal would be anticompetitive. Charter said that it expected the acquisition to close by the end of this year, though some analysts said that they expected the review period to take longer.AdvertisementWith its F.C.C. filing on Thursday, Charter took its first formal step in making its case to regulators as to why its deal is in the public interest.Although the merger would create a new industry force, Charter underscored that the new company would remain smaller than Comcast and would continue to face significant competition from other wireless and satellite providers. Charter also highlighted that none of the merging companies compete in the same geographic regions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Several analysts have said that while regulatory approval for the deal is no longer a given, after Comcast’s struggles with Time Warner Cable, it is still highly likely. Other industry observers have said that the government has signaled that cable companies already may wield too much control and not face enough competition in the broadband market.“Does the government want two companies to have 70-plus percent of broadband?” said Rich Greenfield, a media analyst with BTIG Research, referring to Comcast and the enlarged Charter. “That is the larger question.”In its filing, Charter reiterated statements it has made previously about how consumers would benefit from faster Internet speeds at lower cost, unlimited broadband access and new investments in customer service and technologies, among other offerings.As an example of a consumer benefit, Charter said it would base the price of Internet service on its current model, which is cheaper than comparable offerings from both Time Warner Cable and Bright House. Charter now offers stand-alone Internet service at speeds of 60 megabits a second for $39.99 a month. Time Warner Cable, meanwhile, charges $34.99 a month for 15 megabits a second, and $44.99 a month for 20 megabits a second.The company also introduced a number of legally enforceable commitments, which could become conditions to getting any deal done. Those include promises not to block, slow down or engage in the paid prioritization of Internet traffic. The company also said it would invest in wireless access points and expand Bright House’s program to offer Internet access to people with low incomes.A version of this article appears in print on June 26, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Charter Makes Its Case for 2 Mergers, Telling F.C.C. It’s No Comcast .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.