
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

JUNE 25, 2015
Palantir Technologies’ mystery inflates its valuation. The firm, a private data analytics company backed and beloved by government intelligence, is raising $500 million in fresh cash, giving it a potential valuation of $20 billion and landing it fairly high on the list of so-called unicorns.Going public may not be an option for Palantir because of its clients and culture. The result is a deepening enigma that may actually feed its potential value. A unicorn is a start-up technology company valued at more than $1 billion.The company, led by its chief executive, Alex Karp, was worth a mere $9 billion at the end of 2013. Whether the $11 billion increase is warranted, like many things about the secretive company, is hard to judge.Venture capital investments come with provisions and liquidity preferences. Late-stage investments often grant more of these in exchange for a higher price tag. Moreover, the latest round amounts to only a 2.5 percent stake in the company, so it would be foolish to extrapolate a true value from such a small investment.AdvertisementBut getting an accurate read on its value on the public markets any time soon seems unlikely. Mr. Karp has said an initial public offering of stock would make the company difficult to run. After all, Palantir would have to disclose information on its financial and business relationships.AdvertisementThat would be a problem, as one of its earliest backers and clients was the investment arm of the Central Intelligence Agency. For a company obsessed with secrecy (the chief executive’s office is wired to prevent outsiders from using lasers to overhear conversations), that would be a difficult cultural switch.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.True, companies don’t have to go public just because they are big. Bechtel, Cargill and Koch Industries remain private.That destiny may be hard for Mr. Karp to consider, given his ambitions: “The only time I’m not thinking about Palantir is when I’m swimming, practicing Qigong or during sexual activity,” Mr. Karp, a philosophy student turned billionaire, once told Forbes. But remaining closely held means more control, allowing Mr. Karp to focus on developing new technologies with less pressure to show quarterly profits.In any event, remaining inscrutable may benefit Palantir in other ways. The focus of investors in multibillion-dollar start-ups, like Uber and Airbnb, is on potential, rather than actual profit.It is easier to spin big dreams when investors aren’t entirely sure how to analyze the weaknesses of your business model, management team or technology. There may also be something glamorous about working with spies: Call it the James Bond privacy premium.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »