By JONATHAN WEISMANJUNE 25, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The House gave final approval on Thursday to a significant expansion of aid to workers displaced by global competition, sending to President Obama the second half of a trade package that House Democrats had dramatically rejected just two weeks ago.The trade adjustment assistance program was approved overwhelmingly, 286 to 138, as part of a broader trade bill assembled by Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, to ensure that Mr. Obama has enhanced powers to complete major trade accords with Asia and Europe.Beyond health care, education and retraining assistance to dislocated workers, the newly approved measure extends a popular trade agreement with much of sub-Saharan Africa and expands the government’s ability to confront trade partners that “dump” steel and other products in the United States at artificially low prices to drive American companies into bankruptcy.Still to come is legislation bolstering enforcement of other trade rules — including a first small step toward combating the intentional manipulation of currency to make exports to the United States cheaper and imports from the United States more expensive. That bill is supposed to be negotiated in July.AdvertisementCongress’s actions this week were a triumph for Mr. Obama, who built his victory on Republican votes after his own party revolted against him on trade.“Of course, we still have more work to do on behalf of our workers, which is why I’ll continue to encourage Congress to pass robust trade enforcement legislation that will help us crack down on countries that break the rules,” Mr. Obama said in a statement. “But this week’s votes represent a much-needed win for hardworking American families.”AdvertisementThis month, House Democrats joined conservative Republicans to vote down the worker assistance legislation, hoping to scuttle the White House’s entire trade effort. This time, the assistance bill came before the House as a stand-alone measure that arrived a day after the Democrats’ true target — enhanced negotiating power known as trade promotion authority — was passed by the Senate and sent to the president for his signature. Only six Democrats voted against it, while 111 Republicans — considerably more than the last time — voted for it.Trade adjustment assistance programs have existed since the Kennedy administration, but pro-trade Democrats demanded a significant expansion as a price for their support for trade promotion authority, often known as “fast track” approval. The bill extends assistance through June 2022, with an expansion of the program through June of 2021. That includes $2.7 billion in funds for worker retraining and education, while making workers in service industries eligible for a program once reserved for out-of-work manufacturing workers.The bill extends and expands a tax credit for the purchase of health insurance, and it includes subsidies for the wages of workers 50 years of age or older forced to find lower-paid jobs than the ones they lost to international competition.Some Democrats remained opposed. Representative Stephen Lynch, Democrat of Massachusetts and a former union president, railed against Congress’s abrogation of its responsibility by agreeing to the trade promotion authority, or T.P.A., which blocks Congress from amending the trade agreement. He said that decision could not be assuaged by the salve of welfare.“I would rather have my representative fighting for my job than coming up with a public assistance program after I lost my job,” he said.This is the most ambitious trade deal since the North American Free Trade Agreement in the 1990s.The deal has become a cornerstone of President Obama’s trade policy in his final term.Who would win? American service industries. Who would lose? Manufacturing workers.But Republicans had Democrats cornered.“T.P.A. is already the law of the land,” said Representative Pete Sessions, Republican of Texas. “The question for us today is whether we are going to include the last parts of the package.”AdvertisementWith Congress leaving for its July 4 recess, Mr. Obama can now turn his efforts toward completing the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the largest trade deal in at least a generation, linking 40 percent of the global economy on both sides of the Pacific Ocean under a web of rules on tariffs, import barriers, intellectual property and Internet access.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A separate accord is in the works with the European Union, although that one has further to go. Under the terms of the trade promotion authority bill now approved, Congress can accept or reject such trade deals if they are presented to lawmakers within the next six years, but cannot amend or filibuster them.In an interview, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, predicted the Pacific trade deal would pass Congress with roughly the same breakdown of lawmakers who supported T.P.A. — “a lot of us and a few of them.”But, he said, the working relationship established between the president and Republican leaders should serve Mr. Obama well.“We all found ourselves on the same side,” he said. “I don’t need to be schmoozed by the president. This is not an ego thing. What we need to look for are places where our policy goals intersect.”A version of this article appears in print on June 26, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: House Easily Approves Trade Bill’s Expansion of Aid to Displaced Workers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.