AdvertisementSupported byBook EntryBy Jonathan A. KneeThe idea of a publication of any new Michael Wolff book inevitably elicits discomfort in those likely to come into his line of fire. Mr. Wolff’s studied unpleasantness has emerged as a brand of sorts. USA Today has even capitalized on it, running an ad campaign for his column featuring a potential subject running away from his office via a rope and grappling hook just to avoid an interview with the feared columnist.The catalog of Michael Wolff feuds extends far beyond journalistic subjects. He has picked fights with restaurateurs, family members, other writers and a long list of former employers. The publishers of his latest book have gleefully played up this reputation by plastering his book jacket with ad hominem attacks by “Wolff’s enemies” using phrases such as “needy and amoral” and “mindless jerk.” And the blurb holds out the promise of vicious payback.Fortunately or unfortunately, depending on your perspective, “Television Is the New Television: The Unexpected Triumph of Old Media in the Digital Age” (Portfolio/Penguin) fails to deliver on this threat. Although there is plenty of Mr. Wolff’s trademark snark, it is mostly a thoughtful essay on the state of the cultural and financial wars besieging a media industry in the midst of profound change.It would be a mistake to view the critic’s fear and loathing as merely a marketing gimmick. He is genuinely detested. I have been on friendly terms with Mr. Wolff for a number of years, and he has been, mostly, generous in his published references to my work. He even provided a short blurb for my first book, “The Accidental Investment Banker.”I have been the recipient of repeated unsolicited warnings that it is only a matter of time before Mr. Wolff turns on me. I have comforted myself in the fact that I am nowhere near prominent enough to make my public evisceration worth Mr. Wolff’s trouble (but perhaps I will learn soon enough that I am being naïve).Mr. Wolff’s work has been subject to the charge that the facts and economics he cites are needlessly sloppy and the cultural and personal attacks are gratuitously cruel. There is more than a grain of truth to these assertions, but even his detractors grudgingly acknowledge that he consistently manages to get the overarching narrative right more often than wrong. The result is that Mr. Wolff’s work is the rare guilty pleasure that is actually good for you.In “Television,” Mr. Wolff focuses on the structural tendency of digital media to be subject to constant downward pressure on advertising prices even as use grows. This, according to him, creates corresponding pressure to produce more and more content of lower and lower quality. In turn, that only intensifies digital ad rate compression.It is the very efficiency of digital markets that drives this inevitable downward spiral. Mr. Wolff contrasts this with the “old hat and clumsy” television marketplace, in which advertising capacity is constrained but somehow ad rates continue to go up even as audiences decline.Mr. Wolff is at his best when highlighting the inconsistency between digital media’s self-conception as hot, sexy and new with advertisers’ perception of the medium as “lower-end junk.” Although television is “a business and medium of value … and exclusivity,” Mr. Wolff argues, digital represents little more than “a constant and immediate arbitrage between what you spend to create the medium against the short-term sales it produces.”The figure who emerges as the hero in this worldview is “that totem of the old media establishment,” Leslie Moonves, the chief executive of CBS. Spun off a decade ago as the ugly stepchild of Viacom, larded with legacy asbestos liabilities and slow-growth assets like book publishing, the company has emerged as possibly the best positioned media business in an increasingly volatile environment. Today, CBS has a greater market value than Viacom, having won a standoff with Time Warner Cable that will probably double its subscriber fees over time. To boot, it has an enviable collection of the top dramatic series and sports franchises that make it consistently the leading network.Increasingly, Mr. Wolff argues, digital media finds that it must ape old media to create the kind of engagement that otherwise eludes it. Events since the book was written seem to confirm this thesis — notably Yahoo’s recent acquisition of the rights to live-stream a game.And it is a great irony that James Murdoch, who has continued to be the relentless target of Mr. Wolff’s sharpest barbs after the announcement of his anointment as his father’s successor at 21st Century Fox, has become the industry standard-bearer of the book’s central argument. Television, according to the young Mr. Murdoch, is “the real killer app in digital.” This sentiment could easily have served as an alternative subheadline for Mr. Wolff’s book. “Television,” however, is not a sustained argument but rather an extended musing. Neither all television programming nor all digital businesses are created equal, and Mr. Wolff fails to adequately distinguish among them.He effectively contrasts the permanent challenges to digital content companies like BuzzFeed and The Huffington Post to achieving meaningful profitability with the healthy profit margins of a company like CBS. But he provides no cogent explanation of why these are dwarfed by Google’s and Facebook’s margins. Similarly, the strong cash flow of cable channels and television networks with established distribution provided by a combination of government licenses or long-term carriage agreements is highlighted without reference to the more anemic profitability associated with original production.It was only a few years ago when Netflix’s chief executive, Reed Hastings, confidently declared that his company was “better off letting other people take creative risks.” The subsequent about-face has been reflected not only in the successful “House of Cards” but the much less successful “Marco Polo,” and a half-dozen other expensive upcoming original series. That simply confirms that Netflix has become a significantly more competitive business, and Mr. Hastings was left with little choice.Although Mr. Wolff may be right that there is nothing like great television to attract audiences and advertisers alike, the mystery of how to translate this insight into attractive new business models – whether digital or analog — remains.Jonathan A. Knee is a professor of professional practice at Columbia Business School and a senior adviser at Evercore Partners.Advertisement