By EMILY STEELJUNE 25, 2015
Roger Ailes, the creator of the Fox News Channel, has signed a new multiyear contract as chairman and chief executive of Fox News and Fox Business Network and chairman of Fox Television Stations.Mr. Ailes’s previous contract with 21st Century Fox, the media giant led by Rupert Murdoch that includes the Fox properties, ran through 2016.A public back and forth over Mr. Ailes’s position at 21st Century Fox has played out during the last two weeks since news emerged that Mr. Murdoch’s two sons, Lachlan and James, would take on top leadership roles at the company.Mr. Ailes reportedly clashed with Lachlan Murdoch about a decade ago as part of broader power struggle that led to Lachlan’s unexpected resignation from his father’s empire in 2005. Mr. Ailes has met with the two sons in the last month, said one person briefed on the meetings who spoke on condition of anonymity.AdvertisementTwo weeks ago, after the company announced the new positions for James and Lachlan Murdoch, Mr. Ailes said in an interview with Variety that his job had entailed reporting to Rupert Murdoch and that he expected that relationship to continue. In a shift last week, a company spokeswoman said that Mr. Ailes would report to Lachlan and James and “continue his unique and longstanding relationship with Rupert.”AdvertisementOn Thursday, in announcing Mr. Ailes’s new contract, 21st Century Fox said that Mr. Ailes would report jointly to Rupert, Lachlan and James Murdoch.“Roger is an incredibly talented executive and we’re pleased he has accepted our offer to continue his extraordinary record of success at 21st Century Fox,” Lachlan and James Murdoch said in a joint statement.The company did not disclose the exact terms of Mr. Ailes’s contract. Mr. Ailes’s total compensation was $21 million in 2012, the last year for which the company disclosed his pay package. Under the terms of that contract, signed in 2008, Mr. Ailes’s base salary was $5 million. He also was granted the use of a car and driver, the company’s jet or charter jet for business travel, and security services for Mr. Ailes and his family.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fox News continues to be a major profit center for the company, contributing about 18 percent of 21st Century Fox profits in 2014, according to analyst estimates. Advertising and affiliate revenue for 2015 is expected to reach $2.2 billion this year, up 6.6 percent from 2014, according to SNL Kagan.Mr. Ailes, 75, joined the company in 1996, the same year that he started Fox News as a polarizing challenger to mainstream news organizations. The home of personalities like Bill O’Reilly and Megyn Kelly, Fox News now reaches more than 96 million homes and ranks as the country’s most-viewed cable news network.Rupert Murdoch, in a statement, said Mr. Ailes had created ”a behemoth of a business with one of the most passionate and engaged audiences in the history of television news.”“Roger and I have always had, and will continue to have, a special relationship,” the statement said. “Lachlan, James and I are delighted that Roger will be leading key businesses for us and our shareholders for years to come, and he has our unwavering support.”The cable news category has faced challenges attracting viewers in recent years, with total daily median viewership for Fox News, CNN and MSNBC down 7 percent in 2014, according to the Pew Research Center. The declines at Fox were less pronounced, with total day median viewership at Fox News down 2 percent to 1.1 million viewers in 2014, according to Pew.This week, 21st Century Fox announced that David Hill was stepping down from his senior executive vice president position to start a new production venture backed by Fox called Hilly. Mr. Hill has worked with the company for nearly three decades and helped start many of its TV assets including the Fox broadcast network and Fox Sports.A version of this article appears in print on June 26, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Ailes Signs a New Contract With 21st Century Fox.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.