By SYDNEY EMBERJUNE 25, 2015
CANNES, France — Dr. Phil McGraw, the host of the daytime talk show “Dr. Phil,” is teaming up with the tabloid website DailyMail.com on a syndicated television show that will draw from the site’s celebrity-news-focused content.The show will be called “DailyMailTV” and is scheduled to begin in the fall of 2016. Other details of the show, announced at the Cannes Lions advertising festival on Thursday, are still being worked out, including its length (30 minutes or an hour) and whether there will be a host.Dr. McGraw; his son, Jay; and Carla Pennington, the executive producer of “Dr. Phil,” will be the show’s producers. Dr. Phil will appear on the show if there are interviews he does for his own show that the Daily Mail also wants to run.Dr. McGraw said in an interview that he was interested in partnering with the Daily Mail because he saw an opportunity to create a show unlike anything else on TV.“We’re always interested in what we can do that is truly unique, that is truly different,” he said. “You really have to stop and think, if you’re going to do something, do something that adds to the mix that’s not out there.”The show will have studios in New York, Los Angeles, London and Sydney and will likely run out of New York.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.CBS Television Distribution, which distributes “Dr. Phil,” will also distribute the Daily Mail TV show. On “Dr. Phil,” Dr. McGraw dispenses advice on topics like health, marriage and family dynamics.DailyMail.com and Stage 29 Productions, the production company behind “Dr. Phil,” began talking about creating a show together last year and signed a partnership agreement around April this year. The show’s content will also run on DailyMail.com.On Tuesday, Daily Mail, Snapchat and the advertising giant WPP announced a new marketing venture, called Truffle Pig, to create social content for brands.Dr. McGraw, who is staying with his family in Cannes during the festival, dined with his wife and Daily Mail executives — including the site’s publisher, Martin Clarke, and Jon Steinberg, the chief executive of Daily Mail North America — on Wednesday night on the company’s yacht.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.