By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINJUNE 26, 2015
A private investigator in New York who illegally rummaged through the emails of dozens of people was sentenced to three months in prison on Friday as questions arose about how his case was investigated.Two victims of Eric Saldarriaga’s hacking told Judge Richard J. Sullivan of the Federal District Court in Manhattan that they were annoyed that prosecutors had given them little information about the extent of Mr. Saldarriaga’s activities and the potential invasion of privacy.Judge Sullivan similarly seemed surprised that a prosecutor working for Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, could not provide the victims with more details about Mr. Saldarriaga’s illicit activities.“Do they know how long they were hacked and what was hacked?” Judge Sullivan asked the prosecutor, Daniel S. Noble, after the two victims had addressed the court.AdvertisementMr. Noble said that the authorities could not fully answer that question and that they had done their best to contact all 50 victims.AdvertisementThe victims who addressed the court were Tony Ortega, a journalist, and Robert J. Cipriani, a professional gambler who says he gives some of his winnings to charity. Mr. Cipriani, who lives in the Los Angeles area and addressed the court from a videoconferencing system, had sought to keep his identity confidential but the judge would not allow it.Mr. Cipriani and Mr. Ortega said that Mr. Saldarriaga’s sentencing should be delayed until prosecutors discovered who had paid him to hack into their emails.“I have no idea of the extent of this crime,” said Mr. Ortega, a former editor of The Village Voice who has written critically in the past about the Church of Scientology. He told Judge Sullivan that he suspected that the church, which has hired investigators in the past, might have wanted Mr. Saldarriaga to monitor his activities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Judge Sullivan said that it was not his job to investigate that matter and that he could not require Mr. Saldarriaga to publicly identity who had hired him. But he did express frustration that prosecutors could not tell him what had happened to the overseas hacker-for-hire companies that Mr. Saldarriaga had used to obtain the login credentials for the email accounts he had pilfered.Peter Brill, Mr. Saldarriaga’s lawyer, complained that the investigation of Mr. Saldarriaga had been handled by a string of agents with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and a number of federal prosecutors, potentially missing an opportunity to investigate some leads his client had provided authorities about those who may have hired him.Mr. Brill noted that on some occasions, Mr. Saldarriaga would arrive for scheduled meetings with F.B.I. agents only to discover that the agents were unavailable. Mr. Brill said that at times the matter did not seem to be a priority for authorities, who first approached Mr. Saldarriaga about his illegal hacking in March 2014.Mr. Saldarriaga, 41, who lives in Queens and is married with two children, pleaded guilty in March to one count of conspiracy to commit computer hacking. His name first surfaced several years ago in an investigation by federal authorities in Los Angeles into the hacking-for-hire business.Mr. Brill argued that his client should be given probation and avoid prison time, saying that he had health problems and was remorseful. But Judge Sullivan said a three-month prison term was warranted because of the seriousness of the crime.The judge said the sentencing guidelines permitted him to sentence Mr. Saldarriaga to only as much as six months because the economic loss to the victims was minimal. The guidelines, he said, do not reflect the severity of the invasion of privacy that comes with someone hacking into a person’s emails. “You took active steps to invade people’s privacy and you did it multiple times,” the judge said.AdvertisementFederal prosecutors had asked for up to six months in prison.Judge Sullivan also ordered Mr. Saldarriaga to serve three months of home detention after his release from prison to send a message of deterrence to others.A version of this article appears in print on June 27, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Investigator Gets 3 Months in Prison in Hacking Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.