AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — In the spring of 2013, Paramount Pictures held a research screening at a multiplex here for a new comedy called “Drunk Wedding.” The studio’s vice chairman was so eager to learn the results that he attended in person.In success — that is, if the test audience laughed — Paramount could have had a very profitable film on its hands; “Drunk Wedding,” directed by Nick Weiss, cost the studio a mere $600,000 to make. In failure, the film would probably go to Hollywood’s version of Siberia: video on demand.The audience response was strong. “Drunk Wedding” scored well above the industry norm for an R-rated comedy. “The studio was ecstatic,” Mr. Weiss recalled. Visions of the film becoming a low-budget “Hangover” began to take hold.So why was “Drunk Wedding” sent to Siberia?How Mr. Weiss’s film went from darling to outcast is an archetypal story about the difficulties faced by little movies inside big studios. Hollywood craves low-priced original hits, and often works harder than outsiders realize to find them: Paramount tried for years to get “Drunk Wedding” into theaters. But Paramount and the other old-line studios often conclude that the marketing hurdles are insurmountable.Herding ticket buyers toward a microbudget movie with no stars typically requires a marketing budget of at least $20 million — an astronomical figure compared with the production price. Even with a hefty ad budget, the idiosyncrasies of a small film can defeat the most masterful marketer: Who is this movie for? Remakes and sequels, on the other hand, have a clear target audience.Other factors working against Mr. Weiss’s movie included varying gut instincts — some Paramount executives found the vulgar scenes hilarious, others cringed — and executive churn at the studio; most notably, the president of Paramount, Adam Goodman, who had been the primary supporter of “Drunk Wedding,” was edged out of his job.“I don’t think anybody is entitled to anything, and I appreciate how hard Paramount tried,” said Mr. Weiss, who had never made a feature film before. Still, he acknowledged learning a hard lesson about the vagaries of working inside the movie factories. “I do feel like I’ve graduated from studio school,” he said.“Drunk Wedding,” about alcohol-soaked antics at a destination wedding, got its start in 2010, when Paramount formed a low-budget division called Insurge. Paramount had just struck it big with “Paranormal Activity,” which cost $10,000 to make and took in $193.4 million worldwide.A young executive on the Paramount lot, Couper Samuelson, and his former housemate from Harvard University — Mr. Weiss — decided to pitch Insurge on a found-footage-style comedy: “The Hangover,” if it happened to you. Mr. Samuelson’s boss, Brad Weston, ultimately sold Insurge on the idea.The plan “was to go after the microbudget horror audience, but with a fun, raunchy, R-rated sex comedy,” Mr. Weston said. They were given $100,000, plus $5,000 in product-placement money from a company called Mangroomer. (There was a pubic hair scene in an early version of the film.)In March 2011, Mr. Weiss and the enterprising Mr. Samuelson went to Nicaragua to meet with tourism officials, hoping to get them to defray the cost of shooting the film at a local resort.“But we couldn’t really be up front about the film’s details,” Mr. Weiss said, noting that Nicaragua is socially conservative.To their shock, the Nicaraguans chipped in $400,000 worth of perks, including 70 plane tickets and rooms at a resort called Pelican Eyes. To sweeten the deal, Mr. Weiss agreed to find a job for Juan Carlos Ortega, an aspiring filmmaker and son of Daniel Ortega, Nicaragua’s president. (Mr. Weiss put Juan Carlos to work compiling promotional video.)Insurge was not terribly enthusiastic about Mr. Weiss’s rough cut of the film, but it agreed to pay for a test screening. To their surprise, the crowd responded favorably to a few scenes. It was at this point, said Mr. Weiss, that senior Paramount executives became more involved, most notably Mr. Goodman.Over the next year, the Paramount gears started to turn. One of Hollywood’s top comedy writers, John Hamburg, whose credits include “Meet the Parents,” was brought in to help devise splashier “Drunk Wedding” scenes that Paramount marketers could use to sell the movie in television ads and trailers.In the fall of 2012, in a conference room on the Paramount lot, the “Drunk Wedding” cast gathered to read through the revised script. About a dozen Paramount executives attended, according to Mr. Weiss, including Mr. Goodman and the studio’s marketing chief, Josh Greenstein. “We had a very substantive conversation afterwards, even including feedback that changed a story point in the script,” Mr. Weiss said.Encouraged by the creative momentum, Paramount decided to spend roughly $500,000 on reshoots. Mr. Weiss and the cast and crew returned to Nicaragua in November 2012. The successful February 2013 test screening came next.But then “Drunk Wedding” was left at the altar.Paramount, when it was not consumed with higher priority projects like “Transformers: Age of Extinction,” tried to devise a “Drunk Wedding” advertising campaign. But the same problems kept arising. The film had no stars. It was extremely crude. And, to use Hollywood jargon, there were no “comps,” or similar releases that had been successful and could serve as a blueprint.Then Mr. Greenstein left for a rival studio, and Mr. Goodman exited. (Both men declined to comment for this article.)And Paramount had a decision to make: It could spend no additional money, or extremely little, and release the movie on V.O.D., ensuring some return on its investment. Or it could go for a substantial theatrical release, which would require a marketing budget of at least $20 million.The movie could be a hit, or it could flop, leaving Paramount bleeding red ink in the process — over a microbudget production.Paramount chose the safe route. With almost no fanfare, “Drunk Wedding” was released on May 22 on digital services like iTunes and Google Play, and in 16 small theaters for three days.Megan Colligan, Paramount’s president of distribution and marketing, said in an email, “We view these Insurge movies as true opportunities for both Paramount and the filmmakers. As a filmmaker, you get to make a movie with a guarantee that lots of people will have the opportunity to see it — whether it’s seen in a theater, on digital or both. An independently produced film doesn’t have that guarantee.”Did the studio make the right call?It is impossible to know, but “Drunk Wedding” only took in $3,301 in its tiny release and received negative reviews. Studios do not publicly report video-on-demand sales.There is a silver lining, though, for Mr. Weiss, who is 36. Over the last year, as “Drunk Wedding” became fodder for the Hollywood gossip mill, curious executives at other studios asked to see it, ultimately helping to land Mr. Weiss a deal at ABC Studios.“I’m not eager to go through this again,” he said. “But I’m proud of the movie, and it has really opened some doors for me.”Advertisement