By BEN SISARIOJUNE 26, 2015
For the last two years, the music industry has been watching a series of lawsuits centered on an obscure aspect of copyright law: whether the performers on older recordings should get royalties when their songs are played on digital radio services.On Friday, one of those lawsuits was settled when SiriusXM, the satellite radio provider, announced it would pay $210 million to the major record companies over its broadcasting of songs made before 1972.The settlement may open the door to millions of dollars in new royalty payments for older performers, who in many cases have not been paid from Internet and satellite radio. And coming just days after Apple — nudged by Taylor Swift — reversed course over its plan not to pay royalties during trials of its new music service, the Sirius’ settlement was interpreted as another win for artists in the digital age.“This is a great step forward for all music creators,” said Cary Sherman, chief executive of the Recording Industry Association of America, which coordinated the suit on behalf of Sony, Universal, Warner and Abkco, an independent that controls rights to early Rolling Stones songs. “Music has tremendous value,” Mr. Sherman added, “whether it was made in 1970 or 2015.”AdvertisementThe issue behind the suit is complex, but has been intensely followed in the music industry. Federal copyright protection, which has long applied to songwriting rights, was first extended to recordings only in 1972. For that reason, many digital radio services, including Sirius and Pandora, have not paid recording royalties when they play older songs. (Those services still pay separate songwriting royalties, even on older songs.)AdvertisementBut two years ago members of the 1960s band the Turtles — whose hits included “Happy Together” — sued Sirius in three federal courts, saying that their songs before 1972 were still covered under state laws in New York, California and Florida. The group accused Sirius of broadcasting them without permission, and sought $100 million in damages as part of a class-action suit.The major labels soon followed with their own case, in California state court. On Friday, Sirius disclosed through a securities filing that on June 17 it had reached an agreement with the labels that would cover its use of old songs through the end of 2017, and would negotiate with labels for new licenses thereafter.SoundExchange, a nonprofit clearinghouse for digital royalties, has estimated that in 2013 artists and record labels missed out on $60 million in royalties for pre-1972 recordings. Last year Sirius had $4.2 billion in revenue, and Wall Street analysts estimate that the company paid around 10 percent of that — approximately $400 million — in music royalties.Artist advocates said Friday that the Sirius settlement still left questions unanswered, including how the labels would disseminate the money to their acts. A spokesman for Warner — whose acts include Neil Young, and Joni Mitchell — said the company would distribute payments from the settlement through SoundExchange. The other labels declined to comment on exactly how they would pay.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The major labels also have a similar case pending against Pandora. The Sirius settlement may place pressure on Pandora to do the same, but a company spokesman said in a statement, “We are confident in Pandora’s legal position on this issue.”The suit by the Turtles is still unresolved. The group has won important rulings on the case in federal courts in New York and California, although this week Sirius was granted summary judgment in the Florida case.The Turtles’ suit has been certified with class-action status, although the labels’ settlement with Sirius will reduce the size of that class. In its filing, Sirius said that the three big labels and Abkco supplied about 80 percent of the pre-1972 songs it played.“We are happy to have paved the way for owners of pre-1972 recordings to be compensated for use of their recordings,” said Henry Gradstein, a lawyer for the band. “We trust that the labels will share this money with the artists, and we look forward to resolving the balance of the class with SiriusXM.”A version of this article appears in print on June 27, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: SiriusXM Settles a Lawsuit on Songs Made Before ’72.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.