By THE NEW YORK TIMESOCT. 25, 2015
The Central Committee of China’s Communist Party is scheduled to hold its annual policy session in Beijing from Monday through Thursday. The meeting may bring leadership changes, including in the military, which could reinforce President Xi Jinping’s influence. The gathering is expected to begin drafting a new five-year plan, which will begin in 2016, that aims, in part, to make the currency more convertible and bring more market disciplines to state-owned enterprises.But many important details will not be formally approved and released until the national legislature meets in March. The last several autumn sessions have not produced far-reaching economic policy changes, as reformers have not reached consensus with advocates of state control. —Keith BradsherThis is not the meeting you’ve been waiting for. The Federal Reserve’s policy-making committee convenes in Washington on Tuesday and Wednesday, but it’s not likely to make any changes in policy. The committee is expected to keep the Fed’s benchmark interest rate near zero.The real question is whether the Fed will raise rates at its next meeting in December. Officials, who are likely to debate that issue in private, could provide some hints in the post-meeting statement. —Binyamin AppelbaumAdvertisementTwo reports come out on Tuesday that should give some sense of the American economy’s momentum this fall, especially given headwinds from Asia and wobbles on Wall Street in August and September.AdvertisementFirst will be government data on durable goods orders for September — Wall Street is looking for a 1.3 percent decline, following a steeper drop in August. The headline figure is heavily influenced by volatile orders for aircraft, which are thought to have weakened last month. Economists will be looking at the underlying details to see if other sectors were stronger.Second will be a report on consumer confidence in October from the Conference Board. Economists are expecting a slight drop from the September level because of the weak report on unemployment for September and signs that the economy may not be growing as quickly as it did in the second quarter. Stocks have rallied this month, however, which could provide a boost in sentiment. —Nelson D. SchwartzOn Tuesday, Apple reports earnings results for its fiscal fourth quarter. Wall Street will continue to focus on sales of the iPhone, which account for the bulk of Apple’s revenue and profit. Investors will also pay close attention to Apple’s performance in China to see whether the economic and market woes there affected the company’s sales.Apple has also released a few new products over the past year or so, including Apple Pay and Apple Music. But few analysts expect those initiatives to have an impact on Apple’s financial results anytime soon. —Katie BennerTwitter will report its third-quarter financial results on Tuesday. Jack Dorsey, who moved from interim to permanent chief executive this month, offered his analysis of the social media company’s woes during the second-quarter call: The service is too hard to use.This quarter, Wall Street will be looking for more details on how Mr. Dorsey plans to tame Twitter’s troubles. Analysts have recently slashed their long-term forecasts for the company’s revenue, and are predicting little or no user growth in the near future. —Vindu GoelIt will be a busy week for auto company earnings, with both Ford and Fiat Chrysler reporting their third-quarter results. General Motors already set a high bar when it reported its quarterly earnings last week, which included larger-than-expected profits and an operating margin in North America of nearly 12 percent. Ford will be up first on Tuesday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company’s flagship vehicle, the F-150 pickup truck, is finally at full production, and investors will be interested to learn how well the new mostly aluminum-bodied truck is doing. Analysts expect Ford to deliver a higher operating profit for the quarter than last year. Fiat Chrysler, which reports on Wednesday, is also expected to post higher year-over-year earnings. The company’s Jeep division has been thriving as Americans flock back to trucks and sport utility vehicles. —Aaron KesslerAdvertisementA half dozen of Europe’s biggest lenders are reporting their third-quarter results this week, including the British lenders Barclays, Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds Banking Group; the Spanish bank Santander; the German lender Deutsche Bank; and the French bank BNP Paribas.Several investment banks, including Credit Suisse, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley, have reported disappointing results in the third quarter as uncertainty in the financial markets weighed on their results, particularly in bond and fixed-income trading.Analysts also expect a number of banks in Europe to look to raise capital in the coming months as they seek to meet stricter requirements by regulators. Alongside its third-quarter results, Credit Suisse announced plans this month to raise 6.05 billion Swiss francs, or about $6.2 billion, as well as shrink its investment bank and cut costs. —Chad BrayThe brewing giants Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller have until Wednesday under British takeover rules to complete their discussions on a potential merger. The world’s largest brewer, Anheuser-Busch InBev, the maker of Budweiser and Stella Artois, struck an agreement in principle this month to acquire its closest rival, SABMiller, for about $104 billion and agreed to extend a deadline to complete a deal until this week. If the brewers aren’t able to do so by Tuesday, it is possible that SABMiller will seek permission from British regulators to extend the deadline again.The deal is expected to garner extensive regulatory scrutiny given the size of the combined company and its potential dominance in several markets worldwide, including the United States. If completed, the combination would create a behemoth in the beer industry with annual revenue of about $64 billion. —Chad BrayOn Wednesday, PayPal will post its first earnings report as an independent company since it was spun out from eBay in July. Analysts will be watching PayPal’s mobile payments growth, which, along with total payments processed, has been steadily rising for years. Watch closely to see if PayPal’s proposed acquisition of Xoom, the digital money transfers start-up, is finally closed. —Mike IsaacOn Thursday, the Commerce Department will release its preliminary estimate of economic growth in the United States in the third quarter. Economists are looking for the economy to have grown at an annual rate of 1.6 percent over the course of July, August and September, well below the 3.9 percent rate recorded in the second quarter. —Nelson D. SchwartzDeutsche Bank is expected to update investors on its strategy on Thursday, the same day that it will probably report a huge loss as part of its third-quarter results. The bank, one of the largest in Europe, said this month that it expected to post a net loss of 6.2 billion euros, or about $7 billion, in the quarter. The loss is expected to be driven by $1.3 billion in additional provisions for potential fines and settlements as it faces regulatory scrutiny, particularly in the United States, as well as a write-down of its investment in a Chinese bank, Hua Xia. —Chad BrayExxon Mobil, Chevron, Royal Dutch Shell and BP will all report their third-quarter earnings this week, and the news is not likely to be good since oil and natural gas prices continued to slump in recent months. Investors will be hoping to hear that commodity prices have bottomed. But after the more than 50 percent decline in the value of a barrel of crude since the summer of 2014, executives are expected to warn that the coming year is going to be another tough one, with more cuts in exploration and production. —Clifford KraussA version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.