By KEITH BRADSHERJUNE 28, 2015
HONG KONG — Asian stock markets slumped on Monday as Greece’s financial difficulties triggered worry about possible broader harm to the global financial system. An interest rate cut by Beijing on Saturday failed to stem the fall in Chinese stock markets beyond the first hour of trading.The euro also dropped 1.5 cents against the dollar, to a value of $1.1017, as investors worried that Greece’s troubles would have a spillover effect and make European assets less attractive.Greece has been struggling for a solution to its debt troubles for years. But the speed with which its government called a national referendum and shut its banks appeared to have caught at least some investors off guard. “Most people’s consensus forecast was for them to muddle through with some kind of a deal, so it has taken people a little bit by surprise,” said Kymberly Martin, the senior market strategist at the Bank of New Zealand.The Japanese stock market fell 2.4 percent in midafternoon trade; the Australian market dipped 2.2 percent; and the South Korean market was down 1.3 percent. The price of gold, an asset that tends to become more popular during times of financial or political instability, climbed $12 an ounce, to $1,185.20.AdvertisementConcerns about Greece more than offset any lift from China’s interest rate cut on Saturday. China’s own stock markets were among the worst performers by midday, with share prices tumbling 5.4 percent in Shanghai and 7 percent in Shenzhen, after plunging more than 7 percent on Friday.AdvertisementThe Hang Seng Index in Hong Kong had not climbed nearly as fast as mainland markets over the past year and dropped more gently than the mainland did on Monday, falling 2.7 percent in morning trading.The People’s Bank of China, the country’s central bank, reduced one-year lending and deposit rates by a quarter percentage point, effective on Sunday and also reduced the reserves that some banks are required to hold, allowing them to lend more money.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The central bank had previously refrained from acting so quickly after a market downturn, so its action over the weekend was interpreted as a clear sign that the government was reluctant to see the Chinese stock markets lose their gains after doubling in the past 12 months.“It marks a slight departure from the previous P.B.O.C. moves, because this time it looks to be directly timed as support for the equity markets,” said Erwin Sanft, the head of China strategy in Hong Kong at Macquarie Capital Securities.But while the Shanghai and Shenzhen markets surged at the opening on Monday, they soon reversed course on sustained selling. Heavy investments with borrowed money by individuals, many of them young and with scant experience in bear markets, have propelled the mainland markets to their current heights, and market strategists have been warning for months that if confidence in the markets cracked, the ensuing fall could be swift.Rajiv Biswas, chief economist for Asia at IHS Global Insight, said that if Greece defaulted and left the euro, the effects on Europe’s economy and on exporters in Asia would depend on whether European leaders could prevent financial troubles from spreading to Spain, Portugal and possibly Italy. If the damage were not contained, economic output in Asia could drop 0.3 percent next year on lower exports to Europe, Mr. Biswas said.But Ms. Martin of the Bank of New Zealand said such calculations were not at the front of investors’ minds. “I think people are still more concerned about the immediate impact, not the longer-term effects on eurozone growth,” she said.An article on Monday about the Asian markets’ reaction to the Greek debt crisis misstated, in some editions, the day China’s stock markets rose after an interest-rate cut. The markets in China rose 2.4 percent in early trading on Monday morning there, not on Saturday morning. (The two markets in mainland China are closed on Saturdays. By midday Monday, shares were down sharply.)A version of this article appears in print on June 29, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Asia Markets Slide on Fears Over Greece.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.