By MICHAEL CIEPLY and BROOKS BARNESJUNE 28, 2015
SAN DIEGO — From the superheroic Avengers to the steampunk League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, the comics world is full of murky alliances.But few operate more quietly than a group that protects comics culture and calls itself, in its typically understated fashion, the San Diego Comic Convention. It occupies the 18th floor of a glass tower here, allowing staff members to peer at the fan-demonium their nonprofit organization spawns every July in the streets below.The group’s public face is Comic-Con International, a convention that annually draws 130,000 fans of the genres — graphic novels, superhero movies, video games, animation — that comprise fantasy culture. The sold-out 46th installment begins next week, when the usual array of movie studios, TV networks, publishers and toy companies will clamor for attention from outrageously attired attendees.Up on the 18th floor, however, about three dozen paid Comic Convention employees and the organization’s board will continue to grapple with some of the biggest challenges in their four-decade history: Will Comic-Con be able to stay in San Diego, the only location it has ever occupied? Are competing conventions misappropriating the Comic-Con brand?AdvertisementAs Comic-Con seeks new business opportunities — like a year-round subscription video-on-demand service in partnership with Lionsgate — will it be able to protect its fans-first image and nonprofit status? Will anything be done with the group’s nest egg which included net assets of about $16.4 million in mid-2013, according to the last publicly available report, and has been growing at perhaps $3 million a year since?AdvertisementHow the organization solves these puzzles could have a ripple effect on Hollywood, which has come to rely on Comic-Con as a major marketing platform, and the city of San Diego, which counts on the annual event to attract other conventions and keep a downtown revitalization moving forward.Retaining Comic-Con, whose agreement with the local convention center expires next year, is so important that Kevin L. Faulconer, San Diego’s mayor, has been involved in renewal talks. “It’s very important to keep the convention as affordable as possible,” Mr. Faulconer said in an interview, a reference to a renewal sticking point: Many hotels want to curb room discounting during the event, a longtime practice, and begin charging $450 or more a night.“We think we have offered a competitive package for 2017 and 2018,” said Carol Wallace, chief executive of the agency that oversees the convention center. She declined to provide details. To keep Comic-Con, Ms. Wallace a few years ago began charging the nonprofit a flat $150,000 fee, under a temporary arrangement, or roughly 65 percent less than nondiscounted rent.The nonprofit that puts on Comic-Con has a longstanding reluctance to discuss its affairs or even, for the most part, to share more than rudimentary details about its leaders. “It has always been about the event, and not about the people who do the event,” said David Glanzer, the group’s director for marketing and public relations.But during an interview at the organization’s headquarters in mid-June, Mr. Glanzer agreed to part with past practice to address questions about its structure, resources and prospects. In addition to Comic-Con, the organization runs the similar but significantly smaller WonderCon in Anaheim, Calif.He described a vibrant, if deeply conservative operation — it has largely eschewed growth in favor of preservation — that behaves less like a business or conventional nonprofit than a collective of shadowy guardians. The group began almost by accident, with 300 friends and acquaintances meeting in 1970 to swap notes and artifacts under the aegis of the comic strip artist Sheldon Dorf in the basement of San Diego’s U.S. Grant Hotel.(The headquarters may return to more modest premises when the lease on its tower offices expires.)The nonprofit’s president, John G. Rogers, a 54-year-old software engineer with several patents to his name, has led the organization since 1986. Until last year, Mr. Rogers worked for the telecommunications firm Qualcomm, though he sidestepped even the name of his employer in a rare interview with an engineering trade publication in 2010.AdvertisementLast October, Mr. Rogers left his job to become a paid Comic-Con manager, according to Mr. Glanzer.The group’s hierarchy also includes the executive director, Fae Desmond, who started as a volunteer in the 1970s. “We have been very stable,” said Mr. Glanzer, who has made an art of polite reticence during his own 31 years with the group.Mr. Rogers and Ms. Desmond declined to be interviewed.The group’s volunteer membership now totals a few hundred people and is achieved through sweat equity, Mr. Glanzer said. Members, virtually all from the San Diego area, win their status by attending monthly meetings and joining committees that work year-round on the conventions.A board of about a dozen people is elected by the members. Generally, the nonprofit’s directors have no professional interest in the comic or fantasy business, Mr. Glanzer said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Public purpose, a sine qua non for preserving tax-exempt status, is realized almost entirely inside the conventions. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, for instance, make grants or support public facilities with proceeds from signature events. But Comic-Con is centered on panel discussions — comic book law, gay and lesbian characters in comics — designed to help fulfill the nonprofit’s mission of creating appreciation for comics.While that approach to public benefit has been criticized by some charity watchdogs over the years, the group’s cut-rate access to San Diego’s convention center appears largely to have been accepted by local officials as the price of keeping the convention in town.Comic book artists are given free trade show space by Comic-Con; small press publishers get a discount. But entertainment companies and paraphernalia salesmen pay heavily for their booths, contributing to income of more than $4.6 million from the exhibition part of the convention, along with a growing dividend from internal event sponsorships.From its conventions in San Diego and Anaheim, the nonprofit takes in about $15 million in revenue, including ticket sales. Annual expenses are about $12 million, according to past reports.Perhaps surprisingly, Mr. Glanzer said film and television studios pay nothing for access to the 6,500-seat Hall H at the San Diego Convention Center, in which they showcase major movies like “Avatar” and series like “Game of Thrones.”For the convention, the big hall is instead a loss leader, drawing stars, who in turn draw fans. Studios, however, bear the cost of bringing those stars to town. And extras can add up in a hurry; this year, use of the wraparound movie screens inside the hall runs $600,000 for an hourlong presentation, according to studio executives.AdvertisementMore surprising: Only in 2007 did the nonprofit trademark the Comic-Con name, which it has used since 1970. The move came after similarly named but unrelated conventions — often operated for profit — popped up in New York and elsewhere.Peter Hahn, a lawyer who represents the nonprofit on trademark issues, pointed out that registration is not required to protect a mark. Mr. Hahn said the nonprofit’s tools in dealing with more than a dozen conventions that have used some form of the Comic-Con name have included warning letters and licensing arrangements. Litigation has been used for “the most egregious” cases, he said.Last August, the San Diego group filed an infringement suit against the operators of Salt Lake Comic Con, who, according to the complaint, had gone so far as to wrap an Audi with advertisements for their convention and drive it around San Diego. The Salt Lake operators countersued, asking the United States District Court for the Southern District of California to declare the San Diego nonprofit’s trademark claims invalid.The litigation remains active, and both Mr. Hahn and lawyers for the Salt Lake group declined to discuss it. If the proliferation of rival conventions has curtailed possible expansion by the San Diego group, Mr. Glanzer voiced little concern. Revenue growth, he said, will come from the sale of new sponsorships in San Diego or from the online venture with Lionsgate, which is expected to begin in April and serve as a year-round Comic-Con.The still-unnamed service will be peppered with movies, shorts, newly produced series (including one being shot next week) and archival footage from past conventions. Last Wednesday, Lionsgate announced that Seth Laderman, a former Nerdist.com manager, would run the channel.As for the nonprofit’s nest egg, now most likely above $20 million, Mr. Glanzer said it is viewed primarily as insurance.“If some catastrophe happened, and we couldn’t hold our convention,” said Mr. Glanzer, “we should be able to pay our staff, and meet our commitments, and seed the return of the show.”A version of this article appears in print on June 29, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Comic-Con, Defending Fantasy Culture and, Now, Itself.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.