AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesGreece begins the new business week in the midst of a financial crisis. Its banks and its stock market will be closed on Monday. The country’s situation grew increasingly dire over the weekend after its prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, said early on Saturday morning that he would seek a referendum on the latest offer from creditors.Hours later, the eurozone finance ministers meeting in Brussels rejected Greece’s request to extend its existing bailout program past a Tuesday deadline so that Greece could hold the referendum. And on Sunday, the European Central Bank said it would not expand an emergency loan program that has been propping up Greek banks in recent weeks. For many people in Athens, Sunday became a time to prepare for an approaching storm. —Phyllis MessingerThe debt crisis in Puerto Rico reaches a tipping point this week. On Monday, Governor Alejandro García Padilla plans to release a report, written by former officials at the International Monetary Fund, that lays the groundwork for a vast restructuring of the commonwealth’s $72 billion in debt.One proposed solution would involve the government exchanging its debt for less costly bonds. Mr. García Padilla is scheduled to describe his strategy to Puerto Rico residents in a speech Monday evening. The address comes as the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority is trying to work out a deal with its creditors ahead of a $416 million payment coming due on Wednesday. —Michael CorkeryApple on Tuesday will introduce a new digital music service that will update its music offerings for the streaming age. The new service, Apple Music, will include a $10-a-month subscription streaming service to compete with Spotify, along with a free online radio station and a media platform for artists called Connect.The new service is the biggest change in Apple’s music offerings since it introduced the iTunes store in 2003, a move that led to Apple becoming the world’s biggest retailer of music. Even before the new service opened, Apple last week abruptly reversed its policy on not paying royalties to musicians during free trials of its streaming feature after complaints from independent labels and the pop star Taylor Swift. —Ben SisarioOn Tuesday, two new private reports are due on consumer confidence and home prices. The S.&P. Case/Shiller Home Price Index is expected to show a 5.4 percent gain, with experts looking for cities in Florida and the West to be especially strong. The Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Index is also expected to rise, helped by the economy’s rebound since the slowdown early this year. —Nelson D. SchwartzWith their government finances propped up by grants and loans from Western donor nations, Ukrainian officials are expected to argue at meetings this week in Washington that they cannot repay private bondholders in full while also prosecuting the war in the country’s east. A Finance Ministry envoy, International Monetary Fund officials and members of a bondholder committee plan to meet on Tuesday. The I.M.F. is requiring Ukraine to reduce payments to bondholders as part of a restructuring of $19 billion in debt, as a condition for receiving loans from the fund. Bondholders want to extend the debt’s maturity, while Ukraine is insisting that the principal be written down. —Andrew KramerAt 12:01 a.m. on Wednesday, a major federal agency’s charter will lapse — a victory, at least temporarily, for the Republican Party’s most conservative wing, which has been waging war on the Export-Import Bank for more than a year now. The bank, which guarantees commercial loans for overseas customers of American exporters, will not exactly go out of business. Its employees will continue to service all outstanding loans, some of them so large they could take up to 15 years to pay back.But no new loans can be guaranteed, and a host of small business support programs will halt at midnight. Supporters of the bank, however, are hoping to attach legislative language restarting the bank to a must-pass transportation funding bill in late July, then dare opponents in the House to kill it. Earlier this month, 65 senators voted to keep the bank alive in a test vote to show it could overcome a filibuster. And few doubt the agency has majority support in the House. But so far, the House members who matter have blocked consideration. —Jonathan WeismanAutomakers are expected to report strong new vehicle sales for June on Wednesday, as the industry continues to benefit from increased demand by American consumers for new cars and trucks. Analysts project sales in the United States to reach about 1.5 million vehicles for the month, which would represent about a 6 percent increase over June 2014. As they have so far this year, pickup trucks and crossover vehicles are likely to lead the industry, with sales of midsize passenger cars lagging the overall market. One auto research firm, TrueCar, projects that Fiat Chrysler and Nissan will post the largest year-over-year sales increases. —Bill VlasicOn Thursday, the Labor Department will report the latest figures for unemployment and hiring in June. Economists are expecting the unemployment rate to drop 0.1 percentage point to 5.4 percent, with employers adding about 230,000 jobs. In May, payrolls grew by 280,000, and while few experts expect June’s showing to be that strong, a healthy gain for June of more than 200,000 jobs would be another sign that the Federal Reserve is likely to make its long-awaited interest rate increase in September. The jobs report, usually released on a Friday, will come a day early because of the July 4 holiday, which is being observed by markets and most government agencies on July 3. —Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisement