By BROOKS BARNESJUNE 28, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  Michael D. Eisner is best known for developing the Walt Disney Company into a diversified entertainment conglomerate, but one specific slice of the media business has always been his sweet spot: television.He saw the potential of ESPN and bought it for Disney in 1995. Earlier in his career, as an ABC executive, he helped discover seminal shows like “Happy Days.”Now, as owner of the Tornante Company, which he founded after leaving Disney in 2005, Mr. Eisner sees opportunity in an area that’s considered television’s biggest backwater: original shows aired by local stations, mostly during the day.Tornante and Sinclair Broadcast Group, which owns 162 stations, have formed a company, Tornante-Sinclair, that aims to produce and distribute new syndicated talk shows, court shows and game shows. “It’s not maybe the sexiest area, but it’s also not an irrelevant area,” Mr. Eisner said in an interview. “It’s one where there is a voracious appetite for content, and there is not the kind of competition among suppliers that there was before.”AdvertisementOriginal programming for local stations — what the television industry calls first-run syndication — fell out of favor at studios over the last decade as daytime ratings declined and expensive new offerings like “Katie,” with Katie Couric, failed. In fact, only three new first-run shows will arrive nationwide in the fall.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Studios have also increasingly tailored syndicated programming to the needs of stations in New York, Chicago and Los Angeles. That shift has forced independent station owners like Sinclair, which operates in smaller, more conservative markets, to buy shows that are not always the best fit for those audiences. (As a rule, stations produce news content and rely on studio suppliers and network affiliates for everything else.)AdvertisementSinclair — which has recently been on a station-buying spree, expanding to 40 additional markets — now considers its footprint large enough to warrant making its own shows, in partnership with a production expert: Mr. Eisner. “It became clear that if we were going to get into the content business, then we couldn’t find a better team than the one at Tornante,” said Steven J. Pruett, Sinclair’s co-chief operating officer.Part of the opportunity, Mr. Pruett said, comes from owning digital rights. At the moment, studios typically retain the streaming rights for shows they produce. But station owners see streaming as crucial to their future.Mr. Eisner said he had begun talking to David Smith, Sinclair’s chief executive, about a deal because Sinclair airs “Judge Faith,” a Tornante-made court show. Tornante also makes the animated “BoJack Horseman” for Netflix.A version of this article appears in print on June 29, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Eisner Takes Media Savvy to Local TV.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.