JUNE 28, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.01 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.07 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.00 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $527.6 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYNorth Dakota Public Finance Authority, $124.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Waxahachie, Tex., Independent School District, $75 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAdvertisementArizona, $167.7 million of debt securities. Morgan Stanley.Austin, Tex., $75 million of Eanes Independent School district unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Richardson.AdvertisementCalifornia Municipal Finance Authority, $92.8 million of utility system refinancing and improvement bonds. Goldman Sachs.Clark County, Nev., $101.8 million airport refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Enumclaw, Wash., $67.6 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Davidson Securities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Florida, $79 million of university refinancing revenue bonds. Bank of America.Georgia Private Colleges and Universities Authority, $77 million of university school building and refinancing bonds. George K. Baum.Indiana Finance Authority, $94 million of motor sports improvement lease appropriations bonds. Bank of America.Jets Finance Development, $146.7 million of taxable weekly mode variable rate notes. Jefferies.Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority, $350 million of airport revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Tallahassee, Fla., $94.9 million of energy system refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Texas Transportation Commission State Highway Fund, $800 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.University of Alaska, $65 million of general revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Virginia College Building Authority, $65.6 million of educational facilities revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.A version of this article appears in print on June 29, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.