AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.01 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.13 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.02 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Department of Environmental Protection, $90 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida Board of Education, $230.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Ford County Unified School District No. 443, Kan., $85.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. King County, Wash., $91.8 million of sewer improvement and refinancing revenue bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYLoudoun County Economic Development Authority, Va., $75.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYCalifornia State Public Works Board, $223.2 million of debt securities. Competitive.Lexington County, S.C., $62.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKBroward County Airport Authority, Fla., $492.8 million of debt securities. Raymond James.California Pollution Control Financing Authority, $126 million of solid waste disposal refinancing revenue bonds. Bank of America.Columbia County School District, Ga., $55 million of general obligation bonds. Raymond James.Harris County, Tex., $145 million of toll road revenue refinancing bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Marin Healthcare District, Calif., $170 million of debt securities. Morgan Stanley.Massachusetts Educational Financing Authority, $75 million of education loan revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Mesquite Independent School District, Tex., $74.5 million unlimited tax school building bonds. Oppenheimer.Posey County Economic Development, Ind., $1.2 billion of revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.St. Louis Industrial Development Authority, $74 million of senior living facilities revenue bonds. Cain Brothers.Silicon Valley Clean Water, Calif., $80 million of wastewater revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Tennessee, $414 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Texas, $222.5 million of water financial assistance general obligation bonds. Jefferies.Union City Community Redevelopment Agency, Calif., $71.8 million of tax allocation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Virginia Housing Development Authority, $100.7 million of taxable mortgage bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Washington Township Health Care District, Calif., $145.5 million of general obligation bonds. Bank of America.Advertisement