By BEN SISARIOJUNE 29, 2015
One sign that streaming music has now fully entered the mainstream: AC/DC is on board.The Australian rock stars, who began selling their music on iTunes only three years ago, will join a variety of subscription streaming music services as early as Tuesday, including Spotify, Rdio and Apple’s new service, Apple Music, according to a number of people with knowledge of the band’s plans who spoke on the condition of anonymity.AC/DC — which has sold 72 million albums in the United States alone, according to the Recording Industry Association of America — has long been one of the biggest holdouts in the digital music market. After Apple’s iTunes store opened in 2003, some major artists resisted becoming a part of it, saying that they did not like having their albums split into individual tracks to be sold. (And, whether they said so or not, these artists stood to lose lucrative CD sales if fans bought only the songs they wanted, rather than a whole album.)But Metallica finally joined iTunes in 2006, Led Zeppelin in 2007 and the Beatles in 2010. AC/DC waited until late 2012 — well after the arrival of Spotify — to join the download world, and the band’s latest album, “Rock or Bust,” released in November, was its first new record to be sold digitally. It has since sold more than 500,000 copies in the United States, according to Nielsen.Other big rock acts have already joined the streaming era. Metallica took the dive in late 2012, and Led Zeppelin and Pink Floyd joined the year after. But while many streaming services are now competing with one another for exclusive content, AC/DC is making its music available to a number of major providers.A spokesman for the band declined to comment, as did representatives for Apple, Spotify and Rdio.On Monday, Apple also announced that Dr. Dre’s 1992 album “The Chronic” would be on Apple Music, the first time that album will be available on a subscription streaming outlet, Billboard reported. Dr. Dre was one of the founders of Beats, the audio products company that Apple bought last year for $3 billion.A version of this article appears in print on June 30, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: AC/DC, Long a Digital Holdout, Tells Users of Streaming Music Services: Let There Be Rock .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.