By ANDREW POLLACKJUNE 29, 2015
Celgene, a leading biotech company, said on Monday that it would pay about $1 billion to start a collaboration with Juno Therapeutics, a leader in the hot new area of cancer drugs that harness patients’ immune systems to attack tumors.Most of the $1 billion Celgene will pay will go toward acquiring about 9.1 million shares of Juno at $93 a share. That is about double the price at which Juno closed on Monday, before rising about 40 percent after hours.Juno, which is based in Seattle, went public in December in one of the largest initial offerings ever in the biotechnology industry. That reflected the excitement around its technology, which involves genetically engineering patients’ immune system cells so they can recognize and attack tumors.A deal with Celgene, which is one of the largest biotechnology companies, could help Juno better compete with Novartis, the Swiss pharmaceutical giant, which is developing similar treatments, which are called chimeric antigen receptor T cells, or CAR-T. Many other companies are also in the race.AdvertisementNo such drug is approved for sale yet, but in small clinical trials, the approach has led to some substantial remissions among patients with various blood cancers.Advertisement“Celgene is the ideal partner for Juno to help us realize the full potential of our science and clinical research while maintaining the independence we, our employees, partners and investors believe is so critical for true innovation,” Hans Bishop, the chief executive of Juno, said in a statement.Celgene is a leader in drugs to treat the cancer multiple myeloma, based mainly on its blockbuster Revlimid. It is also known for entering into what some analysts see as generous deals with smaller companies for new drugs and technology, giving it access to a wide variety of potential approaches to treating cancer.But some analysts said that Celgene overpaid. CAR-T and related approaches are not yet totally validated, nor is it clear so far how applicable the techniques will be in treating so-called solid tumors like breast, lung and prostate cancers, which represent a far larger potential market than the blood cancers.“Celgene’s management are to be congratulated on the audacity of their deal-making, but we expect investors to bridle at the company’s increasingly aggressive front-end loading of their transactions,” Geoffrey Porges, a biotechnology analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Company, said in a note on Monday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This transaction amounts to prepaying much of the cost of a distance asset well in advance of the delivery of the asset,” a risky move given the frequent failures in drug development, he said.Celgene executives said the collaboration would help change the face of cancer care. “We consider the combined efforts will far exceed the sum of the parts,” said Dr. Thomas O. Daniel, who leads research and early development for the company.Celgene shares fell about 2 percent in after-hours trading. Celgene will pay $150 million to Juno, and also purchase 9,137,672 newly issued shares at $93 each, giving it about a 10 percent stake in Juno. By the end of the 10-year collaboration, Celgene will be able to increase its stake to as much as 30 percent under certain conditions. It will get one seat on Juno’s board.Under the terms of the agreement, Celgene has the option to be the commercialization partner for Juno’s cancer drugs and also any cell therapies it develops for autoimmune diseases. That includes the cancer drugs Juno now has in clinical trials.AdvertisementJuno will remain responsible for research, development and commercialization in North America. Celgene will be responsible for development and commercialization in the rest of the world and will pay Juno a royalty on sales.The companies may also collaborate globally on certain experimental Juno programs, not including its most advanced ones. And Juno has the option to codevelop and help commercialize certain Celgene drug candidates that are aimed at T cells.Some analysts have said that investors have become overly enthusiastic about engineered T cells, given that the therapies can have severe side effects.Juno has technology from the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, the Seattle Children’s Research Institute and the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York, and they could be in for a windfall if the company succeeds. A version of this article appears in print on June 30, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Celgene to Pay $1 Billion for Juno Collaboration.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.