By JOHN KOBLINJUNE 29, 2015
Discovery Communications won the exclusive rights to broadcast the Olympics from 2018 to 2024 for most of Europe, the media company announced on Monday.Discovery paid 1.3 billion euros, or about $1.45 billion, for the rights to four Olympic Games. The rights cover free and pay television as well as the Internet and mobile.The Games will be televised on channels operated by Eurosport, a leading European sports network. Discovery bought a controlling stake in Eurosport last year.It’s the first time that one media company has acquired all the rights to the Games across Europe, said Thomas Bach, the chief executive of the International Olympic Committee.Advertisement“We think this is a perfect match,” Mr. Bach said during a news briefing.The Games will run in most of Europe, with the exception of Russia. Discovery will also not broadcast the 2018 or 2020 games in France and Britain because the I.O.C. previously made deals for those rights.AdvertisementDiscovery has vowed to broadcast 200 hours of the Summer Olympics and at least 100 hours of the Winter Olympics on free-to-air television. The company also said it would sublicense a portion of the Games in certain countries.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With huge brand recognition, the Olympics are among the most valuable programming for media companies looking to acquire live events that captivate viewers.“There is no more exciting property than the Olympic Games,” said David Zaslav, the chief executive of Discovery.Mr. Zaslav pointed to Dick Ebersol, the former NBC Sports executive, as being critical to the deal. “As we look at this partnership today, it would never have been put together and it would never have happened without Dick being a part of it and helping us to see it through,” Mr. Zaslav said.Mr. Ebersol was one of the chief architects of NBC’s Olympic coverage. NBC has the broadcast rights for the Olympics in the United States through 2032.A version of this article appears in print on June 30, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Discovery Wins Rights to Broadcast Olympic Games.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.