AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningChief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. said during his confirmation hearing that “judges are like umpires,” and as every baseball fan knows, each umpire has a different strike zone.The Securities and Exchange Commission is learning the hard way that having an unfavorable umpire can hurt its cases as it tries to fend off challenges to its use of in-house judges.This month, Judge Leigh Martin May of the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia found that the S.E.C.’s method of appointing its administrative judges violated the constitutional requirement that “officers” are supposed to be appointed by the president of the United States or the head of an agency. Currently, such judges are hired as other S.E.C. employees are, not directly by the five commissioners.Judge May issued a preliminary injunction on June 8 that stopped an impending administrative hearing on charges that Charles L. Hill Jr., a real estate developer, had traded on inside information in advance of a tender offer.As I discussed in a recent column, this is part of a broader fight about whether the S.E.C. should be permitted to pursue charges in administrative hearings that it had previously been required to file in a federal district court. Its authority in this matter was changed by the Dodd-Frank Act in 2010, which allowed the agency, in most cases, to pursue a wide range of financial penalties before one of its administrative judges.The S.E.C.’s enforcement division has pursued more cases in this forum, but there has been considerable criticism of this strategy because of the perception that it gives the agency too much of a “home field” advantage. Gretchen Morgenson took up this issue in a recent Fair Game column. She wrote that even some ex-employees of the S.E.C., who are usually friendly to its position, are questioning whether the agency should pursue complex fraud cases in administrative proceedings that provide only limited discovery and no right to a jury for the defendants.On June 24, the S.E.C. filed a notice that it was appealing Judge May’s decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit in Atlanta. It is asking that she suspend her order in Mr. Hill’s case until the appeals court decides the case. That process could take months, however, and other defendants who have been accused of securities violations in administrative proceedings are seeking similar orders from Judge May to stop the S.E.C. from proceeding with their cases before an administrative law judge.Persuading a district judge to suspend an injunction until the appeal is complete is difficult. The S.E.C. argues that it is “likely to prevail” before the appeals court. Thus, it is essentially asking Judge May to acknowledge that her order was based on a faulty legal analysis.Judges undoubtedly think they are right when making a decision. And in Judge May’s case, she issued a 45-page opinion outlining her position, filled with dense legal analysis of the constitutional provisions at stake.The problem for the S.E.C. is that Judge May is not only unlikely to suspend the injunction, but also that she can be expected to issue similar orders in other cases before her that challenge the S.E.C.’s use of administrative judges to hear charges.Judge May’s ruling is particularly of interest to Timbervest, an investment firm in Georgia. The firm and its four owners were found to have violated the Investment Advisers Act by an administrative judge, and their case is pending before the five S.E.C. commissioners. They filed a lawsuit in Federal District Court in Atlanta shortly after Judge May’s decision in Mr. Hill’s case, asking for an order stopping the proceeding on the same grounds that the appointment of the administrative judge was unconstitutional.Timbervest was able to get its case assigned to Judge May by designating its lawsuit as a “related case” to Mr. Hill’s challenge. The S.E.C. has challenged that claim, filing a brief to ask that the complaint be reassigned according to the usual random draw used by the federal court when a new matter is filed.Another case before Judge May involves administrative charges against the Gray Financial Group, an Atlanta-based investment adviser, and two of its officers. In that case, the agency said the parties breached their fiduciary duty related to recommendations to several public pension funds in Georgia on alternative investments.They filed a lawsuit that challenged the use of an administrative judge in February, with the case originally assigned to Judge Amy Totenberg of the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia. But on June 11, Judge Totenberg, who serves in same district in Atlanta as Judge May, signed an order transferring the case to Judge May “as a matter of judicial economy” because it involved the same issues as Mr. Hill’s case.The potential is high that other defendants in the same jurisdiction will flock to Judge May’s courtroom to stymie charges against them that were heard before administrative law judges. This could have a far-reaching effect on the S.E.C.’s use of the administrative forum for its enforcement actions.Although judges, like umpires, are supposed to apply the law fairly, lawyers often seek ways to get a case before someone more likely to take a favorable view of their position. Some judges develop a reputation of leaning in favor of one side in certain types of cases, and lawyers will try their best to take advantage of that by engaging in what is commonly referred to as “judge shopping.”As the S.E.C. fights Judge May’s order, it faces the prospect that its ability to use administrative proceedings will be hamstrung for months if it is unable to get a reprieve from the preliminary injunction in Mr. Hill’s case. And should the finding of a constitutional violation in the appointment of the in-house judges spread to other courts, the administrative process could quickly grind to a halt.Advertisement