By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONJUNE 29, 2015
For years, private equity firms operated behind a curtain of mystery when it came to how they passed along expenses to investors. The Securities and Exchange Commission is now beginning to pull back the curtain and shine a light on those practices.In a first, the commission on Monday said that the private equity giant Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company breached its fiduciary duty when it passed along more than $17 million in “broken deal” expenses to its investors. The action is expected to lay the groundwork for similar cases in the coming months.Some private equity investors — which include public pension funds that invest on behalf of police officers, firefighters, teachers and other government employees — have lately already been questioning their investments in private equity funds. Such pension funds and other investors are known as limited partners in industry parlance, and they typically make up a significant portion of the money that private equity firms then use to undertake buyouts and other deals.Of concern to the S.E.C. is what private equity firms like K.K.R. charge their limited partners and how that differs from the amount co-investors — which include private equity executives — are required to pay in fees.AdvertisementOver a six-year period, until 2011, K.K.R. incurred $338 million in expenses related to unsuccessful buyouts, the S.E.C. said. Instead of making its own executives absorb some of those costs, the firm passed them on to the funds of their limited partners without informing them.Andrew J. Ceresney, director of the S.E.C.’s enforcement division, said, “Although K.K.R. raised billions of dollars of deal capital from co-investors, it unfairly required the funds to shoulder the cost for nearly all of the expenses incurred to explore potential investment opportunities that were pursued, but ultimately not completed.” Mr. Ceresney made his comments in an email statement.The firm has agreed to pay nearly $30 million to the settle the accusations.The S.E.C.’s move to file civil charges against K.K.R. serves as a warning to the industry, which has been under close scrutiny by the regulator in the wake of the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul of 2010, which has imposed greater disclosure requirements. Over the past few years, the S.E.C. has conducted examinations of private equity firms and found that more than 50 percent of the time there were violations of law or weaknesses in the firm’s control systems.AdvertisementThe S.E.C. is expected to announce a series of similar actions against private equity firms for misallocation of fees and disclosure failures over the next few months, according to people briefed on the agency’s plans.  Nationwide, pension funds are examining closely how much they have paid Wall Street firms to manage their investments. Under Dodd-Frank, private equity firms with more than $150 million in assets under management are required to register as investment advisers. They also have to make public filings about their operations.Private equity firms charge investors a management fee of 1 to 2 percent of assets under management, as well as around 20 percent of any gains each year. But there are other transaction costs that are often not disclosed, including “broken deal” expenses, costs for monitoring investments and legal fees. These undisclosed fees often represent a substantial weight on returns for investors, according to recent study by CEM Benchmarking.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is going to create anxiety in the industry for those firms that aren’t monitoring this issue,” said Thomas A. Sporkin, a lawyer at BuckleySandler who spent nearly two decades as an S.E.C. enforcement lawyer.  “It seems like it’s a basic conflict: You’re allocating expenses in a manner that favors a group with more power over another group with less insight.”Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, which neither admitted nor denied the S.E.C.’s accusations, sought to put the issue behind it on Monday, saying that the settlement related to past issues and not current practices at the firm.“We take our fiduciary responsibilities seriously and have strived to adapt our policies and practices to the changing nature of the industry, market and our business,” Kristi Huller, a spokeswoman for the firm, said in an emailed statement.  “K.K.R. is firmly committed to upholding the highest governance and transparency standards, and we remain dedicated to continually enhancing our practices on behalf of our fund investors."For some investors, that pledge may come too late. In June, the California Public Employees’ Retirement System, known as Calpers, announced plans to reduce the number of private equity funds it invests in to 30 from 98 as it moves to simplify its portfolio. Calpers executives have also acknowledged that the fees they pay to private equity firms are not transparent. Wylie A. Tollette, the chief operating investment officer at Calpers, recently told an investment committee that the $300 billion pension fund could not track those fees. Calpers is an investor in K.K.R.As part of the settlement, K.K.R. agreed to pay a $10 million penalty, more than $14 million in disgorgement as well as more than $4.5 million in prejudgment interest. It had previously refunded clients $3.26 million.It also settled an administrative proceeding brought by the S.E.C. which charged that the firm failed to put into action a written compliance policy for its expense allocations until the end of the six-year period in 2011.The S.E.C. stopped short of holding any one individual accountable, marking a break from a recent trend of holding chief compliance officers accountable for failing to ensure a firm’s compliance policies are being adhered to.AdvertisementIt was not too long ago that two of the main lawyers working on behalf of the private equity firm — Bruce Karpati, now K.K.R.’s global chief compliance officer, and Robert Kaplan, the firm’s outside defense counsel — were bringing cases against Wall Street companies rather than defending them. The two were co-chiefs of the enforcement division at the S.E.C.’s asset management unit, which brought cases against investment firms.A version of this article appears in print on June 30, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: For ‘Broken Deal’ Violations, K.K.R. Will Pay $30 Million .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.