By KEITH BRADSHERJUNE 29, 2015
HONG KONG —  Like a growing number of other investors, Wang Jiacang, a 48-year-old driver in Beijing, is caught in the falling Chinese stock market with no easy exit.Chinese rules halt trading in a company’s shares when they drop 10 percent, and some of the more speculative listings declined by the limit on Friday and again on Monday, while giving investors like Mr. Wang few chances to sell. “I’m quite worried — a fifth of my investment has been trapped,” he said. “Who will buy stocks in a bear market?”An interest-rate cut by China’s central bank on Saturday failed to stem the rout in Chinese share prices on Monday, and the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets closed with steep losses after their wildest swings in percentage terms in more than two decades.The markets gyrated on Monday from initial gains of more than 3 percent, in response to the central bank’s action, to losses of more than 7 percent by early afternoon. The Shanghai market closed with a loss of 3.3 percent, while the especially volatile Shenzhen market plunged 6.1 percent.AdvertisementThe losses pushed both stock exchanges into bear markets, with stock prices declining more than 20 percent since their peak on June 12. Much of those losses came in just the last two trading days, as indexes at both exchanges fell more than 7 percent on Friday.Heavy losses among individual investors pose an economic and financial dilemma for the government and possibly a political challenge as well, if unhappy speculators start protesting that the government should do more to help the market.AdvertisementEven with Monday’s losses, Chinese stock markets have doubled in the past year. Much of that increase has stemmed from a series of signals from the government that it wanted buoyant stock markets. The official Xinhua news agency even produced a prominently distributed analysis on Sunday that the markets remained healthy and sound.As the markets have sunk, they have begun to take a heavy toll on the many investors who borrowed much of the money that they eagerly invested in what had seemed like a robust bull market. Mr. Wang said that one of his friends, who owns his own company, had lost all of his accumulated earnings from years of stock market investments and half the principal that he originally put into the market.“He almost wants to kill himself,” Mr. Wang said. “I asked him out Saturday. He didn’t come out. He was lying at home, listless.”Market strategists and economists have had varying views on the reasons behind the Chinese stock market rally that lasted through mid-June. Some have suggested it was underpinned by a genuine and sustainable increase in demand for Chinese shares, as interest rates have been falling, the stumbling real estate market has seemed unappealing and households have had lots of cash in bank deposits paying just 2 percent interest.Moreover, China has been in discussions with companies managing the leading international stock indexes on when its shares might be included in those indexes. When that occurs international money managers will need to pump tens of billions of dollars into mainland Chinese stocks or else risk having their investment returns diverge substantially from the best-known benchmarks.But skeptics have suggested for months that China’s soaring share prices were really a case of pure speculation. They point out that China’s economic growth rate has been steadily slowing. Many corporations, particularly state-owned enterprises, are struggling to make timely interest payments on their heavy debts. Wages are rising steeply, pinching corporate profit margins, because of a shrinking supply of young workers, a result of increasingly stringent enforcement of the “one child” demographic policy through the 1990s.AdvertisementWhy the Chinese stock markets finally peaked and began descending is also the subject of vigorous debate. Some have suggested that the market was so high that a drop was inevitable. Others point out that an easing of regulations on home purchases has started to kindle a recovery in prices of apartments, the main alternative to investing in stocks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Almost no one thinks that the Chinese markets’ troubles reflect issues in Europe or elsewhere. “I do not believe the situation in Greece has that big an impact on the mainland stock market,” said Andy Wong, a longtime Hong Kong stockbroker.The Hang Seng index in Hong Kong fell 2.6 percent on Monday and had smaller losses last week. The city’s more sophisticated investors did not bet as heavily on a bull market over the past year, as the Hang Seng lagged considerably behind mainland indexes. But that has left Hong Kong investors less perturbed by recent losses.“You would think that with the rate cuts, the markets would go up,” said Alice Yam, a 55-year-old office worker. “Anyway, I am not afraid of this volatility. There is a Chinese saying: If you choose to eat salted fish, you should be prepared to withstand the subsequent thirst.”Patrick Zuo contributed research from Beijing.A version of this article appears in print on June 30, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Stocks Dive Again, Signaling a Choppy Shift Into a Bear Market .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.