AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiPhilip H. Knight, Nike’s co-founder and chairman, said on Tuesday that he planned to step down, and that he wanted to pass the company’s reins to Mark Parker, the president and chief executive.Mr. Knight said in a statement released by the company that he still planned to stay involved with Nike, which he founded in 1964 with his track coach, Bill Bowerman, after selling running shoes from the trunk of his car.But Mr. Knight, 77, said that he felt it was important to outline a succession plan, and that he believed Mr. Parker was the man for Nike’s top job. Mr. Parker has been president and chief executive of the company since 2006. The final decision will be made by the Nike board. “For me, Nike has always been more than just a company — it has been my life’s passion,” Mr. Knight said in the statement. “Over the years, I’ve spent a great deal of time considering how I might someday evolve my ownership and leadership” of Nike, he said.“I believe Mark is the best choice to succeed me,” Mr. Knight said. “For myself, I intend to continue to work with Nike and look forward to contributing to its future well after my chairmanship ends.”Mr. Knight also said that he was transferring his shares in the company to a new company called Swoosh, of which he will be a director, with Mr. Parker and the Nike directors Alan Graf and John Donahoe.Nike, meanwhile, said it expected to appoint Mr. Knight’s successor in 2016, but did not give a departure date for Mr. Knight. It also named Travis Knight, Mr. Knight’s son, who is an animator and a film executive, to the Nike board.With Mr. Knight at its helm, Nike grew into a multibillion-dollar global apparel company with more than $30 billion in sales last year, and turned the Nike swoosh into one of the world’s most recognizable brand symbols. After a period of slowing sales, Nike has rebounded in recent years. Mr. Knight had previously been reluctant to cede control of his company. William Perez, a marketing executive whom Mr. Knight picked to succeed him as chief executive in 2004, lasted 13 months before he left after clashing with Mr. Knight on strategy. At the time, a confidant of Mr. Perez’s remarked, “Some people won’t relinquish until they die.”Mr. Knight eventually picked Mr. Parker, a Nike veteran, to be chief executive.“I have been privileged to work with Phil for over 35 years,” Mr. Parker said. “Nike’s exceptional management team and I are committed to building on Phil’s vision to drive the next era of growth.”Advertisement