AdvertisementSupported byBy Jackie CalmesWASHINGTON — Time was running out on the nation’s 81-year-old Export-Import Bank on Tuesday, but its employees were not. Instead they casually walked in and out of the bank’s classical headquarters a block from the White House, none of them carrying packing boxes or personal effects as one might expect at a federal agency whose charter would expire at midnight.Although Congress left town last week without reauthorizing the bank before its deadline, the agency retains a short-term lease on life: By law, it must manage its existing portfolio of loans, loan guarantees and insurance to help foreign customers buy products from American exporters — behemoths like Boeing, and smaller companies like the 90-employee Morrison Textile Machinery Company in rural Fort Lawn, S.C. But now it cannot make new deals.None of the 420 employees will be furloughed, according to a bank official.For the longer term, advocates of the bank in both parties believe that by the end of July they can foil the antigovernment Republicans in Congress who blocked the bank’s reauthorization and pull off a legislative Lazarus act restoring the agency’s full powers for up to five years. Their plan is for the Senate to attach a bank amendment to a must-pass bill extending the highway trust fund, and send that bill to the House, circumventing conservative foes there.To that end, President Obama convened a private conference call Tuesday afternoon to urge pro-bank representatives of business and labor groups to speak out, write op-eds for local newspapers and otherwise push for Congress to resuscitate the charter of the agency, known as the Ex-Im Bank. Acknowledging that he was “preaching to the choir,” according to a participant on the call who took notes, Mr. Obama credited the bank with supporting well over one million jobs in the past six years, including at small and midsize businesses, earning nearly $7 billion for taxpayers and assuring that American exporters were competitive with foreign companies when commercial financing was not available to their buyers. The president described the bank as critical to his overall trade-promotion agenda. On this issue, unlike his efforts to advance a trade pact with Pacific Rim nations, Mr. Obama has his party’s support since Democrats view the Ex-Im Bank as promoting American jobs rather than threatening them. Tea Party-inspired Republicans ended the bank’s long history of easy, bipartisan votes for reauthorization, contending that the agency is a corrupt exemplar of big government “corporate welfare” and “crony capitalism.”Mr. Obama predicted victory but told those on the call, “We need folks to push hard.”Whatever the outcome, the Ex-Im Bank lives on for now as the latest example of how difficult it is to kill a government agency once it is created. The bank dates back to the Depression, when Washington stepped in as the financier of last resort to help businesses in the United States make sales in a world that was nearly bankrupt. Now, about 85 other countries have export-finance agencies to promote export sales; the biggest by far is China’s. “We did it!” the antibank conservatives at the antigovernment advocacy group Heritage Action for America exulted in an email hours before the midnight deadline for the bank charter.“Change doesn’t come fast or easy in Washington, but over the past three years conservatives created the conditions that caused the Export-Import Bank to expire,” Heritage’s chief, Michael A. Needham, said in a written statement. He added, “Now it is up to Republican leaders to accept and preserve this major policy victory.”But his challenge to the Senate and House leaders, Senator Mitch McConnell and Speaker John A. Boehner, seems to be at odds with their legislative plans. Mr. McConnell in May promised bank supporters that they would get a chance to add reauthorization language to a must-pass bill, presumably the highway measure. And Mr. Boehner has said that the House would have to take up whatever such bill the Senate passes. Bank proponents in both chambers say that they have enough votes to succeed; a test vote recently in the Senate registered 65 supporters for the bank, including 22 Republicans.To date, the hurdle for the agency has been in the House and Senate banking committees. The Republican chairmen, in particular Representative Jeb Hensarling of Texas, oppose the bank and have prevented their panels from producing legislation even to overhaul it to address what they say are its flaws. Mr. Hensarling has done so despite an admonition from Mr. Boehner to pass something, anything, even if it is a bill to wind down the bank. As Mr. Hensarling has acknowledged, doing nothing actually achieves his goal of closing the bank, if temporarily; the danger of sending a committee bill to the House floor is that it could possibly be amended to preserve the bank. The House Democratic leader, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, blamed Republicans for another episode of legislative brinkmanship. “Washington Republicans,” she said, “should end their cycle of obstruction, dysfunction and distraction.”Advertisement