By NOAM SCHEIBERJUNE 30, 2015
WASHINGTON —  For all the ambition of President Obama’s plan to significantly expand the number of Americans eligible for overtime pay, the proposal falls well short of helping substantially increase middle-class wages, its chief advertised benefit.“This rule will raise wages and lead to better lives for millions of working people in the lower middle part of the labor market,” said Damon Silvers, policy director of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. “Of course it’s necessary, but it’s not sufficient. Not by a long shot. Wage stagnation is a problem for 90 percent of workers.” The rule would raise the salary threshold for workers to automatically receive time-and-a-half pay after working 40 hours in a week, lifting it from its current level of $23,660 to $50,440, where it last stood in the mid-1970s in terms of purchasing power. The new threshold would also rise over time so that inflation does not significantly erode its value.“This proposed overtime rule goes to the heart of what it means to be middle-class in America,” Labor Secretary Thomas Perez told reporters Tuesday. As the threshold for overtime pay has “atrophied,” he said, “it’s no coincidence that so too has the middle class’s ability to get ahead and stay ahead.”Given the political hurdles, the White House and its allies argue, the overtime rule represents a major advance.Advertisement“This is the middle-class equivalent of raising the minimum wage,” said Senator Charles Schumer of New York. “It’s about the only thing that can be done by the president with the stroke of the pen that will have a significant effect.”AdvertisementStill, Senator Schumer acknowledged that substantially raising the income of typical workers would require a much more robust agenda, including expanding access to community college, a highway bill to create more construction jobs, incentives for companies to raise wages and strengthening unions.There are three main categories of workers who stand to benefit from the overtime change. They tend to be white-collar workers in industries like finance, professional and business services, and wholesale and retailing.The first category includes workers in the $23,660 to $50,440 salary range who, under the current federal rules, are legitimately exempt from receiving overtime pay because their jobs involve some professional, managerial or supervisory duties. The administration estimates that there are nearly five million workers who fit this description, and that many companies will simply raise their salaries above the new threshold to keep them exempt. Others will become eligible for overtime or have their hours cut back, or both.The second category includes workers in the targeted salary range, like clerks, who should already be eligible for overtime pay because their jobs feature no bona fide managerial or supervisory component and no independent responsibility, but whom employers have misclassified and denied overtime pay.The third category includes workers in the targeted salary range who are eligible to receive overtime and currently receive it, but who are vulnerable to such reclassification.The administration has circulated documents showing that there were roughly 10 million workers combined in the latter two categories. The new rule would make it substantially more difficult to deprive them of the extra pay to which they are legally entitled.Critics representing business complain that the change will raise costs for employers and lead to less hiring. “Making more employees eligible for overtime by severely restricting the exemptions will not guarantee more income, but instead will negatively impact small businesses and drastically limit employment opportunities,” Randel Johnson, a senior vice president at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, said in a statement.AdvertisementAt the very least, many such critics contend, the new rule will cause employers to reduce hours so as not to set off the overtime pay scale.But whatever its ultimate impact, the proposed overtime change only scratches the surface of the bigger problem: While a broad range of workers once reaped the benefits of economic growth, the affluent have captured a rising share in recent decades, leaving the wages of everyone else to stagnate.“We’ve had a full breakdown between productivity gains and wage increases,” said Neera Tanden, president of the Center for American Progress, a research group aligned closely with Hillary Rodham Clinton’s presidential campaign. “It becomes very sharp from 2000 on.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.According to detailed tax data compiled by the economists Emmanuel Saez and Thomas Piketty, the top 10 percent of families captured just under 90 percent of the total growth in income between 2009 and 2014. All other families split the remaining 10 percent.To overcome this disparity, labor advocates and other experts say, there are two main approaches that promise to increase middle-class wages considerably. The first would be to improve the bargaining power of workers, so that they could claim more of the wealth generated by productivity gains, which the affluent are keeping primarily to themselves.“I do believe the single biggest factor contributing to middle-class wage stagnation is the erosion of unions and collective bargaining rights,” said Lawrence Mishel, president of the Economic Policy Institute, who has studied the effect of the decline.The second type of policy change would be to limit the incomes of those nearest the top of the ladder — by reining in the favorable tax treatment of executive pay, for example, or raising income tax rates.“It’s really about preventing the top from grabbing too large a share of the economic pie,” Mr. Saez said in an email. “Restraining the top would boost bottom incomes by making economic growth more equitable to start with.”Given the resistance in Congress to the president’s agenda, however, it is hard to imagine much progress on these fronts in the remaining year and a half of his term. And given the obstacles Mr. Obama encountered even when his party controlled both houses of Congress, a new Democratic president would undoubtedly face huge obstacles as well.AdvertisementSome states like Wisconsin and Michigan have recently passed laws that undermine collective bargaining rights for certain workers, drain unions of membership fees and remove incentives for workers to join them.The day after the president announced his overtime rule, the Supreme Court agreed to hear a case, known as Friedrichs v. California Teachers Association, that could bring so-called right-to-work arrangements to public sector workers, like teachers.Research published by the Economic Policy Institute this year showed that wages in right-to-work states, where workers can opt out of paying union fees even though they benefit from union protection and collective bargaining, were, controlling for relevant factors, 3.1 percent lower than those in other states.To some of his allies, the president has even muddied his own efforts to help lift the middle class by aggressively promoting trade promotion authority, which Congress approved last week. The measure will make it easier to pass the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement the administration is negotiating, which progressives fear will throw blue-collar Americans into even greater competition with low-wage workers abroad.The debate over wages is emerging as the key battleground of the 2016 presidential campaign. Republicans like Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio have styled themselves fixers of middle-class wage stagnation, casting many of their views on limited government and free enterprise as solutions to the problem.Among Democrats, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont has pressured the front-runner, Mrs. Clinton, with his bluntness about the need to strengthen unions and rein in the wealthy.“What I’m going to say to the top 1 percent and the top 0.1 percent is, ‘Sorry, you have to pay your fair share of taxes,’ ” Mr. Sanders said in an interview. “The American people do not look kindly on a society where they can’t afford to send their kids to college and the richest people in the country become phenomenally richer.”A version of this news analysis appears in print on July 1, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Obama Overtime Rule Scratches the Surface in Helping the Middle Class.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.