By PETER EAVISJUNE 30, 2015
When borrowers — whether they are countries, companies or individuals — do not pay their debts on time, they are in default. For practical purposes, then, Greece — which on Tuesday failed to make a scheduled debt repayment of about 1.5 billion euros, or $1.7 billion, to the International Monetary Fund — has defaulted.The I.M.F., however, does not use term default. It instead places countries that miss their payments in what it calls arrears.Semantics aside, missing the payment might lead to a situation in which other large Greek debts are classified as being in default.A default, even when it is not called one, is an event that can have serious repercussions for a country’s economy and relations with other nations. Defaults can roil financial markets, create uncertainty for other lenders, and generally crimp economic activity.AdvertisementEuropean governments have lent around €131 billion to Greece since 2010 through a fund called the European Financial Stability Facility. The terms of the loans say that a failure to pay the I.M.F. can be an “event of default.” But the terms stress that the European fund is not obliged to treat it as a default. In other words, it is up to Europe’s leaders, who will most likely hold off on declaring a default.In sovereign debt crises, the actions of ratings agencies are also crucial. They usually state that a country has defaulted when it has missed a payment on bonds issued to commercial investors. The I.M.F. loan to Greece does not fit into that category of debt because the I.M.F. is an international agency.AdvertisementStandard & Poor’s, however, on Monday sounded a warning in a news release about Greece. “Absent unanticipated favorable changes in Greece’s circumstances, a commercial default is inevitable within the next six months,” the ratings agency wrote. A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Athens Is Placed in ‘Arrears,’ as the I.M.F. Spells ‘Default’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.