AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — Home prices in the United States increased at a solid clip in April, led by double-digit jumps in Denver and San Francisco.The Standard & Poor’s/Case-Shiller 20-city home price index rose 4.9 percent in April from 12 months earlier, roughly the same annual pace as March, S.&P. Dow Jones Indices said Tuesday.In another report on Tuesday, consumer confidence showed a solid gain in June following a modest increase in May, indicating that strong job gains are aiding the overall economy.Job growth and low mortgage rates have brought greater demand for housing, lifting home values. The gains are at roughly double the pace of wage growth, but current levels appear more manageable than the double-digit home price increases seen during parts of 2013 and 2014.“These gains are probably sustainable,” said David Berson, chief economist at Nationwide Insurance. “They’re not so rapid as to cause worry that people won’t be able to afford to buy the average home.”Prices in the Denver metro areas climbed 10.3 percent, while home values in San Francisco rose 10 percent. Values increased more than 7.5 percent in Dallas, Miami, Seattle and Tampa. But growth was tepid in the Boston, Cleveland and Washington areas, where prices were up by 1.8 percent or less.The Case-Shiller index covers roughly half of American homes. It measures prices compared with those in January 2000 and creates a three-month moving average. Other data show faster increases in prices, reflecting a shortage of homes available in the market. May sales figures from the National Association of Realtors found that median home prices increased 7.9 percent over the last 12 months to $228,700, about $1,700 shy of the July 2006 peak. The market has a 5.1-month supply of homes, versus an average of six months in a healthy market. Relatively low mortgage rates have aided home values. The average for a 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage was 4.02 percent, according to Freddie Mac. Still, that average has been steadily rising from a 52-week low of 3.59 percent, creating more pressure for buyers to close deals now.Also Tuesday, the Conference Board said that its consumer confidence index rose to 101.4 in June, up from 94.6 in May. The June level matches the level in March. The index took a tumble in April, but it’s now 17.4 percent higher than it was a year ago, evidence that the economy is poised to enjoy stronger growth in coming months.The June gain, which was stronger than economists had expected, was supported by increases in consumer views about current conditions and the labor market. Those expressing the view that jobs were plentiful rose to 21.4 percent, up from 20.6 percent in the previous month.“After a brief setback, consumer confidence appears to be surging anew,” said Jim Baird, chief investment officer at Plante Moran Financial Advisors. “Continued improvement in job market conditions and income growth should help sustain an optimistic mood and provide fuel for spending growth.”Advertisement