AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben Sisario“Into the unknown we go,” the D. J. Zane Lowe said just after noon on Tuesday, as he began his first show on Beats 1, the Internet radio station that is a big feature of Apple’s new music service.Many in the music industry may have been thinking the same thing. The new service, Apple Music, is the most thorough change to the company’s audio offerings since it introduced the iTunes store in 2003, a move that legitimized a nascent digital market and eventually led to a computer manufacturer becoming the world’s largest retailer of music.As Apple Music opened on Tuesday — most listeners found it as part of an update of Apple’s mobile operating system — much of the attention turned to Beats 1, a live radio feed that in some ways functions as marketing for the entire service. Led by Mr. Lowe, who was born in New Zealand and became a top announcer on the BBC station Radio 1, Beats 1 is in some ways an old-fashioned radio station, with D. J.s, promotional recordings — “carts,” as they are in industry parlance, after the tape cartridges they used to fit on — and teases about new songs.After warming up with atmospheric tracks by Brian Eno, Mr. Lowe opened his first show with the song “City” by Spring King, a little-known alternative band from Manchester, England. Then came Beck, the English producer Jamie XX, the English rapper Skepta and AC/DC, a playlist that in some ways telegraphed Mr. Lowe’s musical approach. He is dedicated to brand-new rock and hip-hop music and isn’t afraid to take chances on the kinds of obscure records that most commercial American radio stations would normally consider too risky to play.Even Spring King seemed surprised by Mr. Lowe’s choice. “Yo @zanelowe are you kidding?!!?!? you just spun our tune! you’re an absolute legend!!” the band tweeted shortly after he played its song. Different music streaming services have varying costs, platforms and catalog sizes. See how some of the most popular companies stack up against one another.But as part of Apple’s new service, the station played plenty of songs that were exclusive to it, or that highlight its catalog. AC/DC, long a holdout to streaming services, joined Apple Music — along with Spotify, Rhapsody and others — only on Tuesday. And Mr. Lowe played Pharrell Williams’s new song, “Freedom,” a track that, for now at least, can be heard only through Apple.Mr. Lowe has a kinetic style that is derived partly from hip-hop producers, and for American listeners it can come across as a slick and hyperactive version of a college-radio announcer who is eager to play all the coolest new tracks. (Although few college D.J.s have Mr. Lowe’s clout in music: On Tuesday, he teased listeners to tune in the next day for his interview with Eminem.“If you have ever had an inkling that you would enjoy Princeton’s very eclectic WPRB, but don’t have the time to tune in, or enough patience once you get there, it’s a more managed version of that experience,” said Sean Ross, a radio analyst with Edison Research who pays close attention to station playlists. “But I imagine somebody in college radio right now saying, ‘Sheesh, I played Spring King ages ago.’ ” Apple Music is competing directly with a range of online streaming music outlets. Like Spotify, it is offering $10 monthly subscriptions that let people stream any song they choose out of a catalog of tens of millions. Like SoundCloud, it lets artists upload brand new or unofficial tracks, and like Pandora, it offers Internet radio feeds that cater to a user’s tastes.The new service carries the hopes as well as the worries of the music business. If Apple Music is successful — some analysts say they believe it can attract as many as 100 million subscribers — it could deliver billions of dollars in revenue to the music industry and establish streaming music as a stable business. But at that same time, its embrace of streaming may hasten the demise of downloads, which are a vital source of income for the music business but over the last couple of years have begun to fall. Apple did not release information on Tuesday about how many people had downloaded the new operating system or were tuning in to Beats 1. But Mr. Lowe’s Twitter feed was full of messages from listeners from around the world — South Africa, Germany, France, the United States, England, Australia — which added to the excitement of the show’s debut and also demonstrated Apple’s enormous reach.“My name is Zane Lowe,” he announced near the beginning of his show. “I come from Auckland, New Zealand, and I’m proud to be here to play music for the entire world.”Advertisement