AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — Adding another female executive to its predominantly male senior ranks, the Walt Disney Company on Tuesday named Christine M. McCarthy as its next chief financial officer, succeeding James A. Rasulo.Ms. McCarthy, the first female C.F.O. in Disney’s history, has most recently been Disney’s treasurer. She will replace Mr. Rasulo, who stepped down in early June after a rival executive, Thomas O. Staggs, was promoted to chief operating officer, making Mr. Staggs the favored candidate to become Disney’s next chief executive.Another candidate for Mr. Rasulo’s job, Kevin Mayer, was promoted on Tuesday to the new position of chief strategy officer. Mr. Mayer, who has recently served as executive vice president for corporate strategy and development, will continue to focus on identifying growth opportunities, including acquisitions.In a statement, Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive and chairman, called Ms. McCarthy “highly respected in the finance sector.” Mr. Iger applauded Mr. Mayer for “playing an integral role” in acquisitions like Lucasfilm and Pixar.Mr. Iger has clearly made it a priority to improve the gender balance at Disney. In May, Mr. Iger selected Leslie Ferraro to run Disney Consumer Products, making her the only woman to lead or co-lead a Disney division.Ms. McCarthy will report directly to Mr. Iger. Mr. Mayer, who previously reported to Mr. Rasulo, will jointly report to Mr. Iger and Mr. Staggs.Mr. Rasulo will serve as an adviser to Mr. Iger for an unspecified period; Disney disclosed in a regulatory filing last week that the role will allow Mr. Rasulo to retain his current salary and target bonus for the 2015 fiscal year. His total compensation for Disney’s last fiscal year was $16.2 million, according to regulatory filings.On Monday, Disney consolidated two stand-alone business units, Disney Consumer Products and Disney Interactive, into one. Ms. Ferraro will become co-chairwoman of Disney Consumer Products and Interactive Media. James Pitaro, until recently president of Disney Interactive, will be its co-chairman.Ms. McCarthy will not oversee Maker Studios, a YouTube-based video supplier that Disney acquired in March 2014 for $500 million and put under Mr. Rasulo’s command. (The purchase called for Disney to pay $450 million more if Maker met undisclosed growth targets.) Instead, Maker will now report to Mr. Pitaro.Advertisement