By GEORGE HAYJUNE 30, 2015
Willis Group Holdings and Towers Watson have taken out some insurance against future troubles in the sectors they serve.Willis, an insurance broker domiciled in Ireland with a big presence in the United States and Britain, is joining forces with Towers Watson, a risk and health care consulting firm based in the United States. The merger has a defensive logic, but it carries positive rationale as well.Insurers are battling historically low interest rates, while reinsurance premiums are at the low end of their long-term ranges. Neither Willis nor Towers Watson appears to be struggling at present – Willis reported that net income fell 0.8 percent from 2013 to 2014, but Towers Watson said its net income rose 13 percent in the same period.Still, the more that reinsurers like PartnerRe do their own mergers, the less will be left for brokering and consulting fees. The promise of more than $100 million in annual cost synergies in a Willis-Towers deal will help maintain returns.AdvertisementBut there’s also a chance to drive up revenue. Towers Watson is big in health care consulting – advising companies on how their employees should arrange their medical and pension affairs. After the Supreme Court ruling on the Affordable Care Act, this area should become busier. A merger with Willis, which already has strong brokering and consulting relationships among midsize corporations, could introduce these services to new markets.So-called mergers of equals usually aren’t. Yet Willis Towers Watson, as the new group will inelegantly be called, has a reasonable division of spoils. Each firm gets six directors, Willis the chairmanship and Towers Watson the chief executive role. Willis shareholders get 50.1 percent of the new group and Towers 49.9 percent, plus a one-time $4.87-a-share dividend.AdvertisementThat said, the June 29 share prices would imply that Towers investors might have received 54 percent of the combined $18.1 billion company – a bigger gap than appears to be bridged by the special dividend. A 5 percent rise in Towers’s shares and a 7 percent drop in Willis’s since March suggest one reason for the disparity. Another might be Towers’s keenness to move its headquarters away from its American base and start taking advantage of Willis’s low Irish corporate tax rate.George Hay is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.