AdvertisementSupported byGlobal ManagerBy Sonia Kolesnikov-JessopYannick Bolloré is chairman and chief executive of the French advertising agency Havas, which is controlled by the Bolloré Group, run by his father, Vincent Bolloré.Q. Your father is a well-known captain of industry. While you were growing up, was leadership discussed at the dinner table?A. My father is great leader, but he’s more famous now, in the last 10 years, than when I was a kid growing up, because he was still very young when he had me, only 26. But I had a lot of great leaders in my family and their stories were told at the dinner table. The story of my great-great-grandfather creating the Bolloré factory in 1822. Two of my uncles participated in D-Day with the Kieffer Commandos. On my mother’s side, her father was a war hero, her grandfather also created an important company in the construction business. I’ve often heard the saying you only live once, so try to do things that matter. That’s a quote that resonates a lot with me.Q. Was it a foregone conclusion that you would join your father’s business?A. When you have that opportunity, it’s a chance you should grab with both hands. It gives you the opportunity to develop much faster and have a more interesting career. You can leapfrog a lot of steps, so I would have been stupid not to jump in.Still, I actually started on my own as an entrepreneur, doing my own thing. I was very young, 21, fresh out of school, and my father wasn’t actually very happy about my decision. But I wanted to prove myself, and in the back of mind I knew that I’d have this great opportunity one day to join the group, and it was just a question of time. It’s my legacy — I’m the seventh generation of Bollorés, and I can’t imagine a world where I don’t pass the torch to my daughters one day.Q. What happened when you finally joined the group?A. I was 26. I was managing a very small entity, of the group a new independent TV channel (Direct 8), which had zero ratings. No one wanted to work there. My father had said, “Why don’t you join? It’s not working, and if it doesn’t work out, it won’t be a disaster, because it wasn’t working before.”It was a key accelerator for my career. In five years, it became the No. 1 independent channel in France, and when we sold the TV business to the Vivendi Group [in 2012], it was worth nearly half a billion euros. That’s probably what got me the C.E.O. job at Havas, because at 33 that was still very early for such a big responsibility. To be honest, I had no idea how to manage a global company, but I was lucky enough to find a great team there that has really helped me.Q. What’s the best advice your father gave you?A. Favor the long term over the short term. He has a good sense of timing and he’s really helped me understand that the decisions I have to make now to build the company for the future are long-term ones. So I’ve never felt any pressure on the quarterly earnings —luckily, the results are very good [laughs], so I’m of course very proud to present them each time.Q. What makes a great leader?A. It’s about setting up the destination, but also how you will travel. You need to create a journey for your employees around that vision, giving them the feeling they are part of this journey. Personally, I have a very simple and very clear vision and we’ve stuck to it. The name of our strategic plan is “Together.” You can’t make it simpler. I’m not a top-down person. I don’t like to impose things. I believe you can run things more efficiently when people are convinced it’s the right thing to do. So you have to make sure they understand what you are doing and are convinced they are in the right company at the right time.I’ve witnessed, once, how a change at the top of a company can completely change a team and its results, and so when I hear someone complaining about his deputy, my first question is: “Is he well managed?” You need to adapt and understand who is good for what. No one is perfect. If you give them the right strategy and manage them properly, then they should be able to do well.Q. What are you looking for when hiring?A. I’m more after personal quality than skills. I work in an industry where you need to be a team player, so that’s very important. When I’m interviewing, in person or by Skype, I’m not really looking at what they have done in their life — are they the best creative, have they proposed the best strategy for their clients? I’m more interested in looking into their soul and seeing if they will fit with the rest of the team. I’m trying to shape a group. Will they bring some cultural added value? It’s much more about personality, and I can judge very easily.Q. Have you ever got it wrong?A. Not that much, actually. I’m hypersensitive; I cry at the movies [laughs].Q. How do you best manage working relationships within a family firm?A. To be honest, I’ve never worked for my father. I’ve always been on my own, and that works best because, given the way I am and the way he is, it would have been complicated to work directly together. We both have too strong a character. When I took over Havas, my father immediately stepped down, although I asked him to stay as chairman. I think he took a risk — it was very bold to give the keys of a company with 15,000 people to a 33-year-old, even if I’d had some success in my previous life. But I think I’ve proven him right.I also have no problem working with my three siblings, because they work together and I alone in my silo [laugh]. Each generation of Bolloré has seen its share of infighting. It’s probably more complicated to work with your siblings than your father. When you work with someone you don’t know, you have a very rational behavior; when you work with someone you grew up with, you have a lot of irrational behavior that comes back to the surface. So you should never forget it’s more complicated to make it work than the opposite, and you have to pay a lot of attention to form, to not create any jealousy. I know it will be one of the challenges to make it work with my siblings and it would be stupid not to recognize it. We will see. Right now we have a very good personal relationship.Q. When you took over at Havas, there were a few senior management changes.A. We had a very charismatic C.E.O. who was supposed to stay, but honestly, from the first day, it didn’t work out. We didn’t share the same vision. I believe in clear leadership — you can’t have two different visions. My father was not happy about it, because he was close to the guy, and he liked him very much, but he also knew he had to choose, and he had to let me do. It happened within a month. All the people who were not aligned, left. I know it’s a bit scary, but I had no other choice to succeed. An external manager might be thinking about his next job, but I don’t have a next job — this is a sentence for life [laughs], I will still be there in 20 years. Maybe I will have more responsibility.Q. Was it the most difficult decision you had to make?A. No, because I was sure it was the right decision. The difficult decision for me is when you’re not sure it’s the right decision. But, of course, on a personal level it’s always difficult.The most difficult decision was when I decided to change the way the group was working. Before, there were silos with specialists working solo — a big network of people working independently. But I was convinced we needed to change. When you create something for the long term, you have to accept that you may have some collateral damage in the short term. To my surprise, people really followed the vision and we didn’t have the slowdown that we had anticipated.Now I want to build on the momentum. The industry will continue to change, so we need to stay agile and adapt. I don’t know what the future will be, but I know I want us to stay the most forward-thinking agency. That means constantly reassessing, never taking anything for granted. Nothing lasts forever and our group is the prime example. It has changed many times, depending on the economic environment. Dinosaurs no longer exist, and they were at the top of the food chain.Q. Do you miss being an entrepreneur?A. No, because I still see myself as an entrepreneur today.Advertisement