By CHAD BRAYJUNE 30, 2015
LONDON — General Electric said on Tuesday that it had agreed to sell a division that finances leveraged buyouts in Europe to a unit of the Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation for about $2.2 billion.The sale of the private equity lending unit to Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation Europe continues G.E.’s efforts to refocus its business on its industrial roots and to retreat from banking. It is the third major transaction G.E. has announced this month.On June 9, G.E. agreed to sell its private equity finance business in the United States to the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board for $12 billion.On Monday, G.E. reached an agreement to sell its fleet-financing businesses in the United States, Mexico, Australia and New Zealand to Element Financial Corporation of Canada for $6.9 billion. It has also signed a memorandum of understanding to possibly sell its fleet businesses in Europe to Arval, a unit of the French bank BNP Paribas.AdvertisementG.E. also expects to sell most of its GE Capital finance arm by the end of next year.“As GE Capital continues to execute on its strategy to sell most of the assets of GE Capital, this agreement with S.M.B.C.E. shows our European businesses are of great interest to financial services firms around the world,” Keith S. Sherin, the chairman and chief executive of GE Capital, said in a news release. “We had many indications of interest in this business and are pleased to partner with S.M.B.C.E. on the sale of this franchise.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The sale of the private equity financing unit is subject to regulatory approval and is expected to close in the third quarterAdvertisementThe deal does not include two joint ventures by General Electric and Ares Capital that also finance private equity buyouts.If the transaction is completed, it will bolster Sumitomo’s leveraged finance business in Europe, which was established in 1997. That business maintains a leverage loan portfolio of more than $1.9 billion and it has completed more than 158 transactions with loan commitments in excess of $5.25 billion, according to the company’s website.G.E. was advised by Bank of America Merrill Lynch and Citigroup and by the law firm Clifford Chance.A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: G.E. Sells Unit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.