By DAVID BARBOZAJUNE 30, 2015
SHANGHAI — Chinese stock markets staged a powerful rally late Tuesday, sending share prices sharply higher in a volatile day of trading. The surge in prices came after investors had suffered some of the sharpest losses in years over the previous two sessions.After a roller coaster ride Tuesday, aggressive buying pushed the Shanghai composite index up 5.5 percent, to close at 4,277.22. The Shenzhen composite fared almost as well, rising 4.8 percent, to close at 2,464.23. And in Hong Kong, the Hang Seng index edged up 1.1 percent to close at 26,250.03.The gains seemed to calm a jittery market after more than a trillion dollars in market value had been wiped out over the previous few weeks, amid fears that the market’s bull run was coming to an end. Until recently, China has had the world’s best-performing stock market.No one knows for sure why prices recovered Tuesday. But some analysts said they believed that the market had stabilized on the expectation that the Chinese government would find ways to intervene and prop up share prices, some of which are down more than 40 percent from their highs.AdvertisementThe government had, after all, seemed to encourage investors to pile into stocks earlier this year, aided by optimistic reports published by the state-run news media. The authorities appeared to view higher stock prices as a way to help indebted state-owned companies to deleverage, analysts said, and with the economy weakening, the government is probably eager to keep prices from falling too sharply.Advertisement“It’s in Beijing’s interest to be supportive of the stock market,” said Li Wei, an economist who covers China for the Commonwealth Bank of Australia. “It can help facilitate corporate deleveraging and offset some of the pain of the economic slowdown.”One sign of the government’s intentions came last weekend, when China’s central bank moved to cut interest rates. But share prices plummeted on Monday, and worried investors began selling early Tuesday. Then a rally late in the day created a huge swing in prices.A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.