By PETER EAVISJULY 1, 2015
Senior executives of companies that publish faulty financial statements would have to give back some of their compensation as punishment for the accounting missteps under a rule proposed on Wednesday by the Securities and Exchange Commission.The rule, required by the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul law, which Congress passed in 2010, is aimed at increasing accountability within corporate America. It focuses on executive bonuses, also known as “incentive-based compensation,” which have grown consistently larger in recent years. Critics of this pay boom say that it creates incentives for executives to cash out quickly, regardless of whether their companies falter in the ensuing years.The size and payment of bonuses typically depend on whether a company meets or exceeds certain financial metrics, like stock price performance or earnings. As it stands, an executive may get to keep a bonus even if the company artificially inflated those metrics and then corrected the missteps by issuing new financial statements. The S.E.C.’s new rule would enable a company to “claw back” bonuses when the financial statements have been restated. The proposed rule will apply to companies listed on United States stock exchanges.“These listing standards will require executive officers to return incentive-based compensation that was not earned,” Mary Jo White, the S.E.C. chairwoman, said in a statement. “The proposed rules would result in increased accountability and greater focus on the quality of financial reporting, which will benefit investors and the markets.”AdvertisementThe S.E.C. has been criticized for taking too long to issue rules that stem from Dodd-Frank. The agency, for instance, has yet to finalize a regulation that requires companies to compare the pay of their chief executives with the median pay of the rest of their employees. In a news release on Wednesday, the S.E.C. noted, perhaps pointedly, that it had completed proposals for all the Dodd-Frank compensation rules.AdvertisementThe new “clawback” provision is somewhat limited by the requirement that a financial restatement take place. But in other ways, it makes it easier for companies to go after the bonuses earned by current and former employees.Existing rules allow corporations to claw back the pay of the chief executive or chief financial officer, but the new regulation will apply to a much broader group that includes not only other senior officers but also “any other person who performs policy-making functions for the company,” according to the S.E.C.The proposed rule allows for clawbacks even if the financial restatement was not the result of misconduct, something that is required under the existing provisions. And the new rule applies to pay earned over three years, compared with a year under the current regulation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This rule targets the lack of accountability and the inflated compensation that helped contribute to excessive risk-taking in the run-up to the financial crisis,” said Kara M. Stein, a Democratic commissioner at the S.E.C. who has pressed the agency to take tougher stances on several issues.In response to the new rule, some companies might decide to adjust their compensation packages so that executives receive more fixed pay, and less in bonuses, to reduce the amounts subject to the new rule. But shareholders, who generally favor bonuses tied to performance instead of large fixed salaries, might push back against such a shift.The new rule allows companies to opt against pursuing a clawback if the costs of doing so might exceed the amount it wants to recover. That aspect of the rule could become a loophole. It might not be hard for companies to show that the legal costs of going after a bonus would exceed the size of the bonus.The authorities are overhauling compensation on other fronts as well.The S.E.C. and banking regulators are working together on compensation rules that focus on pay at financial institutions. In addition, the Federal Reserve has instituted compensation guidelines that apply in particular to the big Wall Street banks it regulates. These can require a bank to claw back the pay of an employee even when a financial restatement has not taken place and even when no loss has occurred.European regulators are also scrutinizing banker pay. European rules limit bankers’ bonuses to the equivalent of their annual salaries, or to two times their base salaries if the company’s shareholders approve it.And Britain has taken a tough stance on clawbacks. Its regulators recently announced new rules under which top executives and managers at banks operating in the country, including units of United States banks, could have their bonuses clawed back for up to 10 years after any finding of misconduct. Senior managers, risk managers and others at banks will also be asked to defer more of their variable pay for a longer period, making it easier for regulators and financial institutions to recover bonuses if misconduct is uncovered.A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Rule From S.E.C. Would Allow Companies to Take Back Executive Bonuses.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.