AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jeffrey GoldfarbAce has set itself the task of overcoming the ghosts of insurance deals past.The property and casualty insurer, which is based in Zurich, is buying its rival, Chubb, for $28.3 billion in cash and stock. Prospective savings won’t cover the premium being paid, implying that Ace believes strongly in the revenue gains it is promising. They don’t always materialize as planned.Similar top-line increases were trumpeted in the union announced a day earlier between the insurance broker Willis Group and the consultant firm Towers Watson of the United States. Extra profit from two companies that sell each other’s products often proves elusive. And as a rationale for deals, revenue synergies come to the fore when the merger market is hot, as now. The $2.2 trillion of global deals to June this year topped the volume in the first half of 2014 by 40 percent.The 30 percent premium over Tuesday’s closing share price that Ace is offering Chubb owners amounts to about $7.1 billion. About $650 million of anticipated annual cost savings would be worth about $5.3 billion today, taxed and capitalized.There could be tax benefits, too. Though Chubb will keep paying United States tax on domestic revenue, the bill could drop by $60 million a year if Ace’s lower 18.2 percent effective tax rate last year applies to a quarter of Chubb’s 2014 pretax income — for approximately $600 million of value today.That leaves a shortfall of more than $1 billion for Ace’s chief executive, Evan Greenberg — who will run the combined entity — to justify. The companies talk about “substantial additional revenue” after the merger. Ace reckons it can peddle its insurance offerings to Chubb’s midsize American business clients and Chubb can serve Ace’s rich overseas customers with its upscale policies.Sanford I. Weill had a similar vision for Citicorp and Travelers that failed to materialize. So did two insurers in the United States worker disability market. Provident and Unum experienced big gains in their stocks when they announced a $5.2 billion merger in November 1998 on the back of plans for their sales teams to market the other’s wares.Those hopes were dashed, however. The deal cost more than expected, cutting costs turned out to be a challenge and cultures clashed, leading to higher policy prices, bitter customers and a collapse of the company’s market value. Ace and Chubb have to rewrite that history.Jeffrey Goldfarb is United States editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement