By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 1, 2015
The Justice Department moved on Wednesday to block General Electric’s plan to sell its famed home appliances division to Electrolux of Sweden, as federal regulators again showed a willingness to assert their antitrust oversight.In filing a lawsuit to block the $3.3 billion deal, the Justice Department moved as it did in its battles to derail both AT&T’s and Sprint’s efforts to buy T-Mobile USA. Similarly, the Federal Trade Commission fought successfully to block Sysco’s attempt to buy US Foods, which would have united the country’s two biggest food distribution companies.And analysts and investors have recently questioned whether a brewing flurry of proposed mergers in the health insurance industry could be damped by government opposition to at least some of the potential deals.In its lawsuit filed on Wednesday in Federal District Court for the District of Columbia, the Justice Department argued that the G.E. deal would lead to less competition and higher prices for customers of stoves, ovens and other cooking appliances.AdvertisementTaking G.E., a century-long presence in the $4 billion market, would leave the cooking appliance industry dominated by Electrolux — which makes products under its own brands like Frigidaire and for customers like Sears — and Whirlpool.AdvertisementBy the Justice Department’s analysis, the proposed transaction would significantly bolster Electrolux’s market position, enabling the company to raise prices.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Electrolux’s proposed acquisition of General Electric’s appliance business would leave millions of Americans vulnerable to price increases for ranges, cooktops and wall ovens, products that serve an important role in family life and represent large purchases for many households,” Leslie C. Overton, a deputy assistant attorney general in the Justice Department’s antitrust division, said in a statement.Electrolux argued in its own statement that the G.E. transaction would lead to greater competition, as well as give the company $350 million in cost savings that it could reinvest into new products. The manufacturer also noted that the Justice Department had allowed Whirlpool to buy Maytag, though that deal was struck in 2006, under a Republican administration.“The appliances industry is more competitive than ever,” Keith McLoughlin, Electrolux’s chief executive, said in a statement. “We believe this acquisition accelerates consumer innovation, which improves the industry as a whole and results in more consumer choice than ever.”General Electric said in a statement: “Electrolux and G.E. intend to vigorously defend the proposed acquisition as pro-competitive and pro-consumer. Our goal remains to close the deal this year.”The government’s lawsuit is another hurdle for G.E., which has long sought to sell its appliance operations. It previously negotiated with not only Electrolux but with other manufacturers like Samsung and LG, only for those talks to wither in the onset of the financial crisis.A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: G.E. Deal Challenged.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.