By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINJULY 1, 2015
After an insider trading investigation tarnished some firms that match hedge funds with industry experts, the industry’s biggest player is trying to recast its image just as an early financial backer has cashed out.The Gerson Lehrman Group, which is based in New York, now wants to be known as a “platform for professional learning,” instead of what used to be called an expert network firm. The shift reflects an effort on the part of the firm to recruit customers from outside Wall Street.The firm’s repositioning coincides with the departure of Silver Lake Partners, one of its early investors. Silver Lake, a big private equity firm that acquired a 25 percent stake in Gerson Lehrman in 2007, exited quietly in March, a Gerson Lehrman spokesman confirmed. Gerson Lehrman secured a $250 million line of credit from a group of banks, $200 million of which will be used to buy back the Silver Lake stake, which was the original amount it invested.Silver Lake, in cashing out, relinquished two board seats at Gerson Lehrman. The private equity firm noted its exit by simply listing its involvement with Gerson Lehrman as a previous investment on its website.AdvertisementRichard Socarides, a spokesman for Gerson Lehrman, said Silver Lake simply wanted to move on, noting that most private equity investments tend not to last more than seven years. He said Gerson Lehrman had explored several options before settling on the line of credit, which was arranged by Silicon Valley Bank, to come up with the cash to buy out Silver Lake’s interest. Other banks involved in financing the deal included Fifth Third Bank, Regions Bank and MUFG Union Bank, he said.Advertisement“We had several options available to us and selected the one that gave us the flexibility to pursue what we believe is a $1 billion economic opportunity in the space,” Mr. Socarides said. He added that Gerson Lehrman now had the freedom “to add board members who are focused on helping us execute on our long-term growth strategy.”Mike Bingle, a Silver Lake managing partner and a former member of Gerson Lehrman’s board, said in a statement given to Gerson Lehrman at the time of the transaction that the private equity firm thought the expert network firm “has a very bright future.”Silver Lake profited on its investment through dividend payments, Mr. Socarides said. Silver Lake reaped a profit of about $50 million from its investment in Gerson Lehrman, according to a person briefed on the matter.It has been a tumultuous period for Gerson Lehrman, a pioneer in the so-called expert network business. The crackdown on insider trading in hedge funds, which led to the conviction of more than 80 traders, analysts and industry consultants, exposed the potential for consultants moonlighting as paid experts to be corrupted by Wall Street traders in search of illegal insider information.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 2007, when Silver Lake invested in Gerson Lehrman, the firm and the expert network industry seemed poised for rapid growth. It was estimated that the three dozen firms that specialized in matching hedge funds with consultants from various industries had generated nearly $500 million in revenue. With Silver Lake’s financial backing and an earlier investment from Bessemer Venture Partners, which is still an investor, Gerson Lehrman appeared to be gearing up for an initial public offering of stock.But then came the financial crisis, and scores of hedge funds closed. Soon after that, a broad federal investigation began into insider trading, which prompted other hedge funds either to shy away from expert network firms or reduce their spending on those services. The prospects of an I.P.O. further dimmed in November 2012 when Gerson Lehrman’s name surfaced in connection with the indictment of Mathew Martoma, a hedge fund trader who was charged in one of the largest insider trading cases ever.Neither Gerson Lehrman nor any of its officials was charged with any wrongdoing in the investigation of Mr. Martoma, who was convicted in February 2014 and began serving a nine-year prison sentence in September. A crucial witness against Mr. Martoma, however, was a former Gerson Lehrman consultant, Dr. Sidney Gilman, who admitted to providing Mr. Martoma with confidential information related to a clinical trial for an experimental drug for Alzheimer’s disease. The timely inside tips helped Mr. Martoma and SAC Capital Advisors, the former hedge fund owned by the billionaire investor Steven A. Cohen, make profits and avoid losses totaling $275 million in 2008.The trial revealed just how lucrative working as a Gerson Lehrman consultant could be. Dr. Gilman, who was paid about $1,000 an hour for consultation, testified he made more money working as consultant for Gerson Lehrman than he did as a professor at the University of Michigan.AdvertisementBut the testimony also showed that Dr. Gilman had violated the terms of his arrangement with Gerson Lehrman, which expressly prohibited him from sharing inside information with any of his clients. Federal prosecutors introduced evidence that both Dr. Gilman and Mr. Martoma had violated Gerson Lehrman’s policy barring the misuse of confidential information.Now, Gerson Lehrman, which has relationships with more than 400,000 experts and operates in 12 countries, is trying to portray itself as much more than a Wall Street institution.In a recently revised marketing document, the phrase “expert network” does not even appear. Although the document notes that Gerson Lehrman has more than 700 hedge fund and private equity clients, it puts more emphasis on its customers from Fortune 500 companies and big law firms. The document also emphasizes Gerson Lehrman’s “rigorous compliance framework” and commitment to the “highest professional ethics.”Mr. Socarides said the firm was less dependent on hedge funds than at any time in its history. “Our business has expanded beyond Wall Street,” he said.Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Consultant Seeks Image Makeover.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.