AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanThe case of missing Franklin Resources stock certificates is pitting two of the most patrician names on Wall Street — onetime friends, no less — against each other in federal court in San Francisco, with conflicting narratives and accusations of extortion.The dispute involves the 82-year-old Charles B. Johnson, the multibillionaire retired founder of Franklin, one of the nation’s largest and most respected mutual fund companies. Mr. Johnson, who recently pledged $250 million to Yale, his alma mater, is also the principal owner of the world champion San Francisco Giants.On the other side is Anson M. Beard Jr., Wall Street royalty, who in his 17 years at Morgan Stanley built the company’s equity business into a global leader. Mr. Beard, who is 79, shares ties to Yale. He was also part of the so-called Group of 8 retired Morgan Stanley partners who, in 2005, overthrew Philip J. Purcell, the chief executive they did not like, in favor of John J. Mack, whom they did.Mr. Johnson and Mr. Beard have known each other since the 1980s. They did business together before retiring, and they both have homes in Palm Beach, Fla. In the early 1990s, they served together as directors of the National Association of Securities Dealers.This relationship is part of the convoluted tale of what happened to 4,000 shares of Franklin Resources that, through stock splits and accumulated dividends, are now worth around $150 million.Anthony Miele Jr., a New Jersey businessman, lent Mr. Johnson $100,000 in 1973, soon after Franklin Resources sold shares to the public in an initial public offering. It is not entirely clear why Mr. Miele lent Mr. Johnson this sum, but there is no disagreement that as part of the consideration, Mr. Johnson gave Mr. Miele 4,000 shares of Franklin Resources stock, which Mr. Miele put in trust for his son, Anthony Miele III.Anthony Miele Jr. died unexpectedly in 1974, when his son was 3 years old. According to a lawsuit filed by Anthony Miele III against Mr. Johnson and Franklin Resources, Mr. Miele was never informed, until years later, of the existence of the trust with the 4,000 Franklin shares.Enter Anson Beard Jr. As fate would have it, Mr. Beard’s son – Anson H. Beard – is married to Veronica Miele, the sister of Anthony Miele III.According to court filings, Mr. Miele found out about his missing Franklin shares by serendipity. In a June 9 signed “declaration” filed with the court, Mr. Beard said that, in 2012, he self-published a history of the Beard family, titled “A Life in Full Sail” and gave copies of the book to his family members and “close acquaintances,” including his “good friend” Mr. Johnson. “The book included photographs of family events including marriages,” Mr. Beard wrote in his statement. “Several photographs included Veronica’s picture and her full married name, Veronica Miele Beard.”On May 11, 2012, Mr. Johnson wrote Mr. Beard a thank-you note for the book and wondered whether his friend’s daughter-in-law was related to the Anthony Miele Jr. who attended Lehigh University in the 1950s. “If so,” Mr. Johnson wrote Mr. Beard, “I have an interesting story for her.”When Mr. Beard informed Mr. Johnson that Veronica Miele was Mr. Miele’s daughter, Mr. Johnson told Mr. Beard, according to the court filing, that Mr. Miele had recounted the story of the 4,000 Franklin shares. Mr. Johnson wondered if “the Mieles knew about the shares,” then worth “over $200 million, including dividends.” Mr. Beard’s daughter and son-in-law told him they knew nothing about the shares but would like to know a lot more about them.According to Mr. Beard, Mr. Johnson “said he was very interested in being helpful to the Miele family, as for years, he wondered what happened to those shares.” In “an attempt to be helpful,” Mr. Johnson then sent to Mr. Beard a copy of a 1974 stock-voting ledger that showed that the 4,000 Franklin shares had been voted that year. In subsequent calls, Mr. Johnson told Mr. Beard he wanted to help the Mieles find the shares and, in May 2013, he told Mr. Beard he was ready to speak to his daughter-in-law’s lawyer and to be of “any assistance,” including using the “resources” of Franklin, to figure out what happened.But in February 2014, Mr. Johnson’s tune changed, according to the complaint, and he stopped offering help. In an email to Mr. Miele’s lawyers at Liddle & Robinson, Mr. Johnson denied there were any ledgers or books from shareholder meetings; the complaint then states that any further cooperation from Mr. Johnson would require a subpoena.Furthermore, Mr. Johnson’s lawyer, Joseph Cotchett, at the small law firm Cotchett, Pitre & McCarthy in Burlingame, Calif., has accused the Mieles of trying to “extort” money out of Mr. Johnson, according to his legal filings, and that the Miele family has known for years about the Franklin stock. That they seem unable to account for it is their problem, not either Mr. Johnson’s or Franklin’s.Mr. Cotchett contends that Anthony Miele III “filed this action in bad faith and only after their threats to embarrass defendants Charles Johnson and Franklin Resources Inc. into paying an extortionate settlement were unsuccessful.” Mr. Cotchett’s motion to dismiss Mr. Miele’s lawsuit is scheduled to be heard on July 23.Mr. Cotchett did not return calls for comment, and Jeffrey Liddle at Liddle & Robinson declined to comment.Lisa Gallegos, vice president for global corporate communications at Franklin, said, “Certain threshold legal issues, including the timeliness and plausibility of Mr. Miele’s claims, are before the court to decide and we will respect that process.”The loss of stock certificates is such a common problem that the Securities and Exchange Commission’s website has basic instructions for obtaining replacements. This involves contacting the issuing company, or its agent, and providing the identification numbers on the stock certificates, along with an affidavit explaining what happened to the certificates and an “indemnity bond” equal to 2 to 3 percent of the current market value of the lost stock in case someone who is not the rightful owner tries to sell the stock. Because the Mieles know the stock certificate numbers, why not just follow the S.E.C. procedures for replacing the certificates? And shouldn’t Franklin be able to track the numbers on the certificates to see if, and when, they were ever sold and by whom?In fact, just before filing the lawsuit, Mr. Miele’s lawyer did write to Franklin Resources and request replacement stock certificates. But Franklin has never replied to the letter. This case just keeps getting curiouser and curiouser.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”Advertisement