By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 1, 2015
As it seeks to become the bridge between the travel industry and the Internet, the start-up Zozi has drawn yet more backers.The company announced on Wednesday that it had raised $30 million in a new round of financing. The new infusion of capital was led by Pritzker Vlock Ventures and included Richard Branson of the Virgin Group.With the new capital, it will continue its quest to become, in its words, the travel industry’s version of OpenTable, an online restaurant reservation company. Zozi essentially powers systems that let merchants, many of whom have not been truly connected to the Internet before, book reservations and payments online.It also runs Zozi.com, an online market hub that lets consumers book travel activities, which are run by the company’s business customers.AdvertisementThough a number of other start-ups are trying to move into the back-end systems of the travel industry, Zozi’s co-founder and chief executive, T. J. Sassani, says the company is aiming to take on much bigger competitors, including TripAdvisor and Eventbrite.AdvertisementThough Zozi was initially known for helping consumers find ways to find unusual travel experiences, its move into booking and payment systems has changed its focus, according to Mr. Sassani.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With the new capital, the company intends to invest more money into developing its products and technology, as well as bringing more merchants onto its platform.“We want to own the booking platform, then capture the local market, and then we’ll capture the tourist,” he said.That focus drew the attention of Mr. Branson, who met with the Zozi team at his resort on Necker Island in the Caribbean and participated in the round.“I’ve founded many companies that have disrupted markets over the years, and it’s clear to me that Zozi is leading a revolution with its innovative online booking software for activity businesses and consumer marketplace,” he said in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Zozi Raises Money.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.