By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and CHAD BRAYJULY 1, 2015
Merger mania has swept across huge swaths of the corporate landscape in the last five years. Now the insurance industry, spurred by a $28.3 billion deal, could be about to join that wave.Ace Ltd.’s agreement to buy Chubb, one of the best-known names in the property insurance business, brought talk that more consolidation is in store for the sector. It is being led by Ace’s chief executive, Evan G. Greenberg, scion of a famous insurance family — one known for growing through serial deal-making.Wednesday’s transaction was one of the biggest yet announced this year, a time that has already proved to be extraordinarily fruitful for mergers in general. It will give Ace valuable operations from Chubb, perhaps best known for insurance covering expensive homes, jewelry and fine art. Together, the two will have net written premiums worth over $30 billion and more than 31,000 employees around the world.“The combination of the two will create greater growth and greater earning power,” Mr. Greenberg said in an interview. “I see greater opportunity for the two on a global basis, including in the U.S.”AdvertisementOver all, analysts say, the property and casualty insurance market has been primed for consolidation for some time. Low interest rates have made it more difficult for these companies to reap satisfactory returns from their capital.AdvertisementAn unusually benign period for natural disasters in the last two and a half years, particularly given a lack of serious hurricanes making landfall in the United States, have swelled their coffers with money that hasn’t been paid out to fulfill claims.Already, reinsurers — which essentially buy the risks of traditional insurance firms — have been gripped in a series of mergers. Now, a catalyst like Ace buying Chubb could prove to be the spark that ignites consolidation among property and casualty insurance providers, one that would reduce costs and provide more scale to branch out into new products and markets.“A deal of this scope tells us that something big has changed, and that is the push for growth,” Todd Bault, an analyst with Citigroup, wrote in a research report. “There is now literally no deal that cannot be contemplated.”And Jay Gelb, an analyst with Barclays, added in his own note that the transaction “probably puts pressure to target deals on other insurers that have historically been focused almost entirely on organic growth.”Mr. Greenberg played down any competitive pressure to pursue such hefty acquisitions, saying in an interview that he would have done the transaction even if interest rates had been higher.“I would have done this in a hard environment,” he said. He added, “If it’s compelling, and it makes strategic sense, then it’s great in all markets.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While Ace is paying a high price, roughly two times book value, merging with Chubb will yield an insurer with much bigger scale and with a proven history of performance, according to Mr. Gelb of Barclays.Empire-building seems to be in the blood of Mr. Greenberg, who is 60. Famously, his father, Maurice R. Greenberg, built the American International Group into a far-flung empire, only to see it nearly crater during the financial crisis.AdvertisementMr. Greenberg’s brother, Jeffrey, had previously worked at A.I.G. before striking off on his own to lead Marsh & McLennan, an insurance broker. Jeffrey Greenberg was later forced to resign after an investigation by Eliot L. Spitzer, then New York State’s attorney general.Evan Greenberg himself was once considered a favorite to succeed his father at A.I.G., spending 25 years and rising to the position of president. But in 2000, he, too, left the company. He later resurfaced at Ace, where he became chief executive in 2004 and embarked on a campaign to create a stronger rival to his family’s insurance empire.Much of that has revolved around acquisitions — 21 in the last decade, according to the data firm Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ — that transformed Ace into a property-and-casualty insurer with an international reach; its operations span from Mexico to Thailand. Its business also encompasses reinsurance and life insurance.That experience with mergers, Mr. Greenberg said, prepared Ace for its biggest acquisition to date.“We’re experienced at that and know how to integrate what we covet and what we purchase,” he said. “My organization is ready for something like this.”The deal on Wednesday came together swiftly, according to Mr. Greenberg. He reached out to John D. Finnegan, his counterpart at Chubb, only several weeks ago and rapidly hammered out details of the merger. Among the factors that may have worked in Ace’s favor: Mr. Finnegan, 66, was set to step down next year, after Chubb’s board waived a company policy that would have required him to retire at the end of last year.Under the deal’s terms, Chubb shareholders will receive cash and shares equivalent to $124.13 a share, representing a 30 percent premium to Chubb’s closing price on Tuesday. They will own roughly 30 percent of the combined company.The newly merged insurer will retain the Chubb name — “It’s a venerable name and brand on a global basis,” Mr. Greenberg said — but will be led by Mr. Greenberg as its chairman and chief executive. Mr. Finnegan will serve as executive vice chairman for external affairs for North America and will help combine the two firms.A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Scion of an Insurance Family Orchestrates the Merger of Ace and Chubb.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.