By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 2, 2015
One of the most prominent advisers to companies besieged by activist investors is preparing to leave his perch at Goldman Sachs.William Anderson, the former lawyer who built up one of the best-known corporate defense practices on Wall Street, is set to join the boutique investment bank Evercore Partners, a person briefed on the matter said on Thursday.The addition of Mr. Anderson, 49, would prove a big coup for Evercore, as banks rush to set up their activism advisory teams. Prompting the flurry of hires has been the notable rise — and success — of hedge funds and other investors who challenge companies to shake up their strategic plans, often by threatening to oust corporate directors.Such has been the winning streak of activists that many companies now seek to settle with these dissident investors before their campaigns become public, often committing to additional stock buybacks, splitting up their businesses or putting themselves up for sale.AdvertisementThough Evercore, led by its founder, Roger Altman, worked with Goldman earlier this year in advising DuPont in its successful effort to beat back a challenge by the billionaire Nelson Peltz, the boutique firm has not had a prominent defense specialist on its roster.AdvertisementNow, it is poised to add Mr. Anderson, who helped give birth to a widely copied model of an activism defense practice. The banker joined Goldman after a career at the law firm Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, making it a specialty of watching companies’ investor rolls and noting when particular red-flagged names emerged as new shareholders.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other banks have since developed their own practices. Credit Suisse hired Chris Young, formerly a senior executive at the influential proxy advisory firm Institutional Shareholder Services, as the head of its takeover defense team in 2010.And Morgan Stanley, whose mergers bankers had long advised companies under assault, announced in April that it had hired David Rosewater, a veteran of activism campaigns at the law firm Schulte Roth & Zabel, to lead its activist defense practice.A spokesman for Goldman declined to comment, while a spokesman for Evercore did not return a request for comment.News of Mr. Anderson’s defection was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.