AdvertisementSupported byBy Hilary StoutAs the manager of her husband’s rock band, Jill Meniketti has booked many flights over the past 12 years.She used to buy tickets for the San Francisco-based band, Y&T, two months in advance; now she makes it three to ensure seats for the eight-member entourage. Even so, when she recently tried to book a trip to Europe in late September, she said, “I couldn’t believe how few seats there were. It was crazy.”As a United Airlines MileagePlus member with premier silver status, she used to get free upgrades to economy plus and two free checked bags for each person. Now she regularly spends about $800 on the band’s baggage fees (there are instruments as well as suitcases). She paid an additional $696 for two upgrades to economy plus.“Booking air travel is my own personal hell,” she said.News this week that the Justice Department is investigating the major domestic airlines for possible collusion has Ms. Meniketti and plenty of other passengers cheering the government on. After a wave of airline mergers, the once-struggling industry is enjoying an unusual period of profitability after years of struggles. And its success comes at a time when passengers’ ire is rising. Add-on fees for everything from bags of pita chips to exit row seats, ever-shifting luggage rules and increasingly crowded and cramped planes have left many travelers feeling powerless and infuriated.Net profits of American carriers hit $12 billion last year, according to a recent Deutsche Bank report. Most of that belongs to the four major carriers — American Airlines, Delta Air Lines, United Airlines and Southwest Airlines — which together control roughly 80 percent of the market, up from 60 percent for the four major carriers in 1999. But while declining competition has pushed up prices on some routes, the overall price of domestic tickets has declined since 2000 after adjusting for inflation, according to the Bureau of Transportation Statistics.Those softening fares have resulted in a growing list of ancillary fees, piled on in an environment of waning competition, some consumer advocates said. Statistics on the overall cost of such fees to consumers are hard to find, but according to the transportation statistics agency, Delta, American and United alone earned more than $2 billion on baggage fees in 2014.“Let’s not think this is just about fares and capacity,” said Diana Moss, president of the American Antitrust Institute, a nonprofit organization that advocates fair competition and enforcement of the antitrust laws.The issue of capacity, or seat availability, is a focus of the Justice Department probe. Industry data shows that the daily supply of seats on domestic flights has fallen sharply since 2007, but has begun to rise. An industry outlook report prepared for Airlines for America, a trade organization, using data from Innovata, found that the daily average of seats available on domestic flights shrank by nearly 300,000 from 2007 to 2012. It has since been edging up, and so far this year the daily average has risen by 81,000 to about 2.37 million seats per day, according to the group. (The supply of international seats has never been higher.)Airline executives and some analysts argue that fewer carriers have not reduced choice and competition for all consumers. Instead, by creating bigger networks, the merged airlines — United and Continental, Delta and Northwest, American and US Airways — have been able to offer connections to more hubs.“The good thing is you can now take one airline to more places — you may have to change planes but you can get to more destinations on a single carrier than ever before,” said Henry H. Harteveldt, a travel industry analyst at the Atmosphere Research Group. Still, he noted, “The fact that you do have four super carriers controlling more than 80 percent of the market certainly is a reason for concern.” At Dallas-Fort Worth Airport, for example, American controls every gate in three of the five terminals and a majority of gates in the fourth terminal, which is for international flights, he said.To mitigate the potential for a similar “fortress hub” after the American-US Airways combination two years ago, the Justice Department ordered the consolidated airline to sell 104 landing slots to other carriers at Reagan National Airport in Washington. That has allowed airlines like JetBlue to acquire more slots and increase options for travelers to Florida.But for other destinations, the opposite effect has occurred. Joan Eisenstodt, a Washington-based meeting planner, said it has become much more expensive to fly from Reagan to cities formerly served by Northwest like Minneapolis and Detroit. She said she had passed up attending an industry conference in Detroit next month because the cost of a nonstop round trip flight — more than $700 — was prohibitive, about double what she used to pay on Northwest.“It’s a short flight. It used to be very easy and cheap on Northwest,” she said, adding that some of her colleagues are planning to fly to Chicago and car-pool to Detroit to save money.Delta, Ms. Eisenstodt said, has raised prices “just because they can, is what I’d have to believe, because if you want a nonstop flight from here to Minneapolis or Detroit, they’re it.”“It’s a market,” she said, “where we’re captive.”Martha C. White contributed reporting.Advertisement