AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedAetna is near an agreement to buy its smaller rival Humana for about $34 billion, people briefed on the matter said on Thursday, in what could be the first in a series of mergers among the country’s big health insurers.Under the terms, Aetna would pay roughly $230 a share in cash and stock, the people said. That is almost 29 percent higher than where Humana’s shares were trading before the emergence of news reports that the company was considering selling itself. A deal between Aetna and Humana could be imminent, though people briefed on the talks said that a formal agreement had yet to be signed and that the discussions could still fall apart.Many of the country’s big health insurers have been rushing toward a new round of consolidation, seeking to gain greater scale and wring out costs from their operations. Such belt-tightening is increasingly important because many of the new customers that insurers are seeking are more sensitive to the price of health coverage. At the same time, getting bigger would give insurers more clout to negotiate prices with health systems. That push for mergers received a jump-start last week after the Supreme Court upheld a key part of the Obama administration’s health care overhaul, which has delivered a boost to the insurance industry.By ruling that the federal government could continue to subsidize health insurance for lower-income Americans, the court essentially guaranteed huge new markets for insurers.Many of the new customers would be coming in through Medicare, a particular strength for Humana — and one of the main attractions for a bevy of suitors that also included Cigna and Anthem. Many of those interested parties have relatively smaller Medicare Advantage operations.At the same time, Humana has been considered primed for a potential deal. The firm, based in Louisville, Ky., struggled to meet profit expectations for much of the last year, though both its membership rolls and its revenue rose in the first quarter of this year.Yet Humana also risked being left out of the flurry of contemplated mergers brewing in the industry. Aetna has received a preliminary takeover approach from UnitedHealth, the biggest of the insurers, while Anthem is pursuing a merger with Cigna.Government regulators are considered unlikely to allow all of those insurers to pursue mergers, meaning that some potential transactions would be blocked. Antitrust officials at the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission have shown off their willingness to clamp down on deal frenzies in recent years, including among telecommunications companies and food service providers.Health insurance analysts, for instance, have said that UnitedHealth would face a tough battle to buy Humana, given that both firms have significant Medicare businesses.That meant Humana had to move quickly to lock up its own merger partner or be left on its own, competing against much bigger rivals.Over the last two weeks or so, Aetna emerged as Humana’s most likely suitor, according to some of the people briefed on the matter. Yet the discussions between the two companies proved rocky at times, with negotiations taking frequent pauses before speeding toward the finish line on Thursday. News of the deal’s terms was reported earlier by Bloomberg News. Advertisement