By BILL VLASICJULY 2, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Federal regulators on Thursday accused Fiat Chrysler Automobiles of putting lives at risk by repeatedly failing to perform timely vehicle recalls and inform consumers of dangerous defects.In a rare public hearing devoted to safety issues at a single automaker, officials of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration sharply criticized Fiat Chrysler for not complying with federal laws in 23 separate recalls covering more than 11 million vehicles.The agency’s sweeping critique of Fiat Chrysler suggests that regulators will seek stiff penalties against the automaker later this month, when the time period ends for public comment on the matter.“There will be action after the docket closes,” said Mark Rosekind, the agency’s chief. “The information was so clear.”AdvertisementThe N.H.T.S.A. itself has been criticized by Congress for its lax enforcement of safety laws relating to the long-delayed recall of defective small cars made by General Motors and faulty airbags produced by the supplier firm Takata. But the tone of Thursday’s hearing, held at the Department of Transportation in Washington, indicated that the agency would be committed to taking a tougher stance on enforcing vehicle safety rules, starting with Fiat Chrysler.AdvertisementThree agency officials took turns describing how Fiat Chrysler failed to promptly notify vehicle owners of recalls, delayed initiating repairs of defective models and neglected to notify regulators of changes in recall schedules.The recalls under scrutiny date to 2013 and cover a wide variety of models and parts, including faulty airbags, ignition switches and electrical wiring. In some cases, the agency has linked deaths and serious injuries to the problems — specifically rear-mounted fuel tanks in Jeep sport utility vehicles that are prone to catching fire in high-speed collisions.“In every one of the 23 recalls, we have identified ways in which Fiat Chrysler failed to do its job,” said Jennifer Timian, the agency’s acting head of defect investigations.Ms. Timian said that Fiat Chrysler repeatedly missed deadlines to notify owners in recalls, and often neglected to provide timely and accurate information to regulators. She said that the company also proposed vehicle repairs that did not work, and, in one case, suspended a recall and told dealers to return parts for quality inspections.In one troubling example, the company recalled Jeep and Dodge sport utility vehicles that were catching fire because of a short circuit in sun visors. However, at least 10 consumers reported that fires occurred after the vehicles had been recalled and repaired.“At the present rate that post-repair fires are occurring, we believe there is cause for concern,” said Scott Yon, a senior defect investigator at N.H.T.S.A.Scott Kunselman, the top safety executive at Fiat Chrysler in the United States, did not challenge the agency’s harsh assessment of its recall practices. “The agency has raised some legitimate questions about the way Fiat Chrysler Automobiles conducts safety recalls,” he said.AdvertisementMr. Kunselman said the company had “learned from our mistakes and missteps,” and had beefed up its staff of product investigators, new executive positions overseeing safety compliance. “We are fully committed to implementing additional improvements,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Rosekind did not testify on Thursday, but he told reporters that he was primarily interested in getting more information at the hearing to help plan the agency’s next course of action.The agency could negotiate a consent agreement with Fiat Chrysler that would detail improvements the company needs to make; the agreement could possibly include a civil penalties.In the absence of an agreement, however, Mr. Rosekind could impose a substantial fine on the company and force it to buy back some defective vehicles from consumers. The agency has the power to fine the automaker up to $35 million for each of the recalls in question.“It’s our job to make sure people meet their obligations,” Mr. Rosekind said. “Every time you delay a recall, you put lives at risk.”One safety advocate who testified at the hearing encouraged the N.H.T.S.A. to make an example of Fiat Chrysler, which was formed last year in the merger of Fiat, the Italian automaker, and Chrysler, the smallest of Detroit’s three car companies.“When it comes to recalls, Fiat Chrysler is an outlaw,” said the advocate, Clarence Ditlow, head of the Center for Auto Safety. “Fiat Chrysler conceals defects in order to avoid recalls, and when forced to recall, Fiat Chrysler delays repairs for years and even refuses to do repairs.”Also testifying was Todd Anderson, whose 17-year-old son, Skyler Anderson-Coughlin, was killed in November 2013 in Massachusetts, when the Jeep Grand Cherokee he was driving burst into flames after it was struck in a rear-end collision.Just months earlier, Fiat Chrysler had agreed to recall 1.56 million Jeeps and install trailer hitches to lessen the impact of a collision on gas tanks mounted behind the rear axle in the affected vehicles.AdvertisementBut recall notices for the trailer hitches were not mailed to consumers until after Mr. Anderson’s son died. He said he finally received such a notice in May 2014.“If I had received that notification sooner, my son would be alive today,” Mr. Anderson said.The public comment period on the Fiat Chrysler recalls ends on July 17. Mr. Rosekind stressed that regulators would continue to investigate the company’s record and amass evidence before he made a decision on penalties or a consent agreement.“Our people aren’t stopping because of the hearing,” he said. “But hearings are critical because that’s how the public knows what is going on.”A version of this article appears in print on July 3, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Fiat Chrysler Accused of Neglect in 23 Recalls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.