By JEREMY ALFORD and JOHN KOBLINJULY 2, 2015
BATON ROUGE, La. —  The symbolism wasn’t lost on the organizers and contestants of the 2015 Miss USA pageant Wednesday evening as thunderstorms drenched the public sports park where their first official media event was scheduled to take place.Storm clouds have been following the Miss USA beauty pageant all week. For several days, the event was left without a broadcaster after first Univision and then NBC pulled out of broadcasting the July 12 pageant, following an uproar over remarks made by Donald J. Trump about immigrants in mid-June. Mr. Trump owns 49 percent of the Miss Universe Organization that includes the Miss USA pageant.The moves will almost certainly result in a diminished television audience for the event, but it will not go dark. On Thursday, the cable network Reelz announced it would broadcast the pageant. The decision “was based on our belief that this special event, and the women who compete in it, are an integral part of American tradition,” said Stan E. Hubbard, the chief executive of Reelz.But it is a tradition that is something of an anachronism these days as beauty pageants have faded as a beloved institution, and now the organizers of Miss USA are further burdened by getting caught in the center of a political storm. Mr. Trump, who is running for president as a Republican, unleashed a flood of protest when he said during his campaign announcement that some Mexican immigrants were “rapists” and “killers.”AdvertisementHe has stood by his remarks, and sued Univision for $500 million, saying it breached its commitment to televise the pageant. He has been removed as host of NBC’s “The Celebrity Apprentice” and likewise lost deals with Macy’s and the mattress company Serta, all in the last week.AdvertisementReelz, an obscure cable channel that’s best known for its lineup of movies, is available in about 60 percent of the country, a fraction of the reach of a national network like NBC.And amid the furor, the contestants have ended up as collateral damage, waiting to learn the fate of the pageant as networks, co-hosts, judges and performers abandoned it. They acknowledged that the reduced television exposure detracted from its glamour.“You were always able to get those viewers who were just flipping through the channels, looking for something, and then, bam, pretty girls,” said Laura Puleo, Miss Virginia, at the event Wednesday night. “But now there’s a lot of attention on the pageant for different reasons. I’m not going to lie, the TV thing is a Debbie Downer moment.”Miss North Carolina, Julia Dalton, said she too was concerned about NBC dropping the broadcast, especially because she remembers watching pageants on TV as a young girl with her mother, who was Miss North Carolina 1982.“I can remember playing with all of her crowns and dresses and watching the pageant on TV with her,” Ms. Dalton said. “It’s sad to think that there are young girls out there who won’t be able to experience it the same way I did. But the show must go on.”Despite the brewing controversy, the show goes on, as did the event at the sports park, billed as the Miss USA “Extreme Sports Outing!” As the skies cleared Wednesday, about a dozen contestants — sashes declaring homesteads in Ohio, Virginia, Michigan, Massachusetts, North Carolina and other states — posed for group photos and collectively screamed “Woo-hoo” for the organization’s film crew.“It’s being recorded for something,” said Jackie Shahinian, director of public relations for the Miss Universe Organization, nodding her head at the cameraman. “For the show, wherever it airs.”AdvertisementWomen were mostly dressed in athletic wear, ranging from spandex biking shorts, sneakers and tank tops. Polikseni Manxhari, Miss Massachusetts, who was born in Albania, stood in the shadow of a 35-foot rock wall that her fellow contestants were climbing during a promotional shoot.“I started watching Miss USA by the time I was 10, and for me, it was all about the pride I felt in having come to the United States,” she said. “That’s when I decided that was what I wanted to do. That was my American dream.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When asked about Mr. Trump, she was diplomatic.“For a lot of people, they think that was offensive,” Ms. Manxhari continued, before pausing. “For me, I’m taking it day by day and being as positive about everything as I can. There’s nothing negative I’m going to say about it.”Last week Miss California, Natasha Martinez, whose mother was born in Nicaragua and father is Mexican-American, told KCAL-TV in Los Angeles that Mr. Trump’s comments were “hurtful.” But other contestants, like Rashontae Wawrzyniak, representing Michigan, were quick to defend Mr. Trump.“I support his right to free speech,” Ms. Wawrzyniak said.Miss New Hampshire Samantha Poirier said the media firestorm and uncertainty has likely forged friendships uncommon to the pageant in the past. “We’re all going through the same thing,” she said. “This has bonded us all together, if nothing else.”The contestants will certainly be the featured attraction this year. Two co-hosts, Cheryl Burke of “Dancing With The Stars” and Thomas Roberts of MSNBC, have pulled out of the pageant in protest of Mr. Trump’s remarks, as have musical performer Flo Rida and two judges — Jonathan Scott of HGTV and Emmitt Smith, the former Dallas Cowboys running back.Meanwhile, Jay Dardenne, Louisiana’s lieutenant governor, has so far refused to pay the Miss Universe Organization $65,000 in tourism incentives from his office, saying that the lack of a network TV partner diminishes the event as an attraction, Jacques Berry, a spokesman for the office of the lieutenant governor, said no payments will be made until after the pageant is completed.“There are still some concerns about there being a smaller audience and no major network signed on to promote the event,” Mr. Berry said. John Delgado, a member of the Baton Rouge Metropolitan Council, said he and other city officials are looking into whether the city could recoup a portion of the $200,000 it agreed to pay the Miss Universe Organization. And he’s encouraging the city’s tourism arm, Visit Baton Rouge, to withhold payment as well.“The Miss USA pageant is in breach of its contract,” Mr. Delgado said in an interview. “This was supposed be a three-hour tourism video on a major network for Baton Rouge.”At the Baton Rouge park Wednesday, Virginia’s Ms. Puleo, dressed in a T-shirt and biking shorts, wondered if all the talk about the pageant, however negative, might turn out to be a boon for the event.Advertisement“The attention the pageant is getting is huge,” she said. Grinning, she added, “Whether that was actually calculated by Donald Trump, I don’t know.”Jeremy Alford reported from Baton Rouge, La., and John Koblin from New York.A version of this article appears in print on July 3, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Miss USA Pageant Finds Venue for a Broadcast.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.