By DEALBOOKJULY 2, 2015
Dollar Tree and Family Dollar have agreed to sell 330 Family Dollar stores to settle a complaint that their proposed merger would probably be anticompetitive, the Federal Trade Commission said on Thursday.The stores, which are in 35 states, will be sold to the private equity firm Sycamore Partners, the F.T.C. said in a statement. Terms of the sale were not disclosed.Without a remedy, the F.T.C. said, Dollar Tree’s acquisition of Family Dollar would most likely reduce competition by eliminating direct competition between the stores and increase the probability that Dollar Tree would unilaterally exercise market power.“Dollar stores offer convenience and value by providing a broad assortment of general merchandise at discounted prices in stores close to where consumers live or work,” Debbie Feinstein, director of the F.T.C.’s bureau of competition, said in the statement. “This settlement will ensure that consumers will continue to benefit from competition among their local dollar stores.”AdvertisementThe proposed settlement requires the divestitures to Sycamore Partners be completed within 150 days after the acquisition.AdvertisementThe proposed settlement caps a dollar store bidding war.Family Dollar first agreed to merge with Dollar Tree last summer for $8.5 billion, but the much bigger Dollar General responded with what ultimately became a $9.1 billion hostile bid for Family Dollar.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Uncertainty over whether regulators would ever approve the higher takeover bid eventually sank Dollar General’s chances. Family Dollar argued that any deal with its bigger competitor would require divesting 3,500 to 4,500 stores, an assessment that Dollar General challenged.Still, Dollar General ultimately capitulated, contending that its only path to success would be to sue the F.T.C. over what it argued was an improper way of determining how many stores would need to be sold off as part of any merger.Prominent shareholder advisory firms, including Institutional Shareholder Services, urged investors in Family Dollar to support the lower takeover offer, arguing that the certainty of closing the Dollar Tree deal outweighed the higher price of the other bid.Family Dollar shareholders approved the deal in January.A version of this article appears in print on July 3, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Dollar Store Chains Clear a Merger Hurdle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.