AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryThe chief executive and chairman of Santander Consumer USA, one of the nation’s largest subprime auto lenders, resigned on Thursday amid regulatory issues and a broad overhaul by the company’s Spanish parent of its United States operations.But the chief executive, Thomas Dundon, is not stepping down empty-handed. He will receive more than $900 million as part of his exit. A longtime executive in the auto finance industry, Mr. Dundon in two decades built a small regional lender into a national player that attracted investments from large private equity firms and the Spanish banking giant Banco Santander. But Santander Consumer, which is based in Dallas, has faced regulatory problems, including federal investigations into its packaging and selling of subprime auto loans and a rebuke by the Federal Reserve for making an unauthorized dividend payment. Mr. Dundon was succeeded by the company’s president, Jason A. Kulas, who has been overseeing corporate development and certain regulatory functions, the company announced on Thursday. As part of the transition, Banco Santander will buy out Mr. Dundon’s roughly 9.7 percent stake, which is worth about $928 million. The Spanish bank already owns 59 percent. Mr. Dundon will also receive twice his annual salary and bonus, which totaled $6.4 million in 2014.Analysts expressed surprise at the timing and details of the leadership change.In a call with analysts on Thursday evening, when much of Wall Street had headed home for the Fourth of July holiday, Mr. Kulas said Mr. Dundon’s parting was amicable and unrelated to the company’s “regulatory standing.”“He has positioned this company for success and growth,” Mr. Kulas said.Mr. Dundon, who will continue to serve on the board, said in a statement: “I am proud to have been part of the company’s success and fortunate to have worked with so many outstanding, driven colleagues over the years.”After a largely rocky year in 2014, its first as a publicly traded company, Santander Consumer’s shares have risen 33 percent since the start of the year. But the company has been dogged by concerns about its lending practices. Santander specializes in making high interest rate auto loans to people with shoddy credit.Earlier this year, Santander Consumer reached a $9.35 million settlement with the Justice Department over accusations that it illegally seized cars from members of the military. The deal involves one of the largest sums ever collected by the United States for the illegal repossession of cars.Mr. Dundon helped start the Texas business that would become Santander Consumer in the 1990s, expanding the company, called Drive Financial Services at the time. Drive Financial was known for lending to used-car customers that other lenders rejected because of the default risks.In 2006, Banco Santander, looking to expand in the United States, bought most of Drive Financial Services for $651 million. Mr. Dundon kept about a 10 percent stake and was appointed chief executive of the company, which was renamed Santander Consumer USA.Mr. Dundon’s role in expanding Santander Consumer was described in a front-page article in The New York Times in January. The article, which included a review of dozens of court records and interviews with two dozen borrowers, credit analysts, legal aid lawyers and investors, showed that large players like Santander in the market for packaging and selling auto loans were increasingly enabling people at the extreme financial margins to obtain loans to buy cars.The company said Santander Consumer had a proven record of deftly managing risk. And more recently, analysts have pointed to a decline in the company’s charge-off rates, as a sign that the credit quality of its auto loans has been improving.Since the financial crisis, subprime auto lending has boomed, fueled in part by the kind of securitization deals that Santander Consumer has sold.Santander Consumer’s regulatory issues have gone beyond lending. Last year, Santander Consumer USA paid a dividend — even though such payments had been prohibited by the Federal Reserve after its holding company, Santander Holdings USA, failed its annual stress test.This year, Banco Santander has been moving to overhaul its United States operations, including the appointment of a former JPMorgan Chase banker, Scott Powell, as the chief executive of Santander Holdings. Advertisement