AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie Picker and Andrew Ross SorkinThe latest company to reach $1 billion or more in valuation upends the stereotype of such so-called unicorns: It is profitable, is based outside Silicon Valley and partners with centuries-old manufacturing companies.Uptake, with headquarters in Chicago, announced on Tuesday that it had raised $45 million, led by GreatPoint Ventures and existing investors, which include New Enterprise Associates and Caterpillar. The new round gives Uptake a valuation of $1.1 billion, a person briefed on the funding terms said.While unicorns — a nickname given to companies valued at more than $1 billion — are now numerous on the coasts, they are much less common in the Midwest. Mu Sigma, which helps corporations sift through data, is based in Northbrook, Ill., and valued at $1.5 billion. Avant, an online lender based in Chicago, recently achieved a $2 billion valuation. The rest of the 139 unicorns, according to CB Insights, are either based closer to the coasts or outside the United States.But Uptake’s Midwest upbringing helped the company win a partner in Caterpillar. About a year and a half ago, Douglas R. Oberhelman, the chief executive of the manufacturing giant, was looking toward Silicon Valley for better data analytics technology for his customers. The goal was to put sensors inside locomotives that would pre-emptively (and quickly) warn customers when repairs were due before an accident or a shutdown occurred.Then Mr. Oberhelman met Brad Keywell, the chief executive and co-founder of Uptake. Mr. Keywell, a serial entrepreneur known as a co-founder of the daily-deals site Groupon, was building Uptake in Chicago, a mere three-hour drive from Peoria, Ill., where Caterpillar is based. So the 90-year-old Caterpillar decided to both invest in and work with the one-year-old company. Their first rollout will be in locomotives, an effort that should be ready in early 2016, and then in construction equipment, Mr. Oberhelman said.“Had Brad not come along, we’d probably be in Silicon Valley,” Mr. Oberhelman said. “We’ve got some design engineers in Illinois and Chicago, so I felt it would be easier to get the two cultures together, and that’s one of the driving forces; other than that, he’s had a good success rate.”Uptake’s model is to partner with well-known companies in various industries — from construction to mining to aviation — and create software and special algorithms that help these customers collect and understand huge amounts of data. The company is already producing positive cash flow, according to a person with knowledge of the financials who spoke on the condition of anonymity. In addition to announcing the new fund-raising round, the start-up also said that Raymond J. Lane, a current director at Hewlett-Packard and partner emeritus at the venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, had joined Uptake’s board.“There’s been a great deal of momentum and progress that we’ve achieved in a short period of time,” Mr. Keywell said. “The expanded opportunities that have come based upon what we’ve built, in essence, have proven that the opportunity is quite extraordinary — having the opportunity for Ray Lane to join the board and bring in meaningful capital.”Advertisement