AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackA new drug for people with the most common genetic type of cystic fibrosis won approval from the Food and Drug Administration on Thursday.The drug, Orkambi, is the second cystic fibrosis treatment brought to market by Vertex Pharmaceuticals, a biotechnology company based in Boston. It is expected to make the company consistently profitable; it has lost several billion dollars since it was founded 26 years ago.Both Vertex drugs are the first to try to counteract the underlying genetic defect that causes the disease, as opposed to treating symptoms.Orkambi will cost $259,000 a year, slightly higher than some Wall Street analysts were expecting. That could lead to some scrutiny by insurance companies and feed into the current debate about pharmaceutical prices. Vertex said it would provide financial assistance or free drugs to certain patients.About 30,000 Americans have the disease, which is characterized by the buildup of sticky mucus in the lungs, causing frequent infections and a gradual decline in lung function. Death from respiratory failure often occurs when people are in their 20s, 30s or 40s.Vertex’s first cystic fibrosis drug, Kalydeco, which was approved in 2012, is applicable to only about 2,000 of the Americans with cystic fibrosis, those with particular genetic mutations. Sales of Kalydeco reached $464 million in 2014, accounting for the bulk of Vertex’s revenue.Orkambi, by contrast, could be useful for nearly half of cystic fibrosis patients, those who have two copies of the most common mutation, known as F508del. The initial approval, however, is only for patients 12 and older, encompassing about 8,500 people.Analysts expect annual sales of Orkambi to eventually exceed $3 billion. Orkambi is a combination of ivacaftor, the active ingredient in Kalydeco, and a second drug called lumacaftor.Approval had been expected because a committee of outside advisers to the F.D.A. endorsed the drug in May by a 12-to-1 vote. The agency’s own staff, however, had given the product a lukewarm review, saying its effectiveness in improving lung function was small.Kalydeco costs more than $300,000 a year for each patient, a price that has drawn criticism from some doctors who treat cystic fibrosis.Orkambi would be used by more patients, meaning Vertex would not have to charge as much per patient to recoup its investment. Also, Orkambi is less effective than Kalydeco in improving lung function, meaning it will have less value in the eyes of insurance companies and government agencies that pay for these drugs.Advertisement