AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberAndrew Essex, a founding member and vice chairman of Droga5, is leaving the independent advertising agency. Mr. Essex, who has also served as chief executive of the agency, will move into an advisory role.“After nearly a decade helping to grow this amazing company from six people to nearly 500, I’m transitioning into an advisory role and relinquishing my day-to-day role as vice chairman,” Mr. Essex said in a statement provided by Droga5. “I look forward to an ongoing relationship with Droga5 as the agency continues its historic rise.”The agency said Mr. Essex was departing to “focus on personal projects.”Mr. Essex has helped expand the agency, which was founded in 2006, into one of the hottest in the industry. It is known for creating innovative ad campaigns that harness the power of the digital age.Last year, for instance, it introduced a campaign for Under Armour featuring Misty Copeland, the ballerina who this week became the first African-American woman to be named principal dancer in the 75-year history of American Ballet Theater.The agency was also behind the viral “If We Made It” digital campaign for Newcastle Brown Ale that riffed on the big Super Bowl ad it said it would have made but could not afford. As part of the campaign, the actress Anna Kendrick complained about Newcastle’s taking back its offer for her to star in a Super Bowl ad.In 2013, the talent agency William Morris Endeavor acquired a 49 percent stake in Droga5, which had also drawn attention from many of the industry’s biggest ad holding companies. Before that, the agency attracted financing from the investor Henry Silverman and the media veteran Bob Pittman, a founder of MTV and now chairman and chief executive of iHeartMedia.In addition to Under Armour, clients of the agency have included brands like Coca-Cola, Spotify and Chobani.Mr. Essex’s departure was first reported by Advertising Age.In a statement, David Droga, the agency’s creative chairman, said: “Andrew was the sixth person to join this company. It was a huge day for us. Not only did he bring a unique P.O.V., wisdom and grace to our five-month-old agency, it meant we could no longer all fit around our only table. A lot of time and desks since then, but he has always been a great friend and partner throughout.”Before joining Droga5, Mr. Essex held senior roles at several magazines, including The New Yorker, Details and Entertainment Weekly.Advertisement