By CHAD BRAYJULY 2, 2015
The Centene Corporation, a managed health care company, said on Thursday that it had agreed to acquire its rival Health Net in a cash-and-stock deal valued at $6.8 billion, including the assumption of debt.The deal would combine two providers of managed care in the United States, creating a company with more than 10 million members and an estimated $37 billion in revenue this year, the companies said.It would also expand Centene’s scale and give it a larger market presence in the western United States.The transaction has an implied value of $78.57 a share for Health Net, representing a 21 percent premium to its closing price on Wednesday. The deal includes the assumption of $500 million in debt.Advertisement“We are pleased to have reached this agreement with Health Net, which we believe will create value for both Centene and Health Net shareholders and will enhance our ability to serve our members and work with our providers and government partners,” Michael F. Neidorff, the chairman, president and chief executive of Centene, said in a news release.AdvertisementThe transaction is subject to regulatory and shareholder approval and is expected to close in early 2016.Under the terms of the deal, Health Net shareholders would receive $28.25 in cash and 0.622 of a Centene share for each Health Net share they hold.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Centene shareholders would own about 71 percent of the combined company and Health Net shareholders would have the remaining 29 percent.Mr. Neidorff would serve as chairman, president and chief executive of the combined company, which would be based in St. Louis, where Centene now has its headquarters.Jay M. Gellert, the Health Net president and chief executive, would assist in the transition, the companies said.Centene said it intended to finance the transaction through existing cash and debt.Health Net is based in Woodland Hills, Calif., and provides managed health care benefits to about six million people through company health plans and government programs like Medicare. The company, which primarily operates in Arizona, California, Oregon and Washington State, posted revenue of $14 billion in 2014 and has about 7,900 employees.Centene provides managed health care benefits in 23 states to about 4.4 million people. It posted revenue of $15.7 billion in 2014 and has about 14,800 employees.Allen & Company and Evercore and the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom advised Centene, while JPMorgan Chase and the law firm Morgan, Lewis & Bockius advised Health Net.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.