By CHAD BRAYJULY 2, 2015
LONDON — The reshaping of Royal Bank of Scotland continued on Thursday as the lender announced plans to significantly reduce its cash management services outside Britain and Ireland.The lender, which is based in Edinburgh, said that it would provide cash management and trade finance services only to clients in Britain and Ireland and to international clients with significant ties to those markets. It also planned to keep providing services to global financial institutions.Affected clients will be referred to the French bank BNP Paribas, R.B.S. said.The R.B.S. business had about 7,000 corporate clients at its peak.“As part of our announced strategy to make R.B.S. a simpler, stronger and more sustainable bank, R.B.S. Transaction Services will focus on its home market capabilities in the U.K. and the Republic of Ireland,” Marc Townsend, the head of R.B.S.’s Global Transaction Services business, said in a news release.AdvertisementGlobal Transaction Services provides clearing and settlement services for financial institutions, advises corporate treasurers on cash management and helps corporate customers process cross-border payments and obtain letters of credit for trade deals.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In an effort to turn around its business, R.B.S. announced plans in February to dismantle its global investment bank and reduce the number of countries in which it operates to about 13 from 38, resulting in significant job cuts.AdvertisementThe bank, about 80 percent of which is owned by the British government, has scaled back its global ambitions and is reshaping itself into a Britain-focused retail and corporate lender.R.B.S. reported its seventh consecutive annual loss in February and labeled a number of businesses nonessential, including Global Transaction Services.In June, George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, announced plans for the government to begin to sell down its stake in the lender, which received a bailout of 45 billion pounds, or about $70 billion, during the financial crisis in 2008.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.