By SYDNEY EMBEROCT. 26, 2015
A woman who accused Bill Cosby of drugging and molesting her in 2004 filed a lawsuit on Monday against a former district attorney in Pennsylvania who declined to file criminal charges against the entertainer.The woman, Andrea Constand, went to the police in 2005 with her accusations. She said in the lawsuit that Bruce Castor, the district attorney for Montgomery County from 2000 to 2008, defamed her in recent statements he made to the news media, and made her “collateral damage for his political ambitions.” Mr. Castor is running to regain his former position as district attorney of the county, in suburban Philadelphia.Dolores M. Troiani, who represented Ms. Constand in a civil case against Mr. Cosby that was settled in 2006, is also representing her in the current lawsuit.In the suit, Ms. Constand said Mr. Castor had defended his decision not to bring charges against Mr. Cosby by saying that she levied more serious sexual assault claims against the entertainer in a lawsuit against him than she did to the police.AdvertisementMs. Constand cited an article by The Associated Press on Sept. 23 that quoted Mr. Castor as saying, “If the allegations in the civil complaint were contained with that detail in her statement to the police, we might have been able to make a case out of it.” Ms. Constand also cited an Oct. 21 article by The Associated Press in which Mr. Castor called the purported discrepancy between Ms. Constand’s accounts “troublesome for the good guys.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Constand claims that those statements and others made to news outlets were intended to make it seem that she “had been inconsistent in her accusations against Cosby, exaggerated her claims in a lawsuit and therefore was not to be believed.”Mr. Castor’s opponent in the district attorney race, Kevin Steele, recently began running advertisements criticizing Mr. Castor for not bringing charges against Mr. Cosby.AdvertisementMr. Cosby has denied all wrongdoing with regard to Ms. Constand and other women who have accused him of assault, and he has never been charged with a crime.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Accuser Sues Ex-Prosecutor Who Didn’t Charge Cosby .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.