AdvertisementSupported byBy Nelson D. SchwartzNot too hot, not too cold. But not, alas, just right.The economy added a healthy 223,000 jobs last month, the Labor Department reported Thursday, but with other indicators showing wages flat and many Americans remaining on the sidelines, the overall economic picture for workers was not nearly as bright.Although the unemployment rate fell to 5.3 percent, the lowest in seven years, that was driven largely by an exodus from the work force, rather than more people finding jobs. Moreover, the strong payroll gains for April and May, which had led many analysts to conclude that the economy might finally be gaining momentum, were revised downward by 60,000 jobs.“This was an O.K. report, but the unemployment rate didn’t go down for the right reasons,” said Liz Ann Sonders, chief investment strategist at Charles Schwab.Perhaps most discouraging, average hourly earnings didn’t budge in June despite the drop in the unemployment rate from 5.5 percent in May, disappointing hopes that wages were finally increasing for most workers. It was a strong sign that plenty of slack remains in the job market, and that companies do not yet feel much pressure to raise pay to attract needed employees.The share of American adults either working or looking for a job, which in many ways is a better gauge of economic strength than the oft-cited unemployment rate, fell 0.3 percentage point in June. With June’s drop to 62.6 percent, the so-called labor participation rate is now at its lowest since 1977. Among prime-age adults, those 25 to 54, there has been no improvement in participation this year.The latest jobs report is likely to sharpen debate among Federal Reserve officials about when to start raising the Fed’s benchmark interest rate. Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, and other officials have pointed to the healthy pace of job growth as a reason to raise rates later this year. They say a stronger labor market will inevitably result in faster inflation, and the Fed needs to start moving in anticipation of that trend.Some officials, however, point to the weak pace of wage growth, which also continued in June, as evidence that concerns about inflation are premature.The Fed has already indicated that it does not plan to raise rates before September, and some analysts said that remained the most likely scenario.“Altogether, we do not view this report as significantly shifting opinions within the Fed about the timing of the first rate hike,” Michael Gapen, chief United States economist at Barclays Capital, wrote on Thursday. “We continue to look for the first rate hike in September.”Investors, however, responded to the jobs report by increasing their bets that the Fed will not move until December, and perhaps not until next year. In New York, stocks initially rose after the report but finished the day modestly lower. Bond yields fell. The Fed and private economists have been watching participation in the labor market closely for any sign that millions of people who dropped out of the work force after the recession are being lured back as hiring picks up.That did not happen last month. Although seasonal factors and the timing of the survey of households by government pollsters in June may have exacerbated the drop in the size of the labor force, “we’re not running out of slack,” said Guy Berger, United States economist at RBS.The fall in the participation rate and the failure of hourly earnings to grow at all last month also suggest that the Fed still has plenty of room to maneuver as it waits for the right moment to move on rates, he said.“The good news is that we are not on the verge of an inflation spiral and we can put people back to work for quite some time without the danger of inflation,” Mr. Berger said.Wage growth has picked up slightly this year, but gains remain relatively restrained. Over the last 12 months, wages are up 2 percent, only modestly ahead of inflation, which is running at around 1.5 percent, according to the latest data.While the American economy is not delivering as many gains to workers as hoped for six full years into the recovery, conditions are better here than in many other advanced economies. Europe has been rocked by the continuing drama over whether Greece will exit the eurozone, and concerns are rising about the fallout from the slowdown in China’s once white-hot economy.As a result, exporters have had to contend with the headwinds from Europe, China and a stronger dollar, leaving domestically focused sectors like health care, education and professional services to supply much of the labor market’s oomph.White-collar workers in fields like insurance, software and marketing have been in especially high demand, a turnaround from the early days of the recovery, when many new jobs tended to be concentrated in low-wage sectors like retailing and restaurants.But there is still a feast-or-famine quality in many corners of the American economy.Since last summer, for example, the financial sector has added more than 100,000 new positions, bringing total employment in finance to just over eight million, the highest since the fall of 2008, when Lehman Brothers collapsed. In June alone, insurers, investment companies and other financial institutions added 20,000 workers.“This is the best it’s been since the recession,” said Robert DeMeola, chief operating officer of CohnReznick, a midsize accounting firm based in New York and with offices nationwide. Referring to the competition he faces from deep-pocketed hedge funds and private equity firms looking for specialized talent, Mr. DeMeola said, “You can walk five blocks and get 50 jobs.”That may be poetic exaggeration, but CohnReznick is definitely hiring and paying up for the right people, those with the necessary degrees, accounting credentials and licensing. So far this year, CohnReznick has hired 90 directors and managers, whose salaries range from $100,000 to $300,000 and who tend to be either certified public accountants or lawyers.There are similar tales around the country. “We’re seeing companies put money into the back office,” said Tom Gimbel, chief executive of LaSalle Network, a Chicago-based staffing firm. “They want to hire for permanent positions in areas like marketing, human resources and accounting.”Even as those back-office, white-collar jobs are filled with workers who nearly always have bachelor’s degrees, he noted, employers also want college graduates for positions where a high school diploma used to suffice, like call center operators.As the pool of college graduates has grown larger, younger workers have found themselves forced to take jobs they once would have turned down cold.“More kids are going to college and some of them don’t have any choice,” Mr. Gimbel said. Students from less prestigious colleges or candidates with lower grade point averages are taking jobs at call centers, earning $25,000 to $30,000 a year, he said.On the brighter side, the Labor Department’s broadest possible measure of unemployment, which includes people forced to take part-time jobs because full-time work was not available, fell 0.3 percentage point to 10.5 percent.Binyamin Appelbaum contributed reporting.Advertisement