By DAVID BARBOZAJULY 3, 2015
SHANGHAI — The financial services affiliate of the Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba Group closed a private placement of shares on Friday that the company said values it at more than $45 billion and makes the Chinese government a stakeholder, according to people familiar with the transaction.The company, the Ant Financial Services Group, is a financial powerhouse in China, with over 400 million customers. It operates Alipay, the country’s dominant online payment platform; a private Internet bank called MYbank; a huge microloan unit and China’s largest money market fund, Yu’e Bao, which manages more than $150 billion in assets.And now, with a new collection of state-backed investors, Ant Financial is also one of the world’s most valuable technology companies, alongside the American car-hailing service Uber and the Chinese smartphone maker Xiaomi, each of which has been valued at close to $50 billion.In a statement released on Friday, Ant Financial said it had completed an early, so-called Series A round of financing that was led by the National Social Security Fund of China, one of the country’s biggest state funds. Ant Financial said it sold a total 12.4 percent stake in itself.AdvertisementA spokeswoman for Ant Financial declined to give a detailed list of investors or the amount of money each invested. But a Chinese government website published a list, and it included many state-owned companies, including China Life Insurance, China Pacific Insurance, New China Life, the People’s Insurance Company of China and an affiliate of China Development Bank.AdvertisementAnt Financial is controlled by Mr. Ma, but is also 37 percent owned by Alibaba, which is listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Mr. Ma said he spun off Ant Financial from Alibaba in 2011 because of Chinese rules that were set to restrict foreign ownership of financial services entities.State backing could be critical for Ant Financial because China’s banking and financial services industry is dominated by government firms, some of which have tried to block private entities from entering the market.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A group of private investors also joined the Series A round, including funds affiliated with Yunfeng Capital, a private equity firm co-founded by Jack Ma, who also founded Alibaba.Analysts say Ant Financial’s valuation is huge because it had an early start in online payments and because it is already a dominant player in China.“This is really just the beginning,” said Chi Tsang, an Internet analyst who covers Alibaba for HSBC in Hong Kong. “When and if they go public, they could be worth a lot more. This is a very unique animal in China.”At the time, Alibaba was largely owned by Yahoo of the United States and SoftBank of Japan. Ant Financial, which then consisted mostly of the operations of the Alipay payment platform that links up to Alibaba, was then registered as a Chinese entity.The decision to pull Alipay out of the Alibaba Group was widely criticized at the time, but investors continued to back Mr. Ma because of the phenomenal success of Alibaba; its e-commerce platform, Taobao; and the growth of the financial services unit.Neither Alibaba nor Ant Financial, which is based in Shanghai, has revealed a timetable for a public listing, but Mr. Ma has said that any initial public stock offering would most likely take place in China’s capital markets.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.