
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
JULY 4, 2015
Samsung has built a name for itself among consumers around the world as a leading manufacturer of smartphones, televisions and home appliances. For investors, though, its reputation is not so stellar.The latest issue for Samsung shareholders is a proposed $8 billion merger of two company affiliates: Samsung C&T, a construction and engineering company, and Cheil Industries, a holding company that issued shares to the public for the first time in December and that has interests in amusement parks, retail fashion, biopharmaceuticals and life insurance.The deal was proposed in late May and is scheduled to go to a shareholder vote on July 17. But some outside investors have criticized the transaction, saying that it is being struck at a price that is unfair to Samsung C&T shareholders. And, they say, Samsung has made matters worse by shifting a 5.76 percent stake of C&T stock held in the company’s treasury into friendly hands to help ensure the deal will go through.It’s not news to investors in any of the large South Korean companies, with their hydra-headed holdings, that they must be wary of transactions between its affiliates. Deals that are not conducted at arms-length can wind up benefiting insiders at the expense of outside investors.AdvertisementSuch transactions are common among the large, family-controlled companies in South Korea known as chaebol. Samsung Electronics is one of the largest of these vast and complex conglomerates with strong ties to the South Korean government. Samsung has 67 domestic affiliates, 18 of which have listed shares trading on the Korea stock exchange.AdvertisementMembers of the founding family of Samsung own 42 percent of Cheil Industries, according to Forbes magazine. And that has led some investors to speculate that the merger between C&T and Cheil may be motivated by family concerns. Lee Kun-hee, the chairman of Samsung and the family patriarch, had a heart attack last year, and his children have been working to consolidate company holdings for a smooth transition. Acquiring C&T, which owns a 4.1 percent stake in Samsung Electronics and a 17 percent stake in another affiliate, Samsung SDS, which provides information technology services, may be a way for them to do that.In addition, there’s the specter of a $5 billion or $6 billion inheritance tax owed by his children upon his death. Paying such a bill will require that they sell some of their company shares.Chief among the critics of the Cheil-C&T merger is Elliott Management, the $26 billion investment firm overseen by Paul Singer. Elliott, which owns a 7 percent stake in Samsung C&T, filed a lawsuit in South Korea asking the Seoul central district court to stop the transaction. On Wednesday, a judge declined that request.But he has yet to rule on a second suit filed by Elliott. That suit asks the court to block the sale of the 5.76 percent C&T stake to KCC, a company that holds a stake in Cheil Industries and therefore has an interest in seeing the deal go through.Samsung contends that the terms of the C&T deal comply with South Korean law, which mandates that the computation of a merger ratio be based upon recent stock prices. Management argues that the merger is necessary if C&T is to turn itself around and accuses Elliott of being interested in short-term gains.As for the sale of C&T shares, Samsung called the transaction part of a “promotion of approval of the merger for procurement of the growth of Samsung C&T.”AdvertisementOfficials at Elliott declined to comment beyond their court filings and public releases. But other investors are also upset about the merger and say they plan to vote against it.“We are not convinced that it is a good deal for Samsung C&T shareholders, particularly at the proposed merger ratio,” said Hugh Young, managing director in Asia for Aberdeen Asset Management, a $491 billion financial firm.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is not enough that the company simply followed the letter of the law when calculating the merger ratio. “For the board to fulfill their fiduciary duties, it must be clear that the price is fair to all shareholders of Samsung C&T and fully recognizes the value of the company,” Mr. Young said.According to an analysis by Elliott, C&T was trading at severely depressed levels before the proposed takeover came about. A revenue slowdown in the first quarter of 2015 may have contributed.The day before the deal was announced, C&T’s share price was 40 percent below its aggregate net asset value, Elliott says. That reflected just 63 percent of C&T’s stakes in publicly traded affiliates such as Samsung Electronics, Samsung SDS and Samsung Engineering.At the same time C&T’s shares were falling, Cheil Industries’ stock was racing ahead. The day of the merger, it was trading at 131 times estimated earnings, an enormous premium to its peers and to the South Korean market index, which trades at around 11 times forward earnings.C&T stockholders will receive just 0.35 Cheil shares for each of their shares if the deal goes through. By Elliott’s reckoning, that represents 22 percent of the fair value of C&T shares and will result in a transfer of $7 billion in asset value from C&T shareholders to Cheil.How the merger plays out probably rests in the hands of NPS, the South Korean pension system. It owns a 10 percent stake in C&T; it has not said how it will vote.C&T investors who are siding with Elliott say this transaction highlights the anti-investor practices that are common among the chaebol.AdvertisementThese practices, they say, are one of the reasons stocks of South Korean companies trade at such a discount to their rivals in other developed countries.It’s time for Samsung and other large Korean companies to take a more enlightened approach to their dealings with minority shareholders, said Yoo-Kyung Park, director of sustainability and governance for Asia at APG Asset Management, a $486 billion pension services manager for government and education employees in the Netherlands.“We hope that the Samsung group companies immediately start conducting a thorough review of the quality of their respective governance structure and actively communicate with investors on a newly established vision to which corporate governance is central,” Ms. Park said.“We also wish,” she added, “that the lessons learned by the Samsung companies through this merger process will be taken aboard by other major groups in Korea, as they face similar structural corporate governance issues.”Will Samsung be forced to forge a new path with investors? Let’s hope so, but don’t hold your breath.The Fair Game column last Sunday, about investors who are critical of a merger between two Samsung affiliates, referred incorrectly to the director of sustainability and governance for Asia at APG Asset Management, who comment-ed on the matter. The director, Yoo-Kyung Park, is a woman.A version of this article appears in print on July 5, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: At Samsung, It’s Insiders vs. Outsiders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »