By JACK EWINGOCT. 26, 2015
NICOSIA, Cyprus —  The Swiss banker Josef Ackermann played a role in the events that nearly destroyed the Cyprus banking system in 2013. Now he was back in this sleepy capital, toiling to fix one of the very banks he helped undermine.Redemption, said Mr. Ackermann, the former Deutsche Bank chief, would be too strong a word to describe why he, once one of the most powerful bankers in the world, agreed to be chairman of the Bank of Cyprus — the Mediterranean island’s largest lender, but puny in global terms.In his office at bank headquarters in Nicosia — which is comfortable but not nearly as grand as his office was at Deutsche Bank — Mr. Ackermann said, “If I could give something back to the people or society, I would like to do that.” He receives what, by investment banking standards, is token compensation of 68,000 euros per year. He said he had no options or other ways to profit from the bank’s recovery, if it happened.But the bank and the island’s economy are so closely intertwined that if Mr. Ackermann, 67, helps revive the bank, he will also help revive the country, whose problems were briefly at the epicenter of global financial market anxiety in 2013. And Mr. Ackermann would perhaps enhance his own legacy, which has lost some of its sheen since he left Deutsche Bank in 2012.AdvertisementAt Deutsche Bank, Mr. Ackermann led the institution to the top echelons of investment banking. But it has since struggled to maintain that status as regulators have pressed banks to reduce risk. His successor, Anshu Jain, has already resigned under pressure.AdvertisementSubsequently, Mr. Ackermann was a part-time chairman of Zurich Insurance, a position that ended badly after its chief financial officer committed suicide, leaving behind a note that blamed Mr. Ackermann for his despair. An investigation by Swiss regulators absolved Mr. Ackermann of blame, but he resigned and has kept a low profile since.Mr. Ackermann says he does not have a bad conscience. “By no means,” he said. “I think we did a lot of good things.”But, he said, “I want to demonstrate that we cannot only make money for ourselves, but also that banking is actually something which is a main contributor to the prosperity of society at large.”Though Bank of Cyprus is the largest lender on the island by far, its 25 billion euros, or about $28 billion, in assets would be a rounding error at Deutsche Bank, which has more than a trillion euros in assets. If the Bank of Cyprus were in the United States, it would be a midsize regional bank, slightly smaller than the Bank of Oklahoma.In addition to Mr. Ackermann, the Bank of Cyprus has attracted a surprising number of financial industry heavyweights to the island, which has a population of about 1.2 million and is geographically closer to the Middle East than to Europe.Its main investors include Wilbur L. Ross Jr., an American billionaire who specializes in buying distressed assets, and who late last year persuaded Mr. Ackermann to oversee Bank of Cyprus. The Renova Group, a Russian conglomerate controlled by Viktor Vekselberg, one of Russia’s most powerful businessmen, is the bank’s largest foreign shareholder, with a 6.2 percent stake. Mr. Ackermann also has connections to Renova; he is a member of the board of a unit that controls the company’s holdings outside Russia.John Hourican, the chief executive of Bank of Cyprus since 2013, is another top manager with an international reputation in need of polishing. Mr. Hourican was formerly head of investment banking at Royal Bank of Scotland, one of Britain’s largest banks. Mr. Hourican left R.B.S. in early 2013 after some of its traders were found to be involved in a conspiracy to fix benchmark interest rates. Mr. Hourican was not directly implicated, but he took responsibility and resigned.AdvertisementThere are many reasons so many prominent names have come to Cyprus. One is simply to make a profit. Mr. Ross tripled his money investing in the Bank of Ireland, a commercial bank, when its ability to survive was in doubt during the financial crisis. If all goes well, the Bank of Cyprus could produce a similar payoff.For others, motivation includes a measure of absolution, even penitence.Mr. Hourican said that the chance to make amends drew him from London to the comparative obscurity of Cyprus. “I don’t think we can shy away from being collectively responsible” for the financial crisis, Mr. Hourican said. “It is nice to come along and actually be able to fix the mistakes that did get made in places like Cyprus.”Not that all Cypriots appreciated the effort. “They did burn my car,” Mr. Hourican recalled.Mr. Hourican was away last March when several arsonists, who have not been identified, set the vehicle aflame after dousing it with gasoline.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It was a bit of sending a message to the bank: ‘We’re still angry.’ I understand that,” Mr. Hourican said, “but I’d prefer if you hadn’t torched my car.”This incident is not the reason he has decided to leave the Cyprus job in November, Mr. Hourican says. Rather, he wants to be closer to his wife and four children, who have continued to live primarily in their native Ireland, he says.The anger of some Cypriots is not surprising. Thousands of people lost money after their deposits were seized in 2013 to cover losses that the Cyprus banks absorbed on their holdings of Greek bonds. Some of the depositors were Russians stashing their money abroad, but many were Cypriots.Ironically, the losses were partly Mr. Ackermann’s work. As chairman of the International Institute of Finance — an industry group that represents the interests of large investment banks like Deutsche, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley — he played a primary role in negotiating an agreement that provided crucial debt relief for Greece.The deal caused enormous collateral damage in Cyprus, because banks here had invested heavily in Greek government debt, which lost about half its value. Cyprus Popular Bank, also known as Laiki Bank, the island’s second-largest lender, collapsed and was absorbed by Bank of Cyprus.The recession that came after the Cyprus banking crisis, as well as a real estate bubble, left it with the highest rate of delinquent loans in the world. More than half of all its outstanding loans are considered nonperforming.AdvertisementUnder pressure from the European Union, the Cyprus Parliament passed laws this year that will streamline the island’s laborious foreclosure procedures. The changes will make it easier for the Bank of Cyprus to repossess property from borrowers who are in arrears, which is critical to dealing with the bad-loan problem.But it will be tricky for the bank to use its new powers without generating enormous ill will.Mr. Ross, the American distressed-asset investor, says that the bank prefers to work out amicable settlements with borrowers and that it has no interest in seizing property when the real estate market is already depressed.“There aren’t going to be mass foreclosures,” Mr. Ross, who also serves on the Bank of Cyprus board as vice chairman, said by telephone. “If there are mass foreclosures, it would mean vast amounts of houses on the market at the same time, and that’s not a good thing in terms of realizing your value.”Under Mr. Ackermann and Mr. Hourican, Bank of Cyprus has reduced its dependence on emergency loans from the European Central Bank, cut costs and decreased its dependence on borrowed money. Profits fell 26 percent in the first half of this year, to €60 million on revenue of €533 million, as the bank increased the amount of money it set aside to cover losses on bad loans. However, the total number of bad loans has started to decline for the first time since before the crisis began.The bank will probably also benefit from a recent upturn in the Cyprus economy, and the potential influx of wealth from newly discovered offshore deposits of natural gas. And the economy could collect a substantial peace dividend if current talks are successful in reuniting the Greek-speaking part of the island with an enclave in the north that has been occupied by Turkey since 1974.But Mr. Ackermann said the turnaround of the bank would take another two or three years. “We are certainly not yet there,” he said.Mr. Ackermann’s said it does not bother him that, if the turnaround succeeds, he would not share in the payoff beyond his 68,000 euro pay as bank chairman.“I don’t need charity,” he said. “I made enough money in my life.”A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Banker Giving Back.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.