
Revalued By                     
 DAVID GELLES
 
JULY 2, 2015
Dan Kish grew up visiting his grandparents’ farm in northwest Pennsylvania. During long summer days, he would can vegetables and shuck thousands of ears of corn. His grandfather would squirt cow’s milk straight from the udder into his mouth. His grandmother taught him how to cook on a white enamel Westinghouse gas stove.Today, Mr. Kish is head chef at Panera Bread and is responsible for the menus at 1,900 restaurants around the country. His job is to serve food that is profitable, easy to prepare, tasty and healthier than a burger and fries.Yet even as he operates at this vast scale — the company said it served a quarter billion bagels last year — Mr. Kish says his family’s farm informs his work.“My approach to food is pretty fundamental,” he said in an interview at a pop-up pantry in downtown Manhattan, where Panera was offering samples of its latest products. “I want people to experience the quality of the ingredients, rather than something manipulated with additives.”AdvertisementIn short, if his grandmother wouldn’t have cooked it in her kitchen, Mr. Kish doesn’t want to serve it at Panera.AdvertisementEasier said than done. Panera is part of the category known as “fast casual” that is eating away at the sales of traditional fast-food chains with supposedly healthier fare, but it still operates within the confines of the industrial food system. Its suppliers rely on a range of artificial flavors and preservatives to provide Panera with food that is safe, long-lasting and consistent.Nonetheless, Panera has a history of pushing suppliers out of their comfort zone. And now Panera has set its sights on something else that Mr. Kish didn’t use in his grandmother’s kitchen: high-fructose corn syrup.Panera has removed high-fructose corn syrup, a cheap and ubiquitous sweetener, from its salad dressings and most pastries. Next, Mr. Kish says, Panera will stop serving soda that includes the syrup. And if that means severing the company’s relationship with PepsiCo, which provides Panera’s soda fountains, so be it.“We’ve told them we have to fix this, please be our partner,” Mr. Kish said of his talks with PepsiCo. “We’ve had countless meetings with them about it. And we’ve said with you or without you, we are getting high-fructose corn syrup off our menu.”Critics of the syrup say its use in sodas and processed foods makes people obese. Hoping to ride this trend, many food makers now advertise that their breads, cereals and drinks are free of it. Still, it remains a staple ingredient in most sodas.Panera would not disclose how much soda it served or how much money it made from soda, which has famously high margins for restaurants. Too much refined sugar can also lead to obesity and health problems, and is chemically very similar to high-fructose corn syrup. (Some have argued that the dispute between the corn syrup and sugar is more about market share in the sweetener business than health.) But Panera said it believed the corn syrup was worse, and it is one of a number of ingredients that the company deemed unnecessary.“As we vetted ingredients, we asked ourselves two questions: ‘Is this necessary?’ and ‘Is it something you’d find in your home pantry?’ ” Mr. Kish said. “In the case of high-fructose corn syrup, the answer to both was no.” He added that limiting “any added sugar, particularly in beverages, plays an important role in wellness.”Weaning customers off Pepsi won’t be easy, and Panera has no immediate plans to stop selling soda. But Mr. Kish said Panera was experimenting with soda sweetened with cane sugar and has asked Pepsi to come up with alternatives to Pepsi, Mountain Dew and Sierra Mist sweetened with high-fructose corn syrup.AdvertisementPepsiCo said it was “exploring other beverage options” with Panera, but would not comment on high-fructose corn syrup.Acting alone, Panera (worth about $5 billion) won’t upend the business model at PepsiCo (worth $140 billion). But there’s reason to believe that Panera’s talk is not idle.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Around the time Mr. Kish joined in 2005, Panera became one of the first national chain restaurants to stop serving poultry raised with antibiotics, which is believed to lead to antibiotic resistance in humans. Ten years later, farmers have increased production of antibiotic-free chicken, bringing prices down, and big fast-food chains including Chick-fil-A and McDonald’s are beginning to follow Panera’s lead.In 2006, Panera voluntarily stopped using trans fats, which clog arteries and are a contributor to heart disease. In June, the Food and Drug Administration announced that the food industry had three years to eliminate trans fats from the food supply.In 2010, Panera became the first big restaurant chain to voluntarily tell customers how many calories were in each item on its menu. Now, the F.D.A. is mandating that all chain restaurants do the same by December.And last year, Panera introduced its “No No List,” a compendium of more than 150 artificial ingredients it either no longer serves or plans to phase out. The list includes sweeteners like aspartame, coloring agents like canthaxanthin and high-fructose corn syrup. Other fast-food chains have recently announced similar moves.As I spoke with Mr. Kish, Panera’s founder and chief executive, Ron Shaich, dropped by our table. Reflecting on a decade of progressive choices, Mr. Shaich said: “The marketplace may be the most powerful way to effect change.”And Mr. Shaich underscored Panera’s move away from high-fructose corn syrup and said the onus was on PepsiCo to reform.Advertisement“Ultimately, they are going to have to evolve, or they are not going to have the business of companies like Panera,” he said.Mr. Kish never expected to be in a position of such influence. He refined his cooking skills at the Culinary Institute of America, worked at fine restaurants, apprenticed with a Michelin-starred chef in the French Alps and then joined his alma mater as an instructor. Along the way, he made time to return to the farm and cook the basics with his grandmother.When Panera hired Mr. Kish, he had no experience cooking for more than a few dozen people at a time, let alone millions. But Mr. Shaich was looking for someone who could help his company get back to the business of preparing what he calls “real food.”Panera still has plenty of work to do when it comes to offering a truly healthy menu. Its pecan roll, for example, has 740 calories.But if Mr. Kish succeeds in removing high-fructose corn syrup from the soda fountains, it will be another step toward making Panera’s menu a little more like his grandmother’s cooking. And given Panera’s track record, the rest of the industry might be just a few years behind.A version of this article appears in print on July 5, 2015, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Fast-Casual Menu From Grandma’s Kitchen .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »