AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon CaramanicaSonny Madrid, who as a founder of Lowrider magazine helped spread Chicano political activism by pairing it with coverage of the tricked-out cars that found popularity among Mexican-Americans, died on June 22 in San Jose. He was 70. The cause was prostate cancer, his son Mario said.Car customization took off after World War II, especially in East Los Angeles, where returning Mexican-American veterans applied their skills to old cars, modifying them so that they would almost scrape the ground. Early lowrider cars were optimal for slow cruising. They became a tool of cultural pride — enthusiasts began forming car clubs in the early 1950s — and differentiation from the mainstream. When Lowrider first appeared, in 1977, it became the scene’s bible. “What Sonny wanted to do was change the image of the lowrider, so people could see they were normal, hard-working individuals like everybody else,” his sister Gloria Flores said.   Mario Manuel Madrid was born on Jan. 19, 1945, in Yuma, Ariz., and moved to San Jose, Calif., as a teenager. In the summers, like many Mexican-Americans of his generation, he worked on farms. An admirer of Cesar Chavez’s work with the United Farm Workers, he became politically active. He was one of a group of young Mexican-Americans who agitated for change at San Jose State University, whether by working to establish minority scholarships or bringing speakers like Reies Lopez Tijerina, a controversial leader of the Chicano rights movement, to campus. He did not graduate. Mr. Madrid was also fascinated by cars. By the 1970s, lowriders could be elaborate affairs, with artwork painted on the exteriors, lavishly reupholstered interiors and hydraulic systems giving them lift and bounce. They became a kind of Chicano folk art, and Mr. Madrid understood their power as a potential unifying force.Each of the three founders of Lowrider magazine — Mr. Madrid, Lorenzo Gonzales and David Nunez (who died in 2011) — contributed $1,500 to help get it off the ground. About 1,000 copies of the first issue, dated January 1977, were put together with a mimeograph machine and a saddle stapler. Mr. Madrid was Lowrider’s “light bulb, the idea guy,” said David Gonzales, creator of the Homies toy line, who got one of his early breaks doing a regular cartoon strip for Lowrider.The magazine was originally distributed by hand, sometimes using Mr. Madrid’s 1954 Chevy panel truck. The magazine was sold from the trunk during car events or community parties, or placed in Mexican-American grocery shops and liquor stores. The founders made trips to Whittier Boulevard in East Los Angeles, the main cruising strip for lowriders, to spread the word, eventually opening an office there. Lowrider also began promoting its own car shows, including the 1979 Supershow at the Los Angeles Convention Center, which drew 20,000 people.Inspired by activist magazines like Con Safos and La Raza, the earliest issues of Lowrider were not just an appreciation of “motorized sculpture,” as Mr. Madrid called the cars in a 1998 interview; the issues also included articles about media representation of Mexican-Americans, prisoner rights and police abuse and misconduct. Mr. Madrid wanted a publication that could serve as a collective memory for the Mexican diaspora across the American West and Southwest. “We used the vehicles as a medium to bring in the people,” Lorenzo Gonzales said. “The ex-con, he felt part of the magazine; the guy with the nice car, he felt part of the magazine; the young Chicano college guy, he felt part of the magazine.” Despite circulation increases, tied in part to the bikini-clad models on the covers — still a feature of the magazine — Lowrider suffered financial losses, and in 1985 the owners lost control of it. It was eventually brought out of bankruptcy by Alberto Lopez, who had worked in marketing and advertising on the initial run, and who reintroduced the magazine in 1988 with the help of Lorenzo Gonzales and others. “Sonny set the template,” Mr. Lopez said. “We just made it bigger.” By the 1990s, lowrider culture had grown exponentially, even internationally, thanks in part to the prominence of West Coast hip-hop, whose stars would often feature lowrider cars in their videos. For a time, Lowrider was the best-selling automotive title on the newsstand. After parting ways with Lowrider, Mr. Madrid lived mostly in Visalia, in California’s Central Valley, occasionally helping a political candidate or a Chicano musician or young publishing entrepreneur. In addition to his son Mario and his sister Ms. Flores, Mr. Madrid is survived by his longtime partner, Linda Camargo; another son, Lennon; and four other sisters, Sylvia Rodriguez, Irene Morales, Eleanor Barraza and Evelyn Aguilar. “He was the Myspace of his time — connecting all the kids from all the different neighborhoods,” said Gilbert Chavez, publisher of Streetlow, a magazine based in San Jose for which Mr. Madrid occasionally wrote and which will devote a coming issue to his legacy. Lowrider, he added, “was like a yearbook,” and Mr. Madrid, “was in parks, at local events, in neighborhoods taking pictures of regular people. That’s the heart of lowriding.”Advertisement