
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

JULY 19, 2015
Michel Landel  is chief executive and chairman of the executive committee of Sodexo, a food service conglomerate.Q. What are the main influences on your leadership style?A. I grew up in Morocco in a large family. My mother is Russian, my father was French, and they were always very keen to travel, to discover new things. This definitely influenced my outlook and my appreciation of different cultures. My desire to go to the U.S. was instilled in me by my father, who was fascinated by America. In my family, we were always talking about travels and other countries. It takes time to realize what is different when you’re first in a new environment. I lived in the U.K., the Middle East, Germany and Africa, as a young man. You have your certitudes and your received ideas, and it takes time to really appreciate the richness of difference. I think you absorb this unconsciously growing up, and the conscious realization comes many years later when you are already launched in an international career and you live in different countries.Q. So family and upbringing were important. Has anybody else influenced your leadership style?A. The founder of the second company I joined [the construction company Poliet, which is now part of Saint-Gobain]. He was a remarkable human being who frankly impressed me a lot and really influenced the way I look at managing today. He put the human factor at the center of everything he did. Even in difficult economic times, when he had to downsize and reorganize the company, he did it extremely well, with huge respect for employees and really taking care of everyone. This was very inspiring. It’s never pleasant to hear you are being let go. You can lose your confidence and your dignity, so the way this is handled by the manager can make a big difference.Q. You must have been in that position during your career. A. Yes, over the years, I have had to terminate many people; not driven by financial situations, more because things didn’t work out. I think it’s important to tell the truth to people, to be real, but find a way to do it which is not brutal and takes into consideration their dignity. It’s a question of time, listening, and finding ways to accommodate.Q. When you are hiring, what are the qualities you are looking for?A. Hiring people is probably one of the most difficult things you have to do. It’s very hard to know someone in the space of three to four hours of discussions. So you can make mistakes, even though with experience you can mitigate those. For me, one thing is clear, you can always find technical skills, but you cannot buy the hearts of people. I’m looking for people who are ambitious yet humble — they should be ambitious for the company, not themselves. What I find absolutely unacceptable is arrogance, people who think they know everything, because to be a good leader you must be able to have doubts, too. Our business is a very people-focused business.AdvertisementQ. What does it take to be a successful leader in your kind of business?A. You should be able to challenge yourself, question the status quo. You have to know yourself, be conscious of your strengths, yet not overestimate yourself, either. Authenticity and loyalty are fundamentals. The world has changed, companies have changed, and leadership styles have also changed. Today, the notion of power for a leader makes no sense to me anymore. I believe the power now belongs to the customers and to the people in the field doing the job. And as the world becomes more and more collaborative, it’s how you work with people, engage them and give them the means to express themselves and be creative that will make you succeed as a leader.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. Have your views changed over time?A. I don’t know. But for sure you can’t manage a company the way people were managing companies 20 years ago. It was a different world then, a much more directive one. Today, you have to seek consensus, even though sometime you have to be able to make a decision even when others don’t agree. As I said, the power, more and more, belongs to the customers. Of course, the Internet and social media have had an impact. Everybody has a voice that can be heard. But also because companies are much more diverse nowadays — even though they may still not be diverse enough.AdvertisementI think that the fact that more women are now in senior committees has really changed the dynamics of management. At Sodexo we now have 43 percent representation of women at the executive level, which is frankly not very common.Q. What have been the benefits?A. A fairer representation of the world we live in. Women and men generally have some different strengths and different leadership styles and I really believe having women on board allows a much more open dialogue. I remember one time when a newly promoted woman introduced herself in an executive committee saying, “I am a woman, I am a mother and wife, and I am an executive of Sodexo.” You would never have a man introducing himself this way. Women are much more driven by teams, they are much more collaborative in general and it brings a new dynamic, a much richer environment for an organization. It’s not good or bad, but a new direction, and it’s the combination of this increased sensitivity and sensibility that makes organizations more creative and more open.Q. What would you tell your younger self based on what you know now?A. Mistakes are necessary as long as you don’t repeat them too many times and you learn from them. And what’s very important is staying close to people, whatever you do, and very close to the reality of your business.A version of this article appears in print on July 6, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »