

      By KEITH BRADSHER

UPDATED August 24, 2015

The Chinese stock market rout in recent weeks has prompted the country’s government to act aggressively to stop the slide. If stocks continue to fall, that could erode consumer confidence in China and slow further the country’s already weakening economy, which would have painful implications for the global economy.
Chinese stocks had surged almost unimpeded, more than doubling in the 12 months ended June 12. Millions of working-class and middle-class Chinese families bet heavily on stocks, often borrowing money to do so and further spurring the rise.  But the rally defied fundamentals, prompting concerns of a bubble. Stocks rose even as the Chinese economy was slowing. While foreigners and domestic institutions bought shares in large companies with fairly stable businesses, working-class and middle-class families mainly bought inexpensive shares in small and medium-size companies, and kept buying these shares simply because they were rising. Weak balance sheets and chronic problems with corporate governance at many of these companies were swept aside. In recent months, the Chinese stocks have experienced brief periods of weakness, as investors started to grow concerned that the market was getting overheated. The government, though, has regularly reassured investors, helping to steady the markets. Now, investors are losing faith. After a drop of more than 7 percent in the Shanghai and Shenzhen markets on June 26, the Chinese central bank responded the next day with an interest-rate cut, saying it was acting to shore up the economy. A broad slide in stocks continued, prompting the government to take aggressive action. On July 9, stocks rose after a series of market-propping government measures. But on July 27, the main Shanghai share index plunged 8.5 percent, its steepest one-day drop in eight years, casting new doubt on the government’s measures to support share prices. And the benchmark Shanghai composite index closed 8.5 percent lower on Aug. 24, erasing all of the gains it had made in its extraordinary run-up this year.RelatedA Blow to Wallets and Hearts (July 23, 2015)China’s Efforts Fail to Contain Market Plunge (July 8, 2015)Market’s Dive Could Delay Economic Reforms in China (July 7, 2015)China’s Market Turn Exposes Borrowers Who Fueled the Frenzy (July 6, 2015)China’s Stock Drop, Felt by Average People, May Shake Leadership (July 5, 2015)China’s Communist Party leaders are trying to restore confidence and stabilize the market with a variety of moves.Since June 25, the Chinese government has tried a series of policy measures to halt the slide. It has cut interest rates, made more loans available to buyers of stocks and promised to investigate anyone involved in market manipulation. Brokerage houses have been ordered to pump billions of dollars into the market. And government-backed funds have earmarked billions more to prop up the shares of flagging companies.A wave of additional measures are meant to prop up prices. Stock trading transactions were slashed. I.P.O.s were suspended. And China’s insurance regulator eased rules so that insurers could more easily invest in stocks.On July 8, China’s Ministry of Finance pledged to “adopt measures to safeguard the stability of capital markets,” and in particular protect state-owned financial enterprises. The move signals that this broad-based effort is being directed from the very top echelons of the state.In August, China abruptly devalued its currency, and authorities said market forces would play a bigger role in determining the value of the renminbi. And on Aug. 23, China’s government announced that the country’s pension funds had been approved for the first time to invest in stocks.More measures could come, as the authorities look to stimulate the economy and try to address the sell-off.The Chinese markets have only recently started to open up to outside investors, so overseas players are not heavily exposed to the downturn. Such investors own an estimated 4 percent of Chinese shares. And they have been heavily concentrated in large companies, which have not been as volatile as their smaller brethren.But stock market routs can quickly spread. The Hong Kong market withstood previous bouts of selling, but fell on July 6 after the Chinese government’s moves. And foreigners have invested heavily in the Hong Kong market, often as a proxy for mainland China.Possibly.China has the world’s second-largest economy. It is the biggest importer of commodities, from countries like Australia and Brazil. China is also a huge buyer of factory equipment and other machinery in Germany and other places. If the Chinese stock market slump damages consumer confidence, it could lead to a slowdown in those purchases.The stock market weakness, should it spread to the Chinese economy over the long term, could prompt Beijing to reassess its overseas loans and investments. Many countries, industries and companies have come to depend on Chinese money to fund their own growth. But Chinese outbound investment could still increase if companies and individuals seek safety overseas.Advertisement